the twelfth magnitude within the preceding 28 hours. And it was still
swiftly ascending. On the 23rd, it outshone Capella; for a brief space
it took rank as the premier star of the northern hemisphere. A decline
set in promptly, but was pursued hesitatingly. The light fluctuated
continually over a range of a couple of magnitudes, and with a close
approach, during some weeks, to a three-day periodicity. A year after
the original outburst, the star was still conspicuous with an
opera-glass. The spectrum underwent amazing changes. At first
continuous, save for fine dark lines of hydrogen and helium, it unfolded
within forty-eight hours a composite range of brilliant and dusky bands
disposed in the usual fashion of Novae. These lasted until far on in
March, when hydrogen certainly, and probably other substances as well,
ceased to exert any appreciable absorptive action. Blue emissions of the
Wolf-Rayet type then became occasionally prominent, in remarkable
correspondence with the varying lustre of the star;[1503] finally, a
band at Lambda 3969, found by Wright at Lick to characterise nebular
spectra,[1504] assumed abnormal importance; and in July the nebular
transformation might be said to be complete. Striking alterations of
colour attended these spectral vicissitudes. White to begin with, the
star soon turned deep red, and its redness was visibly intensified at
each of its recurring minima of light. Blanching, however, ensued upon
the development of its nebulous proclivities; and its surviving rays are
of a steely hue.

All the more important investigations of Nova Persei were conducted by
photographic means. Libraries of spectral plates were collected at the
Yerkes and Lick Observatories, at South Kensington, Stonyhurst, and
Potsdam, and await the more exhaustive interpretation of the future.
Meanwhile, extraordinary revelations have been supplied by immediate
photographic delineation. On August 22 and 23, 1901, Professor Max Wolf,
by long exposures with the 16-inch Bruce twin objectives of the
Koenigstuhl Observatory (Heidelberg), obtained indications of a large
nebula finely ramified, extending south-east of the Nova;[1505] and the
entire formation came out in four hours with the Yerkes 2-foot
reflector, directed to it by Mr. Ritchey on September 20.[1506] It
proved to be a great spiral encircling, and apparently emanating from,
the star. But if so, tumultuously, and under stress of catastrophic
impulsions. A picture obtained by Mr. Perrine with the Crossley
refractor, in 7h. 19m., on November 7 and 8, disclosed the progress of a
startling change.[1507] Comparison with the Yerkes photograph showed
that during the intervening 48 days four clearly identifiable
condensations had become displaced, all to the same extent of about 90
seconds of arc, and in fairly concordant directions, suggesting motion
_round_ the Nova as well as away from it. The velocity implied, however,
is so prodigious as virtually to exclude the supposition of a bodily
transport of matter. It should be at the rate of no less than twenty
thousand miles a second, admitting the object to be at a distance from
us corresponding to an annual parallax of one-tenth of a second, and
actual measurements show it to be indefinitely more remote. The fact of
rapid variations in the nebula was reaffirmed, though with less
precision, from Yerkes photographs of November 9 and 13, Mr. Ritchey
inferring a general expansion of its southern portions.[1508] Much
further evidence must be at hand before a sane judgment can be formed as
to the nature of the strange events taking place in that secluded corner
of the Galaxy.[1509] And it is highly probable that the illumination of
the nebulous wreaths round the star will prove no less evanescent than
the blazing of the star itself.

We have been compelled somewhat to anticipate our narrative as regards
inquiries into the nature of nebulae. The excursions of opinion on the
point were abruptly restricted and defined by the application to them of
the spectroscope. On August 29, 1864, Sir William Huggins sifted through
his prisms the rays of a bright planetary nebula in Draco.[1510] To his
infinite surprise, they proved to be mainly of one colour. In other
words, they avowed their origin from a mass of glowing vapour. As to
what _kind_ of vapour it might be by which Herschel's conjecture of a
"shining fluid" diffused at large throughout the cosmos was thus
unexpectedly verified, an answer only partially satisfactory could be
afforded. The conspicuous bright line of the Draco nebula seemed to
agree in position with one emitted by nitrogen, but has since proved to
be distinct from it; of its two fainter companions, one was unmistakably
the F line of hydrogen, while the other, in position intermediate
between the two, still remains unidentified.

By 1868 Huggins had satisfactorily examined the spectra of about seventy
nebulae, of which one-third displayed a gaseous character.[1511] All of
these gave the green ray fundamental to the nebular spectrum, and
emanating from an unknown form of matter named by Sir William Huggins
"nebulum." It is associated with seven or eight hydrogen lines, with
three of "yellow" helium, and with a good many of undetermined origin.
The absence of the crimson radiation of hydrogen--perceived with
difficulty only in some highly condensed objects--is an anomaly very
imperfectly explained as a physiological effect connected with the
extreme faintness of nebular light.[1512] An approximate coincidence
between the chief nebular line and a "fluting" of magnesium having been
alleged by Lockyer in support of his meteoritic hypothesis of nebular
constitution, it became of interest to ascertain its reality. The task
was accomplished by Sir William and Lady Huggins in 1889 and 1890,[1513]
and by Professor Keeler, with the advantages of the Mount Hamilton
apparatus and atmosphere, in 1890-91.[1514] The upshot was to show a
slight but sure discrepancy as to place, and a marked diversity as to
character, between the two qualities of light. The nebular ray
(wave-length 5,007 millionths of a millimetre) is slightly more
refrangible than the magnesium fluting-edge, and it is sharp and fine,
with no trace of the unilateral haze necessarily clinging even to the
last "remnant" of a banded formation.

Planetary and annular nebulae are, without exception, gaseous, as well as
those termed "irregular," which frequent the region of the Milky Way.
Their constitution usually betrays itself to the eye by their blue or
greenish colour; while those yielding a continuous spectrum are of a
dull white. Among the more remarkable of these are the well-known nebula
in Andromeda, and the great spiral in Canes Venatici; and, as a general
rule, the emissions of all such nebulae as present the appearance of
star-clusters grown misty through excessive distance are of the same
kind. It would, however, be eminently rash to conclude thence that they
are really aggregations of sun-like bodies. The improbability of such an
inference has been greatly enhanced by the occurrence, at an interval of
a quarter of a century, of stellar outbursts in the midst of two of
them. For it is practically certain that the temporary stars were
equally remote with the hazy formations they illuminated; hence, if the
constituent particles of the latter be suns, the incomparably vaster
orbs by which their feeble light was well-nigh obliterated must, as was
argued by Mr. Proctor, have been on a scale of magnitude such as the
imagination recoils from contemplating. Nevertheless, Dr. Scheiner, not
without much difficulty, obtained, in January, 1899, spectrographic
prints of the Andromeda nebula, indicative, he thought, of its being a
cluster of solar stars.[1515] Sir William and Lady Huggins, on the other
hand, _saw_, in 1897, bright intermixed with dark bands in the spectrum
of the same object.[1516] And Mr. Maunder conjectures all "white" nebulae
to be made up of sunlets in which the coronal element predominates,
while chromospheric materials assert their presence in nebulae of the
"green" variety.[1517]

Among the ascertained analogies between the stellar and nebular systems
is that of variability of light. On October 11, 1852, Mr. Hind
discovered a small nebula in Taurus. Chacornac observed it at Marseilles
in 1854, but was confounded four years later to find it vanished.
D'Arrest missed it October 3, and redetected it December 29, 1861. It
was easily seen in 1865-66, but invisible in the most powerful
instruments from 1877 to 1880.[1518] Barnard, however, made out an
almost evanescent trace of it, October 15, 1890, with the great Lick
telescope,[1519] and saw it easily in the spring of 1895, while six
months later it evaded his most diligent search.[1520] Then again, on
September 28, 1897, the Yerkes 40-inch disclosed it to him as a mere
shimmer at the last limit of visibility; and it came out in three
diffuse patches on plates to which, on December 6 and 27, 1899, Keeler
gave prolonged exposures with the Crossley reflector.[1521] Moreover, a
fairly bright adjacent nebula, perceived by O. Struve in 1868, and
observed shortly afterwards by d'Arrest, has totally vanished, and was
most likely only a temporary apparition. These are the most authentic
instances of nebular variability. Many others have been more or less
plausibly alleged;[1522] but Professor Holden's persuasion, acquired
from an exhaustive study of the records since 1758,[1523] that the
various parts of the Orion nebula fluctuate continually in relative
lustre, has not been ratified by photographic evidence.

The case of the "trifid" nebula in Sagittarius, investigated by Holden
in 1877,[1524] is less easily disposed of. What is certain is that a
remarkable triple star, centrally situated, according to the
observations of both the Herschels, 1784-1833, in a dark space between
the three great _lobes_ of the nebula, is now, and has been since 1839,
densely involved in one of them; and since the hypothesis of relative
motion is on many grounds inadmissible, the change that has apparently
taken place must be in the distribution of light. One no less
conspicuous was adduced by Mr. H. C. Russell, director of the Sydney
Observatory.[1525] A particularly bright part of the great Argo nebula,
as drawn by Sir John Herschel, has, it would seem, almost totally
disappeared. He noticed its absence in 1871, using a 7-inch telescope,
failed equally later on to find it with an 11-1/2-inch, and his
long-exposure photographs show no vestige of it. The same structure is
missing from, or scarcely traceable in, a splendid picture of the nebula
taken by Sir David Gill in twelve hours distributed over four nights in
March, 1892.[1526] An immense gaseous expanse has, it would seem, sunk
out of sight. Materially it is no doubt there; but the radiance has left
it.

Nebulae have no ascertained proper motions. No genuine change of place in
the heavens has yet been recorded for any one of them. All equally hold
aloof, so far as telescopic observation shows, from the busy journeyings
of the stars. This seeming immobility is partly an effect of vast
distance. Nebular parallax has, up to the present, proved evanescent,
and nebular parallactic drift, in response to the sun's advance through
space, remains likewise imperceptible.[1527] It may hence be presumed
that no nebulae occur within the sphere occupied by the nearer stars. But
the difficulty of accurately measuring such objects must also be taken
into account. Displacements which would be conspicuous in stars might
easily escape detection in ill-defined, hazy masses. Thus the measures
executed by d'Arrest in 1857[1528] have not yet proved effective for
their designed purpose of contributing to the future detection of proper
motions. Some determinations made by Mr. Burnham with the Lick refractor
in 1891,[1529] will ultimately afford a more critical test. He found
that nearly all planetary nebulae include a sharp stellar nucleus, the
position of which with reference to neighbouring stars could be fixed no
less precisely than if it were devoid of nebulous surroundings. Hence,
the objects located by him cannot henceforward shift, were it only to
the extent of a small fraction of a second, without the fact coming to
the knowledge of astronomers.

The spectroscope, however, here as elsewhere, can supplement the
telescope; and what it has to tell, it tells at once, without the
necessity of waiting on time to ripen results. Sir William Huggins made,
in 1874,[1530] the earliest experiments on the radial movements of
nebulae. But with only a negative upshot. None of the six objects
examined gave signs of spectral alteration, and it was estimated that
they must have done so had they been in course of recession from or
approach towards the earth by as much as twenty-five miles a second.
With far more powerful appliances, Professor Keeler renewed the attempt
at Lick in 1890-91. His success was unequivocal. Ten planetary nebulae
yielded perfectly satisfactory evidence of line-of-sight motion,[1531]
the swiftest traveller being the well-known greenish globe in
Draco,[1532] found to be hurrying towards the earth at the rate of forty
miles a second. For the Orion nebula, a recession of about eleven miles
was determined,[1533] the whole of which may, however, very well belong
to the solar system itself, which, by its translation towards the
constellation Lyra, is certainly leaving the great nebula pretty rapidly
behind. The anomaly of seeming nebular fixity has nevertheless been
removed; and the problem of nebular motion has begun to be solved
through the demonstrated possibility of its spectroscopic investigation.

Keeler's were the first trustworthy determinations of radial motion
obtained visually. That the similar work on the stars begun at Greenwich
in 1874, and carried on for thirteen years, remained comparatively
unfruitful, was only what might have been expected, the instruments
available there being altogether inadequate for the attainment of a high
degree of accuracy.

The various obstacles in the way of securing it were overcome by the
substitution of the sensitive plate for the eye. Air-tremors are thus
rendered comparatively innocuous; and measurements of stellar lines
displaced by motion with reference to fiducial lines from terrestrial
sources, photographed on the same plates, can be depended upon within
vastly reduced limits of error. Studies for the realisation of the
"spectrographic" method were begun by Dr. Vogel and his able assistant,
Dr. Scheiner, at Potsdam in 1887. Their preliminary results,
communicated to the Berlin Academy of Sciences, March 15, 1888, already
showed that the requirements for effective research in this important
branch were at last about to be complied with. An improved instrument
was erected in the autumn of the same year, and the fifty-one stars,
bright enough for determination with a refractor of 11 inches aperture,
were promptly taken in hand. A list of their motions in the line of
sight, published in 1892,[1534] was of high value, both in itself and
for what it promised. One noteworthy inference from the data it
collected was that the eye tends, under unfavourable circumstances, to
exaggerate the line-displacements it attempts to estimate. The
velocities photographically arrived at were of much smaller amounts than
those visually assigned. The average speed of the Potsdam stars came out
only 10.4 miles a second, the quickest among them being Aldebaran, with
a recession of thirty miles a second. More lately, however, Deslandres
and Campbell have determined for Zeta Herculis and Eta Cephei
respectively approaching rates of forty-four and fifty-four miles
a second.

The installation, in 1900, of a photographic refractor 31-1/2 inches in
aperture, coupled with a 20-inch guiding telescope, will enable Dr.
Vogel to investigate spectrographically some hundreds of stars fainter
than the second magnitude; and the materials thus accumulated should
largely help to provide means for a definite and complete solution of
the more than secular problem of the sun's advance through space. The
solution should be complete, because including a genuine determination
of the sun's velocity, apart from assumptions of any kind. M. Homann's
attempt, in 1885,[1535] to extract some provisional information on the
subject from the radial movements of visually determined stars gave a
fair earnest of what might be done with materials of a better quality.
He arrived at a goal for the sun's way shifted eastward to the
constellation Cygnus--a result congruous with the marked tendency of
recently determined apexes to collect in or near Lyra; and the most
probable corresponding velocity seemed to be about nineteen miles a
second, or just that of the earth in its orbit. A more elaborate
investigation of the same kind, based by Professor Campbell in
1900[1536] upon the motions of 280 stars, determined with extreme
precision, suffered in completeness through lack of available data from
the southern hemisphere. The outcome, accordingly, was an apex most
likely correctly placed as regards right ascension, but displaced
southward by some fifteen degrees. The speed of twelve miles a second,
assigned to the solar translation, approximates doubtless very closely
to the truth.

A successful beginning was made in nebular spectrography by Sir William
Huggins, March 7, 1882.[1537] Five lines in all stamped themselves upon
the plate during forty-five minutes of exposure to the rays of the
strange object in Orion. Of these, four were the known visible lines,
and a fifth, high up in the ultra-violet, at wave-length 3,727, has
evidently peculiar relationships, as yet imperfectly apprehended. It is
strong in the spectra of many planetaries; it helped to characterise the
nebular metamorphosis of Nova Aurigae, yet failed to appear in Nova
Persei. Two additional hydrogen lines, making six in all, were
photographed at Tulse Hill, from the Orion nebula, in 1890;[1538] and
Dr. Copeland's detection in 1886[1539] of the yellow ray D_3 gave the
first hint of the presence of helium in this prodigious formation. Nor
are there wanting spectroscopic indications of its physical connection
with the stars visually involved in it. Sir William and Lady Huggins
found a plate exposed February 5, 1888, impressed with four groups of
fine bright lines, originating in the continuous light of two of the
trapezium-stars, but extending some way into the surrounding
nebula.[1540] And Dr. Scheiner[1541] argued a wider relationship from
the common possession, by the nebula and the chief stars in the
constellation Orion, of a blue line, bright in the one case, dark in the
others, since identified as a member of one of the helium series.

The structural unity of the stellar and nebular orders in this extensive
region of the sky has also, by direct photographic means, been
unmistakably affirmed.

The first promising autographic picture of the Orion nebula was obtained
by Draper, September 30, 1880.[1542] The marked approach towards a still
more perfectly satisfactory result shown by his plates of March, 1881
and 1882, was unhappily cut short by his death. Meanwhile, M. Janssen
was at work in the same field from 1881, with his accustomed
success.[1543] But Dr. A. Ainslie Common left all competitors far behind
with a splendid picture, taken January 30, 1883, by means of an exposure
of thirty-seven minutes in the focus of his 3-foot silver-on-glass
mirror.[1544] Photography may thereby be said to have definitely assumed
the office of historiographer to the nebulae, since this one impression
embodies a mass of facts hardly to be compassed by months of labour with
the pencil, and affords a record of shape and relative brightness in the
various parts of the stupendous object it delineates which must prove
invaluable to the students of its future condition. Its beauty and merit
were officially recognised by the award of the Astronomical Society's
Gold Medal in 1884.

A second picture of equal merit, obtained by the same means, February
28, 1883, with an exposure of one hour, is reproduced in the
frontispiece. The vignette includes two specimens of planetary
photography. The Jupiter, with the great red spot conspicuous in the
southern hemisphere, is by Dr. Common. It dates from September 3, 1879,
and was accordingly one of the earliest results with his 36-inch, the
direct image in which imprinted itself in a fraction of a second, and
was subsequently enlarged on paper about twelve times. The exquisite
little picture of Saturn was taken at Paris by MM. Paul and Prosper
Henry, December 21, 1885, with their 13-inch photographic refractor. The
telescopic image was in this case magnified eleven times previous to
being photographed, an exposure of about five seconds being allowed; and
the total enlargement, as it now appears, is nineteen times. A trace of
the dusky ring perceptible on the original negative is lost in the
print.

A photograph of the Orion nebula taken by Dr. Roberts in 67 minutes,
November 30, 1886, made a striking disclosure of the extent of that
prodigious object. More than six times the nebulous area depicted on Dr.
Common's plates is covered by it, and it plainly shows an adjacent
nebula, separately catalogued by Messier, to belong to the same vast
formation.

This disposition to annex and appropriate has come out more strongly
with every increase of photographic power. Plates exposed at Harvard
College in March, 1888, with an 8-inch portrait-lens (the same used in
the preparation of the Draper Catalogue) showed the old-established
"Fish-mouth" nebula not only to involve the stars of the sword-handle,
but to be in tolerably evident connection with the most easterly of the
three belt-stars, from which a remarkable nebulous appendage was found
to proceed.[1545] A still more curious discovery was made by W. H.
Pickering in 1889.[1546] Photographs taken in three hours from the
summit of Wilson's Peak in California revealed the existence of an
enormous, though faint spiral structure, enclosing in its span of nearly
seventeen degrees the entire stellar and nebulous group of the Belt and
Sword, from which it most likely, although not quite traceably, issues
as if from a nucleus. A startling glimpse is thus afforded of the
cosmical importance of that strange "hiatus" in the heavens which
excited the wonder of Huygens in 1656. The inconceivable attenuation of
the gaseous stuff composing it was virtually demonstrated by Mr.
Ranyard.[1547]

In March, 1885, Sir Howard Grubb mounted for Dr. Isaac Roberts, at
Maghull, near Liverpool (his observatory has since been transferred to
Crowborough in Sussex), a silver-on-glass reflector of twenty inches
aperture, constructed expressly for use in celestial photography. A
series of nebula-pictures, obtained with this fine instrument, have
proved highly instructive both as to the structure and extent of these
wonderful objects; above all, one of the great Andromeda nebula, to
which an exposure of three hours was given on October 1, 1888.[1548] In
it a convoluted structure replaced and rendered intelligible the
anomalously rifted mass seen by Bond in 1847.[1549] The effects of
annular condensation appeared to have stamped themselves upon the plate,
and two attendant nebulae presented the aspect of satellites already
separated from the parent body, and presumably revolving round it. The
ring-nebula in Lyra was photographed at Paris in 1886, and shortly
afterwards by Von Gothard with a 10-inch reflector,[1550] and he
similarly depicted in 1888 the two chief spiral and other nebulae.[1551]
Photographs of the Lyra nebula taken at Algiers in 1890,[1552] and at
the Vatican observatory in 1892,[1553] were remarkable for the strong
development of a central star, difficult of telescopic discernment, but
evidently of primary importance to the annular structure around.

The uses of photography in celestial investigations become every year
more manifold and more apparent. The earliest chemical star-pictures
were those of Castor and Vega, obtained with the Cambridge refractor in
1850 by Whipple of Boston under the direction of W. C. Bond. Double-star
photography was inaugurated under the auspices of G. P. Bond, April 27,
1857, with an impression, obtained in eight seconds, of Mizar, the
middle star in the handle of the Plough. A series of measures from
sixty-two similar images gave the distance and position-angle of its
companion with about the same accuracy attainable by ordinary
micrometrical operations; and the method and upshot of these novel
experiments were described in three papers remarkably forecasting the
purposes to be served by stellar photography.[1554] The matter next fell
into the able hands of Rutherfurd, who completed in 1864 a fine object
glass (of 11-1/2 inches) corrected for the ultra-violet rays,
consequently useless for visual purposes. The sacrifice was recompensed
by conspicuous success. A set of measurements from his photographs of
nearly fifty stars in the Pleiades, and their comparison with Bessel's
places, enabled Dr. Gould to announce, in 1866, that during the
intervening third of a century no changes of importance had occurred in
their relative positions.[1555] And Mr. Harold Jacoby[1556] similarly
ascertained the fixity of seventy-five of Rutherfurd's Atlantids,
between the epoch 1873 and that of Dr. Elkin's heliometric triangulation
of the cluster in 1886,[1557] extending the interval to twenty-seven
years by subsequent comparisons with plates taken at Lick, September 27,
1900.[1558] Positive, however, as well as negative results have ensued
from the application of modern methods to that antique group.

On October 19, 1859, Wilhelm Tempel, a Saxon peasant by origin, later a
skilled engraver, discovered with a small telescope, bought out of his
scanty savings, an elliptical nebulosity, stretching far to the
southward from the star Merope. It attracted the attention of many
observers, but was so often missed, owing to its extreme susceptibility
to adverse atmospheric influences, as to rouse unfounded suspicions of
its variability. The detection of this evasive object gave a hint,
barely intelligible at the time, of further revelations of the same kind
by more cogent means.

A splendid photograph of 1,421 stars in the Pleiades, taken by the MM.
Henry with three hours' exposure, November 16, 1885, showed one of the
brightest of them to have a small spiral nebula, somewhat resembling a
strongly-curved comet's tail, attached to it. The reappearance of this
strange appurtenance on three subsequent plates left no doubt of its
real existence, visually attested at Pulkowa, February 5, 1886, by one
of the first observations made with the 30-inch equatoreal.[1559] Much
smaller apertures, however, sufficed to disclose the "Maia nebula,"
_once it was known to be there_. Not only did it appear greatly extended
in the Vienna 27-inch,[1560] but MM. Perrotin and Thollon saw it with
the Nice 15-inch, and M. Kammermann of Geneva, employing special
precautions, with a refractor of only ten inches aperture.[1561] The
advantage derived by him for bringing it into view, from the insertion
into the eye-piece of a uranium film, gives, with its photographic
intensity, valid proof that a large proportion of the light of this
remarkable object is of the ultra-violet kind.

The beginning thus made was quickly followed up. A picture of the
Pleiades procured at Maghull in eighty-nine minutes, October 23, 1886,
revealed nebulous surroundings to no less than four leading stars of the
group, namely, Alcyone, Electra, Merope, and Maia; and a second
impression, taken in three hours on the following night, showed further
"that the nebulosity extends in streamers and fleecy masses till it
seems almost to fill the spaces between the stars, and to extend far
beyond them."[1562] The coherence of the entire mixed structure was,
moreover, placed beyond doubt by the visibly close relationship of the
stars to the nebulous formations surrounding them in Dr. Roberts's
striking pictures. Thus Goldschmidt's notion that all the clustered
Pleiades constitute, as it were, a second Orion trapezium in the midst
of a huge formation of which Tempel's nebula is but a fragment,[1563]
has been to some extent verified. Yet it seemed fantastic enough in
1863.

Then in 1888 the MM. Henry gave exposures of four hours each to several
plates, which exhibited on development some new features of the
entangled nebulae. The most curious of these was the linking together of
stars by nebulous chains. In one case seven aligned stars appeared
strung on a silvery filament, "like beads on a rosary."[1564] The "rows
of stars," so often noticed in the sky, may, then, be concluded to have
more than an imaginary existence. Of the 2,326 stars recorded in these
pictures, a couple of hundred among the brightest can, at the outside,
be reckoned as genuine Pleiades. The great majority were relegated, by
Pickering's[1565] and Stratonoff's[1566] counts of the stellar populace
_in_ and _near_ the cluster, to the position of outsiders from it. They
are undistinguished denizens of the abysmal background upon which it is
projected.

Investigations of its condition were carried a stage further by Barnard.
On November 14, 1890,[1567] he discovered visually with the Lick
refractor a close nebulous satellite to Merope, photographs of which
were obtained by Keeler in 1898.[1568] It appears in them of a rudely
pentagonal shape, a prominent angle being directed towards the adjacent
star. Finally, an exposure of ten hours made by Barnard with the Willard
lens indicated the singular fact that the entire group is embedded in a
nebulous matrix, streaky outliers of which blur a wide surface of the
celestial vault.[1569] The artist's conviction of the reality of what
his picture showed was confirmed by negatives obtained by Bailey at
Arequipa in 1897, and by H. C. Wilson at Northfield (Minnesota) in
1898.[1570]

With the Ealing 3-foot reflector, sold by Dr. Common to Mr. Crossley,
and by him presented to the Lick Observatory, Professor Keeler took in
1899 a series of beautiful and instructive nebula[1571] photographs; One
of the Trifid may be singled out as of particular excellence. An
astonishing multitude of new nebulae were revealed by trial-exposures
with this instrument. A "conservative estimate" gave 120,000 as the
number coming within its scope. Moreover, the majority of those actually
recorded were of an unmistakable spiral character, and they included
most of Sir John Herschel's "double nebulae," previously supposed to
exemplify the primitive history of binary stellar systems.[1572] Dr. Max
Wolf's explorations with a 6-inch Voigtlaender lens in 1901 emphatically
reaffirmed the inexhaustible wealth of the nebular heavens. In one
restricted region, midway between Praesepe and the Milky Way, he located
135 nebulae, where only three had until then been catalogued; and he
counted 108 such objects clustering round the star 31 Comae
Berenices,[1573] and so closely that all might be occulted together by
the moon. The general photographic Catalogue of Nebulae which Dr. Wolf
has begun to prepare[1574] will thus be a most voluminous work.

The history of celestial photography at the Cape of Good Hope began with
the appearance of the great comet of 1882. No special apparatus was at
hand; so Sir David Gill called in the services of a local artist, Mr.
Allis of Mowbray, with whose camera, strapped to the Observatory
equatoreal, pictures of conspicuous merit were obtained. But their
particular distinction lay in the multitude of stars begemming the
background. (See Plate III.) The sight of them at once opened to the
Royal Astronomer a new prospect. He had already formed the project of
extending Argelander's "Durchmusterung" from the point where it was left
by Schoenfeld to the southern pole; and his ideas regarding the means of
carrying it into execution crystallised at the needle touch of the
cometary experiments. He resolved to employ photography for the purpose.
The exposure of plates was accordingly begun, under the care of Mr. Ray
Woods, in 1885; and in less than six years, the sky, from 19 deg. of south
latitude to the pole, had been covered in duplicate. Their measurement,
and the preparation of a catalogue of the stars imprinted upon them,
were generously undertaken by Professor Kapteyn, and his laborious task
has at length been successfully completed. The publication, in 1900, of
the third and concluding volume of the "Cape Photographic
Durchmusterung"[1575] placed at the disposal of astronomers a
photographic census of the heavens fuller and surer than the
corresponding visual enumeration executed at Bonn. It includes 454,875
stars, nearly to the tenth magnitude, and their positions are reliable
to about one second of arc.

The production of this important work was thus a result of the Cape
comet-pictures; yet not the most momentous one. They turned the scale in
favour of recourse to the camera when the MM. Henry encountered, in
their continuation of Chacornac's half-finished enterprise of ecliptical
charting, sections of the Milky Way defying the enumerating efforts of
eye and hand. The perfect success of some preliminary experiments made
with an instrument constructed by them expressly for the purpose was
announced to the Academy of Sciences at Paris, May 2, 1885. By its means
stars estimated as of the sixteenth magnitude clearly recorded their
presence and their places; and the enormous increase of knowledge
involved may be judged of from the fact that, in a space of the Milky
Way in Cygnus 2 deg. 15' by 3 deg., where 170 stars had been mapped by
the old laborious method, about five thousand stamped their images on a
single Henry plate.

These results suggested the grand undertaking of a general photographic
survey of the heavens, and Gill's proposal, June 4, 1886, of an
International Congress for the purpose of setting it on foot was
received with acclamation, and promptly acted upon. Fifty-six delegates
of seventeen different nationalities met in Paris, April 16, 1887, under
the presidentship of Admiral Mouchez, to discuss measures and organise
action. They resolved upon the construction of a Photographic Chart of
the whole heavens, comprising stars of a fourteenth magnitude, to the
surmised number of twenty millions; to be supplemented by a Catalogue,
framed from plates of comparatively short exposure, giving start to the
eleventh magnitude. These will probably amount to about one million and
a quarter. For procuring both sets of plates, instruments were
constructed precisely similar to that of the MM. Henry, which is a
photographic refractor, thirteen inches in aperture, and eleven feet
focus, attached to a guiding telescope of eleven inches aperture,
corrected, of course, for the visual rays. Each place covers an area of
four square degrees, and since the series must be duplicated to prevent
mistakes, about 22,000 plates will be needed for the Chart alone. The
task of preparing them was apportioned among eighteen observatories
scattered over the globe, from Mexico to Melbourne; but three in South
America having become disabled or inert, were replaced in 1900 by those
at Cordoba, Montevideo, and Perth, Western Australia. Meanwhile, the
publication of results has begun, and is likely to continue for at least
a quarter of a century. The first volume of measures from the Potsdam
Catalogue-plates was issued in 1899, and its successors, if on the same
scale, must number nearly 400. Moreover, ninety-six heliogravure
enlargements from the Paris Chart-plates, distributed in the same year,
supplied a basis for the calculation that the entire Atlas of the sky,
composed of similar sheets, will form a pile thirty feet high and two
tons in weight![1576] It will, however, possess an incalculable
scientific value. For millions of stars can be determined by its means,
from their imprinted images, with an accuracy comparable to that
attainable by direct meridian observations.

One of the most ardent promoters of the scheme it may be expected to
realise was Admiral Mouchez, the successor of Leverrier in the direction
of the Paris Observatory. But it was not granted to him to see the
fruition of his efforts. He died suddenly June 25, 1892.[1577] Although
not an astronomer by profession, he had been singularly successful in
pushing forward the cause of the science he loved, while his genial and
open nature won for him wide personal regard. He was replaced by M.
Tisserand, whose mathematical eminence fitted him to continue the
traditions of Delaunay and Leverrier. But his career, too, was unhappily
cut short by an unforeseen death on October 20, 1896; and the more
eminent among the many qualifications of his successor, M. Maurice
Loewy, are of the practical kind.

The sublime problem of the construction of the heavens has not been
neglected amid the multiplicity of tasks imposed upon the cultivators of
astronomy by its rapid development. But data of a far higher order of
precision, and indefinitely greater in amount, than those at the
disposal of Herschel or Struve must be accumulated before any definite
conclusions on the subject are possible. The first organised effort
towards realising this desideratum was made by the German Astronomical
Society in 1865, two years after its foundation at Heidelberg. The
original programme consisted in the _exact_ determination of the places
of all Argelander's stars to the ninth magnitude (exclusive of the polar
zone), from the reobservation of which, say, in the year 1950,
astronomers of two generations hence may gather a vast store of
knowledge--directly of the apparent motions, indirectly of the mutual
relations binding together the suns and systems of space. Thirteen
observatories in Europe and America joined in the work, now virtually
terminated. Its scope was, after its inception, widened to include
southern zones as far as the Tropic of Capricorn; this having been
rendered feasible by Schoenfeld's extension (1875-1885) of Argelander's
survey. Thirty thousand additional stars thus taken in were allotted in
zones to five observatories. Another important undertaking of the same
class is the reobservation of the 47,300 stars in Lalande's _Histoire
Celeste_. Begun under Arago in 1855, its upshot has been the publication
of the great Paris Catalogue, issued in eight volumes, between 1887 and
1902. From a careful study of their secular changes in position, M.
Bossert has already derived the proper motions of a couple of thousand
out of nearly fifty thousand stars enumerated in it.

Through Dr. Gould's unceasing labours during his fifteen years'
residence at Cordoba, a detailed acquaintance with southern stars was
brought about. His _Uranometria Argentina_ (1879) enumerates the
magnitudes of 8,198 out of 10,649 stars visible to the naked eye under
those transparent skies; 33,160 down to 9-1/2 magnitude are embraced in
his "zones"; and the Argentine General Catalogue of 32,468 southern
stars was published in 1886. Valuable work of the same kind has been
done at the Leander McCormick Observatory, Virginia, by Professor O.
Stone; while the late Redcliffe observer's "Cape Catalogue for 1880"
affords inestimable aid to the practical astronomer south of the line,
which has been reinforced with several publications issued by the
present Astronomer Royal at the Cape. Moreover, the gigantic task
entered upon in 1860 by Dr. C. H. F. Peters, director of the Litchfield
Observatory, Clinton (N.Y.), and of which a large instalment was
finished in 1882, deserves honourable mention. It was nothing less than
to map all stars down to, and even below, the fourteenth magnitude,
situated within 30 deg. on either side of the ecliptic, and so to afford
"a sure basis for drawing conclusions with respect to the changes going
on in the starry heavens."[1578]

It is tolerably safe to predict that no work of its kind and for its
purpose will ever again be undertaken. In a small part of one night
stars can now be got to register themselves more numerously and more
accurately than by the eye and hand of the most skilled observer in the
course of a year. Fundamental catalogues, constructed by the old,
time-honoured method, will continue to furnish indispensable
starting-points for measurement; and one of especial excellence was
published by Professor Newcomb in 1899;[1579] but the relative places of
the small crowded stars--the sidereal [Greek: hoi pholloi]--will
henceforth be derived from their autographic statements on the sensitive
plate. Even the secondary purpose--that of asteroidal discovery--served
by detailed stellar enumeration, is more surely attained by photography
than by laborious visual comparison. For planetary movement betrays
itself in a comparatively short time by turning the imprinted image of
the object affected by it from a dot into a trail.

In the arduous matter of determining star distances progress has been
steady, and bids fair to become rapidly accelerated. Together, yet
independently, Gill and Elkin carried out, at the Cape Observatory in
1882-83, an investigation of remarkable accuracy into the parallaxes of
nine southern stars. One of these was the famous Alpha Centauri,
the distance of which from the earth was ascertained to be just
one-third greater than Henderson had made it. The parallax of Sirius, on
the other hand, was doubled, or its distance halved; while Canopus
proved to be quite immeasurably remote--a circumstance which,
considering that, among all the stellar multitude, it is outshone only
by the radiant Dog-star, gives a stupendous idea of its real splendour
and dimensions.

Inquiries of this kind were, for some years, successfully pursued at the
observatory of Dunsink, near Dublin. Annual perspective displacements
were by Dr. Bruennow detected in several stars, and in others remeasured
with a care which inspired just confidence. His parallax for Alpha
Lyrae (0.13") was authentic, though slightly too large (Elkin's final
results gave Pi = 0.082"); and the received value for the
parallax of the swiftly travelling star "Groombridge 1,830" scarcely
differs from that arrived at by him in 1871 (Pi = 0.09"). His
successor as Astronomer-Royal for Ireland, Sir Robert Stawell Ball (now
Lowndean Professor of Astronomy in the University of Cambridge), has
done good service in the same department. For besides verifying
approximately Struve's parallax of half a second of arc for 61 Cygni, he
refuted, in 1811, by a sweeping search for (so-called) "large"
parallaxes, certain baseless conjectures of comparative nearness to the
earth, in the case of red and temporary stars.[1580] Of 450 objects thus
cursorily examined, only one star of the seventh magnitude, numbered
1,618 in Groombridge's Circumpolar Catalogue, gave signs of measurable
vicinity. Similarly, a reconnaissance among rapidly moving stars lately
made by Dr. Chase with the Yale heliometer[1581] yielded no really
large, and only eight appreciable parallaxes among the 92 subjects of
his experiments.

A second campaign in stellar parallax was undertaken by Gill and Elkin
in 1887. But this time the two observers were in opposite hemispheres.
Both used heliometers. Dr. Elkin had charge of the fine instrument then
recently erected in Yale College Observatory; Sir David Gill employed
one of seven inches, just constructed under his directions, in
first-rate style, by the Repsolds of Hamburg. Dr. Elkin completed in
1888 his share of the more immediate joint programme, which consisted in
the determination, by direct measurement, of the average parallax of
stars of the first magnitude. It came out, for the ten northern
luminaries, after several revisions, 0.098", equivalent to a
light-journey of thirty-three years. The deviations from this average
were, indeed, exceedingly wide. Two of the stars, Betelgeux and
Alpha Cygni, gave no certain sign of any perspective shifting; of the rest,
Procyon, with a parallax of 0.334", proved the nearest to our system. At
the mean distance concluded for these ten brilliant stars, the sun would
show as of only fifth magnitude; hence it claims a very subordinate rank
among the suns of space. Sir David Gill's definitive results were
published in 1900.[1582] As the average parallax of the eleven brightest
stars in the southern hemisphere, they gave 0.13", a value enhanced by
the exceptional proximity of Alpha Centauri. Yet four of these
conspicuous objects--Canopus, Rigel, Spica, and Beta Crucis--gave
no sign of perspective response to the annual change in our point of
view. The list included eleven fainter stars with notable proper
motions, and most of these proved to have fairly large parallaxes. Among
other valuable contributions to this difficult branch may be instanced
Bruno Peter's measurements of eleven stars with the Leipzig heliometer,
1887-92;[1583] Kapteyn's application of the method by differences in
right ascension to fifteen stars observed on the meridian 1885-89;[1584]
and Flint's more recent similar determinations at Madison,
Wisconsin.[1585]

The great merit of having rendered photography available for the
sounding of the celestial depths belongs to Professor Pritchard. The
subject of his initial experiment was 61 Cygni. From measurements of 200
negatives taken in 1886, he derived for that classic star a parallax of
0.438", in satisfactory agreement with Ball's of 0.468". A detailed
examination convinced the Astronomer-Royal of its superior accuracy to
Bessel's result with the heliometer. The Savilian Professor carried out
his project of determining all second magnitude stars to the number of
about thirty,[1586] conveniently observable at Oxford, obtaining as the
general outcome of the research an average parallax of 0.056", for
objects of that rank. But this value, though in itself probable, cannot
be accepted as authoritative, in view of certain inaccuracies in the
work adverted to by Jacoby,[1587] Hermann Davis, and Gill. The method
has, nevertheless, very large capabilities. Professor Kapteyn showed, in
1889,[1588] the practicability of deriving parallaxes wholesale from
plates exposed at due intervals, and applied his system, in 1900, with
encouraging success, to a group of 248 stars.[1589] The apparent absence
of spurious shiftings justified the proposal to follow up the completion
of the Astrographic Chart with the initiation of a photographic
"Parallax Durchmusterung."

Observers of double stars are among the most meritorious, and need to be
among the most patient and painstaking workers in sidereal astronomy.
They are scarcely as numerous as could be wished. Dr. Doberck,
distinguished as a computer of stellar orbits, complained in 1882[1590]
that data sufficient for the purpose had not been collected for above 30
or 40 binaries out of between five and six hundred certainly or probably
within reach. The progress since made is illustrated by Mr. Gore's
useful Catalogue of Computed Binaries, including fifty-nine entries,
presented to the Royal Irish Academy, June 9, 1890.[1591] Few have done
more towards supplying the deficiency of materials than the late Baron
Ercole Dembowski of Milan. He devoted the last thirty years of his life,
which came to an end January 19, 1881, to the revision of the Dorpat
Catalogue, and left behind him a store of micrometrical measures as
numerous as they are precise.

Of living observers in this branch, Mr. S. W. Burnham is beyond question
the foremost. While pursuing legal avocations at Chicago, he diverted
his scanty leisure by exploring the skies with a 6-inch telescope
mounted in his back-yard; and had discovered, in May, 1882, one thousand
close and mostly very difficult double stars.[1592] Summoned as chief
assistant to the new Lick Observatory in 1888, he resumed the work of
his predilection with the 36-inch and 12-inch refractors of that
establishment. But although devoting most of his attention to
much-needed remeasurements of known pairs, he incidentally divided no
less than 274 stars, the majority of which lay beyond the resolving
power of less keen and effectually aided eyesight. One of his many
interesting discoveries was that of a minute companion to Alpha
Ursae Majoris (the first Pointer), which already gives unmistakable signs
of orbital movement round the shining orb it is attached to. Another
pair, Kappa Pegasi, detected in 1880, was found in 1892 to have
more than completed a circuit in the interim.[1593] Its period of a
little over eleven years is the shortest attributable to a _visible_
binary system, except that of Delta Equulei, provisionally
determined by Professor Hussey in 1900 at 5.7 years,[1594] and indicated
by spectroscopic evidence to be of uncommon brevity.[1595] Burnham's
Catalogue of 1,290 Double Stars, discovered by him from 1871 to
1899,[1596] is a record of unprecedented interest. Nearly all the 690
pairs included in it, 2" or less than 2" apart, must be physically
connected; and they offer a practically unlimited field for
investigation; while the notes, diagrams, and orbits appended profusely
to the various entries, are eminently helpful to students and computers.
The author is continuing his researches at the Yerkes Observatory,
having quitted the Lick establishment in 1892. The first complete
enrolment of southern double stars was made by Mr. R. T. A. Innes in
1899.[1597] The couples enumerated, twenty-one per cent. of which are
separated by less than one second of arc, are 2,140 in number. They
include 305 discovered by himself. Dr. See gathered a rich harvest of
nearly 500 new southern pairs with the Lowell 24-inch refractor in
1897.[1598] Professor Hough's discoveries in more northerly zones amount
to 623;[1599] Hussey's at Lick to 350; and Aitken's already to over 300.

There is as yet no certainty that the stars of 61 Cygni form a true
binary combination. Mr. Burnham, indeed, holds them to be in course of
definitive separation; and Professor Hall's observations at Washington,
1879 to 1891, although favouring their physical connection, are far from
decisive on the point.[1600] Dr. Wilsing, from certain anomalous
displacements of their photographed images, concluded in 1893[1601] the
presence of an invisible third member of the system, revolving in a
period of twenty-two months; but the effects noticed by him were
probably illusory.

Important series of double-star observations were made by Perrotin at
Nice in 1883-4;[1602] by Hall, with the 26-inch Washington equatoreal,
1874 to 1891;[1603] by Schiaparelli from 1875 onward; by Glasenapp, O.
Stone, Leavenworth, Seabroke, and many besides. Finally, Professor
Hussey's revision of the Pulkowa Catalogue[1604] is a work of the _teres
atque rotundus_ kind, which leaves little or nothing to be desired. The
methods employed in double-star determinations remain, at the beginning
of the twentieth century, essentially unchanged. The camera has scarcely
encroached upon this part of the micrometer's domain.[1605]

A research of striking merit into the origin of binary stars was
published in 1892 by Dr. T. J. J. See, in the form of an Inaugural
Dissertation for his doctor's degree in the University of Berlin. The
main result was to show the powerful effects of tidal friction in
prescribing the course of their development from double nebulae,
revolving almost in contact, to double suns, far apart, yet inseparable.
The high eccentricities of their eventual orbits were shown to result
necessarily from this mode of action, which must operate with enormous
strength on closely conjoined, nearly equal masses, such as the rapidly
revolving pairs disclosed by the spectroscope. That these are still in
an early stage of their life-history is probable in itself, and is
re-affirmed by the exceedingly small density indicated for eclipsing
stars by the ratio of phase-duration to period.

Stellar photometry, initiated by the elder Herschel, and provided with
exact methods by his son at the Cape, by Steinheil and Seidel at Munich,
has of late years assumed the importance of a separate department of
astronomical research. Two monumental works on the subject, compiled on
opposite sides of the Atlantic, were thus appropriately coupled in the
bestowal of the Royal Astronomical Society's Gold Medal in 1886. Harvard
College Observatory led the way under the able direction of Professor E.
C. Pickering. His photometric catalogue of 4,260 stars,[1606]
constructed from nearly 95,000 observations of light-intensity during
the years 1879-82, constitutes a record of incalculable value for the
detection and estimation of stellar variability. It was succeeded in
1885 by Professor Pritchard's "Uranometria Nova Oxoniensis," including
photometric determinations of the magnitude of all naked-eye stars, from
the pole to ten degrees south of the equator to the number of 2,784. The
instrument employed was the "wedge photometer," which measures
brightness by resistance to extinction. A wedge of neutral-tint glass,
accurately divided to scale, is placed in the path of the stellar rays,
when the thickness of it they have power to traverse furnishes a
criterion of their intensity. Professor Pickering's "meridian
photometer," on the other hand, is based upon Zoellner's principle of
equalization effected by a polarising apparatus. After all, however, as
Professor Pritchard observed, "the eye is the real photometer," and its
judgment can only be valid over a limited range.[1607] Absolute
uniformity, then, in estimates made by various means, under varying
conditions, and by different observers, is not to be looked for; and it
is satisfactory to find substantial agreement attainable and attained.
Only in an insignificant fraction of the stars common to the Harvard and
Oxford catalogues discordances are found exceeding one-third of a
magnitude; a large proportion (71 per cent.) agree within one-fourth, a
considerable minority (31 per cent.) within one-tenth of a
magnitude.[1608] The Harvard photometry was extended, on the same scale,
to the opposite pole in a catalogue of the magnitudes of 7,922 southern
stars,[1609] founded on Professor Bailey's observations in Peru,
1889-91. Measurements still more comprehensive were subsequently
executed at the primary establishment. With a meridian photometer of
augmented power, the surprising number of 473,216 settings were made
during the years 1891-98, nearly all by the indefatigable director
himself, and they afforded materials for a "Photometric Durchmusterung,"
published in 1901, including all stars to 7.5 magnitude north of
declination -40 deg.[1610] A photometric zone, 20 deg. wide, has for some
time been in course of observation at Potsdam by MM. Mueller and Kempf.
The instrument employed by them is constructed on the polarising
principle as adapted by Zoellner.

Photographic photometry has meanwhile risen to an importance if anything
exceeding that of visual photometry. For the usefulness of the great
international star-chart now being prepared would be gravely compromised
by systematic mistakes regarding the magnitudes of the stars registered
upon it. No entirely trustworthy means of determining them have,
however, yet been found. There is no certainty as to the relative times
of exposure needed to get images of stars representative of successive
photometric ranks. All that can be done is to measure the proportionate
diameters of such images, and to infer, by the application of a law
learned from experience, the varied intensities of light to which they
correspond. The law is, indeed, neither simple nor constant. Different
investigators have arrived at different formulae, which, being purely
empirical, vary their nature with the conditions of experiment. Probably
the best expedient for overcoming the difficulty is that devised by
Pickering, of simultaneously photographing a star and its secondary
image, reduced in brightness by a known amount.[1611] The results of its
use will be exhibited in a catalogue of 40,000 stars to the tenth
magnitude, one for each square degree of the heavens. A photographic
photometry of all the lucid stars, modelled on the visual photometry of
1884, is promised from the same copious source of novelties. The
magnitudes of the stars in the Draper Catalogue were determined, so to
speak, spectrographically. The quantity measured in all cases was the
intensity of the hydrogen line near G. By the employment of this
definite and uniform test, results were obtained, of special value
indeed, but in strong disaccord with those given by less exclusive
determinations.

Thought, meantime, cannot be held aloof from the great subject upon the
future illustration of which so much patient industry is being expended.
Nor are partial glimpses denied to us of relations fully discoverable,
perhaps, only through centuries of toil. Some important points in
cosmical economy have, indeed, become quite clear within the last fifty
years, and scarcely any longer admit of a difference of opinion. One of
these is that of the true status of nebulae.

This was virtually settled by Sir J. Herschel's description in 1847 of
the structure of the Magellanic clouds; but it was not until Whewell, in
1853, and Herbert Spencer, in 1858,[1612] enforced the conclusions
