
It will be seen then that my journey was in a way infinitely tedious,
but to me, after all those years of waiting, the time passed on winged
feet. I had been separated from my love till I could bear the strain
no longer; let me but see from a distance the place where she lay, and
feast my eyes upon it for a while, and then I could go back to my abode
in the tree and there remain patiently awaiting the will of the Gods.

The air grew more chilly as I began to come out above the region of
trees, on to that higher ground which glares down on the rest of the
world, and I made buskins and a coat of woven grasses to protect my body
from the cold, which began to blow upon me keenly. And later on, where
the snow lay eternally, and was blown into gullies, and frozen into
solid banks and bergs of ice, I had hard work to make any progress
amongst its perilous mazes, and was moreover so numbed by the chill,
that my natural strength was vastly weakened. Overhead, too, following
me up with forbidding swoops, and occasionally coming so close that I
had to threaten it with my weapons, was one of those huge man-eating
birds which live by pulling down and carrying off any creature that
their instincts tell them is weakly, and likely soon to die.

But the lure ahead of me was strong enough to make these difficulties
seem small, and though the air of the mountain agreed with me ill,
causing sickness and panting, I pressed on with what speed I could
muster towards the elusive summit. Time after time I thought the next
spurt would surely bring me out to the view for which my soul yearned,
but always there seemed another bank of snow and ice yet to be climbed.
But at last I reached the crest, and gave thanks to the most High Gods
for Their protection and favour.

Far, far away I could see the Sacred Mountain with its ring of fires
burning pale under the day, and although the splendid city which nestled
at its foot could not be seen from where I stood, I knew its position
and I knew its plan, and my soul went out to that throne of granite in
the square before the royal pyramid, where once, years before, I had
buried my love. Had Phorenice left the tomb unviolated?

I stood there leaning on my spear, filling my eye with the prospect,
warming even to the smoke of mountains that I recognised as old
acquaintances. Gods! how my love burned within me for this woman. My
whole being seemed gone out to meet her, and to leave room for nothing
beside. For long enough a voice seemed dimly to be calling me, but
I gave it no regard. I had come out to that hoary mountain top for
communion with Nais alone, and I wanted none others to interrupt.

But at length the voice calling my name grew too loud to be neglected,
and I pulled myself out of my sweet musing with a start to think that
here, for the first time since parting with Tob and his company, I
should see another human fellow-being. I gripped my weapon and asked who
called. The reply came clearly from up the slopes of mountain, and I saw
a man coming towards me over the snows. He was old and feeble. His body
was bent, and his hair and beard were white as the ground on which he
trod, and presently I recognised him as Zaemon. He was coming towards
me with incredible speed for a man of his years and feebleness, but he
carried in his hand the glowing Symbol of our Lord the Sun, and holy
strength from this would add largely to his powers.

He came close to me and made the sign of the Seven, which I returned
to him, with its completion, with due form and ceremony. And then he
saluted me in the manner prescribed as messenger appointed by the High
Council of the Priests seated before the Ark of the Mysteries, and I
made humble obeisance before him.

"In all things I will obey the orders that you put before me," I said.

"Such is your duty, my brother. The command is, that you return
immediately to the Sacred Mountain, so that if human means may still
prevail, you, as the most skilful general Atlantis owns within her
borders, may still save the country from final wreck and punishment. The
woman Phorenice persists in her infamies. The poor land groans under
her heel. And now she has laid siege to our Sacred Mountain itself, and
swears that not one soul shall be left alive in all Atlantis who does
not bend humbly to her will."

"It is a command and I obey it. But let me ask of another matter that is
intimate to both of us. What of Nais?"

"Nais rests where you left her, untouched. Phorenice knows by her
arts--she has stolen nearly all the ancient knowledge now--that still
you live, and she keeps Nais unharmed beneath the granite throne in the
hopes that some time she may use her as a weapon against you. Little she
knows the sternness of our Priests' creed, my brother. Why, even I, that
am the girl's father, would sacrifice her blithely, if her death or ruin
might do a tittle of good to Atlantis."

"You go beyond me with your devotion."

The old man leaned forward at me, with glowering brow. "What!"

"Or my old blind adherence to the ancient dogma has been sapped and
weakened by events. You must buy my full obedience, Zaemon, if you want
it. Promise me Nais--and your arts I know can snatch her--and I will be
true servant to the High Council of the Priest, and will die in the
last ditch if need be for the carrying out of order. But let me see Nais
given over to the fury of that wanton woman, and I shall have no inwards
left, except to take my vengeance, and to see Atlantis piled up in ruins
as her funeral-stone."

Zaemon looked at me bitterly. "And you are the man the High Council
thought to trust as they would trust one of themselves? Truly we are in
an age of weak men and faithless now. But, my lord--nay, I must call you
brother still: we cannot be too nice in our choosing to-day--you are the
best there is, and we must have you. We little thought you would ask a
price for your generalship, having once taken oath on the walls of the
Ark of the Mysteries itself that always, come what might, you would be a
servant of the High Council of the Clan without fee and without hope of
advancement. But this is the age of broken vows, and you are going no
more than trim with the fashion. Indeed, brother, perhaps I should thank
you for being no more greedy in your demands."

"You may spare me your taunts. You, by self-denial and profound search
into the highest of the higher Mysteries, have made yourself something
wiser than human; I have preserved my humanity, and with it its powers
and frailties; and it seems that each of us has his proper uses, or
you would not be come now here to me. Rather you would have done the
generalling yourself."

"You make a warm defence, my brother. But I have no leisure now to stand
before you with argument. Come to the Sacred Mountain, fight me this
wanton, upstart Empress, and by my beard you shall have your Nais as you
left her as a reward."

"It is a command of the High Council which shall be obeyed. I will come
with my brother now, as soon as he is rested."

"Nay," said the old man, "I have no tiredness, and as for coming with
me, there you will not be able. But follow at what pace you may."

He turned and set off down the snowy slopes of the mountain and I
followed; but gradually he distanced me; and so he kept on, with speed
always increasing, till presently he passed out of my sight round the
spur of an ice-cliff, and I found myself alone on the mountain side.
Yes, truly alone. For his footmarks in the snow from being deep, grew
shallower, and less noticeable, so that I had to stoop to see them. And
presently they vanished entirely, and the great mountain's flank lay
before me trackless, and untrodden by the foot of man since time began.

I was not shaken by any great amazement. Though it was beyond my poor
art to compass this thing myself, having occupied my mind in exile more
with memories of Nais than in study of those uppermost recesses of the
Higher Mysteries in which Zaemon was so prodigiously wise, still I had
some inkling of his powers.

Zaemon I knew would be back again in his dwelling on the Sacred
Mountain, shaken and breathless, even before I had found an end to his
tracks in the snow, and it behoved me to join him there in the quickest
possible time. I had his promise now for my reward, and I knew that he
would carry it into effect. Beforetime I had made an error. I had valued
Atlantis most, and Nais, my private love, as only second. But now it was
in my mind to be honest with others even as with myself. Though all
the world were hanging on my choice, I could but love my Nais most, and
serve her first and foremost of all.




16. SIEGE OF THE SACRED MOUNTAIN


Now, my passage across the great continent of Atlantis, if tedious and
haunted by many dangers, need not be recounted in detail here. Only one
halt did I make of any duration, and that was unavoidable. I had killed
a stag one day, bringing it down after a long chase in an open savannah.
I scented the air carefully, to see if there was any other beast which
could do me harm within reach, and thinking that the place was safe,
set about cutting my meat, and making a sufficiency into a bundle for
carriage.

But underfoot amongst the grasses there was a great legged worm, a
monstrous green thing, very venomous in its bite; and presently as I
moved I brushed it with my heel, and like the dart of light it swooped
with its tiny head and struck me with its fangs in the lower thigh. With
my knife I cut through its neck and it fell to writhing and struggling
and twining its hundred legs into all manner of contortions; and then,
cleaning my blade in the ground, I stabbed with it deep all round the
wound, so that the blood might flow freely and wash the venom from its
lodgement. And then with the blood trickling healthily down from my
heel, I shouldered the meat and strode off, thankful for being so well
quit of what might have made itself a very ugly adventure.

As I walked, however, my leg began to be filled with a tightness and
throbbing which increased every hour, and presently it began to swell
also, till the skin was stretched like drawn parchment. I was taken,
too, with a sickness, that racked me violently, and if one of the
greater and more dangerous beasts had come upon me then, he would have
eaten me without a fight. With the fall of darkness I managed to haul
myself up into a tree, and there abode in the crutch of a limb, in
wakefulness and pain throughout the night.

With the dawn, when the night beasts had gone to their lairs, I
clambered down again, and leaning heavily on my spear, limped onwards
through the sombre forests along my way. The moss which grows on the
northern side of each tree was my guide, but gradually I began to note
that I was seeing moss all round the trees, and, in fact, was growing
light-headed with the pain and the swelling of the limb. But still I
pressed onwards with my journey, my last instinct being to obey the
command of the High Council, and so procure the enlargement of Nais as
had been promised.

My last memory was of being met by someone in the black forest who aided
me, and there my waking senses took wings into forgetfulness.

But after an interval, wit returned, and I found myself on a bed of
leaves in a cleft between two rocks, which was furnished with some poor
skill, and fortified with stakes and buildings against the entrance of
the larger marauding beasts. My wound was dressed with a poultice of
herbs, and at the other side of the cavern there squatted a woman,
cooking a mess of wood-grubs and honey over a fire of sticks.

"How came I here?" I asked.

"I brought you," said she.

"And who are you?"

"A nymph, they call me, and I practise as such, collecting herbs and
curing the diseases of those that come to me, telling fortunes, and
making predictions. In return I receive what each can afford, and if
they do not pay according to their means, I clap on a curse to make them
wither. It's a lean enough living when wars and the pestilence have left
so few poor folk to live in the land."

"Do you visit Atlantis?"

"Not I. Phorenice would have me boiled in brine, living, if she could
lay easy hands on me. Our dainty Empress tolerates no magic but her own.
They say she is for pulling down the Priests off their Mountain now."

"So you do get news of the city?"

"Assuredly. It is my trade to get good news, or otherwise how could I
tell fortunes to the vulgar? You see, my lord, I detected your quality
by your speech, and knowing you are not one of those that come to me for
spells, and potions, I have no fear in speaking to you plainly."

"Tell me then: Phorenice still reigns?"

"Most vilely."

"As a maiden?"

"As the mother of twin sons. Tatho's her husband now, and has been these
three years."

"Tatho! Who followed him as viceroy of Yucatan?"

"There is no Yucatan. A vast nation of little hairy men, so the tale
goes, coming from the West overran the country. They had clubs of
wood tipped with stone as their only arm, but numbers made their chief
weapon. They had no desire for plunder, or the taking of slaves, or
the conquering of cities. To eat the flesh of Atlanteans was their only
lust, and they followed it prodigiously. Their numbers were like the
bees in a swarm.

"They came to each of the cities of Yucatan in turn, and though
the colonists slew them in thousands, the weight of numbers always
prevailed. They ate clean each city they took, and left it to the beasts
of the forest, and went on to the next. And so in time they reached the
coast towns, and Tatho and the few that survived took ship, and
sailed home. They even ate Tatho's wife for him. They must be curious
persevering things, these little hairy men. The Gods send they do not
get across the seas to Atlantis, or they would be worse plague to the
poor country than Phorenice."

Now I had heard of these little hairy creatures before, and though
indeed I had never seen them, I had gathered that they were a little
less than human and a little more than bestial; a link so to speak
between the two orders; and specially held in check by the Gods in
certain forest solitudes. Also I had learned that on occasion, when
punishment was needful, they could be set loose as a devastating army
upon men, devouring all before them. But I said nothing of this to the
nymph, she being but a vulgar woman, and indeed half silly, as is always
the case with these self-styled sorceresses who gull the ignorant,
common folk. But within myself I was bitterly grieved at the fate of
that fine colony of Yucatan, in which I had expended such an infinity of
pains to do my share of the building.

But it did not suit my purpose to have my name and quality blazoned
abroad till the time was full, and so I said nothing to the nymph about
Yucatan, but let the talk continue upon other matters. "What about
Egypt?" I asked.

"In its accustomed darkness, so they say. Who cares for Egypt these
latter years? Who cares for anyone or anything for that matter except
for himself and his own proper estate? Time was when the country folk
and the hunters hereabouts brought me offerings to this cave for sheer
piety's sake. But now they never come near unless they see a way of
getting good value in return for their gifts. And, by result, instead
of living fat and hearty, I make lean meals off honey and grubs. It's
a poor life, a nymph's, in these latter years I tell you, my lord. It's
the fashion for all classes to believe in no kind of mystery now."

"What manner of pestilence is this you spoke of?"

"I have not seen it. Thank the Gods it has not come this way. But they
do say that it has grown from the folk Phorenice has slain, and whose
bodies remain unburied. She is always slaying, and so the bodies lie
thicker than the birds and beasts can eat them. For which of our sins,
I wonder, did the Gods let Phorenice come to reign? I wish that she and
her twins were boiled alive in brine before they came between an honest
nymph of the forest and her living.

"They say she has put an image of herself in all the temples of the
city now, and has ordered prayers and sacrifices to be made night
and morning. She has decreed all other Gods inferior to herself
and forbidden their worship, and those of the people that are not
sufficiently devout for her taste, have their hamstrings slit by their
tormentors to aid them constantly into a devotional attitude.--Will you
eat of my grubs and honey? There is nothing else. Your back was bloody
with carrying meat when I met you, but you had lost your load. You must
either taste this mess of mine now, or go without."

I harboured with that nymph in cave six days, she using her drugs and
charms to cure my leg the while, and when I was recovered, I hunted the
plains and killed her a fat cloven-hoofed horse as payment, and then
went along my ways.

The country from there onwards had at one time carried a sturdy
population which held its own firmly, and, as its numbers grew, took in
more ground, and built more homesteads farther afield. The houses were
perched in trees for the most part, as there they were out of reach
of cave-bear and cave-tiger and the other more dangerous beasts. But
others, and these were the better ones, were built on the ground, of
logs so ponderous and so firmly clamped and dovetailed that the beasts
could not pull them down, and once inside a house of this fashion
its owners were safe, and could progue at any attackers through the
interstices between the logs, and often wound, sometimes make a kill.

But not one in ten of these outlying settlers remained. The houses were
silent when I reached them, the fire-hearth before the door weed-grown,
and the patch of vegetables taken back by the greedy fingers of the
forest into mere scrub and jungle. And farther on, when villages began
