
"Perhaps you could take my blood pressure, or something," Wheatley
offered.

"Well, of course I _could_. But that isn't really my field, you know. It
wouldn't really _mean_ anything, if I did it. But there's nothing to
worry about. We have a fine Hypertensive man at the Diagnostic Clinic."
The doctor checked the appointment book on his desk. "Now, if we could
see you there next Monday morning at nine--"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Very interesting X rays," said the young doctor with the red hair.
"_Very_ interesting. See this shadow in the duodenal cap? See the
prolonged emptying time? And I've never seen such beautiful
pylorospasm!"

"This is my toe?" asked Wheatley, edging toward the doctors. It seemed
he had been waiting for a very long time.

"Toe! Oh, no," said the red-headed doctor. "No, that's the Orthopedic
Radiologist's job. I'm a Gastro-Intestinal man, myself. Upper. Dr.
Schultz here is Lower." The red-headed doctor turned back to his
consultation with Dr. Schultz. Mr. Wheatley rubbed his toe and waited.

Presently another doctor came by. He looked very grave as he sat down
beside Wheatley. "Tell me, Mr. Wheatley, have you had an orthodiagram
recently?"

"No."

"An EKG?"

"No."

"Fluoroaortogram?"

"I--don't _think_ so."

The doctor looked even graver, and walked away, muttering to himself. In
a few moments he came back with two more doctors. "--no question in _my_
mind that it's cardiomegaly," he was saying, "but Haddonfield should
know. He's the best Left Ventricle man in the city. Excellent paper in
the AMA Journal last July: 'The Inadequacies of Modern Orthodiagramatic
Techniques in Demonstrating Minimal Left Ventricular Hypertrophy.' A
brilliant study, simply brilliant! Now _this_ patient--" He glanced
toward Wheatley, and his voice dropped to a mumble.

Presently two of the men nodded, and one walked over to Wheatley,
cautiously, as though afraid he might suddenly vanish. "Now, there's
nothing to be worried about, Mr. Wheatley," he said. "We're going to
have you fixed up in just no time at all. Just a few more studies. Now,
if you could see me in Valve Clinic tomorrow afternoon at three--"

Wheatley nodded. "Nothing serious, I hope?"

"Serious? Oh, no! Dear me, you _mustn't_ worry. Everything is going to
be all right," the doctor said.

"Well--I--that is, my toe is still bothering me some. It's not nearly as
