"But he thinks that there's a chance?"

"Of course there's a chance. And you know he'll do everything he can.
It's just that neither of us wants you to get your hopes up."

It wasn't much, but it was something. Lambertson looked so beat. I
didn't have the heart to ask him what Aarons wanted, even though I know
he'd like to get it off his chest. Maybe tomorrow will be better.

I spent the day with Charlie Dakin in the lab, and did a little work for
a change. I've been disgustingly lazy, and poor Charlie thinks it's all
his fault. Charlie reads like twenty-point type ninety per cent of the
time, and I'm afraid he knows it. I can tell just exactly when he stops
paying attention to business and starts paying attention to _me_, and
then all of a sudden he realizes I'm reading him, and it flusters him
for the rest of the day. I wonder why? Does he really think I'm shocked?
Or surprised? Or _insulted_? Poor Charlie!

I guess I must be good enough looking. I can read it from almost every
fellow that comes near me. I wonder why? I mean, why me and not Marjorie
over in the Main Office? She's a sweet girl, but she never gets a second
look from the guys. There must be some fine differential point I'm
missing somewhere, but I don't think I'll ever understand it.

I'm not going to press Lambertson, but I _hope_ he opens up tomorrow.
He's got me scared silly by now. He has a lot of authority around here,
but other people are paying the bills, and when he's frightened about
something, it can't help but frighten me.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Thursday, 18 May._ We went back to reaction testing in the lab with
Lambertson today. That study is almost finished, as much as anything I
work on is ever finished, which isn't very much. This test had two
goals: to clock my stimulus-response pattern in comparison to normals,
and to find out just exactly _when_ I pick up any given thought-signal
from the person I'm reading. It isn't a matter of developing speed. I'm
already so fast to respond that it doesn't mean too much from anybody
else's standpoint, and I certainly don't need any training there. But
where along the line do I pick up a thought impulse? Do I catch it at
its inception? Do I pick up the thought formulation, or just the final
crystalized pattern? Lambertson thinks I'm with it right from the start,
and that some training in those lines would be worth my time.

Of course, we didn't find out, not even with the ingenious little
random-firing device that Dakin designed for the study. With this
gadget, neither Lambertson nor I know what impulse the box is going to
throw at him. He just throws a switch and it starts coming. He catches
it, reacts, I catch it from him and react, and we compare reaction
times. This afternoon it had us driving up a hill, and sent a ten-ton
truck rolling down on us out of control. I had my flasher on two seconds
before Lambertson did, of course, but our reaction times are
standardized, so when we corrected for my extra speed, we knew that I
must have caught the impulse about 0.07 seconds after he did.

Crude, of course, not nearly fast enough, and we can't reproduce on a
stable basis. Lambertson says that's as close as we can get without
cortical probes. And that's where I put my foot down. I may have a gold
mine in this head of mine, but nobody is going to put burr-holes through
my skull in order to tap it. Not for a while yet.

That's unfair, of course, because it sounds as if Lambertson were trying
to force me into something, and he isn't. I've read him about that, and
I know he wouldn't allow it. _Let's learn everything else we can learn
without it first_, he says. _Later, if you want to go along with it,
maybe. But right now you're not competent to decide for yourself._

He may be right, but why not? Why does he keep acting as if I'm a child?
_Am_ I, really? With everything (and I mean _everything_) coming into my
mind for the past twenty-three years, haven't I learned enough to make
decisions for myself? Lambertson says of course everything has been
coming in, it's just that I don't know what to do with it all. But
somewhere along the line I have to reach a maturation point of some
kind.

It scares me, sometimes, because I can't find an answer to it and the
answer might be perfectly horrible. I don't know where it may end.
What's worse, I don't know what point it has reached _right now_. How
much difference is there between my mind and Lambertson's? I'm psi-high,
and he isn't--granted. But is there more to it than that? People like
Aarons think so. They think it's a difference between _human_ function
and something else.

And that scares me because it _just isn't true_. I'm as human as anybody
else. But somehow it seems that I'm the one who has to prove it. I
wonder if I ever will. That's why Dr. Custer has to help me. Everything
hangs on that. I'm to go up to Boston next week, for final studies and
testing.

If Dr. Custer can do something, what a difference that will make! Maybe
then I could get out of this whole frightening mess, put it behind me
and forget about it. With just the psi alone, I don't think I ever can.

