resent these implications. I assume they have been directed at me. At no
time have I talked about this to reporters, or in any way engaged in
what you accuse me of. If you want my resignation from this school, you
may have it."

"Really? You think that an air of dignified innocence will undo the
damage done? I am well aware of your experiments with the _y_ wave,
gentlemen--and it was on the _y_ wave that the messages came. You may be
interested to know that the number of lives lost, the property damage,
the business losses due to the panic, have not yet been fully
determined; but it makes the hysteria following the Fantafilm hoax very
small potatoes by comparison.

"You may withdraw now, gentlemen; this affair will be discussed at
greater length later, regardless of what the FBI decides. I had hoped
that the main culprit would try to save unwitting accomplices from a
measure of grief. That is all."

The seven students left Dr. Clayton's office in record time.

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Elton rapped the table for silence. "Gentlemen," he began,
"Dr. Clayton and I both extend our sincere apologies." He smiled wanly.
"Of course, that does not exonerate anyone from the charge of
gullibility. But Harvey Gale's confession has been fully confirmed by
the FBI, and you--and this University--have been cleared. The public
knows now that your testimony helped lead to the facts in the case.

"To me, the most interesting feature of this business is the fact that
Gale was able to put over this hoax, despite the fact that the public
had been taken in three times before. The Orson Welles scare rode on a
wave of war-hysteria; the Flying Saucer craze followed world war; the
Fantafilm hoax came when the world was still in dread of sudden
bombings. But the Gale Hoax--what can we call it but what is loosely
known as the continuing gullibility of human beings?

"We trust that this demonstration you have just observed will help you
to remember that while seeing may be believing, it's wise not to believe
until it has been established just what you saw."

       *       *       *       *       *

In his private office, Dr. Clayton leaned forward over his desk. Or, to
be more exact, something that looked like Dr. Clayton leaned over the
desk. The face was impassive as marble, but, from out a slit in his
chest, a pair of black antennae-like feelers were vibrating into a
framed picture on the wall, from which the picture had been slid aside.

_"Landing safely effected. Brief panic when several Terrestrials sighted
ships; all clear now. Full report, containing details on latest
successful persuasion of Earthlings that Martians or other aliens are
imaginary, will follow."_

From the speaker beneath the desk came sounds of gasps, heavy breathing,
then shuffling footsteps. Clayton pushed the picture back into place,
then took off the skin-painted vest he wore, with the flat box on its
