
"Individuals my ... my neck," Patricia snapped back. "Did you ever hear
of Rome and the games? Here a whole people, millions of them, were given
the opportunity to indulge in sadistic spectacles to their heart's
desire. How many of them stayed home from the games?" She laughed in
ridicule.

Ross flushed. "Some of them did, confound it."

Dr. Braun had been taking in their debate, uncomfortably. As though in
spite of himself, he said now, "Very few, I am afraid."

"Religious ethic," Patricia pursued, relentlessly. "The greatest of the
commandments is Thou Shalt Not Kill, but comes along a war in which
killing becomes not only permissible but an absolute virtue and all our
good Christians, Jews, Mohammedans and even Buddhists, who supposedly
are not even allowed to kill mosquitoes, wade in with sheer happiness."

"War releases abnormal passions," Ross said grudgingly.

"You don't need a war. Look at the Germans, supposedly one of our most
highly civilized people. When the Nazi government released all
restraints on persecution of the Jews, gypsies and others, you know what
happened. This began in peace time, not in war."

Dr. Braun shifted in his chair. He said, his voice low, "We needn't look
beyond our own borders. The manner in which our people conducted
themselves against the Amerinds from the very beginning of the white
occupation of North America was quite shocking."

Ross said to him, "I thought you were on my side. The Indian wars were a
long time ago. We're more advanced now."

Dr. Braun said softly, "My father fought against Geronimo in Arizona. It
wasn't so long ago as all that."

Ross Wooley felt the argument going against him and lashed back. "We've
been over and over this, what's your point?"

Patricia said doggedly, "The same point I tried to make from the
beginning. This discovery must not be generally released. We'll simply
have to suppress it."

       *       *       *       *       *

The door opened behind them. They turned. Nothing was there. Ross,
scowling, lumbered to his feet to walk over and close it.

"Hey, take it easy," a voice laughed. "Don't walk right into a guy."

Ross stopped, startled.

Dr. Braun and Patricia stood up and stared, too.

Crowley laughed. "You all look like you're seeing a ghost."

Ross rumbled a grudging chuckle. "It'd be all right if we _saw_ the
ghost, it's not seeing you that's disconcerting."

The air began to shimmer, somewhat like heat on the desert's face.

Crowley said, "Hey, the stuff's wearing off. Where're my clothes?"

"Where you left them. There in that bedroom," Ross said. "We'll wait for
you." He went back and rejoined his associates. The door to the bedroom
opened, there was a shimmering, more obvious now, and then the door
closed behind it.

"He rejoined us just in time," Dr. Braun murmured. "Another ten minutes
and he would have ... umah ... _materialized_ down on the street."

Ross hadn't finished the discussion. He said, his face in all but pout,
"What you don't realize, Pat, is the world has gone beyond the point
where scientific discoveries can be suppressed. If we try to keep the
lid on this today, the Russians or Chinese, or somebody, will hit on it
tomorrow."

Patricia said impatiently, "Good heavens, let's don't bring the Cold War
into it."

Ross opened his mouth to snap something back at her, closed it again and
shrugged his bulky shoulders angrily.

In a matter of less than ten minutes the bedroom door reopened and this
time a grinning Crowley emerged, fully dressed. He said, "Man, that was
a devil of an experience!"

They saw him to a chair and had him talk it all through. He was candid
enough, bubbling over with it all.

In the some eleven and a half hours he'd been on his own, he had covered
quite an area of Manhattan.

Evidently the first hour had been spent in becoming used to the
startling situation. He couldn't even see himself, which, to his
surprise affected walking and even use of his hands. You had to get used
to it. Then there was the fact that he was nude and _felt_ nude and
hence uncomfortable walking about in mixed pedestrian traffic. But that
phase passed. Early in the game he found that there was small percentage
in getting into crowds. It led to all sorts of complications, including
the starting of minor rows, one person thinking another was pushing when
it was simply a matter of Crowley trying to get out from underfoot.

Then he went through a period of the wonder of it all. Being able to
walk _anywhere_ and observe people who had no suspicion that they were
being observed. It was during that phase that he had sought out the
hotel in which he had read the chesty French movie actress Brigette
Loren was in residence. Evidently, he'd hit the nail right on the head.
Brigette was at her toilette when he arrived on scene. In telling about
this, Crowley leered amusedly at Patricia from the side of his eyes. She
ignored him.

Then he'd gone through a period when the full realization of his
immunity had hit him.

At this point he turned to Braun, "Hey, Doc, you ever eaten any caviar?
You know, that Russian stuff. Supposed to be the most expensive food in
the world."

The doctor cleared his throat. "Small amounts in hors d'oeuvres at
cocktail parties."

"Well, maybe I'm just a country boy but the stuff tastes like fish eggs
to me. Anyway, to get back to the story...."

He'd gone into Tiffany's and into some of the other swank shops. And
then into a bank or two, and stared at the treasures of Manhattan.

At this point he looked at Ross. "You know, just being invisible don't
mean all that. How you going to pick up a wad of thousand dollar bills
and just walk out the front door with them? Everybody'd see the dough
just kind of floating through the air."

"I came to the same conclusion myself, when I experimented," Ross said
wryly.

He had ridden on the subways ... free. He had eaten various food in
various swank restaurants. He had even had drinks in name bars, sampling
everything from Metaxa to vintage champagne. He was of the opinion that
even though he remained invisible for the rest of his years, he'd still
stick to bourbon and beer.

[Illustration]

He had gone down to Wall Street and into the offices of the top
brokerage firms and into the sanctum sanctorums of the wealthiest of
mucky-mucks but had been too impatient to stick around long enough to
possibly hear something that might be profitable. He admitted,
grudgingly, that he wouldn't have known what to listen for anyway.
Frustrated there, he had gone back uptown and finally located the
hangout of one of the more renown sports promoters who was rumored to
have gangster connections and was currently under bail due to a boxing
scandal. He had stayed about that worthy's office for an hour, gleaning
nothing more than several dirty jokes he'd never heard before.

All this activity had wearied him so he went to the Waldorf, located an
empty suite in the tower and climbed into bed for a nap after coolly
phoning room service to give him a call in two hours. That had almost
led to disaster. Evidently, someone on room service had found the suite
to be supposedly empty and had sent a boy up to investigate. However,
when he had heard the door open, Crowley had merely rolled out of the
bed and left, leaving a startled bellhop behind staring at rumpled
bedclothes which had seemed to stir of their own accord.

       *       *       *

The rest of the day was little different from the first hours. He had
gone about gawking in places he couldn't have had he been visible. Into
the dressing room of the Roxie, into the bars of swank private clubs,
into the offices of the F.B.I. He would have liked to have walked in on
a poker game with some real high rollers playing, such as Nick the
Greek, but he didn't have the time nor know-how to go about finding one.

Crowley wound it all up with a gesture of both hands, palms upward. "I
gotta admit, it was fun, but what the devil good is it?"

They looked at him questioningly.

Crowley said, "I mean, how's it practical? How can you make a buck out
of it, if you turn it over to the public, like? Everybody'd go around
robbing everybody else and you'd all wind up equal."

Dr. Braun chuckled in deprecation. "There would be various profitable
uses, Don. One priceless one would be scientific observation of wild
life. For that matter there would be valid usage in everyday life. There
are often personal reasons for not wishing to be observed. Celebrities,
for instance, wishing to avoid crowds."

"Yeah," Crowley laughed, "or a businessman out with his secretary."

Dr. Braun frowned. "Of course, there are many other aspects. It would
mean the end of such things as the Iron Curtain. And also the end of
such things as American immigration control. There are many, many
ramifications, Don, some of which frighten us. The world would be never
quite the same."

Crowley leaned forward confidentially. "Well, I'll tell you. I was
thinking it all out. What we got to do is turn it over to the Army and
soak them plenty for it."

The others ignored his cutting himself a piece of the cake.

Ross Wooley merely grunted bitterly.

Patricia said impatiently, "We've thought most of these things through,
Don. However, Dr. Braun happens to be quite a follower of Lord Russell."

Crowley looked at her blankly.

"He's a pacifist," she explained.

Braun pushed his glasses back more firmly on his nose and said, gently,
"The military already have enough gadgets to destroy quite literally
everything and I trust one set of them no more than the other. If
_both_ sides had our discovery, then, very well, each would go about
attempting to find some manner of penetrating the invisibility, or
taking various measures to protect their top secrets. But to give it to
just one would be such an advantage that the other would have to embark
immediately upon a desperate attack before the advantage could be fully
realized. If we turn this over to the Pentagon, for exclusive use, the
Soviets would have to begin a preventative war as soon as they learned
of its existence."

"You a red?" Crowley said, scowling.

The doctor shrugged hopelessly. "No," he said.

Crowley turned to the other two. "If you think it's the patriotic thing
to do, why don't one of you sell it to the government?"

Patricia said testily, "You don't understand, Don. Even if we were so
thoroughly in disagreement that we would act unilaterally, we couldn't.
You see, this is a three-way discovery. No one of us knows the complete
process."

His face twisted. "Look, maybe some of this egghead stuff doesn't get
