
"Not likely," Jeff said. "They don't use the crystals themselves."

Old Dr. Hermann put his chin almost on the Consul's shoulder to present
his wizened face to the scanner.

"Of course they don't," he said. "On an uncomplicated, even
simple-minded world like this, who would need crystals? But maybe they
fear glutting the market or the domination of outside capital coming in
to develop the source. When people backslide, there's no telling what's
on their minds and we have no time to waste negotiating or convincing
them. In any case, how could they stop us from moving in?" Abruptly he
switched to his own interest. "Aubray, have you learned anything new
about the Scoops?"

"Nothing beyond the fact that the islanders don't talk about them," Jeff
said. "I've seen perhaps a dozen offshore during the seven cycles I've
been here. One usually surfaces outside my harbor at about the time old
Charlie Mack's supply boat comes in."

Thinking of Charlie Mack brought a forced end to his report. "Charlie's
due now. I'll call back later."

He cut the circuit, hurrying to have his communicator stowed away before
old Charlie's arrival--not, he thought bitterly, that being found out
now would make any great difference.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stepping out into the brief Calaxian dawn, he caught his glimpse of the
Ciriimian ship's landing before the island forest of palm-ferns cut it
off from sight. Homeside hadn't been bluffing, he thought, assuming as a
matter of course that this was the task force Satterfield had been
ordered to send.

"They didn't waste any time," Jeff growled. "Damn them."

He ignored the inevitable glory of morning rainbow that just preceded
Procyon's rising and strode irritably down to his miniature dock. He was
still scowling over what he should tell Charlie Mack when the _Island
Queen_ hove into view.

She was a pretty sight. There was an artist's perception in Jeff in
spite of his drab years of EI patrol duty; the white puff of sail on
dark-green sea, gliding across calm water banded with lighter and darker
striae where submerged shoals lay, struck something responsive in him.
The comparison it forced between Calaxia and Earth, whose yawning Fourth
War scars and heritage of anxieties made calm-crystals so desperately
necessary, oppressed him. Calaxia was wholly unscarred, her people
without need of the calm-crystals they traded.

Something odd in the set of the _Queen's_ sails puzzled him until he
identified the abnormality. In spite of distance and the swift approach
of the old fishing boat, he could have sworn that her sails bellied not
with the wind, but against.

They fell slack, however, when the _Queen_ reached his channel and
flapped lazily, reversing to catch the wind and nose her cautiously into
the shallows. Jeff dismissed it impatiently--a change of wind or some
crafty maneuver of old Charlie Mack's to take advantage of the current.

Jeff had just set foot on his dock when it happened. Solid as the
planking itself, and all but blocking off his view of the nearing
_Island Queen_, stood a six-foot owl.

It was wingless and covered smoothly with pastel-blue feathers. It stood
solidly on carefully manicured yellow feet and stared at him out of
square violet eyes.

Involuntarily he took a backward step, caught his heel on a sun-warped
board and sat down heavily.

"Well, what the devil!" he said inanely.

The owl winced and disappeared without a sound.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jeff got up shakily and stumbled to the dock's edge. A chill conviction
of insanity gripped him when he looked down on water lapping smooth and
undisturbed below.

"I've gone mad," he said aloud.

Out on the bay, another catastrophe just as improbable was in progress.

Old Charlie Mack's _Island Queen_ had veered sharply off course, left
the darker-green stripe of safe channel and plunged into water too
shallow for her draft. The boat heeled on shoal sand, listed and hung
aground with wind-filled sails holding her fast.

The Scoop that had surfaced just behind her was so close that Jeff
wondered if its species' legendary good nature had been misrepresented.
It floated like a glistening plum-colored island, flat dorsal flippers
undulating gently on the water and its great filmy eyes all but closed
against the slanting glare of morning sun.

It was more than vast. The thing must weigh, Jeff thought dizzily,
thousands or maybe millions of tons.

He thought he understood the _Queen's_ grounding when he saw the
swimmer stroking urgently toward his dock. Old Charlie had abandoned his
boat and was swimming in to escape the Scoop.

But it wasn't Charlie. It was Jennifer, Charlie's niece.

Jeff took the brown hand she put up and drew her to the dock beside her,
steadying her while she shook out her dripping red hair and regained her
breath. Sea water had plastered Jennifer's white blouse and knee-length
dungarees to her body like a second skin, and the effect bordered on the
