the Window fell upon the Speculum in several Angles of Incidence, made
Rings of several bignesses, which diluted and blotted out one another,
as I knew by intercepting some part of that Light. For if I intercepted
that part which was nearest to the Axis of the Speculum the Rings would
be less, if the other part which was remotest from it they would be
bigger.

_Obs._ 12. When the Colours of the Prism were cast successively on the
Speculum, that Ring which in the two last Observations was white, was of
the same bigness in all the Colours, but the Rings without it were
greater in the green than in the blue, and still greater in the yellow,
and greatest in the red. And, on the contrary, the Rings within that
white Circle were less in the green than in the blue, and still less in
the yellow, and least in the red. For the Angles of Reflexion of those
Rays which made this Ring, being equal to their Angles of Incidence, the
Fits of every reflected Ray within the Glass after Reflexion are equal
in length and number to the Fits of the same Ray within the Glass before
its Incidence on the reflecting Surface. And therefore since all the
Rays of all sorts at their entrance into the Glass were in a Fit of
Transmission, they were also in a Fit of Transmission at their returning
to the same Surface after Reflexion; and by consequence were
transmitted, and went out to the white Ring on the Chart. This is the
reason why that Ring was of the same bigness in all the Colours, and why
in a mixture of all it appears white. But in Rays which are reflected in
other Angles, the Intervals of the Fits of the least refrangible being
greatest, make the Rings of their Colour in their progress from this
white Ring, either outwards or inwards, increase or decrease by the
greatest steps; so that the Rings of this Colour without are greatest,
and within least. And this is the reason why in the last Observation,
when the Speculum was illuminated with white Light, the exterior Rings
made by all Colours appeared red without and blue within, and the
interior blue without and red within.

These are the Phaenomena of thick convexo-concave Plates of Glass, which
are every where of the same thickness. There are yet other Phaenomena
when these Plates are a little thicker on one side than on the other,
and others when the Plates are more or less concave than convex, or
plano-convex, or double-convex. For in all these cases the Plates make
Rings of Colours, but after various manners; all which, so far as I have
yet observed, follow from the Propositions in the end of the third part
of this Book, and so conspire to confirm the truth of those
Propositions. But the Phaenomena are too various, and the Calculations
whereby they follow from those Propositions too intricate to be here
prosecuted. I content my self with having prosecuted this kind of
Phaenomena so far as to discover their Cause, and by discovering it to
ratify the Propositions in the third Part of this Book.

_Obs._ 13. As Light reflected by a Lens quick-silver'd on the backside
makes the Rings of Colours above described, so it ought to make the like
Rings of Colours in passing through a drop of Water. At the first
Reflexion of the Rays within the drop, some Colours ought to be
transmitted, as in the case of a Lens, and others to be reflected back
to the Eye. For instance, if the Diameter of a small drop or globule of
Water be about the 500th part of an Inch, so that a red-making Ray in
passing through the middle of this globule has 250 Fits of easy
Transmission within the globule, and that all the red-making Rays which
are at a certain distance from this middle Ray round about it have 249
Fits within the globule, and all the like Rays at a certain farther
distance round about it have 248 Fits, and all those at a certain
farther distance 247 Fits, and so on; these concentrick Circles of Rays
after their transmission, falling on a white Paper, will make
concentrick Rings of red upon the Paper, supposing the Light which
passes through one single globule, strong enough to be sensible. And, in
like manner, the Rays of other Colours will make Rings of other Colours.
Suppose now that in a fair Day the Sun shines through a thin Cloud of
such globules of Water or Hail, and that the globules are all of the
same bigness; and the Sun seen through this Cloud shall appear
encompassed with the like concentrick Rings of Colours, and the Diameter
of the first Ring of red shall be 7-1/4 Degrees, that of the second
10-1/4 Degrees, that of the third 12 Degrees 33 Minutes. And accordingly
as the Globules of Water are bigger or less, the Rings shall be less or
bigger. This is the Theory, and Experience answers it. For in _June_
1692, I saw by reflexion in a Vessel of stagnating Water three Halos,
Crowns, or Rings of Colours about the Sun, like three little Rain-bows,
concentrick to his Body. The Colours of the first or innermost Crown
were blue next the Sun, red without, and white in the middle between the
blue and red. Those of the second Crown were purple and blue within, and
pale red without, and green in the middle. And those of the third were
pale blue within, and pale red without; these Crowns enclosed one
another immediately, so that their Colours proceeded in this continual
order from the Sun outward: blue, white, red; purple, blue, green, pale
yellow and red; pale blue, pale red. The Diameter of the second Crown
measured from the middle of the yellow and red on one side of the Sun,
to the middle of the same Colour on the other side was 9-1/3 Degrees, or
thereabouts. The Diameters of the first and third I had not time to
measure, but that of the first seemed to be about five or six Degrees,
and that of the third about twelve. The like Crowns appear sometimes
about the Moon; for in the beginning of the Year 1664, _Febr._ 19th at
Night, I saw two such Crowns about her. The Diameter of the first or
innermost was about three Degrees, and that of the second about five
Degrees and an half. Next about the Moon was a Circle of white, and next
about that the inner Crown, which was of a bluish green within next the
white, and of a yellow and red without, and next about these Colours
were blue and green on the inside of the outward Crown, and red on the
outside of it. At the same time there appear'd a Halo about 22 Degrees
35' distant from the center of the Moon. It was elliptical, and its long
Diameter was perpendicular to the Horizon, verging below farthest from
the Moon. I am told that the Moon has sometimes three or more
concentrick Crowns of Colours encompassing one another next about her
Body. The more equal the globules of Water or Ice are to one another,
the more Crowns of Colours will appear, and the Colours will be the more
lively. The Halo at the distance of 22-1/2 Degrees from the Moon is of
another sort. By its being oval and remoter from the Moon below than
above, I conclude, that it was made by Refraction in some sort of Hail
or Snow floating in the Air in an horizontal posture, the refracting
Angle being about 58 or 60 Degrees.




THE

THIRD BOOK

OF

OPTICKS


_PART I._

_Observations concerning the Inflexions of the Rays of Light, and the
Colours made thereby._

Grimaldo has inform'd us, that if a beam of the Sun's Light be let into
a dark Room through a very small hole, the Shadows of things in this
Light will be larger than they ought to be if the Rays went on by the
Bodies in straight Lines, and that these Shadows have three parallel
Fringes, Bands or Ranks of colour'd Light adjacent to them. But if the
Hole be enlarged the Fringes grow broad and run into one another, so
that they cannot be distinguish'd. These broad Shadows and Fringes have
been reckon'd by some to proceed from the ordinary refraction of the
Air, but without due examination of the Matter. For the circumstances of
the Phaenomenon, so far as I have observed them, are as follows.

_Obs._ 1. I made in a piece of Lead a small Hole with a Pin, whose
breadth was the 42d part of an Inch. For 21 of those Pins laid together
took up the breadth of half an Inch. Through this Hole I let into my
darken'd Chamber a beam of the Sun's Light, and found that the Shadows
of Hairs, Thred, Pins, Straws, and such like slender Substances placed
in this beam of Light, were considerably broader than they ought to be,
if the Rays of Light passed on by these Bodies in right Lines. And
particularly a Hair of a Man's Head, whose breadth was but the 280th
part of an Inch, being held in this Light, at the distance of about
twelve Feet from the Hole, did cast a Shadow which at the distance of
four Inches from the Hair was the sixtieth part of an Inch broad, that
is, above four times broader than the Hair, and at the distance of two
Feet from the Hair was about the eight and twentieth part of an Inch
broad, that is, ten times broader than the Hair, and at the distance of
ten Feet was the eighth part of an Inch broad, that is 35 times broader.

Nor is it material whether the Hair be encompassed with Air, or with any
other pellucid Substance. For I wetted a polish'd Plate of Glass, and
laid the Hair in the Water upon the Glass, and then laying another
polish'd Plate of Glass upon it, so that the Water might fill up the
space between the Glasses, I held them in the aforesaid beam of Light,
so that the Light might pass through them perpendicularly, and the
Shadow of the Hair was at the same distances as big as before. The
Shadows of Scratches made in polish'd Plates of Glass were also much
broader than they ought to be, and the Veins in polish'd Plates of Glass
did also cast the like broad Shadows. And therefore the great breadth of
these Shadows proceeds from some other cause than the Refraction of the
Air.

Let the Circle X [in _Fig._ 1.] represent the middle of the Hair; ADG,
BEH, CFI, three Rays passing by one side of the Hair at several
distances; KNQ, LOR, MPS, three other Rays passing by the other side of
the Hair at the like distances; D, E, F, and N, O, P, the places where
the Rays are bent in their passage by the Hair; G, H, I, and Q, R, S,
the places where the Rays fall on a Paper GQ; IS the breadth of the
Shadow of the Hair cast on the Paper, and TI, VS, two Rays passing to
the Points I and S without bending when the Hair is taken away. And it's
manifest that all the Light between these two Rays TI and VS is bent in
passing by the Hair, and turned aside from the Shadow IS, because if any
part of this Light were not bent it would fall on the Paper within the
Shadow, and there illuminate the Paper, contrary to experience. And
because when the Paper is at a great distance from the Hair, the Shadow
is broad, and therefore the Rays TI and VS are at a great distance from
one another, it follows that the Hair acts upon the Rays of Light at a
good distance in their passing by it. But the Action is strongest on the
Rays which pass by at least distances, and grows weaker and weaker
accordingly as the Rays pass by at distances greater and greater, as is
represented in the Scheme: For thence it comes to pass, that the Shadow
of the Hair is much broader in proportion to the distance of the Paper
from the Hair, when the Paper is nearer the Hair, than when it is at a
great distance from it.

_Obs._ 2. The Shadows of all Bodies (Metals, Stones, Glass, Wood, Horn,
Ice, &c.) in this Light were border'd with three Parallel Fringes or
Bands of colour'd Light, whereof that which was contiguous to the Shadow
was broadest and most luminous, and that which was remotest from it was
narrowest, and so faint, as not easily to be visible. It was difficult
to distinguish the Colours, unless when the Light fell very obliquely
upon a smooth Paper, or some other smooth white Body, so as to make them
appear much broader than they would otherwise do. And then the Colours
were plainly visible in this Order: The first or innermost Fringe was
violet and deep blue next the Shadow, and then light blue, green, and
yellow in the middle, and red without. The second Fringe was almost
contiguous to the first, and the third to the second, and both were blue
within, and yellow and red without, but their Colours were very faint,
especially those of the third. The Colours therefore proceeded in this
order from the Shadow; violet, indigo, pale blue, green, yellow, red;
blue, yellow, red; pale blue, pale yellow and red. The Shadows made by
Scratches and Bubbles in polish'd Plates of Glass were border'd with the
like Fringes of colour'd Light. And if Plates of Looking-glass sloop'd
off near the edges with a Diamond-cut, be held in the same beam of
Light, the Light which passes through the parallel Planes of the Glass
will be border'd with the like Fringes of Colours where those Planes
meet with the Diamond-cut, and by this means there will sometimes appear
four or five Fringes of Colours. Let AB, CD [in _Fig._ 2.] represent the
parallel Planes of a Looking-glass, and BD the Plane of the Diamond-cut,
making at B a very obtuse Angle with the Plane AB. And let all the Light
between the Rays ENI and FBM pass directly through the parallel Planes
of the Glass, and fall upon the Paper between I and M, and all the Light
between the Rays GO and HD be refracted by the oblique Plane of the
Diamond-cut BD, and fall upon the Paper between K and L; and the Light
which passes directly through the parallel Planes of the Glass, and
falls upon the Paper between I and M, will be border'd with three or
more Fringes at M.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

So by looking on the Sun through a Feather or black Ribband held close
to the Eye, several Rain-bows will appear; the Shadows which the Fibres
or Threds cast on the _Tunica Retina_, being border'd with the like
Fringes of Colours.

_Obs._ 3. When the Hair was twelve Feet distant from this Hole, and its
Shadow fell obliquely upon a flat white Scale of Inches and Parts of an
Inch placed half a Foot beyond it, and also when the Shadow fell
perpendicularly upon the same Scale placed nine Feet beyond it; I
measured the breadth of the Shadow and Fringes as accurately as I could,
and found them in Parts of an Inch as follows.

-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
                                           |  half a   | Nine
                      At the Distance of   |   Foot    |  Feet
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth of the Shadow                  |   1/54    |  1/9
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth between the Middles of the     |   1/38    |
  brightest Light of the innermost Fringes |    or     |
  on either side the Shadow                |   1/39    |  7/50
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth between the Middles of the     |           |
  brightest Light of the middlemost Fringes|           |
  on either side the Shadow                | 1/23-1/2  |  4/17
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth between the Middles of the     |  1/18     |
  brightest Light of the outmost Fringes   |   or      |
  on either side the Shadow                | 1/18-1/2  |  3/10
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The distance between the Middles of the    |           |
  brightest Light of the first and second  |           |
  Fringes                                  |  1/120    |  1/21
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The distance between the Middles of the    |           |
  brightest Light of the second and third  |           |
  Fringes                                  |  1/170    |  1/31
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth of the luminous Part (green,   |           |
  white, yellow, and red) of the first     |           |
  Fringe                                   |  1/170    |  1/32
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth of the darker Space between    |           |
  the first and second Fringes             |  1/240    |  1/45
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth of the luminous Part of the    |           |
  second Fringe                            |  1/290    |  1/55
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------
The breadth of the darker Space between    |           |
  the second and third Fringes             |  1/340    |  1/63
-------------------------------------------+-----------+--------

These Measures I took by letting the Shadow of the Hair, at half a Foot
distance, fall so obliquely on the Scale, as to appear twelve times
broader than when it fell perpendicularly on it at the same distance,
and setting down in this Table the twelfth part of the Measures I then
took.

_Obs._ 4. When the Shadow and Fringes were cast obliquely upon a smooth
white Body, and that Body was removed farther and farther from the Hair,
the first Fringe began to appear and look brighter than the rest of the
Light at the distance of less than a quarter of an Inch from the Hair,
and the dark Line or Shadow between that and the second Fringe began to
appear at a less distance from the Hair than that of the third part of
an Inch. The second Fringe began to appear at a distance from the Hair
of less than half an Inch, and the Shadow between that and the third
Fringe at a distance less than an inch, and the third Fringe at a
distance less than three Inches. At greater distances they became much
more sensible, but kept very nearly the same proportion of their
breadths and intervals which they had at their first appearing. For the
distance between the middle of the first, and middle of the second
Fringe, was to the distance between the middle of the second and middle
of the third Fringe, as three to two, or ten to seven. And the last of
these two distances was equal to the breadth of the bright Light or
luminous part of the first Fringe. And this breadth was to the breadth
of the bright Light of the second Fringe as seven to four, and to the
dark Interval of the first and second Fringe as three to two, and to
the like dark Interval between the second and third as two to one. For
the breadths of the Fringes seem'd to be in the progression of the
Numbers 1, sqrt(1/3), sqrt(1/5), and their Intervals to be in the
same progression with them; that is, the Fringes and their Intervals
together to be in the continual progression of the Numbers 1,
sqrt(1/2), sqrt(1/3), sqrt(1/4), sqrt(1/5), or thereabouts. And
these Proportions held the same very nearly at all distances from the
Hair; the dark Intervals of the Fringes being as broad in proportion to
the breadth of the Fringes at their first appearance as afterwards at
great distances from the Hair, though not so dark and distinct.

_Obs._ 5. The Sun shining into my darken'd Chamber through a hole a
quarter of an Inch broad, I placed at the distance of two or three Feet
from the Hole a Sheet of Pasteboard, which was black'd all over on both
sides, and in the middle of it had a hole about three quarters of an
Inch square for the Light to pass through. And behind the hole I
fasten'd to the Pasteboard with Pitch the blade of a sharp Knife, to
intercept some part of the Light which passed through the hole. The
Planes of the Pasteboard and blade of the Knife were parallel to one
another, and perpendicular to the Rays. And when they were so placed
that none of the Sun's Light fell on the Pasteboard, but all of it
