is!--staggered a bit and looked again and said grave that whatever of
evil might be said of Eire, nobody could deny that its whisky had
imagination!"

He looked about the cabinet room. There was a hole in the baseboard
underneath the sculptured coat of arms of the colony world. He put the
snake down on the floor beside the hole. With an air of offended
dignity, the snake slithered into the dark opening.

"Now--what's the meeting for?" he demanded. "I'll tell you immediate
that if money's required it's impractical."

President O'Hanrahan said morbidly:

"'Twas called, it seems, to put the curse o' Cromwell on whoever let
the black snakes loose. But they'd been cooped up, and they knew they
were not keepin' the dinies down, and they got worried over the work
they were neglectin'. So they took turns diggin', like prisoners in a
penitentiary, and presently they broke out and like the faithful
creatures they are they set anxious to work on their backlog of
diny-catchin'. Which they're doin'. They've ruined us entirely, but
they meant well."

The minister of Information asked apprehensively: "What will O'Donohue
do when he finds out they're here?"

"He's not found out--yet," said the president without elation. "Moira
didn't tell him. She's an angel! But he's bound to learn. And then if
he doesn't detonate with the rage in him, he'll see to it that all of
us are murdered--slowly, for treason to the Erse and blasphemy directed
at St. Patrick." Then the president said with a sort of yearning pride:
"D'ye know what Moira offered to do? She said she'd taken biology at
college, and she'd try to solve the problem of the dinies. The
darlin'!"

"Bein' gathered together," observed the chief justice, "we might as
well try again to think of somethin' plausible."

"We need a good shenanigan," agreed the president unhappily. "But what
could it be? Has anybody the trace of an idea?"

The cabinet went into session. The trouble was, of course, that the
Erse colony on Eire was a bust. The first colonists built houses, broke
ground, planted crops--and encountered dinies. Large ones, fifty and
sixty feet long, with growing families. They had thick bodies with
unlikely bony excrescences, they had long necks which ended in very
improbable small heads, and they had long tapering tails which would
knock over a man or a fence post or the corner of a house, impartially,
if they happened to swing that way. They were not bright.

That they ate the growing crops might be expected, though cursed. But
they ate wire fences. The colonists at first waited for them to die of
indigestion. But they digested the fences. Then between bales of more
normal foodstuffs they browsed on the corrugated-iron roofs of houses.
Again the colonists vengefully expected dyspepsia. They digested the
roofs, too. Presently the lumbering creatures nibbled at axes--the
heads, not the handles. They went on to the plows. When they gathered
sluggishly about a ground-car and began to lunch on it, the colonists
did not believe. But it was true.

The dinies' teeth weren't mere calcium phosphate, like other beasts. An
amateur chemist found out that they were an organically deposited boron
carbide, which is harder than any other substance but crystallized
carbon--diamond. In fact, diny teeth, being organic, seemed to be an
especially hard form of boron carbide. Dinies could chew iron. They
could masticate steel. They could grind up and swallow anything but
tool-steel reinforced with diamond chips. The same amateur chemist
worked it out that the surface soil of the planet Eire was deficient in
iron and ferrous compounds. The dinies needed iron. They got it.

                     *      *      *      *      *

The big dinies were routed by burning torches in the hands of angry
colonists. When scorched often enough, their feeble brains gathered the
idea that they were unwelcome. They went lumbering away.

They were replaced by lesser dinies, approximately the size of
kangaroos. They also ate crops. They also hungered for iron. To them
steel cables were the equivalent of celery, and they ate iron pipe as
if it were spaghetti. The industrial installations of the colony were
their special targets. The colonists unlimbered guns. They shot the
dinies. Ultimately they seemed to thin out. But once a month was
shoot-a-diny day on Eire, and the populace turned out to clear the
environs of their city of Tara.

Then came the little dinies. Some were as small as two inches in
length. Some were larger. All were cute. Colonists' children wanted to
make pets of them until it was discovered that miniature they might be,
but harmless they were not. Tiny diny-teeth, smaller than the heads of
pins, were still authentic boron carbide. Dinies kept as pets cheerily
gnawed away wood and got at the nails of which their boxes were made.
They ate the nails.

Then, being free, they extended their activities. They and their
friends tunneled busily through the colonists' houses. They ate nails.
They ate screws. They ate bolts, nuts, the nails out of shoes, pocket
knives and pants buttons, zippers, wire staples and the tacks out of
upholstery. Gnawing even threads and filings of metal away, they made
visible gaps in the frames and moving parts of farm tractors.

Moreover, it appeared that their numbers previously had been held down
by the paucity of ferrous compounds in their regular diet. The lack led
to a low birth rate. Now, supplied with great quantities of iron by
their unremitting industry, they were moved to prodigies of
multiplication.

The chairman of the Dail Committee on the Condition of the Planet Eire
had spoken of them scornfully as equal to mice. They were much worse.
The planetary government needed at least a pied piper or two, but it
tried other measures. It imported cats. Descendants of the felines of
Earth still survived, but one had only to look at their frustrated,
neurotic expressions to know that they were failures. The government
set traps. The dinies ate their springs and metal parts. It offered
bounties for dead dinies. But the supply of dinies was inexhaustible,
and the supply of money was not. It had to be stopped.

Then upon the spaceport of Eire a certain Captain Patrick Brannicut, of
Boston, Earth, descended. It was his second visit to Eire. On the first
he'd learned of the trouble. On his second he brought what still seemed
the most probable solution. He landed eighteen hundred adult black
snakes, two thousand teen-agers of the same species, and two crates of
soft-shelled eggs he guaranteed to hatch into fauna of the same kind.
He took away all the cash on the planet. The government was desperate.

But the snakes chased dinies with enthusiasm. They pounced upon
dinies while the public watched. They lay in wait for dinies, they
publicly digested dinies, and they went pouring down into any small
