
102. In the cochlea, or snail's shell, which contains the fluid, but no
membrane, the nerve ramifies upon a spiral shelf, which, like the cochlea
itself, takes two and a half turns, growing continuously smaller as it
winds upward. As many as three thousand nerve fibres of different lengths
have been counted therein; which, it has been thought, form the grand, yet
minutely small key-board, upon which strike all the musical tones that are
destined to be conveyed to the brain. The vestibule, it is also supposed,
takes cognizance of noise as distinguished from musical sounds; while the
office of the semicircular canals is, in part at least, to prevent internal
echoes, or reverberations. {224}

[Sidenote: 103. With what does the vestibule communicate? What is the
theory by which sound is conducted to the brain?]

103. The vestibule communicates with the chain of bones of the middle ear
by means of a small opening, called the "oval window," or _fenestra
ovalis_. Across this window is stretched the membrane, which has already
been alluded to as being joined to the stirrup-bone of the middle ear.
Through this window, then, the sound-wave, which traverses the external and
middle ear, arrives at last at the labyrinth. The limpid fluid which the
latter contains, and which bathes the terminal fibres of the nerve of
hearing, is thus agitated, the nerve-fibres are excited, and a sonorous
impression is conducted to the brain, or, as we say, a sound is heard.

[Sidenote: 104. The formation of the organ of hearing with a view to its
protection?]

104. PROTECTION OF THE SENSE OF HEARING.--From what has been seen of the
complicated parts which compose the organ of hearing, it is evident that
while many of them possess an exquisite delicacy of structure, Nature has
well and amply provided for their protection. We have observed the
concealed situation of the most important parts of the mechanism of the
ear, the length of its cavity, its partitions, the hardness of its walls,
and its communication with the atmosphere; all these provisions rendering
unnecessary any supervision or care on our part in reference to the
interior of the ear. But in respect to its external parts, which are under
our control and within the reach of harm, it is otherwise. We may both
observe the dangers which threaten them, and learn the means necessary to
protect them.

[Sidenote: 105. Danger to which the hearing may be subjected? Advice?]

105. One source of danger to the hearing consists in lowering the
temperature of the ear, especially by the introduction of cold water into
the auditory canal. Every one is familiar with the unpleasant sensation of
distension and the confusion of sounds which accompany the filling of the
ear with water when bathing: the weight of the {225} water within it really
distends the membrane, and the cold chills the adjacent sensitive parts. It
is not surprising, therefore, that the frequent introduction of cold water
and its continued presence in the ear enfeeble the sense of hearing. Care
should be taken to remove water from the ear after bathing, by holding the
head on one side, and, at the same time, slightly expanding the outer
orifice, so that the fluid may run out. For a like reason, the hair about
the ears should not be allowed to remain wet, but should be thoroughly
dried as soon as possible.

[Sidenote: 106. The general rule as to the use of water for the ear?]

106. It may be stated as a general rule, to which there are but few
exceptions, that no cold liquid should ever be allowed to enter the ear.
When a wash or injection is rendered necessary, it should always be warmed
before use. The introduction of cold air is likewise hurtful, especially
when it pours through a crevice directly into the ear, as it may often do
through the broken or partially closed window of a car. The avoidance of
this evil gives rise to another almost as great; namely, the introduction
of cotton or other soft substances into the ear to prevent it from
"catching cold." This kind of protection tends to make the part unnaturally
susceptible to changes of temperature, and its security seems to demand the
continued presence of the "warm" covering. As a consequence of its
presence, sounds are not naturally conveyed, and the sensitiveness of the
nerve of hearing is gradually impaired.

[Sidenote: 107. Chief source of injury to the ear? Directions for removing
foreign objects from the ear? Of a live insect?]

107. The chief source of injury, however, to the ear is from the
introduction of solid substances into the auditory canal, with the design
of removing insects or other foreign objects that have found their way into
the ear; or with the design of scraping out the ear-wax. For displacing a
foreign object, it is usually sufficient to syringe the ear gently with
warm water, the head being so held that the {226} fluid easily escapes. If
a live insect has gained entrance to the ear, it may first be suffocated by
pouring a little oil upon it, and afterward removed by syringing the ear as
just mentioned.

108. The removal of ear-wax is generally unnecessary; for, as we have
before seen, Nature provides that the excess of it shall become dry, and
then spontaneously fall out in the form of fine scales. The danger from the
introduction of solid implements into the outer ear is chiefly found in the
fact that the membrane which lies at the bottom of it is very fragile, and
that any injury of it is liable to be permanent, and to permanently impair
the hearing of the injured ear.

QUESTIONS FOR TOPICAL REVIEW.

_Give as full statements as you can on the following subjects_:

  1. Production of sensation                       177, 178
  2. Variety of sensations                         178, 179
  3. General sensibility                           179, 180
  4. The sensation of pain                              180
  5. The uses of pain                         180, 181, 182
  6. Special sensation                             182, 183
  7. Organs of touch                               183, 184
  8. The sense of touch                       184, 185, 186
  9. The delicacy of touch                         186, 187
  10. Sensations of temperature and weight         187, 188
  11. The organ of taste                           188, 189
  12. The sense of taste                           189, 190
  13. Relations of taste, etc.                     190, 191
  14. Influence of education, etc.                 191, 192
  15. The sense of smell                           192, 193
  16. The nerve of smell                           193, 194
  17. Uses of the sense of smell                   194, 195
  18. The sense of sight                           196, 197
  19. Light, and the optic nerve                   197, 198
  20. The organ of sight                           198, 199
  21. The orbits                                        199
  22. The eyelids                                  200, 201
  23. The lachrymal fluid                     201, 202, 203
  24. The eyeball                                  203, 204
  25. The iris                                     205, 206
  26. The retina                         206, 207, 208, 209
  27. The crystalline lens                         209, 210
  28. Uses of the lens                        210, 211, 212
  29. Long and short sight                         212, 213
  30. Function of accommodation                    213, 214
  31. Old sight, or presbyopia                          215
  32. Hearing and sound                       215, 216, 217
  33. The external ear                        217, 218, 219
  34. The middle ear                                219-222
  35. The internal ear                        222, 223, 224
  36. Protection of the sense of hearing      224, 225, 226

       *       *       *       *       *


{227}

CHAPTER XI.

THE VOICE.

    _Voice and Speech--The Larynx, or the Organ of the Voice--The Vocal
    Cords--The Laryngoscope--The Production of the Voice--The Use of the
    Tongue--The different Varieties of Voice--The Change of Voice--Its
    Compass--Purity of Tone--Ventriloquy._

[Sidenote: 1. The uttering of sounds by animals? How produced?]

1. VOICE AND SPEECH.--In common with the majority of the nobler animals,
man possesses the power of uttering sounds, which are employed as a means
of communication and expression. In man, these sounds constitute the voice;
in the animals, they are designated as the cry. The song of the bird is a
modification of its cry, which is rendered possible from the fact that its
respiratory function is remarkably active. The sounds of the animals are
generally, but not always, produced by means of their breathing organs.
Among the insects, they are sometimes produced by the extremely rapid
vibrations of the wings in the act of flight, as in the case of the
musquito; or they are produced by the rubbing together of hard portions of
the external covering of the body, as in the cricket. Almost all kinds of
marine animals are voiceless. The tambour-fish and a few others have,
however, the power of making a sort of noise in the water.

[Sidenote: 2. The evidence of man's superior endowment? What is stated of
the idiot? Parrot? Raven?]

2. But man alone possesses the faculty of speech, or the power to use
articulate sounds in the expression of ideas, and in the communication of
mind with mind. Speech is thus an evidence of the superior endowment of
man, and involves the culture of the intellect. An idiot, while he {228}
may have complete vocal organs and full power of uttering sounds or cries,
is entirely incapable of speech; and, as a rule, the excellence of the
language of any people will be found to be proportional to their
development of brain. Man, however, is not the only being that has the
power to form articulate sounds, for the parrot and the raven may also be
taught to speak by rote; but man alone attaches meaning to the words and
phrases he employs.

[Sidenote: 3. Speech and hearing? A deaf child? Person having "no ear for
music?" Impaired hearing? What do the examples show?]

3. Speech is intimately related to the sense of hearing. A child born deaf
is, of necessity, dumb also; not because the organs of speech are
imperfect, for he can utter cries and may be taught to speak, and even to
converse in a rude and harsh kind of language; but because he can form no
accurate notion of sound. And a person, whose hearing is not delicate, or
as it is commonly expressed, who "has no ear for music," cannot sing
correctly. A person who has impaired hearing commonly talks in an
unnaturally loud and monotonous voice. These examples show the necessary
relation of intelligence and the sense of hearing with that form of
articulate voice, which is termed speech.

[Sidenote: 4. Organ of the voice? Where situated? Of what is its framework
composed?]

4. THE ORGAN OF THE VOICE.--The essential organ of the voice is the Larynx.
This has been previously alluded to in its relation to the function of
respiration; and, in the chapter on that subject, are figured the front
view of that organ (Fig. 35), and its connection with the trachea, tongue,
and other neighboring parts (Fig. 38). It is situated at the upper part of
the neck, at the top of the trachea, or tube by which air passes into and
out of the lungs. The framework of the larynx is composed of four
cartilages, which render it at once very strong and sufficiently flexible
to enable it to move according to the requirements of the voice. {229}

[Illustration: FIG. 55. SECTION OF THE LARYNX AND TRACHEA.

A, The Epiglottis. B, The Thyroid Cartilage. C, Arytenoid Cartilage.
D, Ventricle of the Larynx. E, Cricoid Cartilage. F, Right Vocal Cord.
H, The Trachea.]

[Sidenote: 5. Names, formation, and situation of the cartilages?]

5. The names of the cartilages are (1) the _thyroid_, which is a broad thin
plate, bent in the middle and placed in the central line of the front part
of the neck, where it is known as the _pomum Adami_, or Adam's apple (Fig.
55, B), and where it may be felt moving up and down with each act of
swallowing; (2) the _cricoid_, which is shaped like a seal ring, with the
broad part placed posteriorly (Fig. 55, E). At the top of the cricoid
cartilage are situated the two small _arytenoid_ cartilages, the right one
of which is shown in Fig. 55, C. These latter little organs are much more
movable than the other two, and are very important in the production of the
voice. They have a true ball and socket joint, and several small muscles
which contract and relax with as perfect regularity and accuracy as any of
the larger muscles of the body.

[Sidenote: 6. Lining of the interior of the larynx? The epiglottis?]

6. The interior of the larynx is lined with a very sensitive mucous
membrane, which is much more closely adherent to the parts beneath than is
usually the case with membranes of this description. The epiglottis (A),
consisting of a single leaf-shaped piece of cartilage, is attached to the
front part of the larynx. It is elastic, easily moved, and fits accurately
over the entrance to the air-passages below it. Its office is to guard
these delicate passages and the lungs against the intrusion of food and
other foreign {230} articles, when the act of swallowing takes place. It
also assists in modifying the voice.

[Sidenote: 7. Where are the vocal cords? The false cords? The true cords?]

7. THE VOCAL CORDS.--Within the larynx, and stretched across it from the
thyroid cartilage in front to the arytenoid cartilages behind, are placed
the two sets of folds, called the vocal cords. The upper of these, one on
each side, are the false cords, which are comparatively fixed and
inflexible. These are not at all essential to the formation of vocal
sounds, for they have been injured, in those lower animals whose larynx
resembles that of man, without materially affecting their characteristic
cries. Below these, one on each side, are the true vocal cords (Fig. 55,
F), which pursue a similar direction to the false cords, namely, from
before backward. But they are composed of a highly elastic, though strong
tissue, and are covered with a thin, tightly-fitting layer of mucous
membrane. Their edges are smooth and sharply defined, and when they meet,
as they do in the formation of sounds, they exactly match each other.

[Sidenote: 8. Where is the ventricle of the larynx? The essentials to the
formation of the tones and modulation of the voice?]

8. Between the true and false vocal cords is a depression on each side,
which is termed the ventricle of the larynx (Fig. 55, D). The integrity of
these true cords, and their free vibration, are essential to the formation
of the tones and the modulation of the natural voice. This is shown by the
fact that, if one or both of these cords are injured or become diseased,
voice and speech are compromised; or when the mucous membrane covering them
becomes thickened, in consequence of a cold, the vocal sounds are rendered
husky and indistinct. When an opening is made in the throat below the
cords, as not infrequently happens in consequence of an attempt to commit
suicide, voice is impossible except when the opening is closed by external
pressure. {231}

[Illustration: FIG. 56. A VIEW OF THE VOCAL CORDS BY MEANS OF THE
LARYNGOSCOPE.]

[Sidenote: 9. Variation in the interval between the true cords of the
voice? Experiment with the mirror?]

9. The interval or space between the true cords of the voice is constantly
varying, not only when their vocal function is in exercise, but also during
the act of respiration. Every time the lungs are inflated, the space
increases to make wide the entrance for the air; and diminishes slightly
during expiration. So that these little cords move gently to and fro in
rhythm with the expansion and contraction of the chest in breathing. These
movements and others may be seen to take place, if a small mirror attached
to a long handle be placed back into the upper part of the throat; the
handle near the mirror must be bent at an angle of 45deg, so that we may
look "around the corner," so to speak, behind the tongue. The position
which the mirror must assume will be understood by reference to Fig. 38. A
view of what may be seen under favorable circumstances, during tranquil
inspiration is represented in Fig. 56. The vocal cords are there shown as
narrow, white bands, on each side of the central opening, and since the
image is inverted, the epiglottis appears uppermost. The rings partly seen
through the opening belong to the trachea. This little mirror is the
essential part {232} of an instrument, which is called the laryngoscope,
and, simple as it may seem, it is accounted one of the most valuable of the
recently invented appliances of the medical art.

[Sidenote: 10. The formation of true vocal tones?]

10. THE PRODUCTION OF THE VOICE.--During ordinary tranquil breathing no
sound is produced in the larynx, true vocal tones being formed only during
forcible expiration, when, by an effort of the will, the cords are brought
close together, and are stretched so as to be very tense. The space between
them is then reduced to a narrow slit, at times not more than 1/100 of an
inch in width; and the column of expired air being forced through it causes
the cords to vibrate rapidly, like the strings of a musical instrument.
Thus the voice is produced in its many varieties of tone and pitch; its
intensity, or loudness, depending chiefly upon the power exerted in
expelling the air from the lungs. When the note is high, the space is
diminished both in length and width; but when it is low, the space is wider
and longer (Fig. 57, B, C), and the number of vibrations is fewer within
the same period of time.

[Illustration: FIG. 57. THE DIFFERENT POSITIONS OF THE VOCAL CORDS.

A, The position during inspiration. B, In the formation of low notes. C, In
the formation of high notes.]

[Sidenote: 11. To what is the personal quality of the voice mainly due?
What aids are there?]

11. The personal quality of the voice, or that which enables us to
recognize a person by his speech, is mainly due to the peculiar shape of
the throat, nose, and mouth, and {233} the resonance of the air contained
within those cavities. The walls of the chest and the trachea take part in
the resonance of the voice, the air within them vibrating at the same time
with the parts above them. This may be tested by touching the throat or
breast-bone, when a strong vocal effort is made. The teeth and the lips
also are important, as is shown by the unnatural tones emitted by a person
who has lost the former, or by one who is affected with the deformity known
as "hare-lip." The tongue is useful, but not indispensable to speech; the
case of a woman is reported, from whom nearly the whole tongue had been
torn out, but who could, nevertheless, speak distinctly and even sing.

[Sidenote: 12. Varieties of voice? The baritone? The voice in early youth?]

12. THE VARIETIES of voice are said to be four in number; two, the bass and
tenor, belonging to the male sex; and two, the contralto or alto, and
soprano, peculiar to the female. The baritone voice is the name given to a
variety intervening between the bass and tenor. In man, the voice is strong
and grave; in woman, soft and high. In infancy and early youth, the voice
is the same in both sexes, being of the soprano variety: that of boys is
