
Vovo slumped into one of the heavy chairs that were arranged around the
table. He grimaced, "No vodka, I don't feel patriotic today. How about
one of those long cold drinks, with the cola stuff?"

"Cuba libra," Jim said. "Coming up. Look, would you rather speak
Russian?"

"No," Vovo said, "my English is getting rusty. I need the practice."

Jim brought the glasses over and put them on the table. He began
stripping off his own coat, loosening his tie. "God, I'm tired," he
said. "This sort of thing wears me down."

Vovo sipped his drink. "Now there's as good a thing to discuss as any,
in the way of killing time. The truth now, Jim, do you really believe in
a God? After all that's happened to this human race of ours, do you
really believe in divine guidance?" He twisted his mouth sarcastically.

The other relaxed. "I don't know," he said. "I suppose so. I was raised
in a family that believed in God. Just as, I suppose, you were raised in
one that didn't." He lifted his shoulders slightly in a shrug. "Neither
of us seems to be particularly brilliant in establishing a position of
our own."

Vovo snorted. "Never thought of it that way," he admitted. "We're
usually contemptuous of anyone still holding to the old beliefs. There
aren't many left."

"More than you people admit, I understand."

Vovo shook his heavy head. "No, not really. Mostly crackpots. Have you
ever noticed how it is that the nonconformists in any society are
usually crackpots? The people on your side that admit belonging to our
organizations, are usually on the wild eyed and uncombed hair side--I
admit it. On the other hand, the people in our citizenry who subscribe
to your system, your religion, that sort of thing, are crackpots, too.
Applies to religion as well as politics. An atheist in your country is a
nonconformist--in mine, a Christian is. Both crackpots."

Jim laughed and took a sip of his drink.

Vovo yawned and said, "How long are we going to be in here?"

"I don't know. Up to us, I suppose."

"Yes. How about another drink? I'll make it. How much of that cola stuff
do you put in?"

Jim told him, and while the other was on his feet mixing the drinks,
said, "You figure on sticking to the same line this year?"

"Have to," Vovo said over his shoulder. "What's the alternative?"

"I don't know. We're building up to a whale of a depression as it is,
even with half the economy running full blast producing defense
materials."

Vovo chuckled, "Defense materials. I wonder if ever in the history of
the human race anyone ever admitted to producing _offense_ materials."

"Well, you call it the same thing. All your military equipment is for
defense. And, of course, according to your press, all ours is for
offense."

"Of course," Vovo said.

He brought the glasses back and handed one to the other. He slumped back
