Alaskan Observation Post No. 4. A rocket was coming across the
Pole.

The strange rocket was tracked and escorted by atomic armed
fighters all the way to the Rocket Testing Station where it cut
its own motors and gently landed. In the center of a division of
atomic-armed infantry the captain, the doctor, and everyone else,
waited impatiently. There was an air of uneasiness.

"You're sure it's not ours?" Captain Baird asked.

The doctor laughed. "Identical, yes, but three times the size of
ours."

"Perhaps one of the Asian ones?"

"No, it's our design, but too large, much too large."

Professor Schultz put their thoughts into words. "Looks like
someone copied ours. Someone, somewhere. It's hard to imagine, but
true nevertheless."

They waited two weeks. Nothing happened. Then a radiation-shielded
team went in to examine the rocket. Two more weeks and the strange
rocket was dismantled and spread over the field of the testing
station. The rocket was dismantled and the station had begun to
talk to itself in whispers and look at the sky.

Captain Baird stood now at the window and looked out at the
dismantled rocket. He looked but his mind was not on the parts of
the rocket he could see from the window.

"The materials, they're not ours?" the captain asked.

"Unknown here," the doctor said.

The captain nodded. "Those were our instruments?"

"Yes." The doctor still held the whiskey bottle in a tight grip.

"They sent them back," the captain said.

       *     *     *     *     *

The doctor crashed the bottle hard against the desk top. "Ask it,
Captain, for God's sake!!"

The captain turned to face the doctor directly. "It was a man, a
full grown man."

The doctor sighed as if letting the pent-up steam of his heart
escape. "Yes, it is a man. It breathes, it eats, it has all the
attributes of a man. But it is not of our planet."

"Its speech ..." the captain began.

"That isn't speech, Captain," the doctor broke in, breaking in
