the statute that set forth the conditions for patentability. It was a
good thing I had memorized the statute. I recited the last sentence,
"Patentability shall not be negatived by the manner in which the
invention is made." Well, here it was again.

I asked Callahan, "Did you make a sheet of paper out of it?"

"Sure did. Made a hand sheet in a twelve-by-twelve inch mold. Pressed it
out, dried it, then got busy again so I couldn't test it for a week.
When I did I started working nights to see if I could duplicate my
results. Just finished this morning. Here's the hand sheet, the second
one."

He handed me a sheet of paper, snow-white in color. I put aside my
pencil and notebook to examine it. As I took it in my hand it was
obvious that it was something unusual. It was softer than a cleansing
tissue, and probably even more flexible. I rubbed it between my fingers,
and it had the most remarkable feel of any paper I had ever felt--soft
and clinging and cool, and exceedingly pleasant. I knew the paper
chemists called this property "hand." Callahan's paper had the most
remarkable hand I had ever seen.

"Tear it in half," Callahan said.

       *       *       *       *       *

I took the sheet between my thumbs and forefingers and gingerly pulled,
expecting the light and soft sheet to part easily. Nothing happened. I
pulled harder, and still nothing. I smiled at Callahan, got a better
grip, and gave it a yank. Then I twisted opposite corners around my
fingers and frankly pulled at it. The absurd sheet refused to tear, and
I realized how ridiculous I must look to Callahan to be unable to tear a
flimsy sheet of paper. I suppose I lost my temper a little. I gathered
as much of the paper as I could in each hand, bent over to put my hands
on the inside of my knees, and pulled until I heard my back muscles
crack. I let out my breath explosively and looked helplessly at
Callahan.

He said, "Don't feel bad, Carl. Nobody has been able to tear it."

"You mean it?" I asked. I found myself puffing; I had not realized I was
straining so hard.

"Yup. That paper has a tensile of 2,800 pounds per square inch, and a
tear strength equally unbelievable."

I looked at the little sheet and great possibilities began to occur to
me. "Clothing," I said. "Great heavens, think what this will do for the
clothing industry. No more weaving. Just run this stuff off on a paper
machine at five hundred feet per minute." I stopped and looked at
Callahan and said, "You will be able to make it on a paper-making
machine, won't you?"

"As far as I know."

"Good," I said. "When can we try it in the pilot plant."

"Well, that's where the problem comes in, Carl. I have to leave for the
West Coast tomorrow, and I'll be gone for six months. There's nobody
else around here to take it through the pilot plant. What's worse, one
of my technicians left this morning to take a job with Lafe Rude
Consultants, Inc., up in Boston. The technician is an ethical man, and
all that, but I'm afraid the word will be out on this paper now."

My heart sank. Callahan said, "I've already started another of my
technicians, John Bostick, on the process to make certain he can repeat
my work. But that's all we can do for a few months around here. The
laboratories have never been so busy. What do you think we ought to do?"

The answer was obvious. "We've got to file a patent application right
away. It isn't ready to file, but we've got to do it anyway."

Callahan said, "Oh, we're in good shape. We _know_ it works."

I nodded and said, "What acids other than adipic will work?"

"Oh, azoleic, sebacic, a few others, I suppose."

"What else other than amino alcohols? What other catalysts? Do you
really need mercury vapor? Will some other metallic vapor do? What about
temperature variations in making the polyester? How long a cure time?
How much ultraviolet? Will the fibers be better if you draw them more?
Can you get those tacky fiber ends in any other way? Can you improve
them? What about the sheet-making conditions? Does oxygen in the air
catalyze...?"

Callahan held up his hands and said, "O.K., O.K., we don't know anything
about it. But we're not going to find out these things until we open a
research program, and we can't open a program for at least six months.
In the meantime that technician may ..."

I held up my hands this time, and he fell quiet. We stood silently until
I asked, "All the information in your notebooks, Henry?"

He nodded, and I continued, "Well, I'll be back tomorrow to talk to you
and Bostick. We'll just have to file a patent application on what we
have."

We chatted a while about his work on the West Coast, and then we shook
hands and I left. I had a few moments to think in the cab before I
talked with Mr. Spardleton. Here I was in that situation that a patent
attorney dreads. I had an incomplete invention, one that required a
great deal of work before it could be filed, yet I had to file now in
the incomplete condition. With it all, here was a most significant
invention, one that would make the world take notice. This was one of
the rare ones, I could feel it in my bones. It was obviously an
industry-founder, a landmark invention on a par with the greatest, even
in its incomplete condition. By golly, I was going to do a job on this
one.

       *       *       *

Mr. Spardleton was in a bad mood when I entered his office. I didn't
have a chance to say a thing before he bellowed at me, "Mr. Saddle, do
you know what a plasticizer is?"

"Why, ah, yes. It is a material, generally a solvent, that softens and
renders another material more flexible."

"That's right." His fist banged on the desk. "Yet here," he waved an
Office Action at me, "is an Examiner who says that the term
'plasticizer' is indefinite, and I must give a list of suitable
plasticizers when he knows that Rule 118 forbids me to put in such a
list. Can you imagine? He is saying in effect that a chemist who works
with synthetic resins does not know what a plasticizer is, and I must
take him by the hand and teach him something he learned in freshman
