that Jerry Markham had spent the previous night in activities not
recommended by his superiors but nothing that would bounce him if they
knew. He could hardly be broken for living it up at a party.

He shook hands with the boss and stepped into the elevator. It was not
his idea of a proper send-off. There should be bands playing and girls
throwing paper tape, flowers and a few drinks. Sally should send him off
with a proud smooch of lipstick and a tearful promise to wait. Instead
it was all very military and strict and serious--which is why he'd
whooped it up the night before. He'd had his good night and good by with
Sally Forman, but now eighteen hours later he was fit and raring for a
return match.

Jerry's mind was by no means concerned with this next half hour, which
would be the most perilous part of his flight. Tomorrow would take care
of itself. The possibility that thirty minutes from now he might be dead
in a flaming pyre did not cross his mind, the chance that an hour from
now he could be told that his bird was off-course and his fate
starvation if it obtained an untrue orbit or abrupt destruction if it
didn't orbit at all--nothing bothered him.

He sat there chanting the count down with the official timer and braced
himself when the call came:

"Zero! Fire!"

Inwardly, Jerry Markham's mind said, "We're off!" and he began to look
forward to his landing on Venus. Not the problems of landing, but what
he would find there when he soared down through the clouds.

Determined to hold up through the high-G even though nobody watched, he
went on and on and up and up, his radio voiced the progress tinnily.
Shock followed roaring pressure, release followed shock. Orientation was
lost; only logic and intellect told him where he was and which way he
was going.

Then he was free. Free to eat and drink and read and smoke one cigarette
every three hours and, in essence, behave in about the same way as a
prisoner confined in solitary. The similarity did not bother Jerry
Markham, for this was honor, not punishment.

       *       *       *       *       *

Huvane collected him with the ease of a fisherman landing a netted crab.
Easily, painlessly. Shockingly, for the crab doesn't exactly take to the
net with docility.

Huvane collected the whole shebang, man and machinery; then opened the
spacecraft with the same attitude as a man peeling the lid from a can of
sardines. He could have breached the air lock, but he wanted the Terran
to understand the power behind the act.

Jerry Markham came out blinking; very mildly wondering about the air. It
was good. Without considering the rather high probability that nobody
spoke the language, he blurted:

"What gives?"

He was not very much surprised when one of them in uniform said curtly,
"This way and make it snappy, Terran!"

No, he was not surprised. He was too stunned to permit anything as
simple as surprise. And through the shock and the stun, his months of
training came through. Jerry Markham worried his first worry: _How was
he going to get the word back home?_

Confinement in the metal cell of his top-stage hadn't bothered him. The
concept of landing on a planet that couldn't come closer to home than
some twenty-seven million miles was mere peanuts. Isolation for a year
was no more than a hiatus, a period of adventure that would be rewarded
many-fold. Sally? So she might not wait but there were others; he'd
envisioned himself fighting them off with a club after his successful
return. Hell, they'd swarmed him before his take-off, starting with the
moment his number had come up as possible candidate.

No, the meeting with competence in space did not shock him greatly. What
bothered him was his lack of control over the situation. Had he seen
them and passed on about his business, he recounted the incident.

As it was, his desire to tell somebody about it was cut off. As he sat,
alone and helpless, it occurred to him that he did not mind so much the
dying, if that was to be his lot. What mattered was the unmarked grave.
The mourning did not move him; the physical concept of "grave" and its
fill of moldering organic substances was nothing. It was mere symbol. So
long as people knew how and where, it made little difference to Jerry
Markham whether he was planted in a duridium casket guaranteed to
preserve the dead flesh for a thousand years or whether he went out in a
bright swift flame that glinted in its tongues of the color-traces of
incandescent elements of human organic chemistry.

So long as people knew. Where and how. Vague, vague, mass-volumized
concept. Granite tomb was one idea, here was a _place_. Point a
spread-fingered hand in a waving sweep across the sky that encompasses
the Plane of The Ecliptic and say, "It is there," and another _place_ is
identified. Lost on Venus is no more than a phrase; from Terra Haute or
Times Square, Venus is a tiny point in the sky smaller to the vision
than the granite of Grant's Tomb.

Imagination breeds irritation. Would they call it pilot error or
