
But he disagreed with those orders. It was official theory that
arithmetic values, repeated in proper order, would be the way to open
conversation. The assumption was that any rational creature would grasp
the idea that orderly signals were rational attempts to open
communication.

But it had occurred to Baird that a Plumie might not see this point.
Perception of order is not necessarily perception of information--in
fact, quite the contrary. A message is a disturbance of order. A
microphone does not transmit a message when it sends an unvarying tone. A
message has to be unpredictable or it conveys no message. Orderly clicks,
even if overheard, might seem to Plumies the result of methodically
operating machinery. A race capable of interstellar flight was not likely
to be interested or thrilled by exercises a human child goes through in
kindergarten. They simply wouldn't seem meaningful at all.

But before he could ask permission to attempt to make talk in a more
sophisticated fashion, voices exclaimed all over the ship. They came
blurringly to the loud-speakers. "_Look at that!_" "_What's he do--_"
"_Spinning like--_" From every place where there was a vision-plate on
the _Niccola_, men watched the Plumie ship and babbled.

This was at 06 hours 50 minutes ship time.

       *       *       *       *       *

The elliptical golden object darted into swift and eccentric motion.
Lacking an object of known size for comparison, there was no scale. The
golden ship might have been the size of an autumn leaf, and in fact its
maneuvers suggested the heedless tumblings and scurrying of falling
foliage. It fluttered in swift turns and somersaults and spinnings. There
were weavings like the purposeful feints of boxers not yet come to
battle. There were indescribably graceful swoops and loops and curving
dashes like some preposterous dance in emptiness.

Taine's voice crashed out of a speaker:

"_All even-number rockets_," he barked. "_Fire!_"

[Illustration]

The skipper roared a countermand, but too late. The crunching, grunting
sound of rockets leaving their launching tubes came before his first
syllable was complete. Then there was silence while the skipper gathered
breath for a masterpiece of profanity. But Taine snapped:

"_That dance was a sneak-up! The Plumie came four miles nearer while we
watched!_"

Baird jerked his eyes from watching the Plumie. He looked at the master
radar. It was faintly blurred with the fading lines of past gyrations,
but the golden ship was much nearer the _Niccola_ than it had been.

"Radar reporting," said Baird sickishly. "Mr. Taine is correct. The
Plumie ship did approach us while it danced."

Taine's voice snarled:

"_Reload even numbers with chemical-explosive war heads. Then remove
atomics from odd numbers and replace with chemicals. The range is too
short for atomics._"

Baird felt curiously divided in his own mind. He disliked Taine very
much. Taine was arrogant and suspicious and intolerant even on the
_Niccola_. But Taine had been right twice, now. The Plumie ship had crept
closer by pure trickery. And it was right to remove atomic war heads from
the rockets. They had a pure-blast radius of ten miles. To destroy the
Plumie ship within twice that would endanger the _Niccola_--and leave
nothing of the Plumie to examine afterward.

The Plumie ship must have seen the rocket flares, but it continued to
dance, coming nearer and ever nearer in seemingly heedless and
purposeless plungings and spinnings in star-speckled space. But suddenly
there were racing, rushing trails of swirling vapor. Half the _Niccola's_
port broadside plunged toward the golden ship. The fraction of a second
later, the starboard half-dozen chemical-explosive rockets swung
furiously around the ship's hull and streaked after their brothers. They
moved in utterly silent, straight-lined, ravening ferocity toward their
target. Baird thought irrelevantly of the vapor trails of an
atmosphere-liner in the planet's upper air.

The ruled-line straightness of the first six rockets' course abruptly
broke. One of them veered crazily out of control. It shifted to an almost
right-angled course. A second swung wildly to the left. A third and
fourth and fifth--The sixth of the first line of rockets made a great,
sweeping turn and came hurtling back toward the _Niccola_. It was like a
nightmare. Lunatic, erratic lines of sunlit vapor eeled before the
background of all the stars in creation.

Then the second half-dozen rockets broke ranks, as insanely and
irremediably as the first.

Taine's voice screamed out of a speaker, hysterical with fury:

"_Detonate! Detonate! They've taken over the rockets and are throwing 'em
back at us! Detonate all rockets!_"

The heavens seemed streaked and laced with lines of expanding smoke. But
now one plunging line erupted at its tip. A swelling globe of smoke
marked its end. Another blew up. And another--

The _Niccola's_ rockets faithfully blew themselves to bits on command
from the _Niccola's_ own weapons control. There was nothing else to be
done with them. They'd been taken over in flight. They'd been turned and
headed back toward their source. They'd have blasted the _Niccola_ to
bits but for their premature explosions.

There was a peculiar, stunned hush all through the _Niccola_. The only
sound that came out of any speaker in the radar room was Taine's voice,
high-pitched and raging, mouthing unspeakable hatred of the Plumies, whom
no human being had yet seen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Baird sat tense in the frustrated and desperate composure of the man who
can only be of use while he is sitting still and keeping his head. The
vision screen was now a blur of writhing mist, lighted by the sun and
torn at by emptiness. There was luminosity where the ships had
encountered each other. It was sunshine upon thin smoke. It was like the
insanely enlarging head of a newborn comet, whose tail would be formed
presently by light-pressure. The Plumie ship was almost invisible behind
the unsubstantial stuff.

But Baird regarded his radar screens. Microwaves penetrated the mist of
rapidly ionizing gases.

"Radar to navigation!" he said sharply. "The Plumie ship is still
approaching, dancing as before!"

The skipper said with enormous calm:

"_Any other Plumie ships, Mr. Baird?_"

Diane interposed.

"No sign anywhere. I've been watching. This seems to be the only ship
within radar range."

"_We've time to settle with it, then_," said the skipper. "_Mr. Taine,
the Plumie ship is still approaching._"

Baird found himself hating the Plumies. It was not only that humankind
was showing up rather badly, at the moment. It was that the Plumie ship
had refused contact and forced a fight. It was that if the _Niccola_ were
destroyed the Plumie would carry news of the existence of humanity and of
the tactics which worked to defeat them. The Plumies could prepare an
irresistible fleet. Humanity could be doomed.

But he overheard himself saying bitterly:

"I wish I'd known this was coming, Diane. I ... wouldn't have resolved to
be strictly official, only, until we got back to base."

Her eyes widened. She looked startled. Then she softened.

"If ... you mean that ... I wish so too."

"It looks like they've got us," he admitted unhappily. "If they can take
our rockets away from us--" Then his voice stopped. He said, "Hold
everything!" and pressed the navigation-room button. He snapped: "Radar
to navigation. It appears to take the Plumies several seconds to take
over a rocket. They have to aim something--a pressor or tractor beam,
most likely--and pick off each rocket separately. Nearly forty seconds
was consumed in taking over all twelve of our rockets. At shorter range,
with less time available, a rocket might get through!"

The skipper swore briefly. Then:

"_Mr. Taine! When the Plumies are near enough, our rockets may strike
before they can be taken over! You follow?_"

Baird heard Taine's shrill-voiced acknowledgment--in the form of
practically chattered orders to his rocket-tube crews. Baird listened,
checking the orders against what the situation was as the radars saw it.
Taine's voice was almost unhuman; so filled with frantic rage that it
cracked as he spoke. But the problem at hand was the fulfillment of all
his psychopathic urges. He commanded the starboard-side rocket-battery to
await special orders. Meanwhile the port-side battery would fire two
rockets on widely divergent courses, curving to join at the Plumie ship.
They'd be seized. They were to be detonated and another port-side rocket
fired instantly, followed by a second hidden in the rocket-trail the
first would leave behind. Then the starboard side--

"I'm afraid Taine's our only chance," said Baird reluctantly. "If he
wins, we'll have time to ... talk as people do who like each other. If it
doesn't work--"

Diane said quietly:

"Anyhow ... I'm glad you ... wanted me to know. I ... wanted you to know,
too."

She smiled at him, yearningly.

       *       *       *       *       *

_There was the crump-crump_ of two rockets going out together. Then the
radar told what happened. The Plumie ship was no more than six miles
away, dancing somehow deftly in the light of a yellow sun, with all the
cosmos spread out as shining pin points of colored light behind it. The
radar reported the dash and the death of the two rockets, after their
struggle with invisible things that gripped them. They died when they
headed reluctantly back to the _Niccola_--and detonated two miles from
their parent ship. The skipper's voice came:

"_Mr. Taine! After your next salvo I shall head for the Plumie at full
drive, to cut down the distance and the time they have to work in. Be
ready!_"

The rocket tubes went _crump-crump_ again, with a fifth of a second
