Too many questions by now, Gefty thought. But Maulbow had the answers.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was hurrying up the main deck's central passage when Maulbow's voice
addressed him sharply from a door he'd just passed.

"Stop right there, Rammer! Don't dare to move! I--"

The voice ended on a note of surprise. Gefty's reaction had not been too
rational, but it was prompt. Maulbow's tone and phrasing implied he was
armed. Gefty wasn't, but he kept a gun in the instrument room for
emergencies. He'd been through a whole series of unnerving experiences,
winding up with being shagged out of his storage vault by something that
stank of ammonia and looked like a giant snake. To have one of the
_Queen's_ passengers order him to stand where he was topped it off.
Every other consideration was swept aside by a great urge to get his
hands on his gun.

He glanced back, saw Maulbow coming out of the half-opened door,
something like a twenty-inch, thin, white rod in one hand. Then Gefty
went bounding on along the passage, hunched forward and zigzagging from
wall to wall to give Maulbow--if the thing he held was a weapon and he
actually intended to use it--as small and erratic a target as possible.
Maulbow shouted angrily behind him. Then, as Gefty came up to the next
cross-passage, a line of white fire seared through the air across his
shoulders and smashed off the passage wall.

With that, he was around the corner, and boiling mad. He had no great
liking for gunfire, but it didn't shake him like the silently attacking
beast in the dark storage had done. He reached the deserted instrument
room not many seconds later, had his gun out and cocked, and was faced
back towards the passage by which he had entered. Maulbow, if he had
pursued without hesitation, should be arriving by now. But the passage
stayed quiet. Gefty couldn't see into it from where he stood. He waited,
trying to steady his breathing, wondering where Kerim Ruse was and what
had got into Maulbow. After a moment, without taking his eyes from the
passage entrance, he reached into the wall closet from which he had
taken the gun and fished out another souvenir of his active service
days, a thin-bladed knife in a slip-sheath. Gefty worked the fastenings
of the sheath over his left wrist and up his forearm under his coat,
tested the release to make sure it was functioning, and shook his coat
sleeve back into place.

The passage was still quiet. Gefty moved softly over to one of the
chairs, took a small cushion from it and pitched it out in front of the
entrance.

There was a hiss. The cushion turned in midair into a puff of bright
white fire. Gefty aimed his gun high at the far passage wall just beyond
the entrance and pulled the trigger. It was a projectile gun. He heard
the slug screech off the slick plastic bulkhead and go slamming down the
passage. Somebody out there made a startled, incoherent noise. But not
the kind of a noise a man makes when he's just been hit.

"If you come in here armed," Gefty called, "I'll blow your head off.
Want to stop this nonsense now?"

There was a moment's silence. Then Maulbow's voice replied shakily from
the passage. He seemed to be standing about twenty feet back from the
room.

"If you'll end your thoughtless attempts at interference, Rammer," he
said, "there will be no trouble." He was speaking with the restraint of
a man who is in a state of cold fury. "You're endangering us all. You
must realize that you have no understanding of what you are doing."

Well, the last could be true enough. "We'll talk about it," Gefty said
without friendliness. "I haven't done anything yet, but I'm not just
handing the ship over to you. And what have you done with Miss Ruse?"

Maulbow hesitated again. "She's in the map room," he said then. "I ...
it was necessary to restrict her movements for a while. But you might as
well let her out now. We must reach an agreement without loss of time."

Gefty glanced over his shoulder at the small closed door of the map
room. There was no lock on the door, and he had heard no sound from
inside; this might be some trick. But it wouldn't take long to find out.
He backed up to the wall, pushed the door open and looked inside.

Kerim was there, sitting on a chair in one corner of the tiny room. The
reason she hadn't made any noise became clear. She and the chair were
covered by a rather closely fitting sack of transparent, glistening
fabric. She stared out through it despairingly at Gefty, her lips moving
urgently. But no sound came from the sack.

Gefty called angrily, "Maulbow--"

"Don't excite yourself, Rammer." There was a suggestion of what might be
contempt in Maulbow's tone now. "The girl hasn't been harmed. She can
breathe easily through the restrainer. And you can remove it by pulling
at the material from outside."

Gefty's mouth tightened. "I'll keep my gun on the passage while I do
it--"

Maulbow didn't answer. Gefty edged back into the map room, tentatively
grasped the transparent stuff above Kerim's shoulder. To his surprise,
it parted like wet tissue. He pulled sharply, and in a moment Kerim came
peeling herself out of it, her face tear-stained, working desperately
with hands, elbows and shoulders.

"Gefty," she gasped, "he ... Mr. Maulbow--"

"He's out in the passage there," Gefty said. "He can hear you." His
glance shifted for an instant to the wall where a second of the
shroudlike transparencies was hanging. And who could that have been
intended for, he thought, but Gefty Rammer? He added, "We've had a
little trouble."

"Oh!" She looked out of the room towards the passage, then at the gun in
Gefty's hand, then up at his face.

"Maulbow," Gefty went on, speaking distinctly enough to make sure
Maulbow heard, "has a gun, too. He'll stay there in the passage and
we'll stay in the instrument room until we agree on what should be done.
He's responsible for what's happened and seems to know where we are."

He looked at Kerim's frightened eyes, dropped his voice to a whisper.
"Don't let this worry you too much. I haven't found out just what he's
up to, but so far his tricks have pretty much backfired. He was counting
on taking us both by surprise, for one thing. That didn't work, so now
he'd like us to co-operate."

"Are you going to?"

Gefty shrugged. "Depends on what he has in mind. I'm just interested in
getting us out of this alive. Let's hear what Maulbow has to say--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Some minutes later Gefty was trying to decide whether it was taking a
worse risk to believe what Maulbow said than to keep things stalled on
the chance that he was lying.

Kerim Ruse, perched stiffly erect on the edge of a chair, eyes big and
round, face almost colorless, apparently believed Maulbow and was
wishing she didn't. There was, of course, some supporting evidence ...
primarily the improbable appearance of their surroundings. The
pencil-thin fire-spouter and the sleazy-looking "restrainer" had a
sufficiently unfamiliar air to go with Maulbow's story; but as far as
Gefty knew, either of them could have been manufactured in the Hub.

Then there was the janandra--the big, snakish thing in the storage which
Maulbow had brought back up from the moon along with the battered
machine. It had been, he said, his shipboard companion on another
voyage. It wasn't ordinarily aggressive--Gefty's sudden appearance in
the vault must have startled it into making an attack. It was not
exactly a pet. There was a psychological relationship between it and
Maulbow which Maulbow would not attempt to explain because Gefty and
Kerim would be unable to grasp its significance. The janandra was
essential, in this unexplained manner, to his well-being.

That item was almost curious enough to seem to substantiate his other
statements; but it didn't really prove anything. The only point Gefty
didn't question in the least was that they were in a bad spot which
might be getting worse rapidly. His gaze shifted back to the screens.
What he saw out there, surrounding the ship, was, according to Maulbow,
an illusion of space created by the time flow in which they were moving.

Also according to Maulbow, there was a race of the future, human in
appearance, with machines to sail the current of time through the
universe--to run and tack with the winds of time, dipping in and out of
the normspace of distant periods and galaxies as they chose. Maulbow,
one of the explorers, had met disaster a million light-years from the
home of his kind, centuries behind them, his vehicle wrecked on an
airless moon with damaged control unit and shattered instruments. He had
made his way to a human civilization to obtain the equipment he needed,
and returned at last with the _Silver Queen_ to where the time-sailer
lay buried.

Gefty's lip curled. No, he wasn't buying all that just yet--but if
Maulbow was _not_ lying, then the unseen stars were racing past, the
mass of the galaxy beginning to slide by, eventually to be lost forever
beyond a black distance no space drive could span. The matter simply had
to be settled quickly. But Maulbow was also strained and impatient, and
if his impatience could be increased a little more, he might start
telling the things that really mattered, the things Gefty had to know.
Gefty asked slowly, as if hesitant to commit himself, "Why did you bring
us along?"

The voice from the passage snapped, "Because my resources were nearly
exhausted, Rammer! I couldn't obtain a new ship. Therefore I chartered
yours; and you came with it. As for Miss Ruse--in spite of every
