apparently, and probably late summer by the looks of the vegetation.

He got up a little before daylight and looked at the rabbit and old Tom.
Both seemed to be doing nicely. Old Tom was hungry for more otherworld
meat. Ed gave it to him and made up a light pack. After some thought, he
took the .450 bear gun he used for back-up when guiding. Whatever he ran
into over there, the .450--a model 71 throwing a 400 grain slug at 2100
fps--should handle it.

The first step through into the other world was a queasy one, but it
turned out to be much the same as any other step. The only difference
was that now he was in the other world looking back. From this side, the
niggerhead at the threshold was sliced sharply, but it had been kicked
down a little when he came through, and what with shoving the cage
through and pulling it back, so that some clods of moss and dirt were
scattered in the other world. For some reason, that made Ed feel better,
it seemed to make the joining of the two worlds a little more permanent.

Still, it had come sudden, and it might go sudden. Ed went back into his
own world and got an ax, a saw, more ammunition, salt, a heavy sleeping
robe, a few other possibles. He brought them through and piled them in
the other world, covering them with a scrap of old tarp. He cut a couple
of poles, peeled them, and stuck them in the ground to mark the hole
from this side.

Then he looked around.

He stood on the shoulder of a hill, in a game trail that ran down toward
a stream below, in what seemed to be a fairly recent burn. There were
charred stumps, and the growth was small stuff, with some saplings
pushing up through. There was timber in the valley below, though, and on
the hills beyond, deciduous, somewhat like oak. South was where east had
been in his own world, and the sun seemed smaller, but brighter. The sky
was a very dark blue. He seemed lighter in this world, there was a
spring in his step he had not known for twenty years. He looked at his
compass. It checked with the direction of the sun.

He studied the trail. It had seen a lot of use, but less in recent
weeks. There were sharp hoof-prints of the animal he had caught, larger
hoof-prints, vague pad-marks of various sizes, but nothing that looked
human. The trail went under a charred tree trunk at a height that was
not comfortable for a man, and the spacing of the steps around the
gnarled roots of an old slump did not fit a man's stride.

He did not notice the Harn creature at all--which was understandable, it
was well camouflaged.

He worked circumspectly down the trail, staying a little off it,
studying tracks and droppings, noticing evidences of browsing on the
shrubs--mostly old--pausing to examine tufts of hair and an occasional
feather. Halfway down the slope he flushed a bird about ptarmigan-size,
grayish brown in color.

The trail was more marked where it went into the timber. It wound
through the trees for a few hundred yards and came out on a canoe-sized
stream. Here it forked. One trail crossed the stream and went up the
hill on the other side, the other followed the stream up the valley.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Harn followed Ed's movements, observing carefully. It needed a
specimen from the other world, and this biped would serve nicely, but it
might as well learn as much as possible about him first. It could always
pick him up some time before he returned to his own world. Just to make
sure, it sent a stinging unit to guard the entrance._

       *       *       *       *       *

All his life, except for a short period in France, Ed had been a hunter,
never hunted. Still, you don't grow old in the woods by jumping without
looking. Coming into a new situation, he was wary as an old wolf. There
was a little shoulder right above the fork in the trail. He stood there
for several minutes, looking things over, and then went down and crossed
the stream at the next riffle, above the ford. By doing so, although he
did not know it, he missed the trap the Harn maintained at the ford for
chance passers-by.

On the other side of the creek, the trail ran angling off downstream,
skirted a small lake hidden in the trees, climbed over another low
shoulder and dropped into a second valley. As Ed followed along it, he
began to notice a few more signs of life--birds, small scurriers on the
ground and in tree tops--and this set him thinking. The country had a
picked-over feel to it, a hunted and trapped-out feel, worse where he
had first come through, but still noticeable here.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Harn did not like to cross water, it could, but it did not like
to._

       *       *       *       *       *

Ed looked at the sun. It was getting down in the sky. If there was any
activity at all around here, the ford at dusk would be as likely a place
as any to find it. He worked back along the ridge to a point above where
he judged the ford to be. The breeze was drawing up the valley, but
favoring the other side a little. He dropped down and crossed the stream
a quarter mile above the ford, climbed well above the trail and worked
along the hillside until he was in a position where he could watch both
the ford and the fork in the trail. He squatted down against a tree in a
comfortable position, laid his gun across his knees, and rummaged in his
pack for the cold flapjacks, wrapped around slices of duck breast, which
he had packed for lunch.

After he had finished eating he drank from his canteen--the water in
this world might be good, it might not, there was no point in taking
chances till he could try it on the cat--and took an economical chew of
snuff. He settled back to wait.

_The Harn had lost Ed after he crossed the creek--it used a fallen tree
quite a way further up for its own crossing--and did not pick him up
again until just before he crossed back. Now, however, he had been
immobile for several minutes. This looked like about as good a time as
any to make the pickup. The Harn had a stinging unit just about
positioned, and it had dispatched a carrier to stand by._

After a while, sitting there, Ed began to feel uneasy. The timber was
big here, and open underneath, almost parklike. The nearest cover was
fifty or sixty yards off to his left, a little tangle of brush where a
tree had fallen and let a shaft of sunlight through.

It looked possible, but it didn't feel quite right. Still, it was about
the only place anything big enough to bother him could hide. The feeling
was getting stronger, the back hairs on Ed's neck were starting to stand
up now. Without visible movement, or even noticing himself that he was
doing it, he let awareness run over his body, checking the position and
stiffness of his legs--he had been sitting there quite a while--the
balance of the gun across his knees, the nearness of his thumb to the
hammer.

Thoughtfully, still studying the patch of brush, he spat a thin stream
over his left shoulder at a pile of leaves a few feet away.

Thinking about it later, Ed could almost have sworn the tobacco juice
sizzled as it hit. Actually, this was probably imaginary. The stinging
unit was not that sensitive to tobacco, though it was sensitive enough.
As the drops splattered it, the pile of leaves erupted with a snuffling
hiss like an overloaded teakettle into a tornado of bucking, twisting
activity.

Ed's reflexes were not quite as fast as they had been when he was young,
but they were better educated. Also, he was already keyed-up. Almost as
it started, the flurry in the leaves stopped with the roar of his rifle.
Fired like that, the heavy gun just about took his hand off, but he did
not notice it at the moment. He came erect in a quick scramble, jacking
in a fresh round as he did so. The scene took on that strange timeless
aspect it often does in moments of emergency, with a man's whole being
