"No real reason ... _now_. But there's trouble in the air, sir. I can
smell it. The whole place is buzzing ... with _something_."

"With what?"

"I can't put my finger on it. But all the men know there's some pretty
big shots--at least one general, they say--in the warden's office, right
now. There's a hot rumor that there's trouble outside--some sort of
disaster."

Court laughed shortly. "That Mario! He's going to lose a nice job if he
doesn't keep his mouth shut!"

"None of them keep their mouths shut, captain."

"Yes ... well, I don't know what's up, myself. I'm heading for that
conference right now. I'll ask the warden about letting the men out of
their cells. What's their attitude?"

The sergeant's broad, red face grew more troubled.

"Uh ... the men aren't hostile, captain. They seem worried, nervous ...
kind of scared. If somebody at the top--the warden or yourself--could
convince them things were as usual outside ... they'd quiet down, I'm
sure."

They were now thirty feet from the door to the administration building a
door that opened for but one man at a time. The officers stopped.

"Things are _not_ normal outside," Court growled, "and you know it. I've
been wondering how long this prison could go on--as if there were still
a state's capital, with its Adult Authority, its governor, its Supreme
Court. D'you think every man jack here doesn't know a visit from the
Authority's long overdue!"

"Yeah--"

"Well, I'll go in, sarge, and see what's what. If you _don't_ hear from
me, stick to routine."

"Right, captain."

He remained where he was while Captain Court walked slowly toward the
door, both hands well in sight. A pace from the door he stopped and
exchanged a few words with someone watching him through a barred
peephole. After a moment, the door slid open and he walked into the
building.

He was the last to arrive at the warden's office. Lansing gazed at him
in fascination. Goldsmid had been a Golden Gloves champion middleweight
before he had heeded the call of the Law, and he looked it. Dr. Slade
was the prototype of all overworked doctors. But Court was a type by
himself. Lansing thought he'd never seen a colder eye. Yet, the
captain's lean face--so unlike the warden's mild, scholarly one--was
quiet, composed, unmarked by any weakness of feature or line of
self-indulgence. A big, tough man, Lansing mused, a very tough man. But
a just one.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I've a problem, warden," Court said when the introductions were over.
"Something we should decide right away."

"Can't it wait?" Knox said irritably.

Lansing almost choked with stifled laughter when Court just glanced
briefly at Knox, then said quietly to the warden, "Sergeant Haines has
just advised me that the inmates know about these gentlemen and
they're--restless. I wonder if we shouldn't keep the men in their cells
this afternoon."'

"Blast it!" roared Knox. "Can't you people keep a secret?"

"There are no secrets in prison, general," Halloran said mildly. "I
learned that my first week as a guard, twenty years ago." To Court he
said, "Sit down, Alfred. Unless you disagree strongly, I think we'll let
the men out as usual. It's a risk, yes, but right now, the closer we
stick to normal routine, the better."

"You're probably right, sir."

Court sat down and Halloran turned to his two visitors.

"Now, gentlemen," he smiled, "we're at your disposal. As I told you, my
two associate wardens aren't here. Mr. Briggs is in town and Mr. Tate is
home ill. Dr. McCall, our Protestant clergyman, is also home, recovering
from a siege with one of those pesky viruses. But we here represent
various phases of our administration and can certainly answer all of
your questions."

"Questions!" Knox snorted. "We're here to tell you the facts--not ask."

"General," soothed Lansing. He looked across the desk at Halloran and
shrugged slightly. The warden twinkled. "General Knox is a trifle ...
ah, overblunt, but he's telling you the essential truth of the
situation. We've come to take you away from here. Just as soon as you
can leave."

"Hey?" cried Slade. "Leave here? The devil, man, I've got to take out a
gall bladder this afternoon!"

"I'm afraid I don't understand," murmured Goldsmid. "I thought the war
was over--"

"This is all nonsense!" There was an ominous note in Knox's hoarse
voice. "Do you people realize you're now under the authority of the
Fifth Defense Command?"

Lansing cried: "Let's be sensible about all this!" He pointed his cigar
at the fuming soldier. "General, these gentlemen have every right to
know the situation and we'll save time if you'll permit me to give them
a quick briefing."

"All right! All right!"

"Well, then." Lansing crossed his long legs, glanced nervously about the
room, and said, "The world as we know it is done with. Finished. In
another week it will be completely uninhabitable."

[Illustration]

"Hey," grunted Slade. "You Lansing, the physicist?"

"That's right, doctor."

"Didn't place you at first. Well, what's going to end this lousy old
world of ours?"

"Well," Lansing answered, "we wiped out our late antagonists with skill
and dispatch. But, in the end, they outsmarted us. Left behind some sort
of radioactive dust which ... _spreads_. It's rolling down on us from
Chicago and up from Texas. God knows what other parts of the country are
like--we haven't had time to discuss it with them on the radio."

Goldsmid muttered something in Hebrew.

"Isn't that lack of communication rather odd?" asked the warden.

"Not so very. We've been too busy building rocket ships."

