
                         _Higher Mathematics for Students of
                         Chemistry and Physics (New York, 1902),
                         p. 157._


=1926.= It is well known that the central problem of the whole of
modern mathematics is the study of the transcendental functions
defined by differential equations.--KLEIN, F.

                         _Lectures on Mathematics (New York,
                         1911), p. 8._


=1927.= Every one knows what a curve is, until he has studied
enough mathematics to become confused through the countless
number of possible exceptions.... A curve is the totality of
points, whose co-ordinates are functions of a parameter which may
be differentiated as often as may be required.--KLEIN, F.

                         _Elementar Mathematik vom hoeheren
                         Standpunkte aus. (Leipzig. 1909) Vol. 2,
                         p. 354._


=1928.= Fourier's theorem is not only one of the most beautiful
results of modern analysis, but it may be said to furnish an
indispensable instrument in the treatment of nearly every
recondite question in modern physics. To mention only sonorous
vibrations, the propagation of electric signals along telegraph
wires, and the conduction of heat by the earth's crust, as
subjects in their generality intractable without it, is to give
but a feeble idea of its importance.--THOMSON AND TAIT.

                         _Elements of Natural Philosophy, chap.
                         1._


=1929.= The principal advantage arising from the use of
hyperbolic functions is that they bring to light some curious
analogies between the integrals of certain irrational functions.

                                                  --BYERLY, W. E.

                         _Integral Calculus (Boston, 1890), p.
                         30._


=1930.= Hyperbolic functions are extremely useful in every branch
of pure physics and in the applications of physics whether to
observational and experimental sciences or to technology. Thus
whenever an entity (such as light, velocity, electricity, or
radio-activity) is subject to gradual absorption or extinction,
the decay is represented by some form of hyperbolic functions.
Mercator's projection is likewise computed by hyperbolic
functions. Whenever mechanical strains are regarded great enough
to be measured they are most simply expressed in terms of
hyperbolic functions. Hence geological deformations invariably
lead to such expressions....--WALCOTT, C. D.

                         _Smithsonian Mathematical Tables,
                         Hyperbolic Functions (Washington, 1909),
                         Advertisement._


=1931.= Geometry may sometimes appear to take the lead over
analysis, but in fact precedes it only as a servant goes before
his master to clear the path and light him on the way. The
interval between the two is as wide as between empiricism and
science, as between the understanding and the reason, or as
between the finite and the infinite.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _Philosophic Magazine, Vol. 31 (1866),
                         p. 521._


=1932.= Nature herself exhibits to us measurable and observable
quantities in definite mathematical dependence; the conception of
a function is suggested by all the processes of nature where we
observe natural phenomena varying according to distance or to
time. Nearly all the "known" functions have presented themselves
in the attempt to solve geometrical, mechanical, or physical
problems.--MERZ, J. T.

                         _A History of European Thought in the
                         Nineteenth Century (Edinburgh and
                         London, 1903), p. 696._


=1933.= That flower of modern mathematical thought--the notion of
a function.--MCCORMACK, THOMAS J.

                         _On the Nature of Scientific Law and
                         Scientific Explanation, Monist, Vol. 10
                         (1899-1900), p. 555._


=1934.=

        Fuchs. Ich bin von alledem so consterniert,
               Als wuerde mir ein Kreis im Kopfe quadriert.

        Meph.  Nachher vor alien andern Sachen
               Muesst ihe euch an die Funktionen-Theorie machen.
               Da seht, dass ihr tiefsinnig fasst,
               Was sich zu integrieren nicht passt.
               An Theoremen wird's euch nicht fehlen,
               Muesst nur die Verschwindungspunkte zaehlen,
               Umkehren, abbilden, auf der Eb'ne 'rumfahren
               Und mit den Theta-Produkten nicht sparen.
                                               --LASSWITZ, KURD.

                         _Der Faust-Tragoedie (-n)ter Tiel;
                         Zeitschrift fuer den math.-natur.
                         Unterricht, Bd. 14 (1883), p. 316._

        Fuchs. Your words fill me with an awful dread,
               Seems like a circle were squared in my head.

        Meph.  Next in order you certainly ought
               On function-theory bestow your thought,
               And penetrate with contemplation
               What resists your attempts at integration.
               You'll find no dearth of theorems there--
               To vanishing-points give proper care--
               Enumerate, reciprocate,
               Nor forget to delineate,
               Traverse the plane from end to end,
               And theta-functions freely spend.


=1935.= The student should avoid _founding results_ upon
divergent series, as the question of their legitimacy is disputed
upon grounds to which no answer commanding anything like general
assent has yet been given. But they may be used as means of
discovery, provided that their results be verified by other means
before they are considered as established.--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Trigonometry and Double Algebra
                         (London, 1849), p. 55._


=1936.= There is nothing now which ever gives me any thought or
care in algebra except divergent series, which I cannot follow
the French in rejecting.--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Graves' Life of W. R. Hamilton (New
                         York, 1882-1889), Vol. 3, p. 249._


=1937.= It is a strange vicissitude of our science that these
[divergent] series which early in the century were supposed to be
banished once and for all from rigorous mathematics should at its
close be knocking at the door for readmission.--PIERPONT, J.

                         _Congress of Arts and Sciences (Boston
                         and New York, 1905), Vol. 1, p. 476._


=1938.= Zeno was concerned with three problems.... These are the
problem of the infinitesimal, the infinite, and continuity....
From him to our own day, the finest intellects of each generation
in turn attacked these problems, but achieved broadly speaking
nothing.... Weierstrass, Dedekind, and Cantor, ... have
completely solved them. Their solutions ... are so clear as to
leave no longer the slightest doubt of difficulty. This
achievement is probably the greatest of which the age can
boast.... The problem of the infinitesimal was solved by
Weierstrass, the solution of the other two was begun by Dedekind
and definitely accomplished by Cantor.--RUSSELL, BERTRAND.

                         _International Monthly, Vol. 4 (1901),
                         p. 89._


=1939.= It was not till Leibnitz and Newton, by the discovery of
the differential calculus, had dispelled the ancient darkness
which enveloped the conception of the infinite, and had clearly
established the conception of the continuous and continuous
change, that a full and productive application of the newly-found
mechanical conceptions made any progress.--HELMHOLTZ, H.

                         _Aim and Progress of Physical Science;
                         Popular Lectures [Flight] (New York,
                         1900), p. 372._


=1940.= The idea of an infinitesimal involves no
contradiction.... As a mathematician, I prefer the method of
infinitesimals to that of limits, as far easier and less infested
with snares.--PIERCE, C. F.

                         _The Law of Mind; Monist, Vol. 2
                         (1891-1892), pp. 543, 545._


=1941.= The chief objection against all _abstract_ reasonings is
derived from the ideas of space and time; ideas, which, in common
life and to a careless view, are very clear and intelligible, but
when they pass through the scrutiny of the profound sciences (and
they are the chief object of these sciences) afford principles,
which seem full of obscurity and contradiction. No priestly
_dogmas_, invented on purpose to tame and subdue the rebellious
reason of mankind, ever shocked common sense more than the
doctrine of the infinite divisibility of extension, with
its consequences; as they are pompously displayed by all
geometricians and metaphysicians, with a kind of triumph and
exultation. A real quantity, infinitely less than any finite
quantity, containing quantities infinitely less than itself, and
so on _in infinitum_; this is an edifice so bold and prodigious,
that it is too weighty for any pretended demonstration to
support, because it shocks the clearest and most natural
principles of human reason. But what renders the matter more
extraordinary, is, that these seemingly absurd opinions are
supported by a chain of reasoning, the clearest and most natural;
nor is it possible for us to allow the premises without admitting
the consequences. Nothing can be more convincing and satisfactory
than all the conclusions concerning the properties of circles and
triangles; and yet, when these are once received, how can we
deny, that the angle of contact between a circle and its tangent
is infinitely less than any rectilineal angle, that as you may
increase the diameter of the circle _in infinitum_, this angle of
contact becomes still less, even _in infinitum_, and that the
angle of contact between other curves and their tangents may be
infinitely less than those between any circle and its tangent,
and so on, _in infinitum_? The demonstration of these principles
seems as unexceptionable as that which proves the three angles
of a triangle to be equal to two right ones, though the
latter opinion be natural and easy, and the former big with
contradiction and absurdity. Reason here seems to be thrown into
a kind of amazement and suspense, which, without the suggestion
of any sceptic, gives her a diffidence of herself, and of the
ground on which she treads. She sees a full light, which
illuminates certain places; but that light borders upon the most
profound darkness. And between these she is so dazzled and
confounded, that she scarcely can pronounce with certainty and
assurance concerning any one object.--HUME, DAVID.

                         _An Inquiry concerning Human
                         Understanding, Sect. 12, part 2._


=1942.= He who can digest a second or third fluxion, a second or
third difference, need not, methinks, be squeamish about any
point in Divinity.--BERKELEY, G.

                         _The Analyst, sect. 7._


=1943.= And what are these fluxions? The velocities of evanescent
increments. And what are these same evanescent increments? They
are neither finite quantities, nor quantities infinitely small,
nor yet nothing. May we not call them ghosts of departed
quantities?--BERKELEY, G.

                         _The Analyst, sect. 35._


=1944.= It is said that the minutest errors are not to be
neglected in mathematics; that the fluxions are celerities, not
proportional to the finite increments, though ever so small; but
only to the moments or nascent increments, whereof the proportion
alone, and not the magnitude, is considered. And of the aforesaid
fluxions there be other fluxions, which fluxions of fluxions are
called second fluxions. And the fluxions of these second fluxions
are called third fluxions: and so on, fourth, fifth, sixth, etc.,
_ad infinitum_. Now, as our Sense is strained and puzzled with
the perception of objects extremely minute, even so the
Imagination, which faculty derives from sense, is very much
strained and puzzled to frame clear ideas of the least particle
of time, or the least increment generated therein: and much more
to comprehend the moments, or those increments of the flowing
quantities in _status nascenti_, in their first origin or
beginning to exist, before they become finite particles. And it
seems still more difficult to conceive the abstracted velocities
of such nascent imperfect entities. But the velocities of the
velocities, the second, third, fourth, and fifth velocities,
etc., exceed, if I mistake not, all human understanding. The
further the mind analyseth and pursueth these fugitive ideas the
more it is lost and bewildered; the objects, at first fleeting
and minute, soon vanishing out of sight. Certainly, in any sense,
a second or third fluxion seems an obscure Mystery. The incipient
celerity of an incipient celerity, the nascent augment of a
nascent augment, i.e. of a thing which hath no magnitude; take it
in what light you please, the clear conception of it will, if I
mistake not, be found impossible; whether it be so or no I appeal
to the trial of every thinking reader. And if a second fluxion be
inconceivable, what are we to think of third, fourth, fifth
fluxions, and so on without end.--BERKELEY, G.

                         _The Analyst, sect, 4._


=1945.= The _infinite_ divisibility of _finite_ extension, though
it is not expressly laid down either as an axiom or theorem in
the elements of that science, yet it is throughout the same
everywhere supposed and thought to have so inseparable and
essential a connection with the principles and demonstrations in
Geometry, that mathematicians never admit it into doubt, or make
the least question of it. And, as this notion is the source
whence do spring all those amusing geometrical paradoxes which
have such a direct repugnancy to the plain common sense of
mankind, and are admitted with so much reluctance into a mind not
yet debauched by learning; so it is the principal occasion of all
that nice and extreme subtility which renders the study of
Mathematics so difficult and tedious.--BERKELEY, G.

                         _On the Principles of Human Knowledge,
                         Sect. 123._


=1946.= To avoid misconception, it should be borne in mind that
infinitesimals are not regarded as being actual quantities in the
ordinary acceptation of the words, or as capable of exact
representation. They are introduced for the purpose of abridgment
and simplification of our reasonings, and are an ultimate phase
of magnitude when it is conceived by the mind as capable of
diminution below any assigned quantity, however small....
Moreover such quantities are neglected, not, as Leibnitz stated,
because they are infinitely small in comparison with those that
are retained, which would produce an infinitely small error, but
because they must be neglected to obtain a rigorous result; since
such result must be definite and determinate, and consequently
independent of these _variable indefinitely small quantities_. It
may be added that the precise principles of the infinitesimal
calculus, like those of any other science, cannot be thoroughly
apprehended except by those who have already studied the science,
and made some progress in the application of its principles.

                                                 --WILLIAMSON, B.

                         _Encyclopedia Britannica, 9th Edition;
                         Article "Infinitesimal Calculus," Sect.
                         12, 14._


=1947.= We admit, in geometry, not only infinite magnitudes, that
is to say, magnitudes greater than any assignable magnitude, but
infinite magnitudes infinitely greater, the one than the other.
This astonishes our dimension of brains, which is only about six
inches long, five broad, and six in depth, in the largest heads.

                                                      --VOLTAIRE.

                         _A Philosophical Dictionary; Article
                         "Infinity." (Boston, 1881)._


=1948.= Infinity is the land of mathematical hocus pocus. There
Zero the magician is king. When Zero divides any number he
changes it without regard to its magnitude into the infinitely
small [great?], and inversely, when divided by any number he
begets the infinitely great [small?]. In this domain the
circumference of the circle becomes a straight line, and then the
circle can be squared. Here all ranks are abolished, for Zero
reduces everything to the same level one way or another. Happy is
the kingdom where Zero rules!--CARUS, PAUL.

                         _Logical and Mathematical Thought;
                         Monist, Vol. 20 (1909-1910), p. 69._


=1949.=

        Great fleas have little fleas upon their backs
            to bite 'em,
        And little fleas have lesser fleas, and so _ad
            infinitum._
        And the great fleas themselves, in turn, have
            greater fleas to go on;
        While these again have greater still, and
            greater still, and so on.
                                             --DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Budget of Paradoxes (London, 1872), p.
                         377._


=1950.= We have adroitly defined the infinite in arithmetic by a
loveknot, in this manner [infinity]; but we possess not therefore
the clearer notion of it.--VOLTAIRE.

                         _A Philosophical Dictionary; Article
                         "Infinity." (Boston, 1881)._


=1951.= I protest against the use of infinite magnitude as
something completed, which in mathematics is never permissible.
Infinity is merely a _facon de parler_, the real meaning being a
limit which certain ratios approach indefinitely near, while
others are permitted to increase without restriction.--GAUSS.

                         _Brief an Schumacher (1831); Werke, Bd.
                         8 p. 216._


=1952.= In spite of the essential difference between the
conceptions of the _potential_ and the _actual_ infinite, the
former signifying a _variable_ finite magnitude increasing beyond
all finite limits, while the latter is a _fixed_, _constant_
quantity lying beyond all finite magnitudes, it happens only too
often that the one is mistaken for the other.... Owing to a
justifiable aversion to such _illegitimate_ actual infinities and
the influence of the modern epicuric-materialistic tendency, a
certain _horror infiniti_ has grown up in extended scientific
circles, which finds its classic expression and support in the
letter of Gauss [see 1951], yet it seems to me that the
consequent uncritical rejection of the legitimate actual infinite
is no lesser violation of the nature of things, which must be
taken as they are.--CANTOR, G.

                         _Zum Problem des actualen Unendlichen;
                         Natur und Offenbarung, Bd. 32 (1886), p.
                         226._


=1953.= The Infinite is often confounded with the Indefinite, but
the two conceptions are diametrically opposed. Instead of being a
quantity with unassigned yet assignable limits, the Infinite is
not a quantity at all, since it neither admits of augmentation
nor diminution, having no assignable limits; it is the operation
of continuously _withdrawing_ any limits that may have been
assigned: the endless addition of new quantities to the old: the
flux of continuity. The Infinite is no more a quantity than Zero
is a quantity. If Zero is the sign of a vanished quantity, the
Infinite is a sign of that continuity of Existence which has been
ideally divided into discrete parts in the affixing of limits.

                                                   --LEWES, G. H.

                         _Problems of Life and Mind (Boston,
                         1875), Vol. 2, p. 384._


=1954.= A great deal of misunderstanding is avoided if it be
remembered that the terms _infinity_, _infinite_, _zero_,
_infinitesimal_ must be interpreted in connexion with their
context, and admit a variety of meanings according to the way in
which they are defined.--MATHEWS, G. B.

                         _Theory of Numbers (Cambridge, 1892),
                         Part 1, sect. 104._


=1955.= This further is observable in number, that it is that
which the mind makes use of in measuring all things that by us
are measurable, which principally are _expansion_ and _duration_;
and our idea of infinity, even when applied to those, seems to be
nothing but the infinity of number. For what else are our ideas
of Eternity and Immensity, but the repeated additions of certain
ideas of imagined parts of duration and expansion, with the
infinity of number; in which we can come to no end of addition?

                                                   --LOCKE, JOHN.

                         _An Essay concerning Human
                         Understanding, Bk. 2, chap. 16, sect.
                         8._


=1956.= But of all other ideas, it is number, which I think
furnishes us with the clearest and most distinct idea of infinity
we are capable of.--LOCKE, JOHN.

                         _An Essay concerning Human
                         Understanding, Bk. 2, chap. 17, sect.
                         9._


=1957.=

        Willst du ins Unendliche schreiten?
        Geh nur im Endlichen nach allen Seiten!
        Willst du dich am Ganzen erquicken,
        So musst du das Ganze im Kleinsten erblicken.
                                                   --GOETHE.

                         _Gott, Gemuet und Welt (1815)._

        [Would'st thou the infinite essay?
         The finite but traverse in every way.
         Would'st in the whole delight thy heart?
         Learn to discern the whole in its minutest part.]


=1958.=

        Ich haeufe ungeheure Zahlen,
        Gebuerge Millionen auf,
        Ich setze Zeit auf Zeit und Welt auf Welt zu Hauf,
        Und wenn ich von der grausen Hoeh'
        Mit Schwindeln wieder nach dir seh,'
        Ist alle Macht der Zahl, vermehrt zu tausendmalen,
        Noch nicht ein Theil von dir.
        _Ich zieh' sie ab, und du liegst ganz vor mir._
                                        --HALLER, ALBR. VON.

                         _Quoted in Hegel: Wissenschaft der
                         Logik, Buch 1, Abschnitt 2, Kap. 2, C,
                         b._

        [Numbers upon numbers pile,
         Mountains millions high,
         Time on time and world on world amass,
         Then, if from the dreadful hight, alas!
         Dizzy-brained, I turn thee to behold,
         All the power of number, increased thousandfold,
         Not yet may match thy part.
         _Subtract what I will, wholly whole thou art._]


=1959.= A collection of terms is infinite when it contains as
parts other collections which have just as many terms in it as it
has. If you can take away some of the terms of a collection,
without diminishing the number of terms, then there is an
infinite number of terms in the collection.--RUSSELL, BERTRAND.

                         _International Monthly, Vol. 4 (1901),
                         p. 93._


=1960.= An assemblage (ensemble, collection, group, manifold) of
elements (things, no matter what) is infinite or finite according
as it has or has not a part to which the whole is just _equivalent_
in the sense that between the elements composing that part and
those composing the whole there subsists a unique and reciprocal
(one-to-one) correspondence.--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _The Axioms of Infinity; Hibbert
                         Journal, Vol. 2 (1903-1904), p. 539._


=1961.= Whereas in former times the Infinite betrayed its
presence not indeed to the faculties of Logic but only to the
spiritual Imagination and Sensibility, mathematics has shown ...
that the structure of Transfinite Being is open to exploration
by the organon of Thought.--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _Lectures on Science, Philosophy and Art
                         (New York, 1908), p. 42._


=1962.= The mathematical theory of probability is a science which
aims at reducing to calculation, where possible, the amount of
credence due to propositions or statements, or to the occurrence
of events, future or past, more especially as contingent or
dependent upon other propositions or events the probability of
which is known.--CROFTON, M. W.

                         _Encyclopedia Britannica, 9th Edition;
                         Article, "Probability."_


=1963.= The theory of probabilities is at bottom nothing but
common sense reduced to calculus; it enables us to appreciate
with exactness that which accurate minds feel with a sort of
instinct for which ofttimes they are unable to account. If we
consider the analytical methods to which this theory has given
birth, the truth of the principles on which it is based, the fine
and delicate logic which their employment in the solution of
problems requires, the public utilities whose establishment rests
upon it, the extension which it has received and which it may
still receive through its application to the most important
problems of natural philosophy and the moral sciences; if again
we observe that, even in matters which cannot be submitted to the
calculus, it gives us the surest suggestions for the guidance of
our judgments, and that it teaches us to avoid the illusions
which often mislead us, then we shall see that there is no
science more worthy of our contemplations nor a more useful one
for admission to our system of public education.--LAPLACE.

                         _Theorie Analytique des Probabilities,
                         Introduction; Oeuvres, t. 7 (Paris,
                         1886), p. 153._


=1964.= It is a truth very certain that, when it is not in our
power to determine what is true, we ought to follow what is most
probable.--DESCARTES.

                         _Discourse on Method, Part 3._


=1965.= As _demonstration_ is the showing the agreement or
disagreement of two ideas, by the intervention of one or more
proofs, which have a constant, immutable, and visible connexion
one with another; so _probability_ is nothing but the appearance
of such an agreement or disagreement, by the intervention of
proofs, whose connexion is not constant and immutable, or at
least is not perceived to be so, and it is enough to induce the
mind to judge the proposition to be true or false, rather than
contrary.--LOCKE, JOHN.

                         _An Essay concerning Human
                         Understanding, Bk. 4, chap. 15, sect.
                         1._


=1966.= The difference between necessary and contingent truths is
indeed the same as that between commensurable and incommensurable
numbers. For the reduction of commensurable numbers to a common
measure is analogous to the demonstration of necessary truths, or
their reduction to such as are identical. But as, in the case of
surd ratios, the reduction involves an infinite process, and yet
approaches a common measure, so that a definite but unending
series is obtained, so also contingent truths require an infinite
analysis, which God alone can accomplish.--LEIBNITZ.

                         _Philosophische Schriften [Gerhardt] Bd.
                         7 (Berlin, 1890), p. 200._


=1967.= The theory in question [theory of probability] affords an
excellent illustration of the application of the theory of
permutation and combinations which is the fundamental part of the
algebra of discrete quantity; it forms in the elementary parts an
excellent logical exercise in the accurate use of terms and in
the nice discrimination of shades of meaning; and, above all, it
enters into the regulation of some of the most important
practical concerns of modern life.--CHRYSTAL, GEORGE.

                         _Algebra, Vol. 2 (Edinburgh, 1889),
                         chap. 36, sect. 1._


=1968.= There is possibly no branch of mathematics at once so
interesting, so bewildering, and of so great practical importance
as the theory of probabilities. Its history reveals both the
wonders that can be accomplished and the bounds that cannot be
transcended by mathematical science. It is the link between rigid
deduction and the vast field of inductive science. A complete
theory of probabilities would be the complete theory of the
formation of belief. It is certainly a pity then, that, to quote
M. Bertrand, "one cannot well understand the calculus of
probabilities without having read Laplace's work," and that "one
cannot read Laplace's work without having prepared oneself for it
by the most profound mathematical studies."--DAVIS, E. W.

                         _Bulletin American Mathematical Society,
                         Vol. 1 (1894-1895), p. 16._


=1969.= The most important questions of life are, for the most
part, really only problems of probability. Strictly speaking one
may even say that nearly all our knowledge is problematical; and
in the small number of things which we are able to know with
certainty, even in the mathematical sciences themselves,
induction and analogy, the principal means for discovering truth,
are based on probabilities, so that the entire system of human
knowledge is connected with this theory.--LAPLACE.

                         _Theorie Analytique des Probabilities,
                         Introduction; Oeuvres, t. 7 (Paris,
                         1886), p. 5._


=1970.= There is no more remarkable feature in the mathematical
theory of probability than the manner in which it has been found
to harmonize with, and justify, the conclusions to which mankind
have been led, not by reasoning, but by instinct and experience,
both of the individual and of the race. At the same time it has
corrected, extended, and invested them with a definiteness and
precision of which these crude, though sound, appreciations of
common sense were till then devoid.--CROFTON, M. W.

                         _Encyclopedia Britannica, 9th Edition;
                         Article "Probability."_


=1971.= It is remarkable that a science [probabilities] which
began with the consideration of games of chance, should have
become the most important object of human knowledge.--LAPLACE.

                         _Theorie Analytique des Probabilities,
                         Introduction; Oeuvres, t. 7 (Paris,
                         1886), p. 152._


=1972.= Not much has been added to the subject [of probability]
since the close of Laplace's career. The history of science
records more than one parallel to this abatement of activity.
When such a genius has departed, the field of his labours seems
exhausted for the time, and little left to be gleaned by his
successors. It is to be regretted that so little remains to us of
the inner workings of such gifted minds, and of the clue by which
each of their discoveries was reached. The didactic and synthetic
form in which these are presented to the world retains but faint
traces of the skilful inductions, the keen and delicate
perception of fitness and analogy, and the power of imagination
... which have doubtless guided such a master as Laplace or
Newton in shaping out such great designs--only the minor details
of which have remained over, to be supplied by the less cunning
hand of commentator and disciple.--CROFTON, M. W.

                         _Encyclopedia Britannica, 9th Edition;
                         Article "Probability."_


=1973.= The theory of errors may be defined as that branch of
mathematics which is concerned, first, with the expression of the
resultant effect of one or more sources of error to which
computed and observed quantities are subject; and, secondly, with
the determination of the relation between the magnitude of an
error and the probability of its occurrence.--WOODWARD, R. S.

                         _Probability and Theory of Errors (New
                         York, 1906), p. 30._


=1974.= Of all the applications of the doctrine of probability
none is of greater utility than the theory of errors. In
astronomy, geodesy, physics, and chemistry, as in every science
which attains precision in measuring, weighing, and computing, a
knowledge of the theory of errors is indispensable. By the aid of
this theory the exact sciences have made great progress during
the nineteenth century, not only in the actual determinations of
