
"The 'fire', if you want to call it that, must have stunk up the place
pretty badly," said one of the men dryly.

"It did. There were still traces of ozone and various oxides of nitrogen
in the air when the fire prevention flyers arrived. The wind carried
them away from the ranger, so he didn't get a whiff of them."

"And this--this 'fire'--it destroyed the ship completely?"

"Almost completely. There are some lumps of metal around, but we can't
make anything of them yet. Some of them are badly fused, but that
damage was probably done before the ship landed. Certainly there was not
enough heat generated after the crash to have done that damage." His
hand moved over the control panel in the armrest of his chair, and the
scene changed.

"This was taken from the ground. Those lumps you see are the pieces of
metal I was talking about. Notice the fine white powdery ash, which
caused the white spot that you could see from the air. That is evidently
all that is left of the hull and the rest of the ship. None of it is
radioactive.

"Random samplings from various parts of the area show that the ash
consists of magnesium, lithium, and beryllium carbonates."

"You don't mean oxides?" said one of the others.

"No. I mean carbonates. And some silicate. We estimate that the
remaining ash could not have constituted more than ten percent of the
total mass of the hull of the ship. The rest of it vaporized, apparently
into carbon dioxide and water."

"Some kind of plastic?" hazarded one of the men.

"Undoubtedly, if you want to use a catchall term like 'plastic'. But
what kind of plastic goes to pieces like that?"

That rhetorical question was answered by a silence.

"There's no doubt," said one of them after a moment, "that
circumstantial evidence alone would link the alien with the ship. But
have you any more conclusive evidence?"

The hand moved, and the scene changed again. It was not a pretty scene.

"That, as you can see, is a closeup of the late Wang Kulichenko, the
forest ranger who was the only man ever to see the alien ship before it
was destroyed. Notice the peculiar bruises on the cheek and ear--the
whole side of the head. The pattern is quite similar on the other side
of the head."

"It looks--umm--rather like a handprint."

"It is. Kulichenko was slapped--_hard!_--on both sides of his head. It
crushed his skull." There was an intake of breath.

"This next picture--" The scene changed. "--shows the whole body. If
you'll look closely you'll see the same sort of prints on the ground
around it. All very much like handprints. And that ties in very well
with the photographs of the alien itself."

"There's no doubt about it," said one of the others. "The connection is
definitely there."

The lecturer's hand moved over the control panel again, and suddenly the
screen was filled with the image of an eight-limbed horror with four
glaring violet eyes. In spite of themselves, a couple of the men gasped.
They had seen photographs before, but a full-sized three-dimensional
color projection is something else again.

"Until three weeks ago, we knew of no explanation for the peculiar
happenings in northern Asia. After eight months of investigation, we
found ourselves up against a blank wall. Nothing could account for that
peculiar fire nor for the queer circumstances surrounding the death of
the forest ranger. The investigators suspected an intelligent alien
life-form, but--well, the notion simply seemed too fantastic. Attempts
to trail the being by means of those peculiar 'footprints' failed. They
ended at a riverbank and apparently never came out again. We know now
that it swam downstream for over a hundred miles. Little wonder it got
away.

"Even those investigators who suspected something non-human pictured the
being as humanoid, or, rather, anthropoid in form. The prints certainly
suggest those of an ape. There appeared to be four of them, judging by
the prints--although frequently there were only three and sometimes only
two. It all depended on how many of his 'feet' he felt like walking
on."

"And then the whole herd of them dived into a river and never came up
again, eh?" remarked one of the listeners.

"Exactly. You can see why the investigators kept the whole thing quiet.
Nothing more was seen, heard, or reported for eight months.

"Then, three weeks ago, a non-vision phone call was received by the
secretary of the Board of Regents of the Khrushchev Memorial Psychiatric
Hospital in Leningrad. An odd, breathy voice, speaking very bad Russian,
offered a meeting. It was the alien. He managed to explain, in spite of
the language handicap, that he did not want to be mistaken for a wild
animal, as had happened with the forest ranger.

"The secretary, Mr. Rogov, felt that the speaker was probably deranged,
but, as he said later, there was something about that voice that didn't
sound human. He said he would make arrangements, and asked the caller to
contact him again the next day. The alien agreed. Rogov then--"

"Excuse me," one of the men interrupted apologetically, "but did he
learn Russian all by himself, or has it been established that someone
taught him the language?"

"The evidence is that he learned it all by himself, from scratch, in
those eight months."

"I see. Excuse my interruption. Go on."

"Mr. Rogov was intrigued by the story he had heard. He decided to check
on it. He made a few phone calls, asking questions about a mysterious
crash in the paper forests, and the death of a forest ranger. Naturally
those who _did_ know were curious about how Mr. Rogov had learned so
much about the incident. He told them.

"By the time the alien made his second call, a meeting had been
arranged. When he showed up, those of the Board who were still of the
opinion that the call had been made by a crank or a psychosis case
changed their minds very rapidly."

"I can see why," murmured someone.

"The alien's ability to use Russian is limited," the speaker continued.
"He picked up vocabulary and grammatical rules very rapidly, but he
seemed completely unable to use the language beyond discussion of
concrete objects and actions. His mind is evidently too alien to enable
him to do more than touch the edges of human communication.

"For instance, he called himself 'Nipe' or 'Neep', but we don't know
whether that refers to him as an individual or as a member of his race.
Since Russian lacks both definite and indefinite articles, it is
possible that he was calling himself 'a Nipe' or 'the Nipe'. Certainly
that's the impression he gave.

"In the discussions that followed, several peculiarities were noticed,
as you can read in detail in the reports that the Board and the
Government staff prepared. For instance, in discussing mathematics the
Nipe seemed to be completely at a loss. He apparently thought of
mathematics as a _spoken_ language rather than a _written_ one and could
not progress beyond simple diagrams. That's just one small example. I'm
just trying to give you a brief outline now; you can read the reports
for full information.

"He refused to allow any physical tests on his body, and, short of
threatening him at gunpoint, there was no practicable way to force him
to accede to our wishes. Naturally, threats were out of the question."

"Couldn't X rays have been taken surreptitiously?" asked one of the men.

"It was discussed and rejected. We have no way of knowing what his
tolerance to radiation is, and we didn't want to harm him. The same
applies to using any anesthetic gas or drug to render him unconscious.
There was no way to study his metabolism without his co-operation
unless we were willing to risk killing him."

"I see. Naturally we couldn't harm him."

"Exactly. The Nipe had to be treated as an emissary from his home
world--wherever that may be. He has killed a man, yes. But that has to
be allowed as justifiable homicide in self-defense, since the forester
had drawn a gun and was ready to fire. Nobody can blame the late Wang
Kulichenko for that, but nobody can blame the Nipe, either."

They all looked for a moment in silence at the violet eyes that gazed at
them from the screen.

"For nearly three weeks," the speaker went on, "humans and Nipe tried to
arrive at a meeting of minds, and, just when it would seem that such a
meeting was within grasp, it would fade away into mist. It was only
three days ago that the Russian psychologists and psychiatrists realized
that the reason the Nipe had come to them was because he had thought
that the Board of Regents of the hospital was the ruling body of that
territory."

Someone chuckled, but there was no humor in it.

"Now we come to yesterday morning," said the speaker. "This is the
important part at this very moment, because it explains why I feel we
must immediately take steps to tell the public what has happened, why I
feel that it is necessary to put a man like Colonel Walther Mannheim in
charge of the Nipe affair and keep him in charge until the matter is
cleared up. Because the public is going to be scared witless if we don't
do something to reassure them."

"What happened yesterday morning, Mr. President?" one of the men asked.

"The Nipe got angry, lost his temper, went mad--whatever you want to
call it. At the morning meeting he simply became more and more
incomprehensible. The psychologists were trying to see if the Nipe had
any religious beliefs, and, if so, what they were. One of them, a Dr.
Valichek, was explaining the various religious sects and rites here on
Earth. Suddenly, with no warning whatever, the Nipe chopped at
Valichek's throat with an open-hand judo cut, killing him. He killed two
more men before he leaped out of the window and vanished.

"No trace of him was found until late last night. He killed another man
in Leningrad--we have since discovered that it was for the purpose of
stealing his personal flyer. The Nipe could be anywhere on Earth by
now."

"How was the man killed, Mr. President? With bare hands, as the others
were?"

"We have no way of knowing. Identification of the body was made
difficult by the fact that every shred of flesh had been stripped away.
It had been gnawed--literally _eaten_--to the bone!"




_FIRST INTERLUDE_


The big man with the tiny child on his shoulder pushed through the air
curtain that kept the warm humid air out of the shop.

"There," he said to the little boy softly, turning his head to look up
into the round, chubby, smiling face. "There. Isn't that nicer, huh?
Isn't that better than that hot old air outside?"

"Gleefle-ah," said the child with a grin.

"Oh, come on, boy. I've heard you manage bigger words than that. Or is
it your brother?" He chuckled and headed toward the drug counter.

"Hey, Jim!"

The big man brought himself up short and turned--carefully, so as not to
jiggle the baby on his shoulder. When he saw the shorter, thinner man,
he grinned hugely. "Jinks! By God! Jinks! Watch it! Don't shake the hand
too hard or I'll drop this infant. God damn, man, I thought you were in
Siberia!"

"I was, Jim, but a man can't stay in Siberia forever. Is that minuscule
lump of humanity your own?"

"Yup, yup. So I've been led to believe. Say hello to your Uncle Jinks,
young 'un. C'mon, say hello."

The child jammed the three fingers of his left hand into his mouth and
refused to say a word. His eyes widened with an unfathomable
baby-emotion.

"Well, he's got your eyes," said the thinner man. "Fortunately, he's
going to look like his mother instead of being ugly. He _is_ a he, isn't
he?"

"That's right. Mother's looks, father's plumbing. I got another just
like him, but his mother's taking the other one to the doctor to get rid
of the sniffles. Don't want this one to catch it."

"Twins?"

"Naw," said the big man sarcastically, "Octuplets. The Government took
seventy-five percent for taxes."

"Ask a silly question, get a silly answer," the smaller man said
philosophically.

"Yup. So how's the Great Northern Wasteland, Jinks?"

"Cold," said Jinks, "but it's not going to be a wasteland much longer,
Jim. Those Martian trees are going to be a big business in fifteen
years. There'll be forests all over the tundra. They'll make a hell of a
fine income crop for those people. We've put in over five thousand
square miles in seedlings during the past five years. The first ones
will be ready to harvest in ten years, and from then on, it will be as
regular as clockwork."

"That's great. Great. How long'll you be in town, Jinks?"

"About a week. Then I've got to head back to Siberia."

"Well, look, could you drop around some evening? We could kill off a few
bottles of beer after we eat one of Ellen's dinners. How about it?"

"I'd love to. Sure Ellen won't mind?"

"She'll be tickled pink to see you. How about Wednesday?"

"Sure. I'm free Wednesday evening. But you ask Ellen first. I'll give
you a call tomorrow evening to make sure I won't get a chair thrown at
me when I come in the door."

"Great! I'll let her do the inviting, then."

"Look," Jinks said, "I've got half an hour or so right now. Let me buy
you a beer. Or don't you want to take the baby in?"

"No, it's not that, but I've got to run. I just dropped in to get a
couple of things, then I have to get on out to the plant. Some piddling
little thing came up, and they want to talk to me about it." He patted
the baby's leg. "Nothing personal, pal," he said in a soft aside.

"You taking the baby into an atomic synthesis plant?" Jinks asked.

"Why not? It's safe as houses. You've still got the Holocaust Jitters,
my friend. He'll be safer there than at home. Besides, I can't just
leave him in a locker, can I?"

"I guess not. Just don't let him get his genes irradiated," Jinks said,
grinning. "So long. I'll call tomorrow at twenty hundred."

"Fine. See you then. So long."

The big man adjusted the load on his shoulder and went on toward the
counter.




_[5]_


Two-fifths of a second. That was all the time Bart Stanton had from the
first moment his supersensitive ears heard the first faint whisper of
metal against leather.

He made good use of the time.

The noise had come from behind and slightly to the left of him, so he
drew his left-hand weapon and spun to the left as he dropped to a
crouch. He had turned almost completely around, drawn his gun, and fired
three shots before the other man had even leveled his own weapon.

The bullets from Stanton's gun made three round spots on the man's
jacket, almost touching each other, and directly over the heart. The man
blinked stupidly for a moment, looking down at the spots.

"My God," he said softly.

Then he returned his own weapon slowly to its holster.

The big room was noisy. The three shots had merely added to the noise of
the gunfire that rattled intermittently around the two men. And even
that gunfire was only a part of the cacophony. The tortured molecules of
the air in the room were so besieged by the beat of drums, the blare of
trumpets, the crackle of lightning, the rumble of heavy machinery, the
squawks and shrieks of horns and whistles, the rustle of autumn leaves,
the machine-gun snap of popping popcorn, the clink and jingle of falling
coins, and the yelps, bellows, howls, roars, snarls, grunts, bleats,
moos, purrs, cackles, quacks, chirps, buzzes, and hisses of a myriad of
animals, that each molecule would have thought that it was being shoved
in a hundred thousand different directions at once if it had had a mind
