"And don't think I fell victim to their feline charm. The children were
pets, but you didn't feel like patting the adults on their big grinning
heads. Personally I didn't like the one I knew best. He was
called--well, we called him Charley, and he was the ethnologist,
ambassador, contact man, or whatever you like to call him, who came back
with us. Why I disliked him was because he was always trying to get the
edge on you. All the time he had to be top. Great sense of humor, of
course. I nearly broke my neck on that butter-slide he fixed up in the
metal alleyway to the _Whale's_ engine room. Charley laughed fit to
bust, everyone laughed, I even laughed myself though doing it hurt
me more than the tumble had. Yes, life and soul of the party, old
Charley ...

"My last sight of the _Minnow_ was a cabin full of dead and dying men,
the sweetish stink of burned flesh and the choking reek of scorching
insulation, the boat jolting and shuddering and beginning to break up,
and in the middle of the flames, still unhurt, was Charley. He was
laughing ...

"My God, it's dark out here. Wonder how high I am. Must be all of fifty
miles, and doing eight hundred miles an hour at least. I'll be doing
more than that when I land. What's final velocity for a fifty-mile fall?
Same as a fifty thousand mile fall, I suppose; same as escape;
twenty-four thousand miles an hour. I'll make a mess ...

       *       *       *       *       *

"That's better. Why didn't I close my eyes before? Those star streaks
made me dizzy. I'll make a nice shooting star when I hit air. Come to
think of it, I must be deep in air now. Let's take a look.

"It's getting lighter. Look at those peaks down there! Like great
knives. I don't seem to be falling as fast as I expected though. Almost
seem to be floating. Let's switch on the radio and tell the world hello.
Hello, earth ... hello, again ... and good-by ...

"Sorry about that. I passed out. I don't know what I said, if anything,
and the suit recorder has no playback or eraser. What must have happened
is that the suit ran out of oxygen, and I lost consciousness due to
anoxia. I dreamed I switched on the radio, but I actually switched on
the emergency tank, thank the Lord, and that brought me round.

"Come to think of it, why not crack the suit and breath fresh air
instead of bottled?

"No. I'd have to get up to do that. I think I'll just lie here a little
bit longer and get properly rested up before I try anything big like
standing up.

"I was telling about the return journey, wasn't I? The long jump back
home, which should have dumped us between the orbits of Earth and Mars.
Instead of which, when James took his finger off the button, the
mass-detector showed nothing except the noise-level of the universe.

"We were out in that no place for a day. We astronomers had to establish
our exact position relative to the solar system. The crew had to find
out exactly what went wrong. The physicists had to make mystic passes in
front of meters and mutter about residual folds in stress-free space.
Our task was easy, because we were about half a light-year from the sun.
The crew's job was also easy: they found what went wrong in less than
half an hour.

"It still seems incredible. To program the ship for a star-jump, you
merely told it where you were and where you wanted to go. In practical
terms, that entailed first a series of exact measurements which had to
be translated into the somewhat abstruse co-ordinate system we used
based on the topological order of mass-points in the galaxy. Then you
cut a tape on the computer and hit the button. Nothing was wrong with
the computer. Nothing was wrong with the engines. We'd hit the right
button and we'd gone to the place we'd aimed for. All we'd done was aim
for the wrong place. It hurts me to tell you this and I'm just attached
personnel with no space-flight tradition. In practical terms, one highly
trained crew member had punched a wrong pattern of holes on the tape.
Another equally skilled had failed to notice this when reading back. A
childish error, highly improbable; twice repeated, thus squaring the
