If you get enough of them in you, you won't notice the heat--you won't
notice anything." He laughed uproariously at the hoary joke.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tee looked at him disgustedly and without answering bent to his drink
once more. He felt someone jostle his elbow and turned sideways to allow
the newcomer access to the bar. After a moment he wiped his forehead on
his sleeve. The bartender placed another rainbow before him.

"Hey, I didn't order that," he cried.

The bartender nodded toward the next stool. "On him."

Tee turned and saw a barrel-chested red-haired giant holding up a drink
in the immemorial bar toast. He raised his own glass gingerly, but his
trembling hand caused the layers to mix and he stared ruefully at the
resultant clayey-looking mess.

The redhead laughed. "Mix another one, Jo."

"But--" Tee's face got red.

"I came in here to talk to you anyway," said the giant. "You own the
_Starduster_, don't you?"

"Yeah, what about it?"

"Like to get her out of hock?"

"Who says she's in hock?"

"Look," said the redhead. "Let's not kid each other. Everybody around
this port knows you blew in from Lemmyt last month and can't raise the
money to pay the port charges, much less the refueling fee. And it's no
secret that you're anxious to leave our fair planet." He winked
conspiringly at Tee.

"So?"

The redhead glanced at the bartender who was busy at the other end of
the bar. He leaned closer and whispered. "I know where the _Elen of
Troy_ is."

"The _Elen of Troy_?"

"Oh, that's right, you wouldn't know about her. Eight months ago she
crashed on an uninhabited planet somewhere in this sector. So far
they've been unable to find her." He leaned closer. "She was carrying
four million in Penryx crystals."

"What's that to me?"

The redhead looked around briefly to make sure no one was in hearing
distance, then whispered softly, without moving his lips. "I told you,
they can't find her, but _I_ know where she is."

"_You_ know? But how--"

"Look," said the giant, frowning, "I didn't ask you why _you're_ so
anxious to leave."

"Well?"

"I'll clear your ship and we can pick up the crystals for the salvage
fee. A million each, and all nice and legal. We can leave by the end of
the week and be back in probably six months."

"_Six months!_" Tee stood up. "Sorry!"

The redhead grabbed his arm in a hamlike palm. "A million each in six
months; what's wrong with that?"

Tee jerked out of his grasp. "I ... I just can't do it."

"I don't know what you're running from," persisted the redhead, "but
with a million credits you can fight extradition for the rest of your
life. This is your big chance, can't you see that. Besides, this planet
has some interesting customs." He winked at Tee. "I can introduce you--"

"I can't stay here," interrupted Tee. "You just don't understand."

"Look," cried the redhead exasperatedly, "I'm offering you a full
partnership on a two million credit salvage deal and you want to back
out because it'll take six months. On top of that you're broke and
stranded and your hangar bill gets bigger every day. If you don't take
me up on this deal, you'll still be sitting here six months from now
wondering how to get your ship out of hock--if you don't get caught
first. What do you say? What've you got to lose?"

What did he have to lose? Tee gripped the edge of the bar till his
knuckles showed white. "No! I just can't do it. Why don't you get
someone else?"

"The slow tubs around this port would take years for the trip. I can see
the _Starduster_ has class."

"Fastest thing in the galaxy," said Tee, proudly. Then earnestly, "I'm
sorry, you'll just have to find some other ship."

"Think it over," said the redhead. "I'll wait. When you change your mind
look me up. Name's Yule Larson." He slapped Tee heavily on the back and
swaggered toward the door. He turned and looked back. "Better go along
with me. After six months they can auction off your ship to pay for the
port charges, you know." The door swung shut behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tee sat down again and bent his head, nursing his drink. His eyes darted
nervously around the room and came to rest on the clock. A shudder ran
through him and he lowered his eyes quickly. As he sipped his drink his
eyes returned to the clock continually, as though drawn there against
their will. As he watched, the minute hand jerked downward and an
involuntary gasp escaped his lips.

The bartender turned quickly. "Anything wrong?"

"N ... no, nothing." As he spoke, the minute hand moved again and Tee
started nervously, upsetting his drink. He sat for a moment watching the
bartender mop up the spreading liquid, then abruptly got up and tossed a
half-credit piece on the bar. He hurried outside, steeling himself to
keep from running. He paused just outside the door.

_Stand still_, he told himself. _Mustn't run! Mustn't run! No use
anyway. If I only knew when. If I just could stop and rest. If I had the
time ... Time! Time! That's what I need. Light-years of time ... But
when? When? If only I could be sure._ He looked up slowly at the murky
canopy of clouds. _If I only knew when!_ He looked indecisively up and
down the field, then squaring his shoulders resolutely, set out for the
administration building.
