could neither participate in, nor understand. All that I could therefore
discover about them during this time, was by observation. This soon
taught me that I was not in a seminary--in our acceptance of the
term--but in a College of Experimental Science. The ladies--girls I had
supposed them to be--were, in fact, women and mothers, and had reached
an age that with us would be associated with decrepitude, wrinkles and
imbecility. They were all practical chemists, and their work was the
preparation of food from the elements. No wonder that they possessed the
suppleness and bloom of eternal youth, when the earthy matter and
impurities that are ever present in our food, were unknown to theirs.

I also discovered that they obtained rain artificially when needed, by
discharging vast quantities of electricity in the air. I discovered that
they kept no cattle, nor animals of any kind for food or labor. I
observed a universal practice of outdoor exercising; the aim seeming to
be to develop the greatest capacity of lung or muscle. It was
astonishing the amount of air a Mizora lady could draw into her lungs.
They called it their brain stimulant, and said that their faculties were
more active after such exercise. In my country, a cup of strong coffee,
or some other agreeable beverage, is usually taken into the stomach to
invigorate or excite the mind.

One thing I remarked as unusual among a people of such cultured taste,
and that was the size of the ladies' waists. Of all that I measured not
one was less than thirty inches in circumference, and it was rare to
meet with one that small. At first I thought a waist that tapered from
the arm pits would be an added beauty, if only these ladies would be
taught how to acquire it. But I lived long enough among them to look
upon a tapering waist as a disgusting deformity. They considered a large
waist a mark of beauty, as it gave a greater capacity of lung power; and
they laid the greatest stress upon the size and health of the lungs. One
little lady, not above five feet in height, I saw draw into her lungs
two hundred and twenty-five cubic inches of air, and smile proudly when
she accomplished it. I measured five feet and five inches in height, and
with the greatest effort I could not make my lungs receive more than two
hundred cubic inches of air. In my own country I had been called an
unusually robust girl, and knew, by comparison, that I had a much larger
and fuller chest than the average among women.

I noticed with greater surprise than anything else had excited in me,
the marked absence of men. I wandered about the magnificent building
without hindrance or surveillance. There was not a lock or bolt on any
door in it. I frequented a vast gallery filled with paintings and
statues of women, noble looking, beautiful women, but still--nothing but
women. The fact that they were all blondes, singular as it might appear,
did not so much impress me. Strangers came and went, but among the
multitude of faces I met, I never saw a man's.

In my own country I had been accustomed to regard man as a vital
necessity. He occupied all governmental offices, and was the arbitrator
of domestic life. It seemed, therefore, impossible to me for a country
or government to survive without his assistance and advice. Besides, it
was a country over which the heart of any man must yearn, however
insensible he might be to beauty or female loveliness. Wealth was
everywhere and abundant. The climate as delightful as the most
fastidious could desire. The products of the orchards and gardens
surpassed description. Bread came from the laboratory, and not from the
soil by the sweat of the brow. Toil was unknown; the toil that we know,
menial, degrading and harassing. Science had been the magician that had
done away all that. Science, so formidable and austere to our untutored
minds, had been gracious to these fair beings and opened the door to
nature's most occult secrets. The beauty of those women it is not in my
power to describe. The Greeks, in their highest art, never rivalled it,
for here was a beauty of mind that no art can represent. They enhanced
their physical charms with attractive costumes, often of extreme
elegance. They wore gems that flashed a fortune as they passed. The
rarest was of a pale rose color, translucent as the clearest water, and
of a brilliancy exceeding the finest diamond. Their voices, in song,
could only be equaled by a celestial choir. No dryad queen ever floated
through the leafy aisles of her forest with more grace than they
displayed in every movement. And all this was for feminine eyes
alone--and they of the most enchanting loveliness.

Among all the women that I met during my stay in Mizora--comprising a
period of fifteen years--I saw not one homely face or ungraceful form.
In my own land the voice of flattery had whispered in my ear praises of
face and figure, but I felt ill-formed and uncouth beside the perfect
symmetry and grace of these lovely beings. Their chief beauty appeared
in a mobility of expression. It was the divine fire of Thought that
illumined every feature, which, while gazing upon the Aphrodite of
Praxitiles, we must think was all that the matchless marble lacked.
Emotion passed over their features like ripples over a stream. Their
eyes were limpid wells of loveliness, where every impulse of their
natures were betrayed without reserve.

"It would be a paradise for man."

I made this observation to myself, and as secretly would I propound the
question:

"Why is he not here in lordly possession?"

In _my_ world man was regarded, or he had made himself regarded, as a
superior being. He had constituted himself the Government, the Law,
Judge, Jury and Executioner. He doled out reward or punishment as his
conscience or judgment dictated. He was active and belligerent always in
obtaining and keeping every good thing for himself. He was
indispensable. Yet here was a nation of fair, exceedingly fair women
doing without him, and practising the arts and sciences far beyond the
imagined pale of human knowledge and skill.

Of their progress in science I will give some accounts hereafter.

It is impossible to describe the feeling that took possession of me as
months rolled by, and I saw the active employments of a prosperous
people move smoothly and quietly along in the absence of masculine
intelligence and wisdom. Cut off from all inquiry by my ignorance of
their language, the singular absence of the male sex began to prey upon
my imagination as a mystery. The more so after visiting a town at some
distance, composed exclusively of schools and colleges for the youth of
the country. Here I saw hundreds of children--_and all of them were
girls_. Is it to be wondered at that the first inquiry I made, was:

"Where are the men?"




CHAPTER IV.


To facilitate my progress in the language of Mizora I was sent to their
National College. It was the greatest favor they could have conferred
upon me, as it opened to me a wide field of knowledge. Their educational
system was a peculiar one, and, as it was the chief interest of the
country. I shall describe it before proceeding farther with this
narrative.

All institutions for instruction were public, as were, also, the books
and other accessories. The State was the beneficent mother who furnished
everything, and required of her children only their time and
application. Each pupil was compelled to attain a certain degree of
excellence that I thought unreasonably high, after which she selected
the science or vocation she felt most competent to master, and to that
she then devoted herself.

The salaries of teachers were larger than those of any other public
position. The Principal of the National College had an income that
exceeded any royal one I had ever heard of; but, as education was the
paramount interest of Mizora, I was not surprised at it. Their desire
was to secure the finest talent for educational purposes, and as the
highest honors and emoluments belonged to such a position, it could not
be otherwise. To be a teacher in Mizora was to be a person of
consequence. They were its aristocracy.

Every State had a free college provided for out of the State funds. In
these colleges every department of Science, Art, or Mechanics was
furnished with all the facilities for thorough instruction. All the
expenses of a pupil, including board, clothing, and the necessary
traveling fares, were defrayed by the State. I may here remark that all
railroads are owned and controlled by the General Government. The rates
of transportation were fixed by law, and were uniform throughout the
country.

The National College which I entered belonged to the General
Government. Here was taught the highest attainments in the arts and
sciences, and all industries practised in Mizora. It contained the very
cream of learning. There the scientist, the philosopher and inventor
found the means and appliances for study and investigation. There the
artist and sculptor had their finest work, and often their studios. The
principals and subordinate teachers and assistants were elected by
popular vote. The State Colleges were free to those of another State who
might desire to enter them, for Mizora was like one vast family. It was
regarded as the duty of every citizen to lend all the aid and
encouragement in her power to further the enlightenment of others,
wisely knowing the benefits of such would accrue to her own and the
general good. The National College was open to all applicants,
irrespective of age, the only requirements being a previous training to
enter upon so high a plane of mental culture. Every allurement was held
out to the people to come and drink at the public fountain where the cup
was inviting and the waters sweet. "For," said one of the leading
instructors to me, "education is the foundation of our moral elevation,
our government, our happiness. Let us relax our efforts, or curtail the
means and inducements to become educated, and we relax into ignorance,
and end in demoralization. We know the value of free education. It is
frequently the case that the greatest minds are of slow development, and
manifest in the primary schools no marked ability. They often leave the
schools unnoticed; and when time has awakened them to their mental
needs, all they have to do is to apply to the college, pass an
examination, and be admitted. If not prepared to enter the college, they
could again attend the common schools. We realize in its broadest sense
the ennobling influence of universal education. The higher the culture
of a people, the more secure is their government and happiness. A
prosperous people is always an educated one; and the freer the
education, the wealthier they become."

The Preceptress of the National College was the leading scientist of the
country. Her position was more exalted than any that wealth could have
given her. In fact, while wealth had acknowledged advantages, it held a
subordinate place in the estimation of the people. I never heard the
expression "very wealthy," used as a recommendation of a person. It was
always: "_She_ is a fine scholar, or mechanic, or artist, or musician.
_She_ excels in landscape gardening, or domestic work. _She_ is a
first-class chemist." But never "_She_ is rich."

The idea of a Government assuming the responsibility of education, like
a parent securing the interest of its children, was all so new to me;
and yet, I confessed to myself, the system might prove beneficial to
other countries than Mizora. In that world, from whence I had so
mysteriously emigrated, education was the privilege only of the rich.
And in no country, however enlightened, was there a system of education
that would reach all. Charitable institutions were restricted, and
benefited only a few. My heart beat with enthusiasm when I thought of
the mission before me. And then I reflected that the philosophers of my
world were but as children in progress compared to these. Still
traveling in grooves that had been worn and fixed for posterity by
bygone ages of ignorance and narrow-mindedness, it would require courage
and resolution, and more eloquence than I possessed, to persuade them
out of these trodden paths. To be considered the privileged class was an
active characteristic of human nature. Wealth, and the powerful grip
upon the people which the organizations of society and governments gave,
made it hereditary. Yet in this country, nothing was hereditary but the
prosperity and happiness of the whole people.

It was not a surprise to me that astronomy was an unknown science in
Mizora, as neither sun, moon, nor stars were visible there. "The moon's
pale beams" never afford material for a blank line in poetry; neither do
scientific discussions rage on the formation of Saturn's rings, or the
spots on the sun. They knew they occupied a hollow sphere, bounded North
and South by impassible oceans. Light was a property of the atmosphere.
A circle of burning mist shot forth long streamers of light from the
North, and a similar phenomena occurred in the South.

The recitation of my geography lesson would have astonished a pupil from
the outer world. They taught that a powerful current of electricity
existed in the upper regions of the atmosphere. It was the origin of
their atmospheric heat and light, and their change of seasons. The
latter appeared to me to coincide with those of the Arctic zone, in one
particular. The light of the sun during the Arctic summer is reflected
by the atmosphere, and produces that mellow, golden, rapturous light
that hangs like a veil of enchantment over the land of Mizora for six
months in the year. It was followed by six months of the shifting
iridescence of the Aurora Borealis.

As the display of the Aurora Borealis originated, and was most brilliant
at what appeared to me to be the terminus of the pole, I believed it was
caused by the meeting at that point of the two great electric currents
of the earth, the one on its surface, and the one known to the
inhabitants of Mizora. The heat produced by the meeting of two such
powerful currents of electricity is, undoubtedly, the cause of the open
Polar Sea. As the point of meeting is below the vision of the
inhabitants of the Arctic regions, they see only the reflection of the
Aurora. Its gorgeous, brilliant, indescribable splendor is known only to
the inhabitants of Mizora.

At the National College, where it is taught as a regular science, I
witnessed the chemical production of bread and a preparation resembling
meat. Agriculture in this wonderful land, was a lost art. No one that I
questioned had any knowledge of it. It had vanished in the dim past of
their barbarism. With the exception of vegetables and fruit, which were
raised in luscious perfection, their food came from the elements. A
famine among such enlightened people was impossible, and scarcity was
unknown. Food for the body and food for the mind were without price. It
was owing to this that poverty was unknown to them, as well as disease.
The absolute purity of all that they ate preserved an activity of vital
power long exceeding our span of life. The length of their year,
measured by the two seasons, was the same as ours, but the women who had
marked a hundred of them in their lifetime, looked younger and fresher,
and were more supple of limb than myself, yet I had barely passed my
twenty-second year.

I wrote out a careful description of the processes by which they
converted food out of the valueless elements--valueless because of their
abundance--and put it carefully away for use in my own country. There
drouth, or excessive rainfalls, produced scarcity, and sometimes famine.
The struggle of the poor was for food, to the exclusion of all other
interests. Many of them knew not what proper and health-giving
nourishment was. But here in Mizora, the daintiest morsels came from the
chemists laboratory, cheap as the earth under her feet.

I now began to enjoy the advantages of conversation, which added greatly
to my happiness and acquirements. I formed an intimate companionship
with the daughter of the Preceptress of the National College, and to her
was addressed the questions I asked about things that impressed me. She
was one of the most beautiful beings that it had been my lot to behold.
Her eyes were dark, almost the purplish blue of a pansy, and her hair
had a darker tinge than is common in Mizora, as if it had stolen the
golden edge of a ripe chestnut. Her beauty was a constant charm to me.

The National College contained a large and well filled gallery. Its
pictures and statuary were varied, not confined to historical portraits
and busts as was the one at the College of Experimental Science. Yet it
possessed a number of portraits of women exclusively of the blonde type.
Many of them were ideal in loveliness. This gallery also contained the
masterpieces of their most celebrated sculptors. They were all studies
of the female form. I am a connoisseur in art, and nothing that I had
ever seen before could compare with these matchless marbles, bewitching
in every delicate contour, alluring in softness, but grand and majestic
in pose and expression.

But I haunted this gallery for other reasons than its artistic
attractions. I was searching for the portrait of a man, or something
suggesting his presence. I searched in vain. Many of the paintings were
on a peculiar transparent substance that gave to the subject a
startlingly vivid effect. I afterward learned that they were
imperishable, the material being a translucent adamant of their own
manufacture. After a picture was painted upon it, another piece of
adamant was cemented over it.

Each day, as my acquaintance with the peculiar institutions and
character of the inhabitants of Mizora increased, my perplexity and a
certain air of mystery about them increased with it. It was impossible
for me not to feel for them a high degree of respect, admiration, and
affection. They were ever gentle, tender, and kind to solicitude. To
accuse them of mystery were a paradox; and yet they _were_ a mystery. In
conversation, manners and habits, they were frank to singularity. It was
just as common an occurrence for a poem to be read and commented on by
its author, as to hear it done by another. I have heard a poetess call
attention to the beauties of her own production, and receive praise or
