You, you big ox, could be killed by fright too if the intensity level of
the projector was set higher than your psycho-profile rating."

He saw his last words had lost the boy again. "In any case you know
better. Why did you allow your sister to endanger her life by letting
her illegally use another's permit? And of all things, a horror feelie!"

"Ah didn't want to take her," Jason complained, "but she jus' fussed an'
fretted at me 'till Ah gave in."

"Well you've both broken the law. Your parents will be notified and
you'll have to stay here until they come." The doctor buzzed and a guard
appeared. "Take these two to Mr. Lemson's office," he instructed him.

The guard led them from the floating steel and crystal theater structure
of the U-Live-It Corporation complex to the executive wing of the
general offices. He stayed with them until the receptionist at the
office suite of Vice President Cyrus W. Lemson ushered them inside.

After having them seat themselves, Mr. Lemson stared at Jason in his
tight, crimson, dress dungarees and rhinestone speckled, black shirt
which accentuated his lithe, muscled body. _Eighteen or not_, he thought
in mild astonishment, _that handsome giant is no boy_. "The doctor
viphoned me about you," he said sternly. He spoke to them further about
the seriousness of what they had done and told them their parents were
on the way down. Then he took them into an interior office furnished
like a luxurious living room. "Please wait here," he said, "until your
people arrive. Magazines are there on the table and you may turn on the
television set." He closed the door.

"Want me to turn on the television set?" Jason asked.

"No, Ah don't much feel like it."

They settled themselves on the enormous couch and Robina looked at her
brother. "Jason, Ah'm real sorry. Ah went an' stirred up a hornet's nest
of trouble for you again."

"Don't fret about it, Robee. They won't really do nothin' serious.
They'll talk to Ma an' Pa an' Pa'll make like he's goin' to cuff us
aroun' when we get back to the hotel an' instead he'll jus' look dark
an' make us feel bad with his talk. It'll jus' be a lot of commotion
like a bee stuck in a tar bucket."

"Ah guess," Robina said. She cast a sheepish glance at her brother. "Say
Jason, how did the feelie end up?"

Jason was indignant. "Now listen, Robee, ain't you had enough? You heard
the doc say that last was like to kill you."

"Please, Jason, there's nothin' wrong with you jus' _tellin'_ me."

"It's almost as bad. You still get yourself all flittered up."

"That's because nobody can tell a story like you do, the way you act it
out an' all."

"Ah don't act it out. Ah jus' tell it."

"Well _you_ might call it tellin' but everybody home says it's jus' like
a feelie when you do it. An' don't pretend you don't know it, brother
Jay, an' enjoy it too!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Jason did not tell the ending of the feelie; he recreated it. He was the
monster slurching across the floor toward her, step by scraping step and
in spite of her fist on her mouth a tiny nervous scream escaped Robina.
Jason wanted to stop then but she badgered him into continuing. Now he
was the hero, Gregg Mason, battling the unspeakable fiend and she
shivered uncontrollably as she watched them struggle to the death. In a
last, desperate, superhuman effort, Gregg's hands clawed into the
monster's body and ripped out the foul, quivering heart of it. The
creature twisted to the ground and perished in its own slime. Gregg,
torn and bleeding and with shock-frozen eyes, turned and staggered into
the arms of Robina.

"Oh, Gregg, Gregg," Robina cried in relief, the tears streaming down her
face.

"It's okay, Joan," he said comforting her, "okay. It's all over now.
C'mon now, Joan, get out from behind those tears so you can see how much
Ah love you. Everything's all right."

"Oh, Gregg!" A weak smile broke through.

Gregg enfolded Joan in his arms and pressed his mouth against her eager
lips.

"What are you two _doing_?!!" a shocked voice exclaimed from the open
door.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gregg and Joan were blown away by the sound like spindrift before the
wind. Jason and Robina slowly came apart to see Mr. Lemson and another
man coming into the room.

"What is the matter with you both?" Mr. Lemson spoke again. "Aren't you
in enough trouble now?"

"Let me handle this, Cy," the other man said stepping forward. "I'm Bob
Herschell," he said smiling and radiating friendliness at the
youngsters. "Would you please tell me exactly what you were doing before
we came in here?"

"Weren't doin' nothin'," Jason said belligerently.

"Shades of the decadent South!" Lemson exclaimed. "Brother and sister
glued together and he calls it _nothin'_."

"Ah wasn't kissin' her like you think," Jason said hotly. "Ah was
tellin' her a story."

"What kind of a story?" Herschell asked excitedly.

