Bullard went back to his ship, and Hansen went to bed. He dreamed of His
Exalted Excellency R'thagna Bar, growing angrier day by day as the time of
mating came closer. In his dream he suddenly came upon a magnificent
solution to the problem, a solution involving a telepathic system of
fertilization. He woke up before he had completely worked out the details.

Bullard's friend arrived the same morning. He was a small, dark active
little man whom Hansen immediately disliked.

"Meet Dr. Quemos," Bullard said when Hansen dropped in on them. "Dr. Quemos
is a specialist in the history of technology. He thinks he knows how our
cute little door mechanism is made."

"Can't say for sure," Quemos said, "but I'd guess that those components are
made of metal--real metal."

"I thought that metal was used only in jewelry," Hansen said.

Dr. Quemos grinned slyly. "That's what most people think. Actually, refined
metal of various types was used in large masses, formed masses, for
thousands of years. Historically speaking, the pseudo-mets are relatively
new."

"It's difficult to imagine metal functioning as machinery," Hansen mused.

"And you say that this door mechanism has moving parts, lots of them?"

"Moving parts are nothing to be afraid of," Quemos said. "Here, look at
this." He put something small on the table, much in the manner of a young
boy dropping a garter snake in the midst of school girls. Bullard and
Hansen crowded around. "Now, take turns," said Quemos sharply, "and don't
drop it. It's priceless, I assure you." The ancient wrist watch with its
transparent back was passed from hand to hand.

"Frightening little monster, isn't it," Bullard said.

"Those small round wheels are called gears," elucidated Quemos, "one gear
turns another, which turns another, and so on. I rather imagine that your
door is operated on some similar principle."

"I seem to be the one who asks all the schoolboy questions," Hansen began,
"would somebody tell me why Captain Fromer doesn't take His Excellency to
his home planet, land the ship, and then let his technical staff tear off
the door mechanism?"

"We've gone through that," Bullard said wearily. "Unfortunately we need
special tools. And there's no way to get them into the ship."

"Can I speak to Captain Fromer?" Quemos asked.

"Right away," Hansen said. He pressed his hand in various patterns on his
belt. "This is Hansen. Let us talk to Captain Fromer, please."

"Fromer here. Who is it?"

"Dr. Quemos speaking. How is your passenger?"

"My passenger is fine. But he keeps telling me that he is very anxious to
plant his seed. When can you get us out of here?"

"Plant his seed?" said Quemos.

"There's nothing salacious about this, I've been assured. He simply has a
biological craving at this time in his life to--to plant his seed."

"I got problems like that, too," Bullard said, "but I don't go around
telling everybody."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Stop clowning," Fromer snapped, "you guys better find a way to fix this
damn door or you'll have a galactic war on your hands. Anybody have any
ideas yet?"

"We're sure that the door mechanism is made of metal," Quemos said, "and
the construction is probably based on the principal of a worm gear."

"A what?"

"A worm gear, Captain," Quemos said patiently. "It's an ancient metal
device that was sometimes used for closing large doors. There is also the
possibility that the door is closed and opened by dogs. These seem to have
been used, at least, to operate doors of undersea crafts. Although we're
not quite certain about the function of dogs."

The captain maintained a stony silence.

"Also," Quemos continued, "we have unearthed, so to speak, a reference to a
metal component called a babbitt--"

"Now see here!" Captain Fromer roared, "who do you think you're kidding
with this talk about worms, dogs and rabbits--"

"Babbitts, Captain, babbitts! Perhaps a type of bearing. Anyway, we're at
work on the problem, I assure you." Quemos motioned to Hansen that he was
through talking.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the next three days, Hansen twice visited Bullard and Quemos.
On each occasion, he found the two men in trance-like conditions,
ostensibly thinking through the problem that they had been assigned to
solve, but more probably, Hansen guessed, brooding about the reaction
of Sector Headquarters to their daily progress reports which Hansen had
been relaying for them. Hansen had only sympathy for the people back at
Sector Headquarters, for if these two experts were the Galaxy's two top
trouble-shooters, the Federation, was not, as Hansen put it to himself,
in very good shape to fight a war with one hundred billion enraged
citizens who worshiped His Exalted Excellency R'thagna Bar almost as
much as they did his seed.

Hansen went back to his reading, only to be interrupted with increasing
frequency by message transmissions from an increasingly alarmed Sector
Headquarters. Most messages were addressed to Bullard, and were bravely
designed to disguise the senders' hysteria, while at the same time
urging Bullard on to more magnificent efforts. A few messages, fairly
representative of the state of affairs as time wore on reflected an
increasing suspicion on the part of Sector Headquarters that Quemos and
Bullard, although certainly tops in their fields, were not tops enough.


    SEC HDQ
    BULLARD, COM. RLY.
    43.4SC

    PRESIDENT WOULD LIKE ESTIMATE OF WHEN DOOR WILL BE OPENED. YOU
    SURE YOU CAN HANDLE? EMPHASIZE THAT POLITICAL SITUATION NOW
    GETTING TOUCHY. REPEAT TOUCHY. R'THAGNA BAR CALLING ON PRESIDENT
    TODAY TO MAKE DEMAND THAT SEED BE PLANTED ON TIME. SURE YOU
