well-modulated.

"No, this is CHElsea 7-8161," Houston said. "You must have dialed C-H-E
instead of C-H-A."

"Oh. I'm very sorry. Excuse me." There was a click, and she hung up.

Houston walked back over to the bed and picked up his paper. He looked
at it, but he didn't read it. It no longer interested him.

So Dorrine was finally in London, eh? He'd recognized her voice
instantly; even years of training couldn't smother the midwestern
American of Chicago completely beneath the precise British of the
well-educated English girl.

The signal had been agreed upon, just in case his phone was tapped. Even
the Psychodeviant Police could be suspected of harboring a
Controller--although Houston didn't think it too likely. Nevertheless,
he wasn't one to take too many chances.

He glanced at his watch. He had an hour yet. He'd wait five minutes
before he phoned headquarters.

       *       *       *       *       *

He sat down in his chair again and forced himself to relax, smoke a
cigarette, and read the paper--the sports section. Perusing the records
of the season's cricket matches kept his mind off that picture on the
front page. At least, he hoped they would. Let's see, now--Benton was
being rated as the finest googly bowler on the Staffordshire Club ...

Everything went fine until he came across a reference to a John Harris,
a top-flight batsman for Hambledon; that reminded him of Robert Harris.
Houston threw down the paper in disgust and walked over to the phone.

The number was TROwbridge 5-4321, but no one ever bothered to remember
it. Simply dial 8-7-6-5-4-3-2-1, and every time a voice at the other end
would answer--

"Hamilton speaking."

"Houston here; will I be needed in the next hour or so?"

"Mmmm. Just a second; I'll check the roster. No; your evidence won't be
needed personally. You've filed an affidavit. No, I don't think--wait a
minute! Yes, there's a return here for you; reservation on the six A.M.
jet to New York. Your job here is done, Houston, so you can take the
rest of the evening off and relax. Going anywhere in particular?"

"I thought I'd get a bite to eat and take in a movie, maybe, but if I'm
due out at six, I'll forego the cinematic diversion. When's the trial?"

"It's scheduled for eleven-thirty this evening. Going to come?"

Houston shook his head. "Not if I'm not needed to give evidence. Those
Controllers always give me the creeps."

"They do everybody," said Hamilton. "Well, you caught him; there's no
need for you to stick around for the windup. Have a good time."

"Thanks," said Houston shortly, and hung up.

_The windup_, Houston thought. _Sure. That's all it will be. A
Controller's trial is a farce. Knock him out with a stun gun and then
pump him full of comatol. How can he defend himself if he's unconscious
all through the trial?_

Houston knew what the average man's answer to that would be: "If a
Controller were allowed to remain conscious, he'd take over the judge's
mind and get himself freed."

Houston said an obscene word under his breath, jammed his hat on his
head, put on his coat, and left his apartment.

       *       *       *       *       *

With the coming of darkness, the heavy fog had become still denser. The
yellow beams of the sodium vapor lamps were simply golden spots hanging
in an all-enveloping blackness. Walking the street was a process of
moving from one little golden island of light to another, crossing seas
of blankness between. The monochromatic yellow shone on the human faces
that passed beneath the lamps, robbing them of all color, giving them a
dead, grayish appearance beneath the yellow itself.

David Houston walked purposefully along the pavement, his hand jammed
deep in his overcoat pockets. One hand held the control box for the
little earpiece he wore. He kept moving the band selector, listening for
any sign that the Psychodeviant Police were suspicious of a Controller
in their midst.

If they were following him, of course, they would use a different
scrambler circuit than the one which was plugged into his own unit, but
he would be able to hear the gabble of voices, even if he couldn't
understand what they were saying.

So far, there hadn't been a sound; if he was being followed, his tailers
weren't using the personal intercom units.

He didn't try to elude anyone who might be following. That, in itself,
would be a giveaway. Let them watch, if they _were_ watching. They
wouldn't see anything but a man going to get himself a bit of dinner.

The _Charles II Inn_, on Regent Street, near Piccadilly Circus, was a
haven of brightness in an otherwise Stygian London. It was one of those
"old-fashioned" places--Restoration style of decoration, carried out in
modern plastics. The oak panelling looked authentic enough, but it was
just a little too glossy to be real.

Houston pushed open the door, stepped inside, removed his hat and coat
and shook the dampness from them. As he handed them to the checker, he
looked casually around. Dorrine was nowhere in sight, but he hadn't
expected her to be. There would be no point in their meeting physically;
it might even be downright dangerous.

The headwaiter, clad in the long waistcoat and full trunk-hose of the
late Seventeenth Century, bowed punctiliously.

"You're alone, sir?"

"Alone, yes," Houston said. "I'll just be wanting a light supper and a
drink or two."

"This way, sir."

Houston followed the man to a small table in the rear of the huge dining
room. It was set for two, but the other place was quickly cleared away.
Houston ordered an Irish-and-soda from a waiter who was only slightly
less elaborately dressed than the headwaiter, and then settled himself
down to wait. If he knew Dorrine, she would be on time to the minute.

She came while the waiter was setting the drink on Houston's table. She
stepped in through the door, her unmistakable hair glowing a rich red in
the illumination of the pseudo-candlelight.

She didn't bother to look around; she knew he would be there.

After a single glance, Houston averted his eyes from her and looked back
at his drink.

And in that same instant, their minds touched.

_Dave, darling! I knew you'd be early!_

_Dorrine!_

And then their minds meshed for an instant.

_I_--_(we)_--_you_--LOVE--_you_--(each other)--me!--us!

       *       *       *       *       *

Houston looked complacently at his drink while the headwaiter led
Dorrine to a table on the far side of the room. She sat down gracefully,
smiled at the waiter, and ordered a cocktail. Then she took a magazine
from her handbag and began--presumably--to read.

Her thought came: _Who is this Richard Harris? He's not one of our
Group._

Houston sipped at his drink. _No. An unknown, like the others. I wonder
if he's even a telepath._

_What?_ Her thought carried astonishment. _Why, Dave--he'd_ have _to be!
How else could he have controlled this Sir Lewis--whatsisname--Huntley?_

_Well--I've got a funny idea_, Houston replied. _Look at it this way: So
far as we know, there are two Groups of telepaths. There's our own
Group. All we want is to be left alone. We don't read a Normal's mind
unless we have to, and we don't try to control one unless our lives are
threatened. We stay under cover, out of everyone's way._

_Then there are the megalomaniacs. They try, presumably, to gain wealth
and power by controlling Normals. And they get caught with monotonous
regularity. Right?_

The girl caught an odd note in that thought. _What do you mean,
"monotonous regularity"?_ she asked.

_I mean_, Houston thought savagely, _why is it they're all so bloody
stupid? Look at this Harris guy; he is supposed to have taken over Sir
Lewis's mind in order to get a thousand pounds. So what did he have Sir
Lewis do? Parade all around the city to pick up a PD Police net, and
then give his address to a cabman in a loud voice and lead the whole
net right to Harris! How stupid can a man get?_

_It does look pretty silly_, Dorrine agreed. _Have you got an
explanation?_

_Several_, Houston told her. _And I don't know which one is correct._

_Let's have them_, the girl thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

Houston gave them to her. None of them, he knew, was completely
satisfactory, but they all made more sense that the theory that Harris
had done what the PD Police claimed he'd done.

Theory Number One: The real megalomaniac Controller had taken over Sir
Lewis's mind and made him draw out the thousand pounds and head west on
Leadenhall Street. Somehow, the Controller had found out that Sir Lewis
was being followed, and had steered him away from the original
destination, heading him toward the innocent Robert Harris. That implied
that the Controller had been within a few dozen yards of the net men
that afternoon. A Controller can't control a mind directly from a
distance, although orders can be implanted which will cause a man to
carry out a plan of action, even though he may be miles from the
Controller. But in order to change those plans, the Controller would
have to be within projection range.

Theory Two: Robert Harris actually was a megalomaniac Controller; with a
long record of success behind him, who had finally grown careless.

At that point, Dorrine interjected a thought: _Isn't it possible that he
wanted to be caught?_

Houston mulled it over for a minute. _A guilt-punishment reaction? He
wanted to be punished for his crimes? I suppose that might account for
part of it, yes. But if he'd been so successful, what did he do with all
his money?_

Dorrine gave a mental shrug. _Who knows? What's Theory Number Three?_

       *       *       *       *       *

Number Three was the screwiest one of all, yet it made a weird kind of
sense. Suppose that Sir Lewis himself had had a grudge against Harris?
The whole thing would have been ridiculously easy; all he'd have to do
would be to act just as he had acted and then give evidence against
Harris.

The thing that made it odd wasn't the actual frame-up (if that's what it
was); these days, every crime was blamed on a Controller. A man accused
of murder simply looked virtuous and said that he would never have done
such a thing if he hadn't been under the power of a Controller. Ditto
for robbery, rape, and any other felony you'd care to name.

An aura of fear hung over the whole Earth; each man half suspected
everyone with whom he came in contact of being a Controller.

So it wasn't that the frame-up in itself was peculiar in this case; it
was simply that it wasn't Sir Lewis Huntley's style. If Sir Lewis had
wanted to get Harris, he'd have done it legally, without any underhanded
frame-ups. Still, the theory remained as a possibility.

_I suppose it does_, Dorrine agreed, _but how does that tie in with our
own Group? What about Jackson and Marcy? What happened to them?_

_I don't know_, Houston admitted, _I just don't know_.

Jackson and Marcy had been members of the Group of telepaths who had
banded together for companionship and mutual protection. Both of them
had been trapped by the PD Police in exactly the same way that Harris
had been trapped. They were now where Harris would be in a matter of
hours--in the Penal Cluster.

Their arrests didn't make sense, either; they had been accused of taking
over someone's mind for the purpose of gaining money illegally--illegal,
that is, according to the new UN laws that had been passed to supersede
the various national laws that had previously been in effect.

But Houston had known both men well, and neither of them was the kind of
man who would pull such a stunt, much less do it in such a stupid
manner.

Dorrine thought: _Well, Dave, this Harris case is out of our hands now;
we've got to concentrate on getting others into the Group--we've got to
find the other sane ones._

_You're ready to take over here, then?_ he asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the table, several yards away from where Houston was sitting,
Dorrine, still looking at the book, smiled faintly.

_I'll have to; you're being transferred back to New York at six in the
morning._

Houston allowed a feeling of startled surprise to bridge the gap between
their minds. _How'd you know that?_ He hadn't told her, and she couldn't
have forced the knowledge from his mind. A telepath can open the mind
of a Normal as simply as he might open the pages of a book, but the mind
of another Controller is far stronger. One telepath couldn't force
