difference in the degree of their heliotropic curvature in the several
pots; and there was a well-marked difference between those which stood
nearest and furthest from the lamp, but the difference in each successive
pair of pots was extremely small. In order to avoid prejudice, we asked
three persons, who knew nothing about the experiment, to arrange the pots
in order according to the degree of curvature of the cotyledons. The first
person arranged them in proper order, but doubted long between the 12 feet
and 16 feet pots; yet these two received light in the proportion of 36 to
64. The second person also arranged them properly, but doubted between the
8 feet and 12 feet pots, which received light in the proportion of 16 to
36. The third person arranged them in wrong order, and doubted about four
of the pots. This evidence shows conclusively how little the curvature of
the seedlings differed in the successive pots, in comparison with the great
difference in the amount of light which they received; and it should be
noted that there was no
[page 459]
excess of superfluous light, for the cotyledons became but little and
slowly curved even in the nearest pot. Close to the 6th pot, at the
distance of 20 feet from the lamp, the light allowed us just to distinguish
a dot 3.56 mm. (.14 inch) in diameter, made with Indian ink on white paper,
but not a dot 2.29 mm. (.09 inch) in diameter.

The degree of curvature of the cotyledons of Phalaris within a given time,
depends not merely on the amount of lateral light which they may then
receive, but on that which they have previously received from above and on
all sides. Analogous facts have been given with respect to the nyctitropic
and periodic movements of plants. Of two pots containing seedlings of
Phalaris which had germinated in darkness, one was still kept in the dark,
and the other was exposed (Sept. 26th) to the light in a greenhouse during
a cloudy day and on the following bright morning. On this morning (27th),
at 10.30 A.M., both pots were placed in a box, blackened within and open in
front, before a north-east window, protected by a linen and muslin blind
and by a towel, so that but little light was admitted, though the sky was
bright. Whenever the pots were looked at, this was done as quickly as
possible, and the cotyledons were then held transversely with respect to
the light, so that their curvature could not have been thus increased or
diminished. After 50 m. the seedlings which had previously been kept in
darkness, were perhaps, and after 70 m. were certainly, curved, though very
slightly, towards the window. After 85 m. some of the seedlings, which had
previously been illuminated, were perhaps a little affected, and after 100
m. some of the younger ones were certainly a little curved towards the
light. At this time (i.e. after 100 m.) there was a plain difference
[page 460]
in the curvature of the seedlings in the two pots. After 2 h. 12 m. the
chords of the arcs of four of the most strongly curved seedlings in each
pot were measured, and the mean angle from the perpendicular of those which
had previously been kept in darkness was 19o, and of those which had
previously been illuminated only 7o. Nor did this difference diminish
during two additional hours. As a check, the seedlings in both pots were
then placed in complete darkness for two hours, in order that apogeotropism
should act on them; and those in the one pot which were little curved
became in this time almost completely upright, whilst the more curved ones
in the other pot still remained plainly curved.

Two days afterwards the experiment was repeated, with the sole difference
that even less light was admitted through the window, as it was protected
by a linen and muslin blind and by two towels; the sky, moreover, was
somewhat less bright. The result was the same as before, excepting that
everything occurred rather slower. The seedlings which had been previously
kept in darkness were not in the least curved after 54 m., but were so
after 70 m. Those which had previously been illuminated were not at all
affected until 130 m. had elapsed, and then only slightly. After 145 m.
some of the seedlings in this latter pot were certainly curved towards the
light; and there was now a plain difference between the two pots. After 3
h. 45 m. the chords of the arcs of 3 seedlings in each pot were measured,
and the mean angle from the perpendicular was 16o for those in the pot
which had previously been kept in darkness, and only 5o for those which had
previously been illuminated.

The curvature of the cotyledons of Phalaris towards a lateral light is
therefore certainly influenced by the
[page 461]
degree to which they have been previously illuminated. We shall presently
see that the influence of light on their bending continues for a short time
after the light has been extinguished. These facts, as well as that of the
curvature not increasing or decreasing in nearly the same ratio with that
of the amount of light which they receive, as shown in the trials with the
plants before the lamp, all indicate that light acts on them as a stimulus,
in somewhat the same manner as on the nervous system of animals, and not in
a direct manner on the cells or cell-walls which by their contraction or
expansion cause the curvature.

It has already been incidentally shown how slowly the cotyledons of
Phalaris bend towards a very dim light; but when they were placed before a
bright paraffin lamp their tips were all curved rectangularly towards it in
2 h. 20 m. The hypocotyls of Solanum lycopersicum had bent in the morning
at right angles towards a north-east window. At 1 P.M. (Oct. 21st) the pot
was turned round, so that the seedlings now pointed from the light, but by
5 P.M. they had reversed their curvature and again pointed to the light.
They had thus passed through 180o in 4 h., having in the morning previously
passed through about 90o. But the reversal of the first half of the
curvature will have been aided by apogeotropism. Similar cases were
observed with other seedlings, for instance, with those of Sinapis alba.

We attempted to ascertain in how short a time light acted on the cotyledons
of Phalaris, but this was difficult on account of their rapid
circumnutating movement; moreover, they differ much in sensibility,
according to age; nevertheless, some of our observations are worth giving.
Pots with seedlings were
[page 462]
placed under a microscope provided with an eye-piece micrometer, of which
each division equalled 1/500th of an inch (0.051 mm.); and they were at
first illuminated by light from a paraffin lamp passing through a solution
of bichromate of potassium, which does not induce heliotropism. Thus the
direction in which the cotyledons were circumnutating could be observed
independently of any action from the light; and they could be made, by
turning round the pots, to circumnutate transversely to the line in which
the light would strike them, as soon as the solution was removed. The fact
that the direction of the circumnutating movement might change at any
moment, and thus the plant might bend either towards or from the lamp
independently of the action of the light, gave an element of uncertainty to
the results. After the solution had been removed, five seedlings which were
circumnutating transversely to the line of light, began to move towards it,
in 6, 4, 7 1/2, 6, and 9 minutes. In one of these cases, the apex of the
cotyledon crossed five of the divisions of the micrometer (i.e. 1/100th of
an inch, or 0.254 mm.) towards the light in 3 m. Of two seedlings which
were moving directly from the light at the time when the solution was
removed, one began to move towards it in 13 m., and the other in 15 m. This
latter seedling was observed for more than an hour and continued to move
towards the light; it crossed at one time 5 divisions of the micrometer
(0.254 mm.) in 2 m. 30 s. In all these cases, the movement towards the
light was extremely unequal in rate, and the cotyledons often remained
almost stationary for some minutes, and two of them retrograded a little.
Another seedling which was circumnutating transversely to the line of
light, moved towards it in 4 m. after the solution was removed; it then
remained
[page 463]
almost stationary for 10 m.; then crossed 5 divisions of the micrometer in
6 m.; and then 8 divisions in 11m. This unequal rate of movement,
interrupted by pauses, and at first with occasional retrogressions, accords
well with our conclusion that heliotropism consists of modified
circumnutation.

In order to observe how long the after-effects of light lasted, a pot with
seedlings of Phalaris, which had germinated in darkness, was placed at
10.40 A.M. before a north-east window, being protected on all other sides
from the light; and the movement of a cotyledon was traced on a horizontal
glass. It circumnutated about the same space for the first 24 m., and
during the next 1 h. 33 m. moved rapidly towards the light. The light was
now (i.e. after 1 h. 57 m.) completely excluded, but the cotyledon
continued bending in the same direction as before, certainly for more than
15 m., probably for about 27 m. The doubt arose from the necessity of not
looking at the seedlings often, and thus exposing them, though momentarily,
to the light. This same seedling was now kept in the dark, until 2.18 P.M.,
by which time it had reacquired through apogeotropism its original upright
position, when it was again exposed to the light from a clouded sky. By 3
P.M. it had moved a very short distance towards the light, but during the
next 45 m. travelled quickly towards it. After this exposure of 1 h. 27 m.
to a rather dull sky, the light was again completely excluded, but the
cotyledon continued to bend in the same direction as before for 14 m.
within a very small limit of error. It was then placed in the dark, and it
now moved backwards, so that after 1 h. 7 m. it stood close to where it had
started from at 2.18 P.M. These observations show that the cotyledons of
Phalaris, after being exposed to a lateral
[page 464]
light, continue to bend in the same direction for between a quarter and
half an hour.

In the two experiments just given, the cotyledons moved backwards or from
the window shortly after being subjected to darkness; and whilst tracing
the circumnutation of various kinds of seedlings exposed to a lateral
light, we repeatedly observed that late in the evening, as the light waned,
they moved from it. This fact is shown in some of the diagrams given in the
last chapter. We wished therefore to learn whether this was wholly due to
apogeotropism, or whether an organ after bending towards the light tended
from any other cause to bend from it, as soon as the light failed.
Accordingly, two pots of seedling Phalaris and one pot of seedling Brassica
were exposed for 8 h. before a paraffin lamp, by which time the cotyledons
of the former and the hypocotyls of the latter were bent rectangularly
towards the light. The pots were now quickly laid horizontally, so that the
upper parts of the cotyledons and of the hypocotyls of 9 seedlings
projected vertically upwards, as proved by a plumb-line. In this position
they could not be acted on by apogeotropism, and if they possessed any
tendency to straighten themselves or to bend in opposition to their former
heliotropic curvature, this would be exhibited, for it would be opposed at
first very slightly by apogeotropism. They were kept in the dark for 4 h.,
during which time they were twice looked at; but no uniform bending in
opposition to their former heliotropic curvature could be detected. We have
said uniform bending, because they circumnutated in their new position, and
after 2 h. were inclined in different directions (between 4o and 11o) from
the perpendicular. Their directions were also changed after two additional
hours, and again on the following morning. We may
[page 465]
therefore conclude that the bending back of plants from a light, when this
becomes obscure or is extinguished, is wholly due to apogeotropism.*

In our various experiments we were often struck with the accuracy with
which seedlings pointed to a light although of small size. To test this,
many seedlings of Phalaris, which had germinated in darkness in a very
narrow box several feet in length, were placed in a darkened room near to
and in front of a lamp having a small cylindrical wick. The cotyledons at
the two ends and in the central part of the box, would therefore have to
bend in widely different directions in order to point to the light. After
they had become rectangularly bent, a long white thread was stretched by
two persons, close over and parallel, first to one and then to another
cotyledon; and the thread was found in almost every case actually to
intersect the small circular wick of the now extinguished lamp. The
deviation from accuracy never exceeded, as far as we could judge, a degree
or two. This extreme accuracy seems at first surprising, but is not really
so, for an upright cylindrical stem, whatever its position may be with
respect to the light, would have exactly half its circumference illuminated
and half in shadow; and as the difference in illumination of the two sides
is the exciting cause of heliotropism, a cylinder would naturally bend with
much accuracy towards the light. The cotyledons, however, of Phalaris are
not cylindrical, but oval in section; and the longer axis was to the
shorter axis (in the one which was measured) as 100 to 70. Nevertheless, no
difference could be

* It appears from a reference in Wiesner ('Die Undulirende Nutation der
Internodien,' p. 7), that H. Müller of Thurgau found that a stem which is
bending heliotropically is at the same time striving, through
apogeotropism, to raise itself into a vertical position.
[page 466]

detected in the accuracy of their bending, whether they stood with their
broad or narrow sides facing the light, or in any intermediate position;
and so it was with the cotyledons of Avena sativa, which are likewise oval
in section. Now, a little reflection will show that in whatever position
the cotyledons may stand, there will be a line of greatest illumination,
exactly fronting the light, and on each side of this line an equal amount
of light will be received; but if the oval stands obliquely with respect to
the light, this will be diffused over a wider surface on one side of the
central line than on the other. We may therefore infer that the same amount
of light, whether diffused over a wider surface or concentrated on a
smaller surface, produces exactly the same effect; for the cotyledons in
the long narrow box stood in all sorts of positions with reference to the
light, yet all pointed truly towards it.

That the bending of the cotyledons to the light depends on the illumination
of one whole side or on the obscuration of the whole opposite side, and not
on a narrow longitudinal zone in the line of the light being affected, was
shown by the effects of painting longitudinally with Indian ink one side of
five cotyledons of Phalaris. These were then placed on a table near to a
south-west window, and the painted half was directed either to the right or
left. The result was that instead of bending in a direct line towards the
window, they were deflected from the window and towards the unpainted side,
by the following angles, 35o, 83o, 31o, 43o, and 39o. It should be remarked
that it was hardly possible to paint one-half accurately, or to place all
the seedlings which are oval in section in quite the same position
relatively to the light; and this will account for the differences in the
angles. Five coty-
[page 467]
ledons of Avena were also painted in the same manner, but with greater
care; and they were laterally deflected from the line of the window,
towards the unpainted side, by the following angles, 44o, 44o, 55o, 51o, and
57o. This deflection of the cotyledons from the window is intelligible, for
the whole unpainted side must have received some light, whereas the
opposite and painted side received none; but a narrow zone on the unpainted
side directly in front of the window will have received most light, and all
the hinder parts (half an oval in section) less and less light in varying
degrees; and we may conclude that the angle of deflection is the resultant
of the action of the light over the whole of the unpainted side.

It should have been premised that painting with Indian ink does not injure
plants, at least within several hours; and it could injure them only by
stopping respiration. To ascertain whether injury was thus soon caused, the
upper halves of 8 cotyledons of Avena were thickly coated with transparent
matter,--4 with gum, and 4 with gelatine; they were placed in the morning
before a window, and by the evening they were normally bowed towards the
light, although the coatings now consisted of dry crusts of gum and
gelatine. Moreover, if the seedlings which were painted longitudinally with
Indian ink had been injured on the painted side, the opposite side would
have gone on growing, and they would consequently have become bowed towards
the painted side; whereas the curvature was always, as we have seen, in the
opposite direction, or towards the unpainted side which was exposed to the
light. We witnessed the effects of injuring longitudinally one side of the
cotyledons of Avena and Phalaris; for before we knew that grease was highly
injurious to them, several were painted down one side
[page 468]
with a mixture of oil and lamp-black, and were then exposed before a
window; others similarly treated were afterwards tried in darkness. These
cotyledons soon became plainly bowed towards the blackened side, evidently
owing to the grease on this side having checked their growth, whilst growth
continued on the opposite side. But it deserves notice that the curvature
differed from that caused by light, which ultimately becomes abrupt near
the ground. These seedlings did not afterwards die, but were much injured
and grew badly.

LOCALISED SENSITIVENESS TO LIGHT, AND ITS TRANSMITTED EFFECTS.

Phalaris Canariensis.--Whilst observing the accuracy with which the
cotyledons of this plant became bent towards the light of a small lamp, we
were impressed with the idea that the uppermost part determined the
direction of the curvature of the lower part. When the cotyledons are
exposed to a lateral light, the upper part bends first, and afterwards the
bending gradually extends down to the base, and, as we shall presently see,
even a little beneath the ground. This holds good with cotyledons from less
than .1 inch (one was observed to act in this manner which was only .03 in
height) to about .5 of an inch in height; but when they have grown to
nearly an inch in height, the basal part, for a length of .15 to .2 of an
inch above the ground, ceases to bend. As with young cotyledons the lower
part goes on bending, after the upper part has become well arched towards a
lateral light, the apex would ultimately point to the ground instead of to
the light, did not the upper part reverse its curvature and straighten
itself, as
[page 469]
soon as the upper convex surface of the bowed-down portion received more
light than the lower concave surface. The position ultimately assumed by
young and upright cotyledons, exposed to light entering obliquely from
above through a window, is shown in the accompanying figure (Fig. 181); and
here it may be seen that the whole upper part has become very nearly
straight. When the cotyledons were exposed before a bright lamp, standing
on the same level with them, the upper part, which was at first

Fig. 181. Phalaris Canariensis: cotyledons after exposure in a box open on
one side in front of a south-west window during 8 h. Curvature towards the
light accurately traced. The short horizontal lines show the level of the
ground.

greatly arched towards the light, became straight and strictly parallel
with the surface of the soil in the pots; the basal part being now
rectangularly bent. All this great amount of curvature, together with the
subsequent straightening of the upper part, was often effected in a few
hours.

[After the uppermost part has become bowed a little to the light, its
overhanging weight must tend to increase the curvature of the lower part;
but any such effect was shown in several ways to be quite insignificant.
When little caps of tin-foil (hereafter to be described) were placed on the
summits of the cotyledons, though this must have added considerably to
their weight, the rate or amount of bending was not thus increased. But the
best evidence was afforded by placing pots with seedlings of Phalaris
before a lamp in such a position, that the cotyledons were horizontally
extended and projected at right angles to the line of light. In the course
of 5 ½ h. they were directed towards the light with their bases bent at
right angles; and this abrupt
[page 470]
curvature could not have been aided in the least by the weight of the upper
part, which acted at right angles to the plane of curvature.

It will be shown that when the upper halves of the cotyledons of Phalaris
and Avena were enclosed in little pipes of tin-foil or of blackened glass,
in which case the upper part was mechanically prevented from bending, the
lower and unenclosed part did not bend when exposed to a lateral light; and
it occurred to us that this fact might be due, not to the exclusion of the
light from the upper part, but to some necessity of the bending gradually
travelling down the cotyledons, so that unless the upper part first became
bent, the lower could not bend, however much it might be stimulated. It was
necessary for our purpose to ascertain whether this notion was true, and it
was proved false; for the lower halves of several cotyledons became bowed
to the light, although their upper halves were enclosed in little glass
tubes (not blackened), which prevented, as far as we could judge, their
bending. Nevertheless, as the part within the tube might possibly bend a
very little, fine rigid rods or flat splinters of thin glass were cemented
with shellac to one side of the upper part of 15 cotyledons; and in six
cases they were in addition tied on with threads. They were thus forced to
remain quite straight. The result was that the lower halves of all became
bowed to the light, but generally not in so great a degree as the
corresponding part of the free seedlings in the same pots; and this may
perhaps be accounted for by some slight degree of injury having been caused
by a considerable surface having been smeared with shellac. It may be
added, that when the cotyledons of Phalaris and Avena are acted on by
apogeotropism, it is the upper part which begins first to bend; and when
this part was rendered rigid in the manner just described, the upward
curvature of the basal part was not thus prevented.

To test our belief that the upper part of the cotyledons of Phalaris, when
exposed to a lateral light, regulates the bending of the lower part, many
experiments were tried; but most of our first attempts proved useless from
various causes not worth specifying. Seven cotyledons had their tips cut
off for lengths varying between .1 and .16 of an inch, and these, when left
exposed all day to a lateral light, remained upright. In another set of 7
cotyledons, the tips were cut off for a length of only about .05 of an inch
(1.27 mm.) and these became bowed towards
[page 471]
a lateral light, but not nearly so much as the many other seedlings in the
same pots. This latter case shows that cutting off the tips does not by
itself injure the plants so seriously as to prevent heliotropism; but we
thought at the time, that such injury might follow when a greater length
was cut off, as in the first set of experiments. Therefore, no more trials
of this kind were made, which we now regret; as we afterwards found that
when the tips of three cotyledons were cut off for a length of .2 inch, and
of four others for lengths of .14, .12, .1, and .07 inch, and they were
extended horizontally, the amputation did not interfere in the least with
their bending vertically upwards, through the action of apogeotropism, like
unmutilated specimens. It is therefore extremely improbable that the
amputation of the tips for lengths of from .1 to .14 inch, could from the
injury thus caused have prevented the lower part from bending towards the
light.

We next tried the effects of covering the upper part of the cotyledons of
Phalaris with little caps which were impermeable to light; the whole lower
part being left fully exposed before a south-west window or a bright
paraffin lamp. Some of the caps were made of extremely thin tin-foil
blackened within; these had the disadvantage of occasionally, though
rarely, being too heavy, especially when twice folded. The basal edges
could be pressed into close contact with the cotyledons; though this again
required care to prevent injuring them. Nevertheless, any injury thus
caused could be detected by removing the caps, and trying whether the
cotyledons were then sensitive to light. Other caps were made of tubes of
the thinnest glass, which when painted black served well, with the one
great disadvantage that the lower ends could not be closed. But tubes were
used which fitted the cotyledons almost closely, and black paper was placed
on the soil round each, to check the upward reflection of light from the
soil. Such tubes were in one respect far better than caps of tin-foil, as
it was possible to cover at the same time some cotyledons with transparent
and others with opaque tubes; and thus our experiments could be controlled.
It should be kept in mind that young cotyledons were selected for trial,
and that these when not interfered with become bowed down to the ground
towards the light.

We will begin with the glass-tubes. The summits of nine cotyledons,
differing somewhat in height, were enclosed for rather less than half their
lengths in uncoloured or transparent
[page 472]
tubes; and these were then exposed before a south-west window on a bright
day for 8 h. All of them became strongly curved towards the light, in the
same degree as the many other free seedlings in the same pots; so that the
glass-tubes certainly did not prevent the cotyledons from bending towards
the light. Nineteen other cotyledons were, at the same time, similarly
enclosed in tubes thickly painted with Indian ink. On five of them, the
paint, to our surprise, contracted after exposure to the sunlight, and very
narrow cracks were formed, through which a little light entered; and these
five cases were rejected. Of the remaining 14 cotyledons, the lower halves
of which had been fully exposed to the light for the whole time, 7
continued quite straight and upright; 1 was considerably bowed to the
light, and 6 were slightly bowed, but with the exposed bases of most of
them almost or quite straight. It is possible that some light may have been
reflected upwards from the soil and entered the bases of these 7 tubes, as
the sun shone brightly, though bits of blackened paper had been placed on
the soil round them. Nevertheless, the 7 cotyledons which were slightly
bowed, together with the 7 upright ones, presented a most remarkable
contrast in appearance with the many other seedlings in the same pots to
which nothing had been done. The blackened tubes were then removed from 10
of these seedlings, and they were now exposed before a lamp for 8 h.; 9 of
them became greatly, and 1 moderately, curved towards the light, proving
that the previous absence of any curvature in the basal part, or the
presence of only a slight degree of curvature there, was due to the
exclusion of light from the upper part.

Similar observations were made on 12 younger cotyledons with their upper
halves enclosed within glass-tubes coated with black varnish, and with
their lower halves fully exposed to bright sunshine. In these younger
seedlings the sensitive zone seems to extend rather lower down, as was
observed on some other occasions, for two became almost as much curved
towards the light as the free seedlings; and the remaining ten were
slightly curved, although the basal part of several of them, which normally
becomes more curved than any other part, exhibited hardly a trace of
curvature. These 12 seedlings taken together differed greatly in their
degree of curvature from all the many other seedlings in the same pots.

Better evidence of the efficiency of the blackened tubes was incidentally
afforded by some experiments hereafter to be given,
[page 473]
in which the upper halves of 14 cotyledons were enclosed in tubes from
which an extremely narrow stripe of the black varnish had been scraped off.
These cleared stripes were not directed towards the window, but obliquely
to one side of the room, so that only a very little light could act on the
upper halves of the cotyledons. These 14 seedlings remained during eight
hours of exposure before a south-west window on a hazy day quite upright;
whereas all the other many free seedlings in the same pots became greatly
bowed towards the light.

We will now turn to the trials with caps made of very thin tin-foil. These
were placed at different times on the summits of 24 cotyledons, and they
extended down for a length of between .15 and .2 of an inch. The seedlings
were exposed to a lateral light for periods varying between 6 h. 30 m. and
7 h. 45 m., which sufficed to cause all the other seedlings in the same
pots to become almost rectangularly bent towards the light. They varied in
height from only .04 to 1.15 inch, but the greater number were about .75
inch. Of the 24 cotyledons with their summits thus protected, 3 became much
bent, but not in the direction of the light, and as they did not straighten
themselves through apogeotropism during the following night, either the
caps were too heavy or the plants themselves were in a weak condition; and
these three cases may be excluded. There are left for consideration 21
cotyledons; of these 17 remained all the time quite upright; the other 4
became slightly inclined to the light, but not in a degree comparable with
that of the many free seedlings in the same pots. As the glass-tubes, when
unpainted, did not prevent the cotyledons from becoming greatly bowed, it
cannot be supposed that the caps of very thin tin-foil did so, except
through the exclusion of the light. To prove that the plants had not been
injured, the caps were removed from 6 of the upright seedlings, and these
were exposed before a paraffin lamp for the same length of time as before,
and they now all became greatly curved towards the light.

As caps between .15 and .2 of an inch in depth were thus proved to be
highly efficient in preventing the cotyledons from bending towards the
light, 8 other cotyledons were protected with caps between only .06 and .12
in depth. Of these, two remained vertical, one was considerably and five
slightly curved towards the light, but far less so than the free seedlings
in the same pots.
[page 474]

Another trial was made in a different manner, namely, by bandaging with
strips of tin-foil, about .2 in breadth, the upper part, but not the actual
summit, of eight moderately young seedlings a little over half an inch in
height. The summits and the basal parts were thus left fully exposed to a
lateral light during 8 h.; an upper intermediate zone being protected. With
four of these seedlings the summits were exposed for a length of .05 inch,
and in two of them this part became curved towards the light, but the whole
lower part remained quite upright; whereas the entire length of the other
two seedlings became slightly curved towards the light. The summits of the
four other seedlings were exposed for a length of .04 inch, and of these
one remained almost upright, whilst the other three became considerably
curved towards the light. The many free seedlings in the same pots were all
greatly curved towards the light.

From these several sets of experiments, including those with the
glass-tubes, and those when the tips were cut off, we may infer that the
exclusion of light from the upper part of the cotyledons of Phalaris
prevents the lower part, though fully exposed to a lateral light, from
becoming curved. The summit for a length of .04 or .05 of an inch, though
it is itself sensitive and curves towards the light, has only a slight
power of causing the lower part to bend. Nor has the exclusion of light
from the summit for a length of .1 of an inch a strong influence on the
curvature of the lower part. On the other hand, an exclusion for a length
of between .15 and .2 of an inch, or of the whole upper half, plainly
prevents the lower and fully illuminated part from becoming curved in the
manner (see Fig. 181) which invariably occurs when a free cotyledon is
exposed to a lateral light. With very young seedlings the sensitive zone
seems to extend rather lower down relatively to their height than in older
seedlings. We must therefore conclude that when seedlings are freely
exposed to a lateral light some influence is transmitted from the upper to
the lower part, causing the latter to bend.

This conclusion is supported by what may be seen to occur on a small scale,
especially with young cotyledons, without any artificial exclusion of the
light; for they bend beneath the earth where no light can enter. Seeds of
Phalaris were covered with a layer one-fourth of an inch in thickness of
very fine sand, consisting of extremely minute grains of silex coated with
[page 475]
oxide of iron. A layer of this sand, moistened to the same degree as that
over the seeds, was spread over a glass-plate; and when the layer was .05
of an inch in thickness (carefully measured) no light from a bright sky
could be seen to pass through it, unless it was viewed through a long
blackened tube, and then a trace of light could be detected, but probably
much too little to affect any plant. A layer .1 of an inch in thickness was
quite impermeable to light, as judged by the eye aided by the tube. It may
be worth adding that the layer, when dried, remained equally impermeable to
light. This sand yielded to very slight pressure whilst kept moist, and in
this state did not contract or crack in the least. In a first trial,
cotyledons which had grown to a moderate height were exposed for 8 h.
before a paraffin lamp, and they became greatly bowed. At their bases on
the shaded side opposite to the light, well-defined, crescentic, open
furrows were formed, which (measured under a microscope with a micrometer)
were from .02 to .03 of an inch in breadth, and these had evidently been
left by the bending of the buried bases of the cotyledons towards the
light. On the side of the light the cotyledons were in close contact with
the sand, which was a very little heaped up. By removing with a sharp knife
the sand on one side of the cotyledons in the line of the light, the bent
portion and the open furrows were found to extend down to a depth of about
.1 of an inch, where no light could enter. The chords of the short buried
arcs formed in four cases angles of 11o, 13o, 15o, and 18o, with the
perpendicular. By the following morning these short bowed portions had
straightened themselves through apogeotropism.

In the next trial much younger cotyledons were similarly treated, but were
exposed to a rather obscure lateral light. After some hours, a bowed
cotyledon, .3 inch in height, had an open furrow on the shaded side .04
inch in breadth; another cotyledon, only .13 inch in height, had left a
furrow .02 inch in breadth. But the most curious case was that of a
cotyledon which had just protruded above the ground and was only .03 inch
in height, and this was found to be bowed in the direction of the light to
a depth of .2 of an inch beneath the surface. From what we know of the
impermeability of this sand to light, the upper illuminated part in these
several cases must have determined the curvature of the lower buried
portions. But an apparent cause of doubt may be suggested: as the
cotyledons are continually circumnutating, they tend to form a minute
[page 476]
crack or furrow all round their bases, which would admit a little light on
all sides; but this would not happen when they were illuminated laterally,
for we know that they quickly bend towards a lateral light, and they then
press so firmly against the sand on the illuminated side as to furrow it,
and this would effectually exclude light on this side. Any light admitted
on the opposite and shaded side, where an open furrow is formed, would tend
to counteract the curvature towards the lamp or other source of the light.
It may be added, that the use of fine moist sand, which yields easily to
pressure, was indispensable in the above experiments; for seedlings raised
in common soil, not kept especially damp, and exposed for 9 h. 30 m. to a
strong lateral light, did not form an open furrow at their bases on the
shaded side, and were not bowed beneath the surface.
Perhaps the most striking proof of the action of the upper on the lower
part of the cotyledons of Phalaris, when laterally illuminated, was
afforded by the blackened glass-tubes (before alluded to) with very narrow
stripes of the varnish scraped off on one side, through which a little
light was admitted. The breadth of these stripes or slits varied between
.01 and .02 inch (.25 and .51 mm.). Cotyledons with their upper halves
enclosed in such tubes were placed before a south-west window, in such a
position, that the scraped stripes did not directly face the window, but
obliquely to one side. The seedlings were left exposed for 8 h., before the
close of which time the many free seedlings in the same pots had become
greatly bowed towards the window. Under these circumstances, the whole
lower halves of the cotyledons, which had their summits enclosed in the
tubes, were fully exposed to the light of the sky, whilst their upper
halves received exclusively or chiefly diffused light from the room, and
this only through a very narrow slit on one side. Now, if the curvature of
the lower part had been determined by the illumination of this part, all
the cotyledons assuredly would have become curved towards the window; but
this was far from being the case. Tubes of the kind just described were
placed on several occasions over the upper halves of 27 cotyledons; 14 of
them remained all the time quite vertical; so that sufficient diffused
light did not enter through the narrow slits to produce any effect
whatever; and they behaved in the same manner as if their upper halves had
been enclosed in completely blackened tubes. The lower halves of the 13
other cotyledons became bowed
[page 477]
not directly in the line of the window, but obliquely towards it; one
pointed at an angle of only 18o, but the remaining 12 at angles varying
between 45o and 62o from the line of the window. At the commencement of the
experiment, pins had been laid on the earth in the direction towards which
the slits in the varnish faced; and in this direction alone a small amount
of diffused light entered. At the close of the experiment, 7 of the bowed
cotyledons pointed exactly in the line of the pins, and 6 of them in a line
between that of the pins and that of the window. This intermediate position
is intelligible, for any light from the sky which entered obliquely through
the slits would be much more efficient than the diffused light which
entered directly through them. After the 8 h. exposure, the contrast in
appearance between these 13 cotyledons and the many other seedlings in the
same pots, which were all (excepting the above 14 vertical ones) greatly
bowed in straight and parallel lines towards the window, was extremely
remarkable. It is therefore certain that a little weak light striking the
upper halves of the cotyledons of Phalaris, is far more potent in
determining the direction of the curvature of the lower halves, than the
full illumination of the latter during the whole time of exposure.

In confirmation of the above results, the effect of thickly painting with
Indian ink one side of the upper part of three cotyledons of Phalaris, for
a length of .2 inch from their tips, may be worth giving. These were placed
so that the unpainted surface was directed not towards the window, but a
little to one side; and they all became bent towards the unpainted side,
and from the line of the window by angles amounting to 31o, 35o, and 83o.
The curvature in this direction extended down to their bases, although the
whole lower part was fully exposed to the light from the window.

Finally, although there can be no doubt that the illumination of the upper
part of the cotyledons of Phalaris greatly affects the power and manner of
bending of the lower part, yet some observations seemed to render it
probable that the simultaneous stimulation of the lower part by light
greatly favours, or is almost necessary, for its well-marked curvature; but
our experiments were not conclusive, owing to the difficulty of excluding
light from the lower halves without mechanically preventing their
curvature.

Avena sativa.--The cotyledons of this plant become quickly bowed towards a
lateral light, exactly like those of Phalaris.
[page 478]
Experiments similar to the foregoing ones were tried, and we will give the
results as briefly as possible. They are somewhat less conclusive than in
the case of Phalaris, and this may possibly be accounted for by the
sensitive zone varying in extension, in a species so long cultivated and
variable as the common Oat. Cotyledons a little under three-quarters of an
inch in height were selected for trial: six had their summits protected
from light by tin-foil caps, .25 inch in depth, and two others by caps .3
inch in depth. Of these 8 cotyledons, five remained upright during 8 hours
of exposure, although their lower parts were fully exposed to the light all
the time; two were very slightly, and one considerably, bowed towards it.
Caps only .2 or .22 inch in depth were placed over 4 other cotyledons, and
now only one remained upright, one was slightly, and two considerably bowed
to the light. In this and the following cases all the free seedlings in the
same pots became greatly bowed to the light.

Our next trial was made with short lengths of thin and fairly transparent
quills; for glass-tubes of sufficient diameter to go over the cotyledons
would have been too heavy. Firstly, the summits of 13 cotyledons were
enclosed in unpainted quills, and of these 11 became greatly and 2 slightly
bowed to the light; so that the mere act of enclosure did not prevent the
lower part from becoming bowed. Secondly, the summits of 11 cotyledons were
enclosed in quills .3 inch in length, painted so as to be impermeable to
