sent word to the muscles to do it.

Now, you know what we mean when we say, "As quick as thought." Surely
nothing could be quicker.

You see that the brain has a great deal of work to do, for it has to
send so many orders.

There are some muscles which are moving quietly and steadily all the
time, though we take no notice of the motion.

You do not have to think about breathing, and yet the muscles work all
the time, moving your chest.

If we had to think about it every time we breathed, we should have no
time to think of any thing else.

There is one part of the brain that takes care of such work for us. It
sends the messages about breathing, and keeps the breathing muscles and
many other muscles faithfully at work. It does all this without our
needing to know or think about it at all.

Do you begin to see that your body is a busy work-shop, where many kinds
of work are being done all day and all night?

Although we lie still and sleep in the night, the breathing must go on,
and so must the work of those other organs that never stop until we
die.


OTHER WORK OF THE NERVES.

The little white nerve-threads lie smoothly side by side, making small
white cords. Each kind of message goes on its own thread, so that the
messages need never get mixed or confused.

These nerves are very delicate little messengers. They do all the
feeling for the whole body, and by means of them we have many pains and
many pleasures.

If there was no nerve in your tooth it could not ache. But if there were
no nerves in your mouth and tongue, you could not taste your food.

If there were no nerves in your hands, you might cut them and feel no
pain. But you could not feel your mother's soft, warm hand, as she laid
it on yours.

One of your first duties is the care of yourselves.

Children may say: "My father and mother take care of me." But even while
you are young, there are some ways in which no one can take care of you
but yourselves. The older you grow, the more this care will belong to
you, and to no one else.

Think of the work all the parts of the body do for us, and how they help
us to be well and happy. Certainly the least we can do is to take care
of them and keep them in good order.


CARE OF THE BRAIN AND NERVES.

As one part of the brain has to take care of all the rest of the body,
and keep every organ at work, of course it can never go to sleep itself.
If it did, the heart would stop pumping, the lungs would leave off
breathing, all other work would stop, and the body would be dead.

But there is another part of the brain which does the thinking, and this
part needs rest.

When you are asleep, you are not thinking, but you are breathing and
other work of the body is going on.

If the thinking part of the brain does not have good quiet sleep, it
will soon wear out. A worn-out brain is not easy to repair.

If well cared for, your brain will do the best of work for you for
seventy or eighty years without complaining.

The nerves are easily tired out, and they need much rest. They get tired
if we do one thing too long at a time; they are rested by a change of
work.


IS ALCOHOL GOOD FOR THE NERVES AND THE BRAIN?

Think of the wonderful work the brain is all the time doing for you!

You ought to give it the best of food to keep it in good working order.
Any drink that contains alcohol is not a food to make one strong; but is
a poison to hurt, and at last to kill.

It injures the brain and nerves so that they can not work well, and send
their messages properly. That is why the drunkard does not know what he
is about.

Newspapers often tell us about people setting houses on fire; about men
who forgot to turn the switch, and so wrecked a railroad train; about
men who lay down on the railroad track and were run over by the cars.

Often these stories end with: "The person had been drinking." When the
nerves are put to sleep by alcohol, people become careless and do not do
their work faithfully; sometimes, they can not even tell the difference
between a railroad track and a place of safety. The brain receives no
message, or the wrong one, and the person does not know what he is
doing.

You may say that all men who drink liquor do not do such terrible
things.

That is true. A little alcohol is not so bad as a great deal. But even a
little makes the head ache, and hurts the brain and nerves.

A body kept pure and strong is of great service to its owner. There are
people who are not drunkards, but who often drink a little liquor. By
this means, they slowly poison their bodies.

When sickness comes upon them, they are less able to bear it, and less
likely to get well again, than those who have never injured their bodies
with alcohol.

When a sick or wounded man is brought into the hospital, one of the
first questions asked him by the doctor is: "Do you drink?"

If he answers "Yes!" the next questions are, "What do you drink?" and
"How much?"

The answers he gives to these questions, show the doctor what chance the
man has of getting well.

A man who never drinks liquor will get well, where a drinking man would
surely die.


TOBACCO AND THE NERVES.

Why does any one wish to use tobacco?

Because many men say that it helps them, and makes them feel better.

Shall I tell you how it makes them feel better?

If a man is cold, the tobacco deadens his nerves so that he does not
feel the cold and does not take pains to make himself warmer.

If a man is tired, or in trouble, tobacco will not really rest him or
help him out of his trouble.

It only puts his nerves to sleep and helps him think that he is not
tired, and that he does not need to overcome his troubles.

It puts his nerves to sleep very much as alcohol does, and helps him to
be contented with what ought not to content him.

A boy who smokes or chews tobacco, is not so good a scholar as if he did
not use the poison. He can not remember his lessons so well.

Usually, too, he is not so polite, nor so good a boy as he otherwise
would be.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. How do the muscles know when to move?

          2. What part of you is it that thinks?

          3. What are the nerves?

          4. Where is the spinal cord?

          5. What message goes to the brain when you put
          your finger on a hot stove?

          6. What message comes back from the brain to the
          finger?

          7. What is meant by "As quick as thought"?

          8. Name some of the muscles which work without
          needing our thought.

          9. What keeps them at work?

          10. Why do not the nerve messages get mixed and
          confused?

          11. Why could you not feel, if you had no nerves?

          12. State some ways in which the nerves give us
          pain.

          13. State some ways in which they give us
          pleasure.

          14. What part of us has the most work to do?

          15. How must we keep the brain strong and well?

          16. What does alcohol do to the nerves and brain?

          17. Why does not a drunken man know what he is
          about?

          18. What causes most of the accidents we read of?

          19. Why could not the man who had been drinking
          tell the difference between a railroad track and a
          place of safety?

          20. How does the frequent drinking of a little
          liquor affect the body?

          21. How does sickness affect people who often
          drink these liquors?

          22. When a man is taken to the hospital, what
          questions does the doctor ask?

          23. What depends upon his answers?

          24. Why do many men use tobacco?

          25. How does it make them feel better?

          26. Does it really help a person who uses it?

          27. Does tobacco help a boy to be a good scholar?

          28. How does it affect his manners?

[Illustration: _Bones of the human body._]




CHAPTER IV.

WHAT IS ALCOHOL?


[Illustration: R]IPE grapes are full of juice.

This juice is mostly water, sweetened with a sugar of its own. It is
flavored with something which makes us know, the moment we taste it,
that it is grape-juice, and not cherry-juice or plum-juice.

Apples also contain water, sugar, and apple flavor; and cherries contain
water, sugar, and cherry flavor. The same is true of other fruits. They
all, when ripe, have the water and the sugar; and each has a flavor of
its own.

Ripe grapes are sometimes gathered and put into great tubs called vats.
In these the juice is squeezed out.

In some countries, this squeezing is done by bare-footed men who jump
into the vats and press the grapes with their feet.

The grape-juice is then drawn off from the skins and seeds and left
standing in a warm place.

Bubbles soon begin to rise and cover the top of it with froth. The juice
is all in motion.

[Illustration: _Picking grapes and making wine._]

If the cook had wished to use this grape-juice to make jelly, she would
say: "Now, I can not make my grape-jelly, for the grape-juice is
spoiled."


WHAT IS THIS CHANGE IN THE GRAPE-JUICE?

The sugar in the grape-juice is changing into something else. It is
turning into alcohol and a gas[A] that moves about in little bubbles in
the liquid, and rising to the top, goes off into the air. The alcohol is
a thin liquid which, mixed with the water, remains in the grape-juice.

The sugar is gone; alcohol and the bubbles of gas are left in its place.

This alcohol is a liquid poison. A little of it will harm any one who
drinks it; much of it would kill the drinker.

Ripe grapes are good food; but grape-juice, when its sugar has turned to
alcohol, is not a safe drink for any one. It is poisoned by the alcohol.


WINE.

This changed grape-juice is called wine. It is partly water, partly
alcohol, and it still has the grape flavor in it.

Wine is also made from currants, elderberries, and other fruits, in very
much the same way as from grapes.

People sometimes make it at home from the fruits that grow in their own
gardens, and think there is no alcohol in it, because they do not put
any in.

But you know that the alcohol is made in the fruit-juice itself by the
change of the sugar into alcohol and the gas.

[Illustration]

It is the nature of alcohol to make the person who takes a little of it,
in wine, or any other drink, want more and more alcohol. When one goes
on, thus taking more and more of the drinks that contain alcohol, he is
called a drunkard.

In this way wine has made many drunkards. Alcohol hurts both the body
and mind. It changes the person who drinks it. It will make a good and
kind person cruel and bad; and will make a bad person worse.

Every one who takes wine does not become a drunkard, but you are not
sure that you will not, if you drink it.

You should not drink wine, because there is alcohol in it.


CIDER.

Cider is made from apples. In a few hours after the juice is pressed out
of the apples, if it is left open to the air the sugar begins to change.

Like the sugar in the grape, it changes into alcohol and bubbles of gas.

At first, there is but little alcohol in cider, but a little of this
poison is dangerous.

More alcohol is all the time forming until in ten cups of cider there
may be one cup of alcohol. Cider often makes its drinkers ill-tempered
and cross.

Cider and wine will turn into vinegar if left in a warm place long
enough.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. What two things are in all fruit-juices?

          2. How can we tell the juice of grapes from that
          of plums?

          3. How can we tell the juice of apples from that
          of cherries?
