than those on each side of it.

Although Galileo had announced that nothing new appeared in the other
planets, yet he soon communicated to the world another discovery of no
slight interest. The enigmatical letters in which it was concealed
formed the following sentence:--

     "Cynthiae figuras aemulatur mater Amorum."

     Venus rivals the phases of the moon.

Hitherto, Galileo had observed Venus when her disc was largely
illuminated; but having directed his telescope to her when she was not
far removed from the sun, he saw her in the form of a crescent,
resembling exactly the moon at the same elongation. He continued to
observe her night after night, during the whole time that she could be
seen in the course of her revolution round the sun, and he found that
she exhibited the very same phases which resulted from her motion round
that luminary.

Galileo had long contemplated a visit to the metropolis of Italy, and he
accordingly carried his intentions into effect in the early part of the
year 1611. Here he was received with that distinction which was due to
his great talents and his extended reputation. Princes, Cardinals, and
Prelates hastened to do him honour; and even those who discredited his
discoveries, and dreaded their results, vied with the true friends of
science in their anxiety to see the intellectual wonder of the age.

In order to show the new celestial phenomena to his friends at Rome,
Galileo took with him his best telescope; and as he had discovered the
spots on the sun's surface in October or November 1610, or even
earlier,[16] he had the gratification of exhibiting them to his admiring
disciples. He accordingly erected his telescope in the Quirinal garden,
belonging to Cardinal Bandini; and in April 1611 he shewed them to his
friends in many of their most interesting variations. From their change
of position on the sun's disc, Galileo at first inferred, either that
the sun revolved about an axis, or that other planets, like Venus and
Mercury, revolved so near the sun as to appear like black spots when
they were opposite to his disc. Upon continuing his observations,
however, he saw reason to abandon this hasty opinion. He found that the
spots must be in contact with the surface of the sun,--that their
figures were irregular,--that they had different degrees of
darkness,--that one spot would often divide itself into three or
four,--that three or four spots would often unite themselves into
one,--and that all the spots revolved regularly with the sun, which
appeared to complete its revolution in about twenty-eight days.

     [16] Professor Rigaud is of opinion that Galileo had discovered the
     solar spots at an earlier period than eighteen months before May
     1612.

Previous to the invention of the telescope, spots had been more than
once seen on the sun's disc with the unassisted eye. But even if these
were of the same character as those which Galileo and others observed,
we cannot consider them as anticipations of their discovery by the
telescope. As the telescope was now in the possession of several
astronomers, Galileo began to have many rivals in discovery; but
notwithstanding the claims of Harriot, Fabricius, and Scheiner, it is
now placed beyond the reach of doubt that he was the first discoverer of
the solar spots. From the communication which I received in 1822 from
the late Dr Robertson, of Oxford,[17] it appeared that Thomas Harriot
had observed the solar spots on the 8th of December 1610; but his
manuscripts, in Lord Egremont's possession,[18] incontestably prove that
his regular observations on the spots did not commence till December 1,
1611, although he had seen the spots at the date above mentioned, and
that they were continued till the 18th of January 1613. The
observations which he has recorded are 199 in number, and the accounts
of them are accompanied with rough drawings representing the number,
position, and magnitude of the spots.[19] In the observation of Harriot,
made on the 8th December 1610, before he knew of Galileo's discovery, he
saw three spots on the sun, which he has represented in a diagram. The
sun was then 7 deg. or 8 deg. high, and there was a frost and a mist, which no
doubt acted as a darkening glass. Harriot does not apply the name of
spots to what he noticed in this observation, and he does not enumerate
it among the 199 observations above mentioned. Professor Rigaud[20]
considers it "a misapplication of terms to call such an observation a
discovery;" but, with all the respect which we feel for the candour of
this remark, we are disposed to confer on Harriot the merit of an
original discoverer of the spots on the sun.

     [17] See page 40.

     [18] These interesting MSS. I have had the good fortune of seeing
     in the possession of my much valued friend, the late Professor
     Rigaud of Oxford.

     [19] Edin. Phil. Journ. 1822, vol. vi. p. 317. See Rigaud's Life of
     Bradley, Supplement, p. 31.

     [20] Id. It., p. 37, 38.

Another candidate for the honour of discovering the spots of the sun,
was John Fabricius, who undoubtedly saw them previous to June 1611. The
dedication of the work[21] in which he has recorded his observation,
bears the date of the 13th of June 1611; and it is obvious, from the
work itself, that he had seen the spots about the end of the year 1610;
but as there is no proof that he saw them before October, we are
compelled to assign the priority of the discovery to the Italian
astronomer.

     [21] Joh. Fabricii Phrysii de Maculis in Sole observatis, et
     apparente earum cum Sole conversione, Narratio. Wittemb. 1611.

The claim of Scheiner, professor of mathematics at Ingolstadt, is more
intimately connected with the history of Galileo. This learned
astronomer having, early in 1611, turned his telescope to the sun,
necessarily discovered the spots which at that time covered his disc.
Light flying clouds happened, at the time, to weaken the intensity of
his light, so that he was able to show the spots to his pupils. These
observations were not published till January 1612; and they appeared in
the form of three letters, addressed to Mark Velser, one of the
magistrates of Augsburg, under the signature of _Appelles post Tabulam_.
Scheiner, who, many years afterwards, published an elaborate work on
the subject, adopted the same idea which had at first occurred to
Galileo--that the spots were the dark sides of planets revolving round
and near the sun.[22]

     [22] It does not appear from the history of solar observations at
     what time, and by whom, coloured glasses were first introduced for
     permitting the eye to look at the sun with impunity. Fabricius was
     obviously quite ignorant of the use of coloured glasses. He
     observed the sun when he was in the horizon, and when his
     brilliancy was impaired by the interposition of thin clouds and
     floating vapours; and he advises those who may repeat his
     observations to admit at first to the eye a small portion of the
     sun's light, till it is gradually accustomed to its full splendour.
     When the sun's altitude became considerable, Fabricius gave up his
     observations, which he often continued so long that he was scarcely
     able, for two days together, to see objects with their usual
     distinctness. Fabricius speaks of observing the sun by admitting
     his rays through a small _hole_ into a dark room, and receiving his
     image on paper; but he says nothing about a lens or a telescope
     being applied to the hole; and he does not say that he saw the
     spots of the sun in this way. Harriot also viewed the solar spots
     when the sun was near the horizon, or was visible through "thick
     layer and thin cloudes," or through thin mist. On December 21,
     1611, at a quarter past 2 P.M., he observed the spots when the sky
     was perfectly clear, but his "sight was after dim for an houre."

     Scheiner, in his "Appelles post Tabulam," describes four different
     ways of viewing the spots; one of which is by the _interposition of
     blue or green glasses_. His first method was to observe the sun
     near the horizon; the second was to view him through a transparent
     cloud; the third was to look at him through his telescope with a
     blue or a green glass of a proper thickness, and plane on both
     sides, or to use a thin blue glass when the sun was covered with a
     thin vapour or cloud; and the fourth method was to begin and
     observe the sun at his margin, till the eye gradually reached the
     middle of his disc.

On the publication of Scheiner's letters, Velser transmitted a copy of
them to his friend Galileo, with the request that he would favour him
with his opinion of the new phenomena. After some delay, Galileo
addressed three letters to Velser, in which he combated the opinions of
Scheiner on the cause of the spots. The first of these letters was dated
the 4th of May 1612;[23] but though the controversy was carried on in
the language of mutual respect and esteem, it put an end to the
friendship which had existed between the two astronomers. In these
letters Galileo showed that the spots often dispersed like vapours or
clouds; that they sometimes had a duration of only one or two days, and
at other times of thirty or forty days; that they contracted in their
breadth when they approached the sun's limb, without any diminution of
their length; that they describe circles parallel to each other; that
the monthly rotation of the sun again brings the same spots into view;
and that they are seldom seen at a greater distance than 30 deg. from the
sun's equator. Galileo likewise discovered on the sun's disc _faculae_,
or _luculi_, as they were called, which differ in no respect from the
common ones but in their being brighter than the rest of the sun's
surface.[24]

     [23] The original of this letter is in the British Museum.

     [24] See Istoria e Dimonstrazioni, intorno alle macchie solare.
     _Roma_, 1616. See Opere di Galileo, vol, v., p. 131-293.

In the last of the letters which our author addressed to Velser, and
which was written in December 1612, he recurs to his former discovery of
the elongated shape, or rather the triple structure, of Saturn. The
singular figure which he had observed in this planet had entirely
disappeared; and he evidently announces the fact to Velser, lest it
should be used by his enemies to discredit the accuracy of his
observations. "Looking on Saturn," says he, "within these few days, I
found it solitary, without the assistance of its accustomed stars, and,
in short, perfectly round and defined like Jupiter; and such it still
remains. Now, what can be said of so strange a metamorphosis? Are the
two smaller stars consumed like the spots on the sun? Have they suddenly
vanished and fled? or has Saturn devoured his own children? or was the
appearance indeed fraud and illusion, with which the glasses have for so
long a time mocked me, and so many others who have often observed with
me? Now, perhaps, the time is come to revive the withering hopes of
those who, guided by more profound contemplations, have followed all the
fallacies of the new observations, and recognised their impossibilities.
I cannot resolve what to say in a chance so strange, so new, and so
unexpected; the shortness of the time, the unexampled occurrence, the
weakness of my intellect, and the terror of being mistaken, have greatly
confounded me." Although Galileo struggled to obtain a solution of this
mystery, yet he had not the good fortune to succeed. He imagined that
the two smaller stars would reappear, in consequence of the supposed
revolution of the planet round its axis; but the discovery of the ring
of Saturn, and of the obliquity of its plane to the ecliptic, was
necessary to explain the phenomena which were so perplexing to our
author.

The ill health to which Galileo was occasionally subject, and the belief
that the air of Florence was prejudicial to his complaints, induced him
to spend much of his time at Selve, the villa of his friend Salviati.
This eminent individual had ever been the warmest friend of Galileo, and
seems to have delighted in drawing round him the scientific genius of
the age. He was a member of the celebrated Lyncaean Society, founded by
Prince Frederigo Cesi; and though he is not known as the author of any
important discovery, yet he has earned, by his liberality to science, a
glorious name, which will be indissolubly united with the immortal
destiny of Galileo.

The subject of floating bridges having been discussed at one of the
scientific parties which had assembled at the house of Salviati, a
difference of opinion arose respecting the influence of the shape of
bodies on their disposition to float or to sink in a fluid. Contrary to
the general opinion, Galileo undertook to prove that it depended on
other causes; and he was thus led to compose his discourse on floating
bodies,[25] which was published in 1612, and dedicated to Cosmo de
Medici. This work contains many ingenious experiments, and much acute
reasoning in support of the true principles of hydrostatics; and it is
now chiefly remarkable as a specimen of the sagacity and intellectual
power of its author. Like all his other works, it encountered the most
violent opposition; and Galileo was more than once summoned into the
field to repel the aggressions of his ignorant and presumptuous
opponents. The first attack upon it was made by Ptolemy Nozzolini, in a
letter to Marzemedici, Archbishop of Florence;[26] and to this Galileo
replied in a letter addressed to his antagonist.[27] A more elaborate
examination of it was published by Lodovico delle Colombe, and another
by M. Vincenzo di Grazia. To these attacks, a minute and overwhelming
answer was printed in the name of Benedetti Castelli, the friend and
pupil of Galileo; but it was discovered, some years after Galileo's
death, that he was himself the author of this work.[28]

     [25] Discorso intorno alle cose che stanno in su l'acqua, o che in
     quella si muovono. Opere di Galileo, vol. ii. pp. 165-311.

     [26] Opere di Galileo, vol. ii. pp. 355-367.

     [27] Ibid. 367-390.

     [28] These three treatises occupy the whole of the third volume of
     the Opere di Galileo.




CHAPTER IV.

     _Galileo treats his opponents with severity and sarcasm--He is
     aided by the sceptics of the day--The Church party the most
     powerful--Galileo commences the attack, and is answered by Caccini,
     a Dominican--Galileo's Letter to the Grand Duchess of Tuscany, in
     support of the motion of the Earth and the stability of the Sun---
     Galileo visits Rome--Is summoned before the Inquisition, and
     renounces his opinions as heretical--The Inquisition denounces the
     Copernican System--Galileo has an audience of the Pope, but still
     maintains his opinions in private society--Proposes to find out the
     Longitude at Sea by means of Jupiter's Satellites--His negociation
     on this subject with the Court of Spain--Its failure--He is unable
     to observe the three Comets of 1618, but is involved in the
     controversy to which they gave rise._


The current of Galileo's life had hitherto flowed in a smooth and
unobstructed channel. He had now attained the highest objects of earthly
ambition. His discoveries had placed him at the head of the great men of
the age; he possessed a professional income far beyond his wants, and
even beyond his anticipations; and, what is still dearer to a
philosopher, he enjoyed the most perfect leisure for carrying on and
completing his discoveries. The opposition which these discoveries
encountered, was to him more a subject for triumph than for sorrow.
Prejudice and ignorance were his only enemies; and if they succeeded for
a while in harassing his march, it was only to lay a foundation for
fresh achievements. He who contends for truths which he has himself been
permitted to discover, may well sustain the conflict in which
presumption and error are destined to fall. The public tribunal may
neither be sufficiently pure nor enlightened to decide upon the issue;
but he can appeal to posterity, and reckon with confidence on "its sure
decree."

The ardour of Galileo's mind, the keenness of his temper, his clear
perception of truth, and his inextinguishable love of it, combined to
exasperate and prolong the hostility of his enemies. When argument
failed to enlighten their judgment, and reason to dispel their
prejudices, he wielded against them his powerful weapons of ridicule
and sarcasm; and in this unrelenting warfare, he seems to have forgotten
that Providence had withheld from his enemies those very gifts which he
had so liberally received. He who is allowed to take the start of his
species, and to penetrate the veil which conceals from common minds the
mysteries of nature, must not expect that the world will be patiently
dragged at the chariot wheels of his philosophy. Mind has its inertia as
well as matter; and its progress to truth can only be insured by the
gradual and patient removal of the obstructions which surround it.

The boldness--may we not say the recklessness--with which Galileo
insisted upon making proselytes of his enemies, served but to alienate
them from the truth. Errors thus assailed speedily entrench themselves
in general feelings, and become embalmed in the virulence of the
passions. The various classes of his opponents marshalled themselves for
their mutual defence. The Aristotelian professors, the temporising
Jesuits, the political churchmen, and that timid but respectable body
who at all times dread innovation, whether it be in religion or in
science, entered into an alliance against the philosophical tyrant who
threatened them with the penalties of knowledge.

The party of Galileo, though weak in numbers, was not without power and
influence. He had trained around him a devoted band, who idolised his
genius and cherished his doctrines. His pupils had been appointed to
several of the principal professorships in Italy. The enemies of
religion were on this occasion united with the Christian philosopher;
and there were, even in these days, many princes and nobles who had felt
the inconvenience of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and who secretly
abetted Galileo in his crusade against established errors.

Although these two parties had been long dreading each others power, and
reconnoitring each others position, yet we cannot exactly determine
which of them hoisted the first signal for war. The church party,
particularly its highest dignitaries, were certainly disposed to rest on
the defensive. Flanked on one side by the logic of the schools, and on
the other by the popular interpretation of Scripture, and backed by the
strong arm of the civil power, they were not disposed to interfere with
the prosecution of science, however much they may have dreaded its
influence. The philosophers, on the contrary, united the zeal of
innovators with that firmness of purpose which truth alone can inspire.
Victorious in every contest, they were flushed with success, and they
panted for a struggle in which they knew they must triumph.

In this state of warlike preparation Galileo addressed a letter, in
1613, to his friend and pupil, the Abbe Castelli, the object of which
was to prove that the Scriptures were not intended to teach us science
and philosophy. Hence he inferred, that the language employed in the
sacred volume in reference to such subjects should be interpreted only
in its common acceptation; and that it was in reality as difficult to
reconcile the Ptolemaic as the Copernican system to the expressions
which occur in the Bible.

A demonstration was about this time made by the opposite party, in the
person of Caccini, a Dominican friar, who made a personal attack upon
Galileo from the pulpit. This violent ecclesiastic ridiculed the
astronomer and his followers, by addressing them sarcastically in the
sacred language of Scripture--"Ye men of _Galilee_, why stand ye here
looking up into heaven?" But this species of warfare was disapproved of
even by the church; and Luigi Maraffi, the general of the Dominicans,
not only apologised to Galileo, who had transmitted to him a formal
complaint against Caccini, but expressed the acuteness of his own
feelings on being implicated in the "brutal conduct of thirty or forty
thousand monks."

From the character of Caccini, and the part which he afterwards played
in the persecution of Galileo, we can scarcely avoid the opinion that
his attack from the pulpit was intended as a snare for the unwary
philosopher. It roused Galileo from his wonted caution; and stimulated,
no doubt, by the nature of the answer which he received from Maraffi, he
published a long letter of seventy pages, defending and illustrating his
former views respecting the influence of scriptural language on the two
contending systems. As if to give the impress of royal authority to this
new appeal, he addressed it to Christian, Grand Duchess of Tuscany, the
mother of Cosmo; and in this form it seems to have excited a new
interest, as if it had expressed the opinion of the grand ducal family.
These external circumstances gave additional weight to the powerful and
unanswerable reasoning which this letter contains; and it was scarcely
possible that any man, possessed of a sound mind, and willing to learn
the truth, should refuse his assent to the judicious views of our
author. He expresses his belief that the Scriptures were designed to
instruct mankind respecting their salvation, and that the faculties of
our minds were given us for the purpose of investigating the phenomena
of nature. He considers Scripture and nature as proceeding from the same
divine author, and, therefore, incapable of speaking a different
language; and he points out the absurdity of supposing that professors
of astronomy will shut their eyes to the phenomena which they discover
in the heavens, or will refuse to believe those deductions of reason
which appeal to their judgment with all the power of demonstration. He
supports these views by quotations from the ancient fathers; and he
refers to the dedication of Copernicus's own work to the Roman Pontiff,
Paul III., as a proof that the Pope himself did not regard the new
system of the world as hostile to the sacred writings. Copernicus, on
the contrary, tells his Holiness, that the reason of inscribing to him
his new system was, that the authority of the Pontiff might put to
silence the calumnies of some individuals, who attacked it by arguments
drawn from passages of Scripture twisted for their own purpose.

It was in vain to meet such reasoning by any other weapons than those of
the civil power. The enemies of Galileo saw that they must either crush
the dangerous innovation, or allow it the fullest scope; and they
determined upon an appeal to the inquisition. Lorini, a monk of the
Dominican order, had already denounced to this body Galileo's letter to
Castelli; and Caccini, bribed by the mastership of the convent of St
Mary of Minerva, was invited to settle at Rome for the purpose of
embodying the evidence against Galileo.

Though these plans had been carried on in secret, yet Galileo's
suspicions were excited; and he obtained leave from Cosmo to go to Rome
about the end of 1615.[29] Here he was lodged in the palace of the
Grand Duke's ambassador, and kept up a constant correspondence with the
family of his patron at Florence; but, in the midst of this external
splendour, he was summoned before the inquisition to answer for the
heretical doctrines which he had published. He was charged with
maintaining the motion of the earth, and the stability of the sun--with
teaching this doctrine to his pupils--with corresponding on the subject
with several German mathematicians--and with having published it, and
attempted to reconcile it to Scripture, in his letters to Mark Velser in
1612. The inquisition assembled to consider these charges on the 25th of
February 1615; and it was decreed that Galileo should be enjoined by
Cardinal Bellarmine to renounce the obnoxious doctrines, and to pledge
himself that he would neither teach, defend, nor publish them in future.
In the event of his refusing to acquiesce in this sentence, it was
decreed that he should be thrown into prison. Galileo did not hesitate
to yield to this injunction. On the day following, the 26th of February,
he appeared before Cardinal Bellarmine, to renounce his heretical
opinions; and, having declared that he abandoned the doctrine of the
earth's motion, and would neither defend nor teach it, in his
conversation or in his writings, he was dismissed from the bar of the
inquisition.

     [29] It is said that Galileo was cited to appear at Rome on this
     occasion; and the opinion is not without foundation.

Having thus disposed of Galileo, the inquisition conceived the design of
condemning the whole system of Copernicus as heretical. Galileo, with
more hardihood than prudence, remained at Rome for the purpose of giving
his assistance in frustrating this plan; but there is reason to think
that he injured by his presence the very cause which he meant to
support. The inquisitors had determined to put down the new opinions;
and they now inserted among the prohibited books Galileo's letters to
Castelli and the Grand Duchess, Kepler's epitome of the Copernican
theory, and Copernicus's own work on the revolutions of the heavenly
bodies.

Notwithstanding these proceedings, Galileo had an audience of the Pope,
Paul V., in March 1616. He was received very graciously, and spent
nearly an hour with his Holiness. When they were about to part, the Pope
assured Galileo, that the congregation were not disposed to receive upon
light grounds any calumnies which might be propagated by his enemies,
and that, as long as he occupied the papal chair, he might consider
himself as safe.

These assurances were no doubt founded on the belief that Galileo would
adhere to his pledges; but so bold and inconsiderate was he in the
expression of his opinions, that even in Rome he was continually engaged
in controversial discussions. The following very interesting account of
these disputes is given by Querenghi, in a letter to the Cardinal
D'Este:--

"Your eminence would be delighted with Galileo if you heard him holding
forth, as he often does, in the midst of fifteen or twenty, all
violently attacking him, sometimes in one house, sometimes in another.
But he is armed after such fashion that he laughs all of them to scorn;
and even if the novelty of his opinions prevents entire persuasion, he
at least convicts of emptiness most of the arguments with which his
adversaries endeavour to overwhelm him. He was particularly admirable on
Monday last in the house of Signor Frederico Ghisilieri; and what
especially pleased me was, that before replying to the contrary
arguments, he amplified and enforced them with new grounds of great
plausibility, so as to leave his adversaries in a more ridiculous
plight, when he afterwards overturned them all."

The discovery of Jupiter's satellites suggested to Galileo a new method
of finding the longitude at sea. Philip III. had encouraged astronomers
to direct their attention to this problem, by offering a reward for its
solution; and in those days, when new discoveries in science were
sometimes rejected as injurious to mankind, it was no common event to
see a powerful sovereign courting the assistance of astronomers in
promoting the commercial interests of his empire. Galileo seems to have
regarded the solution of this problem as an object worthy of his
ambition; and he no doubt anticipated the triumph which he would obtain
over his enemies, if the Medicean stars, which they had treated with
such contempt, could be made subservient to the great interests of
mankind. During his residence at Rome in 1615 and 1616, Galileo had
communicated his views on this subject to the Comte di Lemos, the
Viceroy of Naples, who had presided over the council of the Spanish
Indies. This nobleman advised him to apply to the Spanish minister the
Duke of Lerma; and, through the influence of the Grand Duke Cosmo, his
ambassador at the court of Madrid was engaged to manage the affair. The
anxiety of Galileo on this subject was singularly great. He assured the
Tuscan ambassador that, in order to accomplish this object, "he was
ready to leave all his comforts, his country, his friends, and his
family, to cross over into Spain, and to stay as long as he might be
wanted at Seville or at Lisbon, or wherever it might be convenient to
communicate a knowledge of his method." The lethargy of the Spanish
court seems to have increased with the enthusiasm of Galileo; and though
the negotiations were occasionally revived for ten or twelve years, yet
no steps were taken to bring them to a close. This strange
procrastination has been generally ascribed to jealousy or indifference
on the part of Spain; but Nelli, one of Galileo's biographers, declares,
on the authority of Florentine records, that Cosmo had privately
requested from the government the privilege of sending annually to the
Spanish Indies two Leghorn merchantmen free of duty, as a compensation
for the loss of Galileo!

The failure of this negotiation must have been a source of extreme
mortification to the high spirit and sanguine temperament of Galileo.
He had calculated, however, too securely on his means of putting the new
method to a successful trial. The great imperfection of the time-keepers
of that day, and the want of proper telescopes, would have baffled him
in all his efforts, and he would have been subject to a more serious
mortification from the failure and rejection of his plan, than that
which he actually experienced from the avarice of his patron, or the
indifference of Spain. Even in the present day, no telescope has been
invented which is capable of observing at sea the eclipses of Jupiter's
satellites; and though this method of finding the longitude has great
advantages on shore, yet it has been completely abandoned at sea, and
superseded by easier and more correct methods.

In the year 1618, when no fewer than _three_ comets visited our system,
and attracted the attention of all the astronomers of Europe, Galileo
was unfortunately confined to his bed by a severe illness; but, though
he was unable to make a single observation upon these remarkable bodies,
he contrived to involve himself in the controversies which they
occasioned. Marco Guiducci, an astronomer of Florence, and a friend of
Galileo, had delivered a discourse on comets before the Florentine
Academy. The heads of this discourse, which was published in 1619,[30]
were supposed to have been communicated to him by Galileo, and this
seems to have been universally admitted during the controversy to which
it gave rise. The opinion maintained in this treatise, that comets are
nothing but meteors which occasionally appear in our atmosphere, like
halos and rainbows, savours so little of the sagacity of Galileo that we
should be disposed to question its paternity. His inability to partake
in the general interest which these three comets excited, and to employ
his powerful telescope in observing their phenomena, and their
movements, might have had some slight share in the formation of an
opinion which deprived them of their importance as celestial bodies.
But, however this may have been, the treatise of Guiducci afforded a
favourable point of attack to Galileo's enemies, and the dangerous task
was entrusted to Horatio Grassi, a learned Jesuit, who, in a work
entitled _The Astronomical and Philosophical Balance_, criticised the
discourse on comets, under the feigned name of Lotario Sarsi.

     [30] Discorso delle Comete. Printed in the Opere di Galileo, vol.
     vi., pp. 117-191.

Galileo replied to this attack in a volume entitled _Il Saggiatore_, or
_The Assayer_, which, owing to the state of his health, was not
published till the autumn of 1623.[31] This work was written in the form
of a letter to Virginio Cesarini, a member of the Lyncaean Academy, and
master of the chamber to Urban VIII., who had just ascended the papal
throne. It was dedicated to the Pontiff himself, and has been long
celebrated among literary men for the beauty of its language, though it
is doubtless one of the least important of Galileo's writings.

     [31] Printed in the Opere di Galileo, vol. vi., pp. 191-571.




CHAPTER V.

     _Urban VIII., Galileo's friend, raised to the Pontificate--Galileo
     goes to Rome to offer his congratulations--The Pope loads Galileo
     with presents, and promises a Pension to his Son--Galileo in
     pecuniary difficulties, owing to the death of his patron,
     Cosmo--Galileo again rashly attacks the Church, notwithstanding the
     Pope's kindness--He composes his System of the World, to
     demonstrate the Copernican System--Artfully obtains a license to
     print it--Nature of the work--Its influence on the public mind--The
     Pope resolves on suppressing it--Galileo summoned before the
     Inquisition--His Trial--His Defence--His formal abjuration of his
     opinions--Observations on his conduct--The Pope shews great
     indulgence to Galileo, who is allowed to return to his own house at
