He had time for meetings and was allowed to go to them--the anger rose
slowly like a swelling bubble from the hard core of his stomach. Then he
realized that Mason had stopped talking and was looking at him.

"Milt, you look glum tonight. Is there-- Why not have supper with me,
and we'll take in the movie in the lounge?"

"I've eaten already." Collins was on his feet. He forced a, "Thanks
anyway. See you tomorrow. I'm--" and he was gone.

As he strode angerly across the quadrangle Mason's words and cheerful
attitude rankled in his mind. The gravel of the walk spurted from under
his shoes, and the night air was clear and cool. It was good at least to
feel something other than despair again, even anger.

But once in his study with its attached bedroom and bath that made up
his living quarters, he sank to the couch near his desk, all of the
fight gone. He needed a drink. Today all the irritations, tensions, and
suspicions of the past months seemed to close in on him. His work was
going badly. Perhaps seeing Mason had brought it to a head. The fifth of
bourbon in the bottom desk drawer was partly gone from the party last
month. He took a swallow neat, and the fire of the liquid burned and
clawed its way down his throat and spread with blossoming warmth in his
stomach.

Kicking off his shoes and loosening his tie he leaned back with the
bottle on the floor beside him.

Later in the evening when the early clarity of thought had left him and
his mind moved disjointedly in and out of seemingly brilliant, emotional
solutions to his problem, he knew he must have a showdown. Lying back on
the couch he drifted into sleep determined to have it out with Gordon in
the morning--resign if necessary.

                 *       *       *       *       *

The momentary pause of lighting his cigarette gave Collins a chance
to decide where to start, as he sat across from Gordon. The Division
Administrator was older with a heavy-jowled, close shaven face, and he
waited patiently for Collins to speak.

"Dr. Gordon, I am having a great deal of difficulty in making an
adjustment both in my work and in my personal relations here at Fair
Oaks, and last night I realized that I would have to talk to you about
it."

Gordon's face changed slightly, his eyebrows rising almost
imperceptibly.

"So, what ... how do you mean, Milt?"

Use of the first name--the familiar approach thought
Collins--administrative technique number blank blank dash blank.

"Dr. Gordon, these security measures we are under, the difficulty of
publishing, of getting to scientific meetings, the problem of getting
furloughs, lack of knowledge of what is going on in my own field, it's
just a little too much. It's personally irritating, but it greatly
hampers my work as well. Frankly, I'm against the entire security
program as it now stands. If it isn't stopped research will ... well,
simply be impossible. Free interchange of information is essential to--"
His fingers were gripping the arms of his chair.

"Yes, of course, Milt, but corny as it sounds there is a war on you
know. Oh, not a war with military weapons--yet, but a cold war of
science and engineering, a struggle for supremacy in many fields of
knowledge. If information of our work leaks out, gets to the enemy, we
might as well not do that work. We can't be too careful."

"I agree, but it goes too far." He leaned forward. "My private mail is
read, and on my last furlough I am certain I was watched from the time I
left the gates out there until I returned, and I don't like it. I can't
prove it, but-- That's getting to the point that life's not worth
while."

"Come now, Milt, don't you think you're taking this a little too
seriously? You're getting stale, overwrought. You need a fresh point of
view. Lots of our people feel as you do at one time or another, but most
of us learn to live with these necessary regulations, and do our work in
spite of them. Let me make a suggestion, relax, take a little time off,
develop a hobby. Why not do some reading in a field of science other
than your own. It's good for you. Several of the people here are doing
