
"You're junior to all the others, for one thing. And besides, you'll
still be around to see Boy America grow up."

"Boy America?"

"Each year there will be a new contest; a boy the first year, a girl the
second and so on. You'll have to appear on colorvision of course. It
will be a nice change for you, and good for the Laboratory too! New York
is a grand town for a vacation."

       *       *       *       *       *

"New York is a grand town for a vacation," George thought bitterly, as
he parried the reporters' persistent questions in the lobby of
Coloraudio System a week later.

"Say Doc, what about this super-female from Texas," one needler shouted
above the babble.

"So what about her?" George said gruffly.

"Senator Bragg says she should be the one selected for Mother America."

"Look, friend, Senator Bragg is a Texan and a politician. Naturally he
wants his state to have the honor. I'll pick the one I think best
qualified!"

"Yeah, Doc, we know. But what is this super-female gag anyway?"

"Some women have more female sex genes than others. She happens to have
the most ever reported to the Genetic Registry. Has the Senator seen
her?"

"He didn't say."

"He should take a look sometime. She's five feet five, one hundred and
sixty pounds and looks like a Texas longhorn, without the horns." He
brushed past the reporter. "You got any more bright ideas?"

A New York reporter pulled on his coat sleeve. Annoyed by their
persistence Turner shrugged free.

"Doctor Turner," the man said. "What do you think of this idea of using
the Man from Mars as the male donor?"

"You mean Captain Jack Harmon of the Space Force?"

"Yes. He's in town for the big parade right now."

"Look, we can't tell you who the donor will be. It's against the law,
remember?" Turner quoted the rule, "Under Section 48b, single females
may bear children if they wish, when authorized by law, but are not
allowed to pick the donor. He must remain anonymous. The local Genetics
Panel does the choosing. Besides, Harmon has been in space for months.
Who knows what changes there may be in his sex glands."

They reached the conference room and entered. The Dee Lish
representative looked at his watch and raised his hands.

"Gentlemen, no more questions please. We have a program on the air
tonight and Doctor Turner has to be prepared." When the room cleared he
turned to George. "Doctor, will you be ready to name the winner on
tonight's program?"

Turner shook his head. "You know I've interviewed all the finalists but
one, Miss Gloria Manson. Until I see her I can't decide. I haven't
talked to her at all but her press agent promised he would have her here
this afternoon."

"That's Gloria Manson the actress-dramatist?"

"Yes, the one who wrote _The Canals of Mars_ and takes the female lead."

"Roaring rockets! If she wins what a blastoff that will be."

"I don't understand."

"We have arranged with the Mayor of New York that the winner will ride
with Captain Jack Harmon tomorrow in the big parade celebrating his
return from Mars. And Miss Manson is the star in a hilarious hit about
space. What could be better?"

"To stop the whole damn foolishness altogether," said George gloomily
and ignored the hurt look on the press agent's face.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were getting up to leave when the door burst open and slammed
against the wall. A tall, beautifully dressed and shaped brunette
brushed aside a little man who was trying to talk to her and strode into
the room. Her green eyes narrowed like a cat's after a bird.

"Which of you is the geneticist?" she demanded, and then to George, "You
... you must be ... you aren't dressed like a business man. Your suit is
five years out of style."

Abashed, George looked at himself. "What's wrong with it?"

"You'd never understand and I haven't time to tell you. What I want to
know is, who gave you the right to use my name in this silly Mother
America contest. And you," she turned on the Dee Lish agent, "quit
gawping at me. I'm not going to blast off. Who are you anyway?"

"Miss Manson, please!" The little man was in front of her again. "If the
reporters hear about this ..."

"Oh shut up, Harry! All right, Doctor, what's your excuse?"

George rallied and attacked. "I haven't any, Miss Manson. I didn't ask
for your name. It was submitted to me as a possibility from the Dee
