his webbing, and stood up.

"Take over, Mr. Marsden," he said. "Lay a course for Parth."

"Aye, sir," I replied, slipping into the chair and fastening the web. I
slipped the helmet on my head and instantly I was a part of the ship.
It's a strange feeling, this synthesis of man and metal that makes a
fighting ship the metallic extension of the Commander's will. I was
conscious of every man on duty. What they saw I saw, what they heard I
heard, through the magic of modern electronics. The only thing missing
was that I couldn't feel what they felt, which perhaps was a mercy
considering the condition of the crew. Using the sensor circuits in the
command helmet, I let my perception roam through the ship, checking the
engines, the gun crews, the navigation board, the galley--all the
manifold stations of a fighting ship. Everything was secure, the ship
was clean and trimmed, the generators were producing their megawatts of
power without a hitch, and the converters were humming contentedly,
keeping us in the blue as our speed built to fantastic levels.

I checked the course, noted it was true, set the controls on standby and
relaxed, half dozing in the chair as Lume after Lume dropped astern with
monotonous regularity.

An hour passed and Halloran came up to relieve me. With a sigh of relief
I surrendered the chair and headset. The unconscious strain of being in
rapport with ship and crew didn't hit me until I was out of the chair.
But when it did, I felt like something was crushing me flat. Not that I
didn't expect it, but the "Lachesis" was worse than the "Clotho" had
ever been.

I had barely hit my couch when General Quarters sounded. I smothered a
curse as I pounded up the companionway to my station at the bridge.
Chase was there, stopwatch in hand, counting the seconds.

"Set!" Halloran barked.

"Fourteen seconds," Chase said. "Not bad. Tell the crew well done." He
put the watch in his pocket and walked away.

I picked up the annunciator mike and pushed the button. "Skipper says
well done," I said.

"He got ten seconds out of us once last trip," Halloran said. "And he's
been trying to repeat that fluke ever since. Bet you a munit to an 'F'
ration that he'll be down with the section chief trying to shave off
another second or two. Hey!--what's that--oh ..." He looked at me.
"Disturbance in Cth yellow, straight down--shall we go?"

"Stop ship," I ordered. "Sound general quarters." There was no
deceleration. We merely swapped ends as the alarm sounded, applied full
power and stopped. That was the advantage of Cth--no inertia. We
backtracked for three seconds and held in middle blue.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What's going on?" Chase demanded as he came up from below. His eyes
raked the instruments. "Why are we stopped?"

"Disturbance in Cth yellow, sir," I said. "We're positioned above it."

"Very good, Mr. Marsden." He took the spare helmet from the Exec's
chair, clapped it on, fiddled with the controls for a moment, nodded,
and took the helmet off. "Secure and resume course," he said. "That's
the 'Amphitrite'--fleet supply and maintenance. One of our people."

"You sure, sir?" I asked, and then looked at the smug grin on Halloran's
face and wished I hadn't asked.

"Of course," Chase said. "She's a three converter job running at full
output. Since the Rebels have no three converter ships, she has to be
one of ours. And since she's running at full output and only in Cth
yellow, it means she's big, heavy, and awkward--which means a
maintenance or an ammunition supply ship. There's an off phase beat in
her number two converter that gives a twenty cycle pulse to her pattern.
And the only heavy ship in the fleet with this pattern is 'Amphitrite.'
You see?"

I saw--with respect. "You know all the heavies like that, sir?" I asked.

"Not all of them--but I'd like to. It's as much a part of a scoutship
commander's work to know our own ships as those of the enemy."

"Could that trace be a Rebel ruse?"

"Not likely--travelling in the yellow. A ship would be cold meat this
far inside our perimeter. And besides, there's no Rebel alive who can
tune a converter like a Navy mechanic."

"You sure?" I persisted.

"I'm sure. But take her down if you wish."

I did. And it was the "Amphitrite."

"I served on her for six months," Chase said drily as we went back
through the components. I understood his certainty now. A man has a
feeling for ships if he's a good officer. But it was a trait I'd never
expected in Chase. I gave the orders and we resumed our band and speed.
Chase looked at me.

"You acted correctly, Mr. Marsden," he said. "Something I would hardly
expect, but something I was glad to see."

"I served under Andy Royce," I reminded him.

"I know," Chase replied. "That's why I'm surprised." He turned away
before I could think of an answer that would combine insolence and
respect for his rank. "Keep her on course, Mr. Halloran," he tossed over
his shoulder as he went out.

We kept on course--high and hard despite a couple of disturbances that
lumbered by underneath us. Once I made a motion to stop ship and check,
but Halloran shook his head.

"Don't do it, sir," he warned.

"Why not?"

"You heard the Captain's orders. He's a heller for having them obeyed.
Besides, they might be Rebs--and we might get hurt shooting at them.
We'll just report their position and approximate course--and keep on
travelling. Haskins is on the Dirac right now." Halloran's voice was
sarcastic.

I didn't like the sound of it, and said so.

"Well, sir--we won't lose them entirely," Halloran said comfortingly.
"Some cruiser will investigate them. Chances are they're ours
anyway--and if they aren't there's no sense in us risking our nice shiny
skin stopping them--even though we could take them like Lundy took
Koromaja. Since the book doesn't say we have to investigate, we won't."
His voice was bitter again.

At 0840 hours on the fourth day out, my annunciator buzzed. "Sir," the
talker's voice came over the intercom, "Lieutenants Marsden and Allyn
are wanted in the Captain's quarters."

       *       *       *       *       *

