droughts had increased with the years, and before Omega had reached
middle-life all rain had ceased to fall. The atmosphere became so rare,
even near the ground, that it was difficult for the people with the aid
of their machines to draw sufficient oxygen and nitrogen from it to
prepare the food which had been man's principal sustenance for ages.

Gradually the weaker peoples had succumbed. But the remnants of the
nations gathered about the receding waters, all foreseeing the end, but
all determined to defer it as long as possible. There was no recourse.
For ages before Omega was born the nations, knowing that the earth was
drying up, had fought one another for the privilege of migrating to
another planet to fight its inhabitants for its possession. The battle
had been so bitterly contested that two-thirds of the combatants were
slain. By the aid of their space-cars the victors colonized other
planets in our solar system leaving the vanquished on earth to shift for
themselves. There was nothing for them to do but to fight on and await
the end, for no space-car that man had ever devised was able to
penetrate the cold, far-reaches of space. Only among the family of our
own sun could he navigate his ships. And now, like the earth, every
member of that once glorious family was dead or dying. For millions of
years, Mars, his ruddy glow gone forever, had rolled through space, the
tomb of a mighty civilization. The ashes of Venus were growing cold.
Life on Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn already was in the throes of
dissolution, and the cold, barren wastes of Uranus and Neptune always
had forbidden man.

So it seemed that the name, Omega, had been fittingly bestowed. More
than ever the stark truth made him shudder with apprehension, and he
felt that only the coming of Alpha would give him strength to carry on.

"Now we must make ready for Alpha," said Omega, even while thoughts of
the sea-monster chilled his heart. "We will make our servants prepare
the way. Here in this valley must be born a new race of men. Life must
come from death. Come, Thalma."

       *       *       *       *       *

She smiled back at him, reassured by his confident manner, and together
they entered a lower compartment of the ship. This compartment contained
the servants of which Omega had spoken--divers machinery and other
marvels of man's construction. Omega touched several buttons and a
section of the ship's hull rolled aside. He pressed other buttons and
whirled wheels. Then great sections of mirror slid out into the air and
without apparent direction or control they ranged themselves far up on a
steep hillside. Yet all were under perfect control. With invisible,
atomic rays Omega made all do his bidding. For countless centuries man
had mastered the atom, divided it, harnessed its electrons. Following
the discoveries of the great French scientist, Becquerel, man had
learned that the potential energy of all atoms--especially that of
radium--is almost limitless. And as the disintegration of the atom
carries an electrical discharge, man had learned to control this energy.
Omega's machines, utilizing atoms from everywhere, even the ether, split
them by radio-activity through electromagnetic waves, and utilized the
energy of their electrons which always move in fixed orbits. There being
forty radio-active substances, Omega took advantage of them all, and
equalizing the atomic weight of the atoms--whether those around a
hydrogen nucleus or a helium nucleus--he broke the atoms down and
directed the charges of their electrons. Then his motors amplified the
discharges and, through the medium of an electric current, projected
them in the form of invisible atomic rays which he could control and
direct against any object and sustain and move at will by means of
oscillating currents.

Soon upon the hillside, perfectly arranged and adjusted, appeared a
giant, parabolic, refracting mirror with which he could obtain a view of
any portion of the earth's surface by sending vibrating currents around
the world and reproducing impressions already recorded on the ether, on
the surface of the mirror. And beneath its center was a receiver,
through which he might have heard the minutest sound around the world,
had there been any to hear.

The small, atomic motors--which drew their energy both from hydrogen
nuclei, the ether of space and the radio-active substances of all
metals--now were placed on the hillside near the great mirror. There
motors were capable of creating and focusing light, without bulb or
other container, whenever and wherever needed. All were operated with
scarcely any effort by Omega.

In a measure it seemed strange that the Greek alphabet and all the
classics of the ancients had survived antiquity. But the latest
inventions of man explained it all. For man with his machines had
reached far back into the shadowy past and proved the immortality of all
thought and action. All the records of history, all the triumphs and
defeats, the joys and sorrows and aspirations of humanity, came out of
the past and marched across the screen of his historical recorder. As
nothing is ever lost, all sounds and impressions occurring on earth
since the dawn of its creation, being already impressed on the sensitive
plastic and all-pervading ether, the same as a photograph is recorded on
its film or plate, man had developed a machine for drawing on these
impressions until at will the history of the world was before him. Even
the varied life of the ancients came out of the past. Saints and
sinners, slaves and masters mingled. Confucius sat before him in
humility; Guatama counseled his followers to be humble; Christ died upon
the cross. Warriors and statesmen shouted their triumphs and bewailed
their defeats. Philosophers expounded their wisdom and Socrates drank
the hemlock. Hannibal and Caesar and Alexander fought their battles,
and Napoleon marched gory and unafraid from Austerlitz to Waterloo. All
came back at the call of Omega's science.

       *       *       *       *       *

As has been stated it was a giant craft on which Omega and Thalma had
come to this last retreat of man. Within its interior were all the
latest marvels of man's ingenuity and skill. These instruments of almost
supernatural power not only reached back into the past but also
penetrated the future. There was a great atomic-electric motor used in
creating and controlling climate as long as there was any to control.
Sending forth electromagnetic waves it massed and directed the
atmospheric pressure, sending heat waves here, cold ones there, thus
causing droughts and rainfall at will. But now, as with the case of most
of the other machines, Omega needed it no longer. He kept it because it
linked him with the joy of the past. Besides, there was the mind-control
appliance by whose aid man's mind might visit other worlds. This was
done through the development of the subconscious and the discipline of
the will. But Omega was weary of these pilgrimages, because his body
could not perform those far-off flights. As time went on he realized
that the earth was his natural home. Even the earth's neighbors, dead
and dying, offered him no haven.

Yes, Omega and Thalma had garnered the gist of the world's treasures
before commencing this last trek. Gold and precious stones were common
objects to them, because for countless ages man had made them at will,
but around those they had brought clustered sacred memories of loved
ones gone before. The biological machine in the chemical laboratory of
the ship--the machine that brought forth life from nature's bountiful
storehouse--was of little use now that both atmosphere and moisture were
nearly gone. Yet Omega cherished this machine, and aside from its
associations with the past, it held for him a fascination that he could
not understand.

Having set the Mirror and other mechanical servants in position, Omega
and Thalma returned to the ship, and slept throughout the day, for with
the descending sun they must again go forth to hunt that scaly demon
which had taken possession of the earth's last water.

The night was moonless, but the bright starlight brought all objects
into plain relief against the dark rocks. Taking position on the slope
several rods above the beach, Omega and Thalma watched the lake eagerly,
but nothing disturbed its mirror-like surface. As on the preceding
night the awful silence appalled them--even though they were accustomed
to the vast solitude. It was so calm and still, so full of death and
mystery, that it seemed they must cry out in the agony of their
emotions. As the very silence was crushing their spirits so the
knowledge that only one form of life on earth stood between them and the
water to which their last hope clung, was maddening. How they longed to
battle the hideous monster! But the hours dragged on with nothing to
disturb the dead, heart-breaking silence. At last the Great Dipper had
swung so far around that dawn appeared. Yet there had been not a ripple
on the lake. Omega concluded that his guess was wrong--the beast did not
leave the water at night to search for food. Perhaps it had learned the
futility of such a search in a dead, dust-covered world.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wearied by their long and fruitless vigil they must have dozed, for
suddenly Omega, who sat but a yard or two from Thalma, was aroused by a
padded footfall and the exhalations of a noisome breath. Looking up he
was horrified to see the monster towering above him, its head swaying
gently to and fro, as its great, awkward feet sent it lunging forward
and backward for many feet, its spotted, scale-covered body trailed over
the rocks. By suddenly rounding the shoulder of the rock, sheltering
Omega and Thalma, its head held high, it seemed not to have seen the two
humans, for its terrible unblinking eyes were fixed ahead on the water.
However, Omega, paralyzed with fear and astonishment, and being directly
in the beast's path, believed that his hour had come. This was to be the
end of all his plans--to be crushed by the enormous weight of the
monster which challenged his right to live. But in that tense moment
when he thought that it was all over, the lithe form of Thalma reached
his side and in a frenzy of terror pulled him away. But even then the
sloping belly of the onrushing beast tore him from her frail hands and
dashed him against the rock.

While he lay there stunned and unable to move, Thalma discharged her
weapon at the monster. Three times she fired in quick succession but the
shots went wild, and in another moment the great brute struck the water
with a resounding splash and disappeared from view. For a few minutes a
trail of surface bubbles marked its rapid course toward the lake's
center, then all was motionless and still as before.

"Are you hurt, Omega?" Thalma cried anxiously, kneeling by his side.

"Just shaken up a bit," he returned, sitting up with an effort. "Great
hunters are we," he went on with a laugh. "We almost allowed the game to
catch the hunters! Well, let's go back to the ship. We'll get him next
