"and what if we do spend a bit of unprofitable time in this one
planetary system--haven't we all an endless lifetime before us? Eternity
is ours."

"We shall visit the second planet first of all," directed 25X-987, who
was in charge of this particular expedition of the Zoromes, "and on the
way there we shall cruise along near the third planet to see what we can
of the surface. We may be able to tell whether or not it holds anything
of interest to us. If it does, after visiting the second planet, we
shall then return to the third. The first world is not worth bothering
with."

       *       *       *       *       *

The space ship from Zor raced on in a direction which would take it
several thousand miles above the earth and then on to the planet which
we know as Venus. As the space ship rapidly neared the earth, it
slackened its speed, so that the Zoromes might examine it closely with
their glasses as the ship passed the third planet.

Suddenly, one of the machine men ran excitedly into the room where
25X-987 stood watching the topography of the world beneath him.

"We have found something!" he exclaimed.

"What?"

"Another space ship!"

"Where?"

"But a short distance ahead of us on our course. Come into the foreport
of the ship and you can pick it up with the glass."

"Which is the way it's going?" asked 25X-987.

"It is behaving queerly," replied the machine man of Zor. "It appears to
be in the act of circling the planet."

"Do you suppose that there really is life on that dead
world--intelligent beings like ourselves, and that this is one of their
space craft?"

"Perhaps it is another exploration craft like our own from some other
world," was the suggestion.

"But not of ours," said 25X-987.

Together, the two Zoromes now hastened into the observation room of the
space ship where more of the machine men were excitedly examining the
mysterious space craft, their thought impulses flying thick and fast
like bodiless bullets.

"It is very small!"

"Its speed is slow!"

"The craft can hold but few men," observed one.

"We do not yet know of what size the creatures are," reminded another.
"Perhaps there are thousands of them in that space craft out there. They
may be of such a small size that it will be necessary to look twice
before finding one of them. Such beings are not unknown."

"We shall soon overtake it and see."

"I wonder if they have seen us?"

"Where do you suppose it came from?"

"From the world beneath us," was the suggestion.

"Perhaps."




CHAPTER II

_The Mysterious Space Craft_


The machine men made way for their leader, 25X-987, who regarded the
space craft ahead of them critically.

"Have you tried communicating with it yet?" he asked.

"There is no reply to any of our signals," came the answer.

"Come alongside of it then," ordered their commander. "It is small
enough to be brought inside our carrying compartment, and we can see
with our penetration rays just what manner of creatures it holds. They
are intelligent, that is certain, for their space ship does imply as
much."

The space flyer of the Zoromes slowed up as it approached the mysterious
wanderer of the cosmic void which hovered in the vicinity of the dying
world.

"What a queer shape it has," remarked 25X-987. "It is even smaller than
I had previously calculated."

A rare occurrence had taken place among the machine men of Zor. They
were overcome by a great curiosity which they could not allow to remain
unsatiated. Accustomed as they were to witnessing strange sights and
still stranger creatures, meeting up with weird adventures in various
corners of the Universe, they had now become hardened to the usual run
of experiences which they were in the habit of encountering. It took a
great deal to arouse their unperturbed attitudes. Something new,
however, about this queer space craft had gripped their imaginations,
and perhaps a subconscious influence asserted to their minds that here
they have come across an adventure radically unusual.

"Come alongside it," repeated 25X-987 to the operator as he returned to
the control room and gazed through the side of the space ship in the
direction of the smaller cosmic wanderer.

"I'm trying to," replied the machine man, "but it seems to jump away a
bit every time I get within a certain distance of it. Our ship seems to
jump backward a bit too."

"Are they trying to elude us?"

"I don't know. They should pick up more speed if that is their object."

"Perhaps they are now progressing at their maximum speed and cannot
increase their acceleration any more."

"Look!" exclaimed the operator. "Did you just see that? The thing has
jumped away from us again!"

"Our ship moved also," said 25X-987. "I saw a flash of light shoot from
the side of the other craft as it jumped."

Another machine man now entered and spoke to the commander of the Zorome
expedition.

"They are using radium repellent rays to keep us from approaching," he
informed.

"Counteract it," instructed 25X-987.

The man left, and now the machine man at the controls of the craft tried
again to close with the mysterious wanderer of the space between
planets. The effort was successful, and this time there was no glow of
repulsion rays from the side of the long metal cylinder.

They now entered the compartment where various objects were transferred
