The newspaperman said simply: "I have no idea."

"Man," cried the old man, "can't you see that it would be a matter of
dimensions? From the fourth dimension to the third, from the third to
the second, from the second to the first, from the first to a
questionable existence or plane which is beyond our understanding or
perhaps to oblivion and the end of life. Might not the fourth have
evolved from a fifth, the fifth from a sixth, the sixth from a seventh,
and so on to no one knows what multidimension?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. White paused to allow the other man to grasp the importance of his
statements. Woods failed lamentably to do so.

"But what has this to do with the Horror?" he asked.

"Have you absolutely no imagination?" shouted the old man.

"Why, I suppose I have, but I seem to fail to understand."

"We are facing an invasion of fourth-dimensional creatures," the old man
whispered, almost as if fearful to speak the words aloud. "We are being
attacked by life which is one dimension above us in evolution. We are
fighting, I tell you, a tribe of hellhounds out of the cosmos. They are
unthinkably above us in the matter of intelligence. There is a chasm of
knowledge between us so wide and so deep that it staggers the
imagination. They regard us as mere animals, perhaps not even that. So
far as they are concerned we are just fodder, something to be eaten as
we eat vegetables and cereals or the flesh of domesticated animals.
Perhaps they have watched us for years, watching life on the world
increase, lapping their monstrous jowls over the fattening of the Earth.
They have awaited the proper setting of the banquet table and now they
are dining.

"Their thoughts are not our thoughts, their ideals not our ideals.
Perhaps they have nothing in common with us except the primal basis of
all life, self-preservation, the necessity of feeding.

"Maybe they have come of their own will. I prefer to believe that they
have. Perhaps they are merely following the natural course of events,
obeying some immutable law legislated by some higher being who watches
over the cosmos and dictates what shall be and what shall not be. If
this is true it means that there has been a flaw in my reasoning, for I
believed that the life of each plane degenerated in company with the
degeneration of its plane of existence, which would obey the same
evolutional laws which govern the life upon it. I am quite satisfied
that this invasion is a well-planned campaign, that some
fourth-dimensional race has found a means of breaking through the veil
of force which separates its plane from ours."

"But," pointed out Henry Woods, "you say they are fourth-dimensional
things. I can't see anything about them to suggest an additional
dimension. They are plainly three-dimensional."

"Of course they are three-dimensional. They would have to be to live in
this world of three dimensions. The only two-dimensional objects which
we know of in this world are merely illusions, projections of the third
dimension, like a shadow. It is impossible for more than one dimension
to live on any single plane.

"To attack us they would have to lose one dimension. This they have
evidently done. You can see how utterly ridiculous it would be for you
to try to attack a two-dimensional thing. So far as you were concerned
it would have no mass. The same is true of the other dimensions.
Similarly a being of a lesser plane could not harm an inhabitant of a
higher plane. It is apparent that while the Horror has lost one material
dimension, it has retained certain fourth-dimensional properties which
make it invulnerable to the forces at the command of our plane."

The newspaperman was now sitting on the edge of his chair.

"But," he asked breathlessly, "it all sounds so hopeless. What can be
done about it?"

Dr. White hitched his chair closer and his fingers closed with a fierce
grasp upon the other's knee. A militant boom came into his voice.

"My boy," he said, "we are to strike back. We are going to invade the
fourth-dimensional plane of these hellhounds. We are going to make them
feel our strength. We are going to strike back."

Henry Woods sprang to his feet.

"How?" he shouted. "Have you...?"

Dr. White nodded.

"I have found a way to send the third-dimensional into the fourth. Come
and I will show you."

       *       *       *       *       *

The machine was huge, but it had an appearance of simple construction. A
large rectangular block of what appeared to be a strange black metal was
set on end and flanked on each side by two smaller ones. On the top of
the large block was set a half-globe of a strange substance, somewhat,
Henry thought, like frosted glass. On one side of the large cube was set
a lever, a long glass panel, two vertical tubes and three clock-face
indicators. The control board, it appeared, was relatively simple.

Beside the mass of the five rectangles, on the floor, was a large plate
of transparent substance, ground to a concave surface, through which one
could see an intricate tangle of wire mesh.

Hanging from the ceiling, directly above the one on the floor, was
another concave disk, but this one had a far more pronounced curvature.

Wires connected the two disks and each in turn was connected to the
rectangular machine.

"It is a matter of the proper utilization of two forces, electrical and
gravitational," proudly explained Dr. White. "Those two forces, properly
used, warp the third-dimensional into the fourth. A reverse process is
used to return the object to the third. The principle of the machine
is--"

The old man was about to launch into a lengthy discussion, but Henry
interrupted him. A glance at his watch had shown him press time was
drawing perilously close.

"Just a second," he said. "You propose to warp a third-dimensional being
into a fourth dimension. How can a third-dimensional thing exist there?
You said a short time ago that only a specified dimension could exist on
one single plane."

"You have missed my point," snapped Dr. White. "I am not sending a
third-dimensional thing to a fourth dimension. I am changing the
third-dimensional being into a fourth-dimensional being. I add a
dimension, and automatically the being exists on a different plane. I am
reversing evolution. This third dimension we now exist on evolved,
millions of eons ago, from a fourth dimension. I am sending a lesser
entity back over those millions of eons to a plane similar to one upon
which his ancestors lived inconceivably long ago."

"But, man, how do you know you can do it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The doctor's eyes gleamed and his fingers reached out to press a bell.

A servant appeared almost at once.

"Bring me a dog," snapped the old man. The servant disappeared.

"Young man," said Dr. White, "I am going to show you how I know I can do
it. I have done it before, now I am going to do it for you. I have sent
dogs and cats back to the fourth dimension and returned them safely to
this room. I can do the same with men."

The servant reappeared, carrying in his arms a small dog. The doctor
stepped to the control board of his strange machine.

"All right, George," he said.

The servant had evidently worked with the old man enough to know what
was expected of him. He stepped close to the floor disk and waited. The
dog whined softly, sensing that all was not exactly right.

The old scientist slowly shoved the lever toward the right, and as he
did so a faint hum filled the room, rising to a stupendous roar as he
advanced the lever. From both floor disk and upper disk leaped strange
cones of blue light, which met midway to form an hour-glass shape of
brilliance.

The light did not waver or sparkle. It did not glow. It seemed hard and
brittle, like straight bars of force. The newspaperman, gazing with awe
upon it, felt that terrific force was there. What had the old man said?
Warp a third-dimensional being into another dimension! That would take
force!
