"N-no."

"Okay, then. Stop fighting it. What do you care what kind of English
they use? Or whether they used sign language. The buck, kid, the buck."

"Deena," Muldoon said gravely, "you have the grubbing soul of a
pawnbroker. Or real estate broker," he added. He bent his head and
kissed her lips.

Her lips opened to his with that familiar warmth, a hunger for him which
never failed to thrill. This time she did not remove his hand when it
returned.

"... Kevie, baby--darling ... oh, my darling," she whispered.

Strange, he thought, that at a moment like this, I should be thinking of
those fat twins....

       *       *       *       *       *

Muldoon hated the pirate prices of midtown parking lots, and so was
late. It had taken him ten minutes to find parking space for the
Plymouth. As he started to open the door of room 657 he heard the voice
of one of the twins. The words or sounds were in a language completely
foreign to him. He thought to knock, but changed his mind. To knock
would have made it obvious he had been listening. He barged right in.

The twins were in the anteroom. Muldoon got the impression they knew he
had heard them, and an even stronger impression, that the fact was of no
importance. That bothered him, for some reason.

"Ah, there you are," the twin to the left said. "Evin was wondering
whether you would show up, but I told him he was putting himself to
useless aggravation."

That damned mixed-up phrasing again, Muldoon thought. "Took a little
time to find parking space," he said.

"Shall we be off, then?" Robert asked.

"All right with me," Muldoon replied. There was another odd thing. Evin
Reeger seemed to have so very little to say.

Their destination was a place halfway down the Island. Muldoon's brow
had lifted when they gave him the area. So far as he knew there hadn't
been any development in the area. It was just a bit too far off the
highways and rail lines for housing developments, and even more badly
located for industrial requirements. He wondered what the devil they
had in mind out there.

Traffic was light and the drive took little more than an hour and a half
on the main highway, and another fifteen minutes of blacktop side road
before Evin told him to "Turn left here," onto a rutted path off the
blacktop. The path led through some scrub growth that ended on the edge
of an acre or so of dump heap. Rusted heaps of broken cars were
scattered about. A foul odor came from the left as though garbage, too,
had been dumped and left to rot. There was a flat one-storied wooden
shack close by to which Evin directed him to drive up to.

       *       *       *       *       *

Evin produced a key and opened the door to the shack. There was a
partition separating the place neatly into two sections. There were a
couple of straight-backed wooden chairs and a leather sofa in the near
room. The door to the other room was closed.

"Sit down, Muldoon," Robert Reeger said. He waited for Muldoon to make
himself comfortable on the sofa, then continued: "First time we've ever
been out here during the day. But Evin's sense of direction is
unfailing." He shook his head, smiled brightly. "Ah, well, we must each
have some factor to make for validity of existence, eh?"

"I don't follow," Muldoon said.

"No matter. Now, to the business at hand. I wanted you to see the area
involved. Evin, the plot plan, please."

To Muldoon's surprise Evin Reeger went into the next room and returned
after a moment with a plot plan of the lower third of the Island. He
gave it to Muldoon who spread it at his feet.

"That red-pencilled area I've marked off," Robert Reeger said, "is what
we'll be concerned with. As you notice, the dump and this shack are at
the approximate center. What I have in mind to do is buy all the land in
the marked-off area."

"_Buy_ it!..."

"You seem surprised."

"Shocked, would be the better word. Have you any idea what this could
cost? You've marked off an area of approximately a square mile. Even out
here that would run into millions. And once news got around that someone
was buying parcels of this size--well, you'd have more publicity than
you might want."

"About the cost we won't worry. There will be enough money. But the
attendant publicity could mean not being able to get the land we want.
Is that correct?"

"Could be. Suppose we get options, or leases on these pieces ..."

"That was a good phrase," Evin broke in unexpectedly. "Don't you think
so, Robert?"

"Yes!" Robert said sharply. He seemed to have suddenly lost his smile.
He gave Evin a hard look from under down-drawn brows. He turned to
Muldoon. "We are renting this, this tumbledown structure. A two-year
lease. H'mm! I see your point. Spending millions in a sudden buying move
would make unneeded difficulties. No! Options to buy, but lease for the
present. Evin, the list of names, please."

Evin didn't have to go anywhere for the list. He had it with him.
Muldoon looked it over. There were thirty-three names, including the
County and State.

"Well?" Robert said.

