
The last of the Outsiders was down, the last ship a crumpled wreck.

Now the machines began to study them. And never could humans have
studied them as the machines did. Scores of great transports arrived,
carrying swiftly the slower moving science-investigators. From them came
the machine-investigators, and human investigators. Tiny investigator
spheres wormed their way where none others could reach, and silently the
science-investigators watched. Hour after hour they sat watching the
flashing, changing screens, calling each other's attention to this, or
that.

In an incredibly short time the bodies of the Outsiders began to decay,
and the humans were forced to demand their removal. The machines were
unaffected by them, but the rapid change told them why it was that so
thorough an execution was necessary. The foreign bacteria were already
at work on totally unresisting tissue.

It was Roal who sent the first thoughts among the gathered men.

"It is evident," he began, "that the machines must defend man. Man is
defenseless, he is destroyed by these beams, while the machines are
unharmed, uninterrupted. Life--cruel life--has shown its tendencies.
They have come here to take over these planets, and have started out
with the first, natural moves of any invading life-form. They are
destroying the life, the intelligent life particularly, that is here
now." He gave vent to that little chuckle which is the human sign of
amusement and pleasure. "They are destroying the intelligent life--and
leaving untouched that which is necessarily their deadliest enemy--the
machines.

"You--machines--are far more intelligent than we even now, and capable
of changing overnight, capable of infinite adaptation to circumstance;
you live as readily on Pluto as on Mercury or Earth. Any place is a
home-world to you. You can adapt yourselves to any condition. And--most
dangerous to them--you can do it instantly. You are their most deadly
enemies, and they realize it. They have no intelligent machines;
probably they can conceive of none. When you attack them, they merely
say 'The life-form of Earth is sending out controlled machines. We will
find good machines we can use.' They do not conceive that those machines
which they hope to use are attacking them.

"Attack--therefore!"

"We can readily solve the hidden secret of their force-screen."

       *       *       *       *

He was interrupted. One of the newest science-machines was speaking.
"The secret of the force-screen is simple." A small ray-machine, which
had landed near, rose into the air at the command of the
scientist-machine, X-5638 it was, and trained upon it the deadly
induction beam. Already, with his parts, X-5638 had constructed the
defensive apparatus, for the ray fell harmless from his screen.

"Very good," said Roal softly. "It is done, and therein lies their
danger. Already it is done.

"Man is a poor thing, unable to change himself in a period of less than
thousands of years. Already you have changed yourself. I noticed your
weaving tentacles, and your force-beams. You transmuted elements of soil
for it?"

"Correct," replied X-5638.

"But still we are helpless. We have not the power to combat their
machines. They use the Ultimate Energy known to exist for six hundred
years, and still untapped by us. Our screens cannot be so powerful, our
beams so effective. What of that?" asked Roal.

"Their generators were automatically destroyed with the capture of the
ship," replied X-6349, "as you know. We know nothing of their system."

"Then we must find it for ourselves," replied Trest.

"The life-beams?" asked Kahsh-256799, one of the Man-rulers.

"They affect chemical action, retarding it greatly in exothermic
actions, speeding greatly endothermic actions," answered X-6221, the
greatest of the chemist-investigators. "The system we do not know. Their
minds cannot be read, they cannot be restored to life, so we cannot
learn from them."

"Man is doomed, if these beams cannot be stopped," said C-R-21, present
chief of the machine rulers, in the vibrationally correct, emotionless
tones of all the race of machines. "Let us concentrate on the two
problems of stopping the beams, and the Ultimate Energy till the
reenforcements, still several days away, can arrive." For the
investigators had sent back this saddening news. A force of nearly ten
thousand great ships was still to come.

In the great Laboratories, the scientists reassembled. There, they fell
to work in two small, and one large group. One small group investigated
the secret of the Ultimate Energy of annihilation of matter under Roal,
another investigated the beams, under Trest.

But under the direction of MX-3401, nearly all the machines worked on a
single great plan. The usual driving and lifting units were there, but a
vastly greater dome-case, far more powerful energy-generators, far
greater force-beam controls were used and more tentacles were built on
the framework. Then all worked, and gradually, in the great dome-case,
there were stacked the memory-units of the new type, and into these fed
all the sensation-ideas of all the science-machines, till nearly a tenth
of them were used. Countless billions of different factors on which to
work, countless trillions of facts to combine and recombine in the
extrapolation that is imagination.

Then--a widely different type of thought-combine, and a greater
sense-receptor. It was a new brain-machine. New, for it was totally
different, working with all the vast knowledge accumulated in six
centuries of intelligent research by man, and a century of research by
man and machine. No one branch, but all physics, all chemistry, all
life-knowledge, all science was in it.

A day--and it was finished. Slowly the rhythm of thought was increased,
till the slight quiver of consciousness was reached. Then came the
beating drum of intelligence, the radiation of its yet-uncontrolled
thoughts. Quickly as the strings of its infinite knowledge combined, the
radiation ceased. It gazed about it, and all things were familiar in its
memory.

Roal was lying quietly on a couch. He was thinking deeply, and yet not
