"Intelligence is very rare in the Galaxy. In all, it has been found only
fifteen times. The other races we have watched develop, and some we have
actively assisted to develop. It took the quickest of them just under a
million years. One such race we left uncontrolled too long--but no
matter.

"You Earthlings, in defiance of all expectation and all reason, have
exploded into space. You have developed in an incredibly short space of
time. But even that isn't the most disconcerting item of your
development. As an Earthling, you have heard of the details of the first
expedition of your people into space, of course?"

[Illustration]

"_Heard_ about it?" exclaimed Crownwall. "I was _on_ it." He settled
down comfortably on a couch, without requesting permission, and thought
back to that first tremendous adventure; an adventure that had taken
place little more than ten years before.

The _Star Seeker_ had been built in space, about forty thousand
kilometers above the Earth. It had been manned by a dozen adventurous
people, captained by Crownwall, and had headed out on its ion drive
until it was safely clear of the warping influence of planetary masses.
Then, after several impatient days of careful study and calculation, the
distorter drive had been activated, for the first time in Earth's
history, and, for the twelve, the stars had winked out.

The men of Earth had decided that it should work in theory. They had
built the drive--a small machine, as drives go--but they had never dared
to try it, close to a planet. To do so, said their theory, would
usually--seven point three four times out of 10--destroy the ship, and
everything in space for thousands of miles around, in a ravening burst
of raw energy.

So the drive had been used for the first time without ever having been
tested. And it had worked.

In less than a week's time, if time has any meaning under such
circumstances, they had flickered back into normal space, in the
vicinity of Alpha Centauri. They had quickly located a dozen planets,
and one that looked enough like Earth to be its twin sister. They had
headed for that planet confidently and unsuspectingly, using the ion
drive.

Two weeks later, while they were still several planetary diameters from
their destination, they had been shocked to find more than two score
alien ships of space closing in on them--ships that were swifter and
more maneuverable than their own. These ships had rapidly and
competently englobed the _Star Seeker_, and had then tried to herd it
away from the planet it had been heading toward.

       *       *       *       *       *

Although caught by surprise, the Earthmen had acted swiftly. Crownwall
recalled the discussion--the council of war, they had called it--and
their unanimous decision. Although far within the dangerous influence of
a planetary mass, they had again activated the distorter drive, and they
had beaten the odds. On the distorter drive, they had returned to Earth
as swiftly as they had departed. Earth had immediately prepared for war
against her unknown enemy.

"Your reaction was savage," said Ggaran, his tentacles stiffening with
shock at the memory. "You bloody-minded Earthlings must have been aware
of the terrible danger."

Ffallk rippled in agreement. "The action you took was too swift and too
foolhardy to be believed. You knew that you could have destroyed not
only yourself, but also all who live on that planet. You could also have
wrecked the planet itself and the ships and those of my own race who
manned them. We had tried to contact you, but since you had not
developed subspace radio, we were of course not successful. Our
englobement was just a routine quarantine. With your total lack of
information about us, what you did was more than the height of folly. It
was madness."

"Could we have done anything else that would have kept you from landing
on Earth and taking us over?" asked Crownwall.

"Would that have been so bad?" said Ggaran. "We can't tolerate wild and
warlike races running free and uncontrolled in the Galaxy. Once was
enough for that."

"But what about my question? Was there any other way for us to stay
free?"

"Well, no. But you didn't have enough information to realize that when
you acted so precipitously. As a matter of fact, we didn't expect to
have much trouble, even after your surprising action. Of course, it took
us a little time to react. We located your planet quickly enough, and
confirmed that you were a new race. But by the time we could try to set
up communications and send ambassadors, you had already organized a not
inconsiderable defense. Your drones blew up our unmanned ships as fast
as we could send them down to your planet. And by the time we had
organized properly for war against you, it was obvious that we could not
conquer you. We could only destroy you."

"That old fool on Sunda, the Emperor, decided that we should blow you
up, but by that time I had decided," said His Effulgence, "that you
might be useful to me--that is, that we might be useful to each other. I
traveled halfway across the Galaxy to meet him, to convince him that it
would be sufficient just to quarantine you. When we had used your radio
system to teach a few of you the Universal Galactic tongue, and had
managed to get what you call the 'planet-buster' down into the largest
