
"I'm sorry," he said. "That's something I couldn't help."

"Why not?"

"I don't know. It's not that I'm afraid, but there's something in me
that makes me back away from the prospect of fighting anyone."

Trella sighed. Cowardice was a state of mind. It was peculiarly
inappropriate, but not unbelievable, that the strongest and most agile
man on Ganymede should be a coward. Well, she thought with a rush of
sympathy, he couldn't help being what he was.

                   *       *       *       *       *

They had reached the more brightly lighted section of the city now.
Trella could get a cab from here, but the Stellar Hotel wasn't far. They
walked on.

Trella had the desk clerk call a cab to deliver the unconscious Motwick
to his home. She and Quest had a late sandwich in the coffee shop.

"I landed here only a week ago," he told her, his eyes frankly admiring
her honey-colored hair and comely face. "I'm heading for Earth on the
next spaceship."

"We'll be traveling companions, then," she said. "I'm going back on that
ship, too."

For some reason she decided against telling him that the assignment on
which she had come to the Jupiter system was to gather his own father's
notebooks and take them back to Earth.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Motwick was an irresponsible playboy whom Trella had known briefly on
Earth, and Trella was glad to dispense with his company for the
remaining three weeks before the spaceship blasted off. She found
herself enjoying the steadier companionship of Quest.

As a matter of fact, she found herself enjoying his companionship more
than she intended to. She found herself falling in love with him.

Now this did not suit her at all. Trella had always liked her men tall
and dark. She had determined that when she married it would be to a
curly-haired six-footer.

She was not at all happy about being so strongly attracted to a man
several inches shorter than she. She was particularly unhappy about
feeling drawn to a man who was a coward.

The ship that they boarded on Moon Nine was one of the newer ships that
could attain a hundred-mile-per-second velocity and take a hyperbolic
path to Earth, but it would still require fifty-four days to make the
trip. So Trella was delighted to find that the ship was the _Cometfire_
and its skipper was her old friend, dark-eyed, curly-haired Jakdane
Gille.

"Jakdane," she said, flirting with him with her eyes as in days gone
by, "I need a chaperon this trip, and you're ideal for the job."

"I never thought of myself in quite that light, but maybe I'm getting
old," he answered, laughing. "What's your trouble, Trella?"

"I'm in love with that huge chunk of man who came aboard with me, and
I'm not sure I ought to be," she confessed. "I may need protection
against myself till we get to Earth."

"If it's to keep you out of another fellow's clutches, I'm your man,"
agreed Jakdane heartily. "I always had a mind to save you for myself.
I'll guarantee you won't have a moment alone with him the whole trip."

"You don't have to be that thorough about it," she protested hastily. "I
want to get a little enjoyment out of being in love. But if I feel
myself weakening too much, I'll holler for help."

The _Cometfire_ swung around great Jupiter in an opening arc and
plummeted ever more swiftly toward the tight circles of the inner
planets. There were four crew members and three passengers aboard the
ship's tiny personnel sphere, and Trella was thrown with Quest almost
constantly. She enjoyed every minute of it.

She told him only that she was a messenger, sent out to Ganymede to pick
up some important papers and take them back to Earth. She was tempted to
tell him what the papers were. Her employer had impressed upon her that
her mission was confidential, but surely Dom Blessing could not object
to Dr. Mansard's son knowing about it.

All these things had happened before she was born, and she did not know
what Dom Blessing's relation to Dr. Mansard had been, but it must have
been very close. She knew that Dr. Mansard had invented the surgiscope.

This was an instrument with a three-dimensional screen as its heart. The
screen was a cubical frame in which an apparently solid image was built
up of an object under an electron microscope.

                   *       *       *       *       *

The actual cutting instrument of the surgiscope was an ion stream. By
operating a tool in the three-dimensional screen, corresponding
movements were made by the ion stream on the object under the
microscope. The principle was the same as that used in operation of
remote control "hands" in atomic laboratories to handle hot material,
and with the surgiscope very delicate operations could be performed at
the cellular level.

Dr. Mansard and his wife had disappeared into the turbulent atmosphere
of Jupiter just after his invention of the surgiscope, and it had been
