calculi? Will fermenting vegetable juices, as sweet-wort, or sugar and
water in the act of fermentation with yest, dissolve any kind of animal
concretions?

11. _Calculus arthriticus._ Gout-stones are formed on inflamed membranes,
like those of the kidnies above described, by the too hasty absorption of
the thinner and saline parts of the mucus. Similar concretions have been
produced in the lungs, and even in the pericardium; and it is probable,
that the ossification, as it is called, of the minute arteries, which is
said to attend old age, and to precede some mortifications of the
extremities, may be a process of this kind.

As gout-stones lie near the surface, it is probable, that ether, frequently
applied in their early state, might render them so liquid as to permit
their reabsorption; which the stimulus of the ether might at the same time
encourage.

12. _Rheumatismus chronicus._ Chronic rheumatism. After the acute
rheumatism some inspissated mucus, or material similar to chalk-stones of
the gout, which was secreted on the inflamed membrane, is probably left,
owing to the too hasty absorption of the thinner and saline part of it; and
by lying on the fascia, which covers some of the muscles, pains them, when
they move and rub against it, like any extraneous material.

The pain of the shoulder, which attends inflammations of the upper membrane
of the liver, and the pains of the arms, which attend asthma dolorificum,
or dropsy of the pericardium, are distinguished from the chronic
rheumatism, as in the latter the pain only occurs on moving the affected
muscles.

M. M. Warm bath, cold bath, bandage of emplastrum de minio put on tight, so
as to compress the part. Cover the part with flannel. With oiled silk. Rub
it with common oil frequently. With ether. A blister. A warmer climate.
Venesection. A grain of calomel and a grain of opium for ten successive
nights. The Peruvian bark.

13. _Cicatrix vulnerum._ The scar after wounds. In the healing of ulcers
the matter is first thickened by increasing the absorption in them; and
then lessened, till all the matter is absorbed, which is brought by the
arteries, instead of being deposed in the ulcer.

M. M. This is promoted by bandage, by the sorbentia externally, as powder
of bark, white lead; solution of sugar of lead. And by the sorbentia
internally after evacuations. See Sect. XXXIII. 3. 2.

In those ulcers, which are made by the contact of external fire, the
violent action of the fibres, which occasions the pain, is liable to
continue, after the external heat is withdrawn. This should be relieved by
external cold, as of snow, salt and water recently mixed, ether, or spirits
of wine suffered to evaporate on the part.

The cicatrix of an ulcer generally proceeds from the edges of it; but in
large ones frequently from the middle, or commences in several places at
the same time; which probably contributes to the unevenness of large scars.

14. _Corneae obfuscatio._ Opacity of the cornea. There are few people, who
have passed the middle of life, who have not at some time suffered some
slight scratches or injuries of the cornea, which by not healing with a
perfectly smooth surface, occasion some refractions of light, which may be
conveniently seen in the following manner: fill a tea-saucer with cream and
tea, or with milk, and holding it to your lips, as if going to drink it,
the imperfections of the cornea will appear like lines or blotches on the
surface of the fluid, with a less white appearance than that surface. Those
blemishes of the eye are distinguished from the muscae volitantes described
in Class I. 2. 5. 3. by their being invariably seen at any time, when you
look for them.

Ulcers may frequently be seen on the cornea after ophthalmy, like little
pits or indentations beneath the surface of it: in this case no external
application should be used, lest the scar should be left uneven; but the
cure should be confined to the internal use of thirty grains of bark twice
a day, and from five to ten drops of laudanum at night, with five grains of
rhubarb, if necessary.

After ulcers of the cornea, which have been large, the inequalities and
opacity of the cicatrix obscures the sight; in this case could not a small
piece of the cornea be cut out by a kind of trephine about the size of a
thick bristle, or a small crow-quill, and would it not heal with a
transparent scar? This experiment is worth trying, and might be done by a
piece of hollow steel wire with a sharp edge, through which might be
introduced a pointed steel screw; the screw to be introduced through the
opake cornea to hold it up, and press it against the cutting edge of the
hollow wire or cylinder; if the scar should heal without losing its
transparency, many blind people might be made to see tolerably well by this
slight and not painful operation. An experiment I wish strongly to
recommend to some ingenious surgeon or oculist.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO I.

_Increased Irritation._

GENUS IV.

_With increased Actions of other Cavities and Membranes._

SPECIES.

1. _Nictitatio irritativa._ Winking of the eyes is performed every minute
without our attention, for the purpose of cleaning and moistening the
eye-ball; as further spoken of in Class II. 1. 1. 8. When the cornea
becomes too dry, it becomes at the same time less transparent; which is
owing to the pores of it being then too large, so that the particles of
light are refracted by the edges of each pore, instead of passing through
it; in the same manner as light is refracted by passing near the edge of a
knife. When these pores are filled with water, the cornea becomes again
transparent. This want of transparency of the cornea is visible sometimes
in dying people, owing to their inirritability, and consequent neglect of
nictitation.

The increase of transparency by filling the pores with fluid is seen by
soaking white paper in oil; which from an opake body becomes very
transparent, and accounts for a curious atmospheric phenomenon; when there
exists a dry mist in a morning so as to render distant objects less
distinct, it is a sign of a dry day; when distant objects are seen very
distinct, it is a sign of rain. See Botan. Garden, Part I. add. note xxv.
The particles of air are probably larger than those of water, as water will
pass through leather and paper, which will confine air; hence when the
atmosphere is much deprived of moisture, the pores of the dry air are so
large, that the rays of light are refracted by their edges instead of
passing through them. But when as much moisture is added as can be
perfectly dissolved, the air becomes transparent; and opake again, when a
part of this moisture collects into small spherules previous to its
precipitation. This also accounts for the want of transparency of the air,
which is seen in tremulous motions over corn-fields on hot summer-days, or
over brick-kilns, after the flame is extinguished, while the furnace still
remains hot.

2. _Deglutitio irritativa._ The deglutition of our saliva is performed
frequently without our attention, and is then an irritative action in
consequence of the stimulus of it in the mouth. Or perhaps sometimes for
the purpose of diffusing a part of it over the dry membranes of the fauces
and pharinx; in the same manner as tears are diffused over the cornea of
the eye by the act of nictitation to clean or moisten it.

3. _Respiratio et Tussis irritativae._ In the acts of respiration and of
coughing there is an increased motion of the air-cells of the lungs owing
to some stimulating cause, as described above in Class I. 1. 2. 8. and I.
1. 3. 4. and which are frequently performed without our attention or
consciousness, and are then irritative actions; and thus differ from those
described in Class II. 1. 1. 2. and 5. To these increased actions of the
air-cells are superadded those of the intercostal muscles and diaphragm by
irritative association. When any unnatural stimulus acts so violently on
the organs of respiration as to induce pain, the sensorial power of
sensation becomes added to that of irritation, and inflammation of the
membranes of them is a general consequence.

4. _Exclusio bilis._ The exclusion of the bile from the gall-bladder, and
its derivation into the duodenum, is an irritative action in consequence of
the stimulus of the aliment on the extremity of the biliary duct, which
terminates in the intestine. The increased secretion of tears is occasioned
in a similar manner by any stimulating material in the eyes; which affects
the excretory ducts of the lacrymal glands. A pain of the external membrane
of the eye sometimes attends any unusual stimulus of it, then the sensorial
power of sensation becomes added to that of irritation, and a superficial
inflammation is induced.

5. _Dentitio._ Toothing. The pain of toothing often begins much earlier
than is suspected; and is liable to produce convulsions; which are
sometimes relieved, when the gum swells, and becomes inflamed; at other
times a diarrhoea supervenes, which is generally esteemed a favourable
circumstance, and seems to prevent the convulsions by supplying another
means of relieving the pain of dentition by irritative exertion; and a
consequent temporary exhaustion of sensorial power. See Class I. 1. 2. 5.
Sect. XXXV. 2. 1.

The convulsions from toothing generally commence long before the appearance
of the teeth; but as the two middle incisors of the lower jaw generally
appear first, and then those of the upper, it is adviseable to lance the
gums over these longitudinally in respect to the jaw-bones, and quite down
to the periosteum, and through it.

As the convulsions attending the commencement of toothing are not only
dangerous to life in their greatest degree, but are liable to induce stupor
or insensibility by their continuance even in a less degree, the most
efficacious means should be used to cure them.

M. M. Lance the gum of the expected teeth quite through the periosteum
longitudinally. Venesection by the lancet or by two or three leeches. One
grain of calomel as a purge. Tincture of jalap, five or six drops in water
every three hours til it purges, to be repeated daily. After evacuations a
small blister on the back or behind the ears. And lastly, two or three
drops of laudanum according to the age of the child. Warm bath. See Class
III. 1. 1. 5. and 6.

6. _Priapismus chronicus._ I have seen two cases, where an erection of the
penis, as hard as horn, continued two or three weeks without any venereal
desires, but not without some pain; the easiest attitude of the patients
was lying upon their backs with their knees up. At length the corpus
cavernosum urethrae became soft, and in another day or two the whole
subsided. In one of them a bougie was introduced, hoping to remove some bit
of gravel from the caput gallinaginis, camphor, warm bathing, opium,
lime-water, cold aspersion, bleeding in the veins of the penis, were tried
in vain. One of them had been a free drinker, had much gutta rosacea on his
face, and died suddenly a few months after his recovery from this
complaint. Was it a paralysis of the terminations of the veins, which
absorb the blood from the tumid penis? or from the stimulus of indurated
semen in the seminal vessels? In the latter case some venereal desires
should have attended. Class III. 1. 2. 16.

The priapismus, which occurs to vigorous people in a morning before they
awake, has been called the signum salutis, or banner of health, and is
occasioned by the increase of our irritability or sensibility during sleep,
as explained in Sect. XVIII. 15.

7. _Distentio mamularum._ The distention of the nipples of lactescent women
is at first owing to the stimulus of the milk. See Sect. XIV. 8. and Sect.
XVI. 5. See Class II. 1. 7. 10.

8. _Descensus uteri._ This is a very frequent complaint after bad labours,
the fundus uteri becomes inverted and descends like the prolapsus ani.

M. M. All the usual pessaries are very inconvenient and ineffectual. A
piece of soft sponge about two inches diameter introduced into the vagina
gives great ease to these patients, and supports the uterus; it should have
a string put through it to retract it by.

There are also pessaries now made of elastic gum, which are said to be
easily worn, and to be convenient, from their having a perforation in their
centre.

9. _Prolapsus ani._ The lower part of the rectum becomes inverted, and
descends after every stool chiefly in children; and thus stimulates the
sphincter ani like any other extraneous body.

M. M. It should be dusted over with very fine powder of gum sandarach, and
then replaced. Astringent fomentations; as an infusion of oak-bark, or a
slight solution of alum. Horizontal rest frequently in the day.

10. _Lumbricus._ Round worm. The round worm is suspected in children when
the belly is tumid, and the countenance bloated and pale, with swelling of
the upper lip. The generation of these worms is promoted by the too dilute
state of the bile, as is evident in the fleuke-worm found in the biliary
ducts and substance of the liver in sheep; and in water-rats, in the livers
of which last animals they were lately detected in large numbers by Dr.
Capelle. Transactions of the college at Philadelphia, v. i.

Now as the dilute state of the bile depends on the deficiency of the
absorption of its thinner parts, it appears, that the tumid belly, and
bloated countenance, and swelled upper lip, are a concomitant circumstance
attending the general inactivity of the absorbent system; which is
therefore to be esteemed the remote cause of the generation of worms.

The simplicity of the structure of worms probably enables them to exist in
more various temperatures of heat; and their being endued with life
prevents them from being destroyed by digestion in the stomach, probably in
the same manner as the powers of life prevent the fermentation and
putrefaction of the stomach itself. Hence I conclude, that worms are
originally taken into our alimentary canal from without; as I believe
similar worms of all kinds are to be found out of the body.

M. M. The round worm is destroyed by a cathartic with four or six grains of
calomel; and afterwards by giving six or eight grains of filings of iron
twice a day for a fortnight. See Hepatis tumor, Class I. 2. 3. 9. As worms
are liable to come away in fevers, whether of the hectic or putrid kind,
could they be removed by purulent matter, or rotten egg, or putrid flesh,
since in those fevers from the enfeebled action of the intestines the
faeces become highly putrid?

11. _Taenia._ Tape-worm consists of a chain of animals extending from the
stomach to the anus. See Sect. XXXIX. 2. 3. It frequently exists in cats,
rats, and geese, and probably in many other animals.

The worms of this genus possess a wonderful power of retaining life. Two of
them, which were voided by a pointer dog in consequence of violent
purgatives, each of which were several feet in length, had boiling water
poured on them in a bason; which seemed not much to inconvenience them.
When the water was cool, they were taken out and put into gin or whiskey of
the strongest kind, in which their life and activity continued unimpaired;
and they were at length killed by adding to the spirit a quantity of
corrosive sublimate. Medic. Comment. for 1791, p. 370.

The tape-worm is cured by an amalgama of tin and quicksilver, such as is
used on the back of looking-glasses; an ounce should be taken every two
hours, till a pound is taken; and then a brisk cathartic of Glauber's salt
two ounces, and common salts one ounce, dissolved in two wine pints of
water, half a pint to be taken every hour till it purges. The worm extends
from the stomach to the anus, and the amalgama tears it from the intestine
by mechanical pressure, acting upon it the whole way. Electric shocks
through the duodenum greatly assists the operation. Large doses of tin in
powder. Iron filings in large doses. The powder of fern-root seems to be of
no use, as recommended by M. Noufflier.

12. _Ascarides._ Thread-worms. These worms are said to be more frequent in
some parts of this kingdom than in others, as near the fens of
Lincolnshire. Do they escape from the body and become flies, like the
bott-worm in horses? Do they crawl from one child to another in the same
bed? Are they acquired from flies or worms, which are seen in putrid
necessary houses, as these worms as well as the tapeworms, are probably
acquired from without? this may account for their re-appearance a few weeks
or months after they have been destroyed; or can this happen from the eggs
or parts of them remaining?

Ascarides appear to be of two kinds, the common small ones like a thread;
which has a very sharp head, as appears in the microscope; and which is so
tender, that the cold air soon renders it motionless; and a larger kind
above an inch long, and nearly as thick as a very small crow-quill, and
which is very hard in respect to its texture, and very tenacious of life.
One of these last was brought to me, and was immediately immersed in a
strong solution of sugar of lead, and lived in it a very long time without
apparent inconvenience.

M. M. Ascarides are said to be weakened by twenty grains of cinnabar and
five of rhubarb taken every night, but not to be cured by this process. As
these worms are found only in the rectum, variety of clysters have been
recommended. I was informed of a case, where solutions of mercurial
ointment were used as a clyster every night for a month without success.
Clysters of Harrowgate water are recomended, either of the natural, or of
the factitious, as described below, which might have a greater proportion
of liver of sulphur in it. As the cold air soon destroys them, after they
are voided, could clysters of iced water be used with advantage? or of
spirit of wine and water? or of ether and water? Might not a piece of
candle, about an inch long, or two such pieces, smeared with mercurial
ointment, and introduced into the anus at night, or twice a day, be
effectual by compressing their nidus, as well as by the poison of the
mercury.

The clysters should be large in quantity, that they may pass high in the
rectum, as two drams of tobacco boiled a minute in a pint of water. Or
perhaps what might be still more efficacious and less inconvenient, the
smoke of tobacco injected by a proper apparatus every night, or alternate
nights, for six or eight weeks. This was long since recommended, I think by
Mr. Turner of Liverpool; and the reason it has not succeeded, I believe to
have been owing to the imperfections of the joints of the common apparatus
for injecting the smoke of tobacco, so that it did not pass into the
intestine, though it was supposed to do so, as I once observed. The smoke
should be received from the apparatus into a large bladder; and it may then
be certainly injected like the common clyster with sufficient force;
otherwise oiled leathers should be nicely put round the joints of the
machine; and a wet cloth round the injecting pipe to prevent the return of
the smoke by the sides of it. Clysters of carbonated hydrogen gas, or of
other factitious airs, might be tried.

Harrowgate water taken into the stomach, so as to induce six or seven
stools every morning, for four or six weeks, is perhaps the most
efficacious method in common use. A factitious Harrowgate water may be made
probably of greater efficacy than the natural, by dissolving one ounce of
marine salt, (called bay salt) and half an ounce of magnesia Glauber's
salt, (called Epsom salt, or bitter purging salt) in twenty-eight ounces of
water. A quarter or half a pint of this is to be taken every hour, or two
hours in the morning, till it operates, with a tea-spoonful of a solution
of liver of sulphur, which is to be made by putting an ounce of hepar
sulphuris into half a pint of water. See Class IV. 1. 2. 9.

13. _Dracunculus._ A thin worm brought from the coast of Guinea. It is
found in the interstices of the muscles, and is many yards long; it makes a
small ulcer; which is cured by extracting an inch of the worm a day, and
wrapping the extracted part slowly round a bit of tobacco pipe till next
day, so as not to break it. I have twice seen long worms, like a thick
horse-hair, in water in July in this country, which appeared hard and
jointed.

14. _Morpiones._ Crab-lice. The excrement of this animal stains the linen,
and appears like diluted blood.

M. M. Spirit of wine. Mercurial ointment, shaving the part. Oil destroys
other insects, if they be quite covered with it, as the ticks on dogs, and
would probably therefore destroy these. Its manner of operation is by
stopping up or filling their spiracula, or breathing pores; a few drops of
oil poured on a wasp, so as to cover it, destroys it in a few seconds.

15. _Pediculi._ Lice. There is said to be a disease, in which these animals
are propagated in indestructible numbers, so as to destroy the patient.

M. M. Cleanliness, mercurial ointment, stavis acria in powder, or the
tincture of it in spirit of wine. Spirit of wine alone? Bath of oil?

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO I.

_Increased Irritation._

GENUS V.

_With Increased Actions of the Organs of Sense._

SPECIES.

1. _Visus acrior._ Acuter sight. There have been instances of people, who
could see better in the gloom of the evening, than in the stronger light of
the day; like owls, and bats, and many quadrupeds, and flying insects. When
the eye is inflamed, great light becomes eminently painful, owing to the
increased irritative motions of the retina, and the consequent increased
sensation. Thus when the eye is dazzled with sudden light, the pain is not
owing to the motion of the iris; for it is the contraction of the iris,
which relieves the pain from sudden light; but to the too violent
contractions of the moving fibres, which constitute the extremities of the
optic nerve.

2. _Auditus acrior._ The irritative ideas of hearing are so increased in
energy as to excite our attention. This happens in some diseases of the
epileptic kind, and in some fevers. Hence the whispering of the currents of
air in a room, the respiration of the company, and noises before
unperceived, become troublesome; and sounds louder than usual, or
unexpected, produce starting, and convulsions.

M. M. Put oil of almonds into the ears. Stop the meatus auditorius with
cotton wool. Set the feet of the patient's bed on cushions, or suspend it
by cords from the ceiling.

3. _Olfactus acrior._ The irritative ideas of smell from the increased
action of the olfactive nerve excite our attention. Hence common odours are
disagreeable; and are perceived from variety of objects, which were before
thought inodorous. These are commonly believed to be hallucinations of the
sense.

M. M. Snuff starch up the nostrils.

4. _Gustus acrior._ The irritative ideas of taste, as of our own saliva,
and even of the atmospheric air, excite our attention; and common tastes
are disagreeably strong.

M. M. Water. Mucilage. Vegetable acids. Scrape the tongue clean. Rub it
with a sage-leaf and vinegar.

5. _Tactus acrior._ The irritative ideas of the nerves of touch excite our
attention: hence our own pressure on the parts, we rest upon, becomes
uneasy with universal soreness.

M. M. Soft feather-bed. Combed wool put under the patients, which rolls
under them, as they turn, and thus prevents their friction against the
sheets. Drawers of soft leather. Plasters of cerate with calamy.

6. _Sensus caloris acrior._ Acuter sense of heat occurs in some diseases,
and that even when the perceptible heat does not appear greater than
natural to the hand of another person. See Class I. 1. 2. See Sect. XIV. 8.
All the above increased actions of our organs of sense separately or
jointly accompany some fevers, and some epileptic diseases; the patients
complaining of the perception of the least light, noises in their ears, bad
smells in the room, and bad tastes in their mouths, with soreness,
numbness, and other uneasy feels, and with disagreeable sensations of
general or partial heat.

7. _Sensus extensionis acrior._ Acuter sense of extension. The sense of
extension was spoken of in Sect. XIV. 7. and XXXII. 4. The defect of
distention in the arterial system is accompanied with faintness; and its
excess with sensations of fulness, or weight, or pressure. This however
refers only to the vascular muscles, which are distended by their
appropriated fluids; but the longitudinal muscles are also affected by
different quantities of extension, and become violently painful by the
excess of it.

These pains of muscles and of membranes are generally divided into acute
and dull pains. The former are generally owing to increase of extension, as
in pricking the skin with a needle; and the latter generally to defect of
extension, as in cold head-aches; but if the edge of a knife, or point of a
pin, be gradually pressed against the fibres of muscles or membranes, there
would seem to be three states or stages of this extension of the fibres;
which have acquired names according to the degree or kind of sensation
produced by the extension of them; these are 1. titillation or tickling. 2.
itching, and the 3. smarting; as described below. See Sect. XIV. 9.

8. _Titillatio._ Tickling is a pleasureable pain of the sense of extension
above mentioned, and therefore excites laughter; as described in Sect.
XXXIV. 1. 4. The tickling of the nostrils, which precedes the efforts of
sneezing, is owing to the increased irritation occasioned by external
stimulus; and is attended with a pleasureable sensation in consequence of
the increased action of the part. When this action is exerted in a greater
degree, the sensation becomes painful, and the convulsion of sneezing
ensues; as the pain in tickling the soles of the feet of children is
relieved by laughter.

A lady after a bruise on her nose by a fall was affected with incessant
sneezing, and relieved by snuffing starch up her nostrils. Perpetual
sneezings in the measles, and in catarrhs from cold, are owing to the
stimulus of the saline part of the mucous effusion on the membrane of the
nostrils. See Class II. 1. 1. 3.

9. _Pruritus._ Itching seems to be a greater degree of titillation, and to
be owing to the stimulus of some acrid material, as the matter of the itch;
or of the herpes on the scrotum, and about the anus; or from those
universal eruptions, which attend some elderly people, who have drank much
vinous spirit. It occurs also, when inflammations are declining, as in the
healing of blisters, or in the cure of ophthalmia, as the action of the
vessels is yet so great as to produce sensation; which, like the
titillations that occasion laughter, is perpetually changing from pleasure
to pain.

When the natural efforts of scratching do not relieve the pain of itching,
it sometimes increases so as to induce convulsions and madness. As in the
furor uterinus, and satyriasis, and in the sphincter ani and scrotum. See
Class II. 1. 4. 14. IV. 2. 2. 6.

M. M. Warm bath. Fomentation. Alcohol externally. Poultice. Oiled silk.
Mercurial ointments on small surfaces at once. See Class II. 1. 4. 12.
Solutions of lead on small surfaces at once.

10. _Dolor urens._ Smarting follows the edge of a knife in making a wound,
and seems to be owing to the distention of a part of a fibre, till it
breaks. A smarting of the skin is liable to affect the scars left by herpes
or shingles; and the callous parts of the bottoms of the feet; and around
the bases of corns on the toes; and frequently extends after sciatica along
the outside of the thigh, and of the leg, and part of the foot. All these
may be owing to the stimulus of extension, by blood or serum being forced
into vessels nearly coalesced.

M. M. Emplastrum de minio put like a bandage on the part. Warm fomentation.
Oil and camphor rubbed on the part. Oil-silk covering. A blister on the
part. Ether, or alcohol, suffered to evaporate on the part.

11. _Consternatio._ Surprise. As our eyes acquaint us at the same time with
less than half of the objects, which surround us, we have learned to
confide much in the organ of hearing to warn us of approaching dangers.
Hence it happens, that if any sound strikes us, which we cannot immediately
account for, our fears are instantly alarmed. Thus in great debility of
body, the loud clapping of a door, or the fall of a fire-shovel, produces
alarm, and sometimes even convulsions; the same occurs from unexpected
sights, and in the dark from unexpected objects of touch.

In these cases the irritability is less than natural, though it is
erroneously supposed to be greater; and the mind is busied in exciting a
train of ideas inattentive to external objects; when this train of ideas is
dissevered by any unexpected stimulus, surprise is excited; as explained in
Sect. XVII. 3. 7. and XVIII. 17. then as the sensibility in these cases is
greater, fear becomes superadded to the surprise; and convulsions in
consequence of the pain of fear. See Sect. XIX. 2.

The proximate cause of surprise is the increased irritation induced by some
violent stimulus, which dissevers our usual trains of ideas; but in
diseases of inirritability the frequent starting or surprise from sounds
not uncommon, but rather louder than usual, as the clapping of a door,
shews, that the attention of the patient to a train of sensitive ideas was
previously stronger than natural, and indicates an incipient delirium;
which is therefore worth attending to in febrile diseases.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO II.

_Decreased Irritation._

GENUS I.

_With decreased Action of the Sanguiferous System._

The reader should be here apprized, that the words strength and debility,
when applied to animal motions, may properly express the quantity of
resistance such motions may overcome; but that, when they are applied to
mean the susceptibility or insusceptibility of animal fibres to motion,
they become metaphorical terms; as in Sect. XII. 2. 1. and would be better
expressed by the words activity and inactivity.

There are three sources of animal inactivity; first, the defect of the
natural quantity of stimulus on those fibres, which have been accustomed to
perpetual stimulus; as the arterial and secerning systems. When their
accustomed stimulus is for a while intermitted, as when snow is applied to
the skin of the hands, an accumulation of sensorial power is produced; and
then a degree of stimulus, as of heat, somewhat greater than that at
present applied, though much less than the natural quantity, excites the
vessels of the skin into violent action. We must observe, that a deficiency
of stimulus in those fibres, which are not subject to perpetual stimulus,
as the locomotive muscles, is not succeeded by accumulation of sensorial
power; these therefore are more liable to become permanently inactive after
a diminution of stimulus; as in strokes of the palsy, this may be called
inactivity from defect of stimulus.

2. A second source of animal inactivity exists, when the sensorial power in
any part of the system has been previously exhausted by violent stimuli; as
the eyes after long exposure to great light; or the stomach, to repeated
spirituous potation; this may be termed inactivity from exhaustion of
sensorial power. See Sect. XII. 2. 1.

3. But there is a third source of inactivity owing to the deficient
production of sensorial power in the brain; and hence stimuli stronger than
natural are required to produce the accustomed motions of the arterial
system; in this case there is no accumulation of sensorial power produced;
as in the inactivity owing to defect of stimulus; nor any previous
exhaustion of it, as in the inactivity owing to excess of stimulus.

This third kind of inactivity causes many of the diseases of this genus;
which are therefore in general to be remedied by such medicines as promote
a greater production of sensorial power in the brain; as the incitantia,
consisting of wine, beer, and opium, in small repeated quantities; and
secondly of such as simply stimulate the arterial and glandular system into
their natural actions; as small repeated blisters, spices, and essential
oils. And lastly the sorbentia, which contribute to supply the more
permanent strength of the system, by promoting the absorption of
nourishment from the stomach, and intestines; and of the superfluous fluid,
which attends the secretions.

SPECIES.

1. _Febris inirritativa._ Inirritative fever. This is the typhus mitior, or
nervous fever of some writers; it is attended with weak pulse without
inflammation, or symptoms of putridity, as they have been called. When the
production of sensorial power in the brain is less than usual, the pulse
becomes quick as well as weak; and the heart sometimes trembles like the
limbs of old age, or of enfeebled drunkards; and when this force of the
contractions of the heart and arteries is diminished, the blood is pushed
on with less energy, as well as in less quantity, and thence its stimulus
on their sides is diminished in a duplicate ratio. In compressions of the
brain, as in apoplexy, the pulse becomes slower and fuller; for in that
disease, as in natural sleep, the irritative motions of the heart and
arteries are not diminished, volition alone is suspended or destroyed.

If the absorption of the terminations of the veins is not equally impaired
with the force of the heart and arteries, the blood is taken up by the
veins the instant it arrives at their extremities; the capillary vessels
are left empty, and there is less resistance to the current of the blood
from the arteries; hence the pulse becomes empty, as well as weak and
quick; the veins of the skin are fuller than the arteries of it; and its
appearance becomes pale, bluish, and shrunk. See Class II. 1. 3. 1.

When this pulse persists many hours, it constitutes the febris
inirritativa, or typhus, or nervous fever, of some writers; it is attended
with little heat, the urine is generally of a natural colour, though in
less quantity; with great prostration of strength, and much disturbance of
the faculties of the mind. Its immediate cause seems to be a deficient
secretion of the sensorial power from the inaction of the brain; hence
almost the whole of the sensorial power is expended in the performance of
the motions necessary to life, and little of it can be spared for the
voluntary actions of the locomotive muscles, or organs of sense, see Class
I. 2. 5. 3. Its more remote cause may be from a paralysis or death of some
other part of the body; as of the spleen, when a tumour is felt on the left
side, as in some intermittents; or of the kidnies, when the urine continues
pale and in small quantity. Does the revivescence of these affected parts,
or their torpor, recurring at intervals, form the paroxysms of these
fevers? and their permanent revivescence establish the cure? See Class IV.
2. 1. 19.

M. M. Wine and opium in small quantities repeated every three hours
alternately; small repeated blisters; warm but fresh air; sorbentia;
nutrientia; transfusion of blood. Small electric shocks passed through the
brain in all directions. Oxygene air?

2. _Paresis inirritativa._ Inirritative debility. A defective action of the
irritative motions without increase of the frequency of the pulse. It
continues three or four weeks like a fever, and then either terminates in
health, or the patient sinks into one kind of apoplexy, and perishes. Many
symptoms, which attend inirritative fevers, accompany this disease, as cold
hands and feet at periodic times, scurf on the tongue, want of appetite,
muddy urine, with pains of the head, and sometimes vertigo, and vomiting.

This disease differs from the inirritative fever by the pulse not being
more frequent than in health. The want of appetite and of digestion is a
principal symptom, and probably is the cause of the universal debility,
which may be occasioned by the want of nourishment. The vertigo is a
symptom of inirritability, as shewn in Class IV. 2. 1. 16. the muddy urine
is owing to increased absorption from the bladder in consequence of the
diminished cutaneous and cellular absorption, as in anasarca, explained in
Sect. XXIX. 5. 1. and is therefore a consequence of the inirritability of
that part of the system; the foul tongue is owing to an increased
absorption of the thinner part of the mucus in consequence of the general
deficiency of fluid, which should be absorbed by the skin and stomach. The
sickness is owing to decreased action of the stomach, which is probably the
primary disease, and is connected with the vertigo.

M. M. An emetic. Calomel, grains iv. once or twice. Then a blister.
Peruvian bark. Valerian. Columbo. Steel. Opium and wine in small
quantities, repeated alternately every three hours. Small electric
percussions through the stomach.

3. _Somnus interruptus._ Interrupted sleep. In some fevers, where the
inirritability is very great, when the patient falls asleep, the pulse in a
few minutes becomes irregular, and the patient awakes in great disorder,
and fear of dying, refusing to sleep again from the terror of this uneasy
sensation. In this extreme debility there is reason to believe, that some
voluntary power during our waking hours is employed to aid the irritative
stimuli in carrying on the circulation of the blood through the lungs; in
the same manner as we use voluntary exertions, when we listen to weak
sounds, or wish to view an object by a small light; in sleep volition is
suspended, and the deficient irritation alone is not sufficient to carry on
the pulmonary circulation. This explanation seems the most probable one,
because in cases of apoplexy the irritative motions of the arterial system
do not seem to be impaired, nor in common sleep. See Incubus III. 2. 1. 13.

M. M. Opium in very small doses, as three drops of laudanum. A person
should watch the patient, and awaken him frequently; or he should measure
the time between slumber and slumber by a stop-watch, and awaken the
patient a little before he would otherwise awake; or he should keep his
finger on the pulse, and should forcibly awaken him, as soon as it becomes
irregular, before the disorder of the circulation becomes so great as to
disturb him. See Class I. 2. 1. 9. and Sect. XXVII. 2.

4. _Syncope._ Fainting consists in the decreased action of the arterial
system; which is sometimes occasioned by defect of the stimulus of
distention, as after venesection, or tapping for the dropsy. At other times
it arises from great emotions of the mind, as in sudden joy or grief. In
these cases the whole sensorial power is exerted on these interesting
ideas, and becomes exhausted. Thus during great surprise or fear the heart
stops for a time, and then proceeds with throbbing and agitation; and
sometimes the vital motions become so deranged, as never to recover their
natural successive action; as when children have been frightened into
convulsions. See Sect. XII. 7. 1.

Miss ----, a young lady of Stafford, in travelling in a chaise was so
affected by seeing the fall of a horse and postillion, in going down a
hill, though the carriage was not overturned, that she fainted away, and
then became convulsed, and never spoke afterwards; though she lived about
three days in successive convulsions and stupor.

5. _Haemorrhagia venosa._ A bleeding from the capillaries arising from
defect of venous absorption, as in some of those fevers commonly termed
putrid. When the blood stagnates in the cellular membrane, it produces
petechiae from this torpor or paralysis of the absorbent mouths of the
veins. It must be observed, that those people who have diseased livers, are
more liable to this kind of haemorrhages, as well as to the haemorrhagia
arteriosa; the former, because patients with diseased livers are more
subject to paralytic complaints in general, as to hemiplegia, and to
dropsy, which is a paralysis of the lymphatics; and the latter is probably
owing to the delay of the circulation in the vena porta by the torpor of
this hepatic vessel, when the liver is not much enlarged; and to its
pressure on the vena cava, when it is much enlarged.

M. M. Vitriolic acid, opium, steel, bark. Sponge bound on the part. Steel
dissolved in spirit of wine externally. Flour.

6. _Haemorrhois cruenta._ In the bleeding piles the capillary vessels of
the rectum become distended and painful from the defect of the venous
absorption of the part, and at length burst; or the mucous glands are so
dilated as to give a passage to the blood; it is said to observe lunar
periods.

M. M. Venesection, poultices, cathartics, spice, cold bath, and sorbentia.
External compression by applying lint, sponge, or cotton. Internal
compression by applying a bit of candle smeared with mercurial ointment.
Strangulate the tumid piles with a silk string. Cut them off. See Class I.
2. 3. 22.

Mrs. ---- had for twelve or fifteen years, at intervals of a year or less,
a bleeding from the rectum without pain; which however stopped
spontaneously after she became weakened, or by the use of injections of
brandy and water. Lately the bleeding continued above two months, in the
quantity of many ounces a day, till she became pale and feeble to an
alarming degree. Injections of solutions of lead, of bark and salt of
steel, and of turpentine, with some internal astringents, and opiates, were
used in vain. An injection of the smoke of tobacco, with ten grains of
opium mixed with the tobacco, was used, but without effect the two first
times on account of the imperfection of the machine; on the third time it
produced great sickness, and vertigo, and nearly a fainting fit; from which
time the blood entirely stopped. Was this owing to a fungous excrescence in
the rectum; or to a blood-vessel being burst from the difficulty of the
blood passing through the vena porta from some hepatic obstruction, and
which had continued to bleed so long? Was it stopped at last by the
fainting fit? or by the stimulus of the tobacco?

7. _Haemorrhagia renum._ Haemorrhage from the kidnies, when attended with
no pain, is owing to defect of venous absorption in the kidney. When
attended with pain on motion, it is owing to a bit of gravel in the ureter
or pelvis of the kidney; which is a much more frequent disease than the
former. See Sect. XXVII. 1.

M. M. 1. Venesection in small quantity, calomel, bark, steel, an opiate;
cold immersion up to the navel, the upper part of the body being kept
cloathed. Neville-Holt water. 2. Alcalized water aerated. Much diluent
liquids. Cool dress. Cool bed-room.

Cows are much subject to bloody urine, called foul water by the farmers; in
this disease about sixty grains of opium with or without as much rust of
iron, given twice a day, in a ball mixed with flour and water, or dissolved
in warm water, or warm ale, is, I believe, an efficacious remedy, to which
however should be added about two quarts of barley or oats twice a day, and
a cover at night, if the weather be cold.

8. _Haemorrhagia Hepatis._ Haemorrhage from the liver. It sometimes happens
in those, who have the gutta rosea, or paralytic affections owing to
diseased livers induced by the potation of fermented liquors, that a great
discharge of black viscid blood occasionally comes away by stool, and
sometimes by vomiting: this the ancients called Melancholia, black bile. If
it was bile, a small quantity of it would become yellow or green on
dilution with warm water, which was not the case in one experiment which I
tried; it must remain some time in the intestines from its black colour,
when it passes downwards, and probably comes from the bile-ducts, and is
often a fatal symptom. When it is evacuated by vomiting it is less
dangerous, because it shews greater remaining irritability of the
intestinal canal, and is sometimes salutary to those who have diseased
livers.

M. M. An emetic. Rhubarb, steel, wine, bark.

9. _Haemoptoe venosa._ Venous haemoptoe frequently attends the beginning of
the hereditary consumptions of dark-eyed people; and in others, whose lungs
have too little irritability. These spittings of blood are generally in
very small quantity, as a tea-spoonful; and return at first periodically,
as about once a month; and are less dangerous in the female than in the
male sex; as in the former they are often relieved by the natural periods
of the menses. Many of these patients are attacked with this pulmonary
haemorrhage in their first sleep; because in feeble people the power of
volition is necessary, besides that of irritation, to carry on respiration
perfectly; but, as volition is suspended during sleep, a part of the blood
is delayed in the vessels of the lungs, and in consequence effused, and the
patient awakes from the disagreeable sensation. See Class I. 2. 1. 3. II.
1. 6. 6. III. 2. 1. 10.

M. M. Wake the patient every two or three hours by an alarum clock. Give
half a grain of opium at going to bed, or twice a day. Onions, garlic,
slight chalybeates. Issues. Leeches applied once a fortnight or month to
the hemorrhoidal veins to produce a new habit. Emetics after each period of
haemoptoe, to promote expectoration, and dislodge any effused blood, which
might by remaining in the lungs produce ulcers by its putridity. A hard
bed, to prevent too sound sleep. A periodical emetic or cathartic once a
fortnight.

10. _Palpitatio cordis._ The palpitation of the heart frequently attends
the haemoptoe above mentioned; and consists in an ineffectual exertion of
the heart to push forwards its contents in due time, and with due force.
The remote cause is frequently some impediment to the general circulation;
as the torpor of the capillaries in cold paroxysms of fever, or great
adhesions of the lungs. At other times it arises from the debility of the
action of the heart owing to the deficient sensorial power of irritation or
of association, as at the approach of death.

In both these cases of weak exertion the heart feels large to the touch, as
it does not completely empty itself at each contraction; and on that
account contracts more frequently, as described in Sect. XXXII. 2. 2.
Another kind of palpitation may sometimes arise from the retrograde motions
of the heart, as in fear. See Class I. 3. 1. 2. and IV. 3. 1. 6.

11. _Menorrhagia._ Continued flow of the catamenia. The monthly effusion of
blood from the uterus or vagina is owing to a torpor of the veins of those
membranes in consequence of the defect of venereal stimulus; and in this
respect resembles the mucus discharged in the periodical venereal orgasm of
the female quadrupeds, which are secluded from the males. The menorrhagia,
or continued flow of this discharge, is owing to a continued defect of the
venous absorption of the membranes of the uterus or vagina. See Class IV.
2. 4. 7.

M. M. Venesection in small quantity. A cathartic. Then opium, a grain every
night. Steel. Bark. A blister. Topical aspersion with cold water, or cold
vinegar.

12. _Dysmenorrhagia._ A difficulty of menstruation attended with pain. In
this complaint the torpor of the uterine vessels, which precedes
menstruation, is by sympathy accompanied with a torpor of the lumbar
membranes, and consequent pain; and frequently with cold extremities, and
general debility. The small quantity and difficulty of the discharge is
owing to arterial inactivity, as in chlorosis. Whence it happens, that
chalybeate medicines are of efficacy both to stop or prevent too great
menstruation, and to promote or increase deficient menstruation; as the
former is owing to inirritability of the veins, and the latter of the
arteries of the uterus. See Article IV. 2. 6. in the Materia Medica.

M. M. Opium, steel, pediluvium. Warm bath.

13. _Lochia nimia._ Too great discharge after delivery. In that unnatural
practice of some hasty accoucheurs of introducing the hand into the uterus
immediately after the delivery of the child, and forcibly bringing away the
placenta, it frequently happens, that a part of it is left behind; and the
uterus, not having power to exclude so small a portion of it, is prevented
from complete contraction, and a great haemorrhage ensues. In this
circumstance a bandage with a thick compress on the lower part of the
belly, by appressing the sides of the uterus on the remaining part of the
placenta, is likely to check the haemorrhage, like the application of a
pledget of any soft substance on a bleeding vessel.

In other cases the lochia continues too long, or in too great quantity,
owing to the deficiency of venous absorption.
