breath of the diver is deprived of its carbonic acid; the diver
also carries a supply of compressed oxygen from which to add to the
remaining nitrogen oxygen, in substitution for that which has been
burnt up in the process of respiration. Armed with this apparatus,
a diver is enabled to follow his vocation without any air-tube
connecting with the surface, indeed without any connections whatever.
A notable instance of a most courageous use of this apparatus was
afforded by a diver named Lambert, who, during one of the inundations
which occurred in the construction of the Severn tunnel, descended
into the heading, and proceeding along it for some 330 yards (with the
water standing some 35 feet above him), closed a sluice door, through
which the water was entering the excavations, and thus enabled the
pumps to unwater the tunnel. Altogether, on this occasion, this man
was under the water, and without any communication with those above,
for one hour and twenty-five minutes. The apparatus has also proved to
be of great utility in cases of explosion in collieries, enabling
the wearer to safely penetrate the workings, even when they have been
filled with the fatal choke-damp, to rescue the injured or to remove
the dead.


CONSTRUCTION OF TUNNELS.

With respect to the subject of tunneling thus incidentally introduced,
in subaqueous work of this kind, I have already alluded to that which
is done by "cut and cover," but where the influx of water is a source
of great difficulty, as it was in the old Thames tunnel (though in
this case for water one should read silt or mud), I do not know that
anything has been devised so ingenious as the Thames tunnel shield;
improvement has, however, been made by the application of compressed
air.

In the instance of the Hudson River tunnel, the work was done in the
manner proposed so long ago as the year 1830 by Lord Cochrane (Earl
Dundonald) in that specification of his, No. 6,018, wherein he
discloses, not merely the crude idea, but the very details needed for
compressed air cylinder-sinking and tunneling, included air-locks
and hydraulically-sealed modes for the introduction and extraction of
materials. I may, perhaps, be permitted to mention that some few years
ago I devised for a tunnel through the water-bearing chalk a mode of
excavation by the use of compressed air to hold back the water, and
combined with the employment of a tunneling machine. This work, I
regret to say, was not carried out. But there are, happily, cases of
subaqueous tunneling where the water can be dealt with by ordinary
pumping power, more or less extensive, and where the material is
capable of being cut by a tunneling machine. This was so in the Mersey
tunnel, and would be in the Channel tunnel. In the Mersey tunnel, and
in the experimental work of the Channel tunnel, Colonel Beaumont and
Major English's tunneling machine has done most admirable work. In the
7 foot 4 inch diameter heading, in the new red sandstone of the Mersey
tunnel, a speed of as much as 10 yards forward in twenty-four hours
has been averaged, while a maximum of 11-2/3 yards has been attained;
while in the 7 foot heading for the Channel tunnel, in the gray chalk,
a maximum speed of as much as 24 yards forward in the twenty-four
hours has been attained on the English side; and with the later
machine put to work at the French end, a maximum speed of as much as
27-1/3 yards forward in the twenty-four hours has been effected. In
ordinary land tunneling since 1862 there has been great progress, by
the substitution of dynamite and preparations of a similar nature
for gunpowder, and by the improvements in the rock-drills worked by
compressed air, which are used in making the holes into which the
explosive is charged. For boring for water, and for many other
purposes, the diamond drill has proved of great service, and most
certainly its advent should be welcomed by the geologist, as it has
enabled specimens of the stratum passed through to be taken in the
natural, unbroken condition, exhibiting not only the material and the
very structure of the rock, but the direction and the angle of the dip
of the beds.

Closely connected with tunneling machines are the machines for
"getting" coal. This "getting," when practiced by manual labor,
involves, as we know, the conversion into fragments and dust of a very
considerable portion of the underside of the seam of coal, the workman
laboring in a confined position, and in peril of the block of coal
breaking away and crushing him beneath it. Coal-getting machines, such
as those of the late Mr. Firth, worked by compressed air, reduce to
a minimum the waste of coal, relieve the workman of a most fatiguing
labor in a constrained position, and save him from the danger to which
he is exposed in the hand operation. It is a matter of deep regret on
many grounds, but especially as showing how little the true principles
of political economy are realized by working men, who are usually well
informed on many other points, that the commercial failure of these
machines is due to their opposition. In connection with colliery
work, and indeed in connection with explosives, in the sense of a
substitution for them of sources of expansion acting more slowly,
mention should be made of the hydraulic wedges. The employment of
these in lieu of gunpowder, to force down the block of coal that had
been undercut, is one of the means to be looked to for diminishing the
explosions in collieries. Another substitute for gunpowder is found in
the utilization of the expansion of lime when wetted. This has given
birth to the lime cartridge, the merits of which are now universally
recognized, but it is feared that trade prejudices may also prevent
its introduction. While on this subject of "accidents in mines," it
will be well to call attention to the investigations that have been
made into the causes of these disasters, and into the probable part
played by the minute dust which prevails to so great an extent in dry
collieries.

The experiments of our honorary member, Sir Frederick Abel, on this
point have been of the most striking and conclusive character, and
corroborate investigations of the late Macquorn Rankine into the
origin of explosions in flour mills and rice mills, which had
previously been so obscure. The name of Mr. Galloway should also be
mentioned as one of the earliest workers in this direction. At
first sight, pile driving appears to have but little connection with
explosives, but it will be well to notice an invention which has been
brought into practical use, although not largely (in this country at
all events), for driving piles, by allowing the monkey to fall on
a cartridge placed in the cavity in the cap on top of the pile; the
cartridge is exploded by the fall, and in the act of explosion drives
down the pile and raises the monkey; during its ascent, and before the
completion of its descent, time is found for the removal of the empty
cartridge and the insertion of a new one.


CANALS AND RIVER IMPROVEMENTS.

In the days of Brindley and of Smeaton, and of the other fathers
of our profession, whose portraits are on these walls, canals and
canalized rivers formed the only mode of internal transit which was
less costly than horse traction, and, thanks to their labors, the
country has been very well provided with canals; but the introduction
of railways proved, in the first instance, a practical bar to the
extension of the canal system, and, eventually, a too successful
competitor with the canals already made. Frequently the route that had
been selected by the canal engineer was found (as was to be expected)
a favorable one for the competing railway, and the result was, the
towns that had been served by the canal were served by the railway,
which was thus in a position to take away even the local traffic of
the canal. For some time it looked as though canal and canalized river
navigations must come to an end; for although heavy goods could be
carried very cheaply on canals, and with respect to the many works and
factories erected on the canal banks, or on bases connected therewith,
there was with canal navigation no item of expense corresponding to
the cost of cartage to the railway stations, yet the smallness of the
railway rates for heavy goods, and the greater speed of transit, were
found to be more than countervailing advantages. But when private
individuals have embarked their capital in an undertaking, they do not
calmly see that capital made unproductive, nor do they refrain from
efforts to preserve their dividends, and thus canal companies set
themselves to work to add to their position of mere owners of water
highways, entitled to take toll for the use of those highways, the
function of common carriers, thus putting themselves on a par with the
railway companies, who, as no doubt is within the recollection of our
older members, were in the outset legalized only as mere owners of
iron highways, and as the receivers of toll from any persons who might
choose to run engines and trains thereon, a condition of things
which was altered as soon as it was pointed out that it was utterly
incompatible either with punctuality or with safe working. This
addition to the legal powers of the canal companies, made by the acts
of 1845 and 1847, has had a very beneficial effect upon the value
of their property, and has assisted to preserve a mode of transport
competing with that afforded by the railways. Further, the canal
proprietors have from time to time endeavored to improve the rate of
transport, and with this object have introduced steam in lieu of horse
haulage, and by structural improvements have diminished the number of
lockages. Many years before the period we are considering, there was
employed, to save time in the lockages and to economize water, the
system of inclined planes, where, either water-borne in a traveling
caisson, as on the Monklands incline, or supported on a cradle, as
in the incline at Newark, in the State of New Jersey, the barges were
transferred from one level to another; but an important improvement on
either of these modes of overcoming a great difference of level is the
application of direct vertically lifting hydraulic power. A notable
instance of this system was brought before the Institution in a paper
read on the "Hydraulic Canal Lift at Anderton, on the River Weaver,"
by S. Duer,[2] and another instance exists on the Canal de New Fosse,
at Fontinettes, in France, the engineers being Messrs. Clark and
Standfield, who have other lifts in progress. This system reduces the
consumption of water and the expenditure of time to a minimum.

   [Footnote 2: Minutes of Proceedings Inst. C. E., vol. xlv., p. 107.]

With respect to canalized rivers, the difficulty that must always have
existed when these rivers (as was mostly the case) were provided with
weirs to dam up the water for giving power to mills has been augmented
of late years by the change in the character of floods. It has
frequently been suggested that in these days of steam motors in lieu
of water power, and of railways in lieu of water carriage, the injury
done by obstructing the delivery of floods is by no means compensated
by the otherwise all but costless power obtained, or by the
preservation of a mode of transport competing with railways. It has
thereupon been suggested that it would be in the interests of the
community to purchase and extinguish both the manufacturing and the
navigating rights, so as to enable the weirs to be removed, and free
course to be provided for floods. It need hardly be said, however,
that if means could be devised for giving full effect to the river
channels for flood purposes, while maintaining them for the provision
of motive power and of navigation, it is desirable that this should be
done. The great step in this direction appears to be the employment
of readily or, it may be, of automatically movable weirs. Two very
interesting papers on this subject by Messrs. Vernon-Harcourt and E.
B. Buckley were read and discussed in the session 1879-1880. These
dealt, I fear exclusively, with foreign, notably with French and
Indian, examples. I say I fear, not in the way of imputing blame to
the authors for not having noticed English weirs, but because the
absence of such notice amounts to a confession of backwardness in the
adoption of remedial measures on English rivers. An instance, however,
of improvement since then has been the construction by Mr. Wiswall,
the engineer to the Bridgewater Navigation Company (on the Mersey and
Irwell section of that navigation), of the movable Throstle Nest weir
at Manchester. It does seem to me that by the adoption of movable
weirs, rivers in ordinary times may be dammed up to retain sufficient
water to admit of a paying navigation and water for the mills on their
banks; while in time of flood they shall allow channels as efficient
for relief as if every weir had been swept away.

But the great feature of late years in canal engineering is not the
preservation or improvement of the ordinary internal canal, but the
provision of canals, such as the completed Suez canal, the Panama
canal in course of construction, the contemplated Isthmus of Corinth
canal--all for saving circuitous journeys in passing from one sea to
another; or in the case nearer home of the Manchester ship canal, for
taking ocean steamers many miles inland.

But the old fight between the canal engineer and the railway engineer,
or, more properly speaking, between the engineer when he had his canal
"stop" on and the same individual when he has his railway "stop"--you
will see that I am borrowing a figure, either from Dombey & Son, where
Mr. Feeder, B.A., is shown to us with his Herodotus "stop" on, or,
as is more likely, I am thinking of the organs to be exhibited in the
Second division, "Music," of that exhibition of which I have the honor
to be chairman--I am afraid this is a long parenthesis breaking
the continuity of my observations, which related to the old rivalry
between canal and railway engineering. I was about to say that this
rivalry was revived, even in the case of the transporting of ocean
vessels from sea to sea, for we know that our distinguished member,
Mr. Eads, is proposing to connect the Atlantic and Pacific oceans by
means of a ship railway across the Isthmus of Panama. He suggests that
the largest vessels should be raised out of the water, in the manner
commonly employed in floating docks, and should then be transferred
to a truck-like cradle on wheels, fitted with hydraulic bearing blocks
(this being, however, not a new proposition as applied to graving
docks), so as to obtain practical equality of support for the ship,
notwithstanding slight irregularities in the roadway, while he
proposes to deal with the question of changes of direction by the
avoidance of curves and by the substitution of angles, having at the
point of junction of the two sides turntables on which the cradle
and ship will be drawn; these can be moved with perfect ease,
notwithstanding the heavy load, because the turntable will be floating
in water carried in circular tanks.

The question of preserving the level of the turntable, whether
unloaded, partially loaded, or loaded, is happily met by an
arrangement of water ballast and pumping. I cannot pass away from the
mention of Mr. Eads' work without just reminding you of the successful
manner in which he has dealt with the mouth of the Mississippi, by
which he has caused that river to scour and maintain a channel 30 feet
deep at low water, instead of that 8 feet deep which prevailed there
before his skillful treatment. Neither can I refrain from mentioning
the successful labors of our friend Sir Charles Hartley, in improving
the navigation of that great European river, the Danube. I am sure we
are all rejoiced to see that one of the lectures of the forthcoming
series, that on "Inland Navigation," is to be delivered by him, and I
do earnestly trust he will remember it is his duty to the Institution
not to leave important and successful works unreferred to because
those works happen to be his own.

I regret that time does not admit of my noticing the many improved
machines for excavating, to be used either below water or on dry land.
I also regret, for similar reasons, I must omit all mention of ship
construction, whether for the purpose of commerce or of war, a subject
that would naturally follow that of rivers and of ship railways and
canals, and would have enabled me to speak of the great debt this
branch of civil engineering owes to the labors of our late member,
William Froude, and would have enabled me also to deal with the
question of material for ships, and with the question of armor
plating, in which, and in the construction of ordnance, our past
president, Mr. Barlow, and myself, as the two lay members of the
Ordnance Committee, are so specially interested.


MILITARY ENGINEERING APPLIANCES.

The mention of armor plates inevitably brings to our minds the
consideration of ordnance, but I do not intend to say even a few words
on this head of invention and improvement--a topic to which a whole
evening might well be devoted--because only three years ago my
talented predecessor in this chair, Sir William Armstrong, made it the
subject of his inaugural address, and dealt with it in so masterly
and exhaustive a style as to render it absolutely impossible for me
to usefully add anything to his remarks. I cannot, however, leave this
branch of the subject without mentioning, not a piece of ordnance, but
a small arm, invented since the date of Sir William's address. I mean
the Maxim machine gun. This is not only one of the latest, but is
certainly one of the most ingenious pieces of mechanism that has been
devised. The single barrel fires the Martini-Henry ammunition; the
cartridges are placed in loops upon a belt, and when this belt is
introduced to the gun, and some five or six cartridges have been drawn
in by as many reciprocations of a handle, the gun is ready to commence
firing. After the first shot, which must be fired by the pulling of
a trigger in the ordinary way, the gun will automatically continue
to send out shot after shot, until the whole of the cartridges on the
belt are exhausted; and if care is taken before this happens to link
on to the tail of the first belt the head of a second one, and another
belt to this, and so on, the firing will be automatically continuous,
and at a rate anywhere between one shot per minute and six hundred
shots per minute, dependent on the will of the person in charge of the
gun, the whole of the operations of loading, firing, and ejecting the
cartridge being performed by the energy of the recoil. This perfectly
automatic action enables the man who works the gun to devote his whole
attention to directing it, and as it is carried on a pivot and can
be elevated and depressed, he can, while the gun is firing, aim the
bullets to any point he may choose.

Since 1862 the power of defending seaports has been added to by the
application of submarine mines, arranged to be fired by impact alone,
or to be fired on impact when (under electrical control) the firing
arrangement is set for the purpose, or to be fired electrically from
the shore by two persons stationed on cross-bearings, both of whom
must concur in the act of explosion. These mines are charged with
gun-cotton, the development of which owes so much to Sir Frederick
Abel, while for purposes of attack the same material, not yet in
practical use for shells, is taken as the charge for torpedoes, which
are either affixed to a spar or are carried in the head of a submerged
cigar-shaped body. By a compressed air or by a direct steam impulse
arrangement these weapons are started on their course and are
directed, and then the running is taken up by their own engines
operating on screw propellers, driven by a magazine of compressed
air contained in the body of the torpedo. Means are also provided to
maintain the designed level below the water surface. The torpedo may
either be projected from the war ship itself or from one of those
launches which owe their origin to our member, Mr. John Isaac
Thornycroft, who first demonstrated the feasibility of that which was
previously considered to be impossible, viz., the obtaining a speed
of twenty miles and over from a vessel not more than 80 feet long.
Experiments have been carried on in the United States by Captain
Ericsson to dispense with the internal machinery of the torpedo, and
to rely for its traverse through the water upon the original impulse
given to it by a breech-loading gun, carried at the requisite depth
below the water level in a torpedo boat. This gun, having a feeble
charge of powder at a low gravimetric density, fires the torpedo, and,
it is said, succeeds in sending it many yards, and with a sufficient
terminal velocity to explode the charge by impact. Also, in the United
States, experiments have been made with a compressed air gun of
40 feet in length and 4 inches in diameter (probably by this time
replaced by a gun of 8 inches in diameter), to propel a dart through
the air, in the front of which dart there is a metallic chamber
containing dynamite. Although no doubt the best engineer is the man
who does good work with bad materials, yet I presume we should not
recommend any member of our profession to select unsuitable materials
with the object of showing how skillfully he can employ them. On
the contrary, an engineer shows his ability by the choice of those
materials which are the very best for his purpose, having regard,
however, to the relative facilities of carriage, to the power of
supply in sufficiently large quantities, to the ease with which they
can be worked up or built in, and to the cost.


USES OF CEMENT.

Probably few materials have been found more generally useful to
the civil engineer, in works which are not of metal, than has been
Portland cement. It should be noticed that during the last twenty-two
years great improvements have been made in the grinding and in the
quality of the cement. These have been largely due to the labors
in England of our member, Mr. John Grant, to the labors of foreign
engineers following in his footsteps, and to the zeal and intelligence
with which the manufacturers have followed up the question, from a
scientific as well as from a practical point of view, not resting
until they were able with certainty to produce a cement such as the
engineer needed. I do not know that there is very much to be said in
the way of progress (so far as the finished results are concerned) in
the materials which Portland cement and other mortars are intended to
unite. Clean gravel and ballast and clean sand are, I presume, very
much the same in the year 1884 as they were not only in the year 1862,
but as they were in the year 1. The same remark applies to stone
and to all other natural building materials; and, indeed, even the
artificial material brick cannot in these days be said to surpass in
quality the bricks used by the Romans in this island nineteen hundred
years ago, but as regards the mode of manufacture and the materials
employed there is progress to be noted. The brick-making machine and
the Hoffmann kiln have economized labor and fuel, while attempts have
been made, which I trust may prove successful, for utilizing the clay
which is to be found in the form of slate in those enormous mounds
of waste which disfigure the landscape in the neighborhood of slate
quarries. Certain artificial stones, moreover, appear at last to be
made with a uniformity and a power of endurance, and in respect of
these qualities compare favorably with the best natural stone, and
still more favorably having regard to the fact that they can be made
of the desired dimensions and shape, thus being ready for use without
labor of preparation.


PRESERVATION OF WOOD.

Reverting to natural materials, there remains to be mentioned that
great class, timber. In new countries the engineer is commonly glad to
avail himself of this material to an extent which among us is unknown.
For here, day by day, owing to the ready adaptability of metals to
the uses of the engineer, the employment of wood is decreasing. Far,
indeed, are we from the practice of not more than a hundred years ago,
when it was not thought improper to make the shell of a steam engine
boiler of wooden staves. The engineer of to-day, in a country like
England, refrains from using wood. He cannot cast it into form, he
cannot weld it. Glue (even if marine) would hardly be looked upon as
an efficient substitute for a sound weld; and the fact is, that it is
practically impossible to lay hold of timber when employed for tensile
purposes so as to obtain anything approaching to the full tensile
strength. If it be desired to utilize metals for such a purpose,
they can be swollen out into appropriate "eyes" to receive the needed
connection; but this cannot be done with wood, for the only way of
making an enlarged eye in wood is by taking a piece that is big enough
to form the eye, and then cutting away the superfluous portion of the
body. Moreover, when too much exposed to the weather, and when too
much covered up, wood has an evil habit of rotting, compared with
the rapidity of which mode of decay the oxidizing of metals is
unimportant. Further, one's daily experience of the way in which
a housemaid prepares a fire for lighting is suggestive of the
undesirability of the introduction of resinous sticks of timber, even
although they may be large sticks, into our buildings. Many attempts,
as we know, have been made to render timber proof against these two
great defects of rapid decay and of ready combustibility, and, as
it appears to me, it is in these directions alone one can look for
progress in connection with timber. With respect to the first, it was
only at the last meeting of the Institution we presented a Telford
medal and a Telford premium to Mr. S. B. Boulton for his paper "On the
Antiseptic Treatment of Timber," to which I desire to refer all those
who seek information on this point. With respect to the preservation
from fire of inflammable building materials, the processes, more or
less successful, that have been tried are so numerous that I cannot
even pretend to enumerate them. I will, however, just mention one, the
asbestos paint, because it is used to coat the wooden structures of
the Inventions Exhibition. To the employment of this, I think, it is
not too much to say those buildings owed their escape, in last year's
very dry summer, from being consumed by a fire that broke out in an
exhibitor's stand, destroying every object on that stand, but happily
not setting the painted woodwork on fire, although it was charred
below the surface. I do not pretend to say that a surface application
can enable wood to resist the effects of a continued exposure to fire,
but it does appear that it can prevent its ready ignition.

(_To be continued._)

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CATHEDRAL OF THE INCARNATION.

