
There seemed to be disappointment in Milt's voice; something Frankie
couldn't understand. Milt seemed suddenly nervous, ill-at-ease. But
Frankie was too eager to give it much attention. "How about it,
Milt--huh?"

Milt had been squatting on the sand. He got to his feet and looked out
across the water. "All right. Maybe we'll try it."

He seemed sad as he walked away. Frankie, occupied with his own elation,
didn't notice ...

       *       *       *       *       *

In the studio dressing room, a few hours later Milt and Frankie were
warming up. Frankie in the practice ring and Milt perched on a high
chair just outside the ropes.

Everything was just as it would be in the fight. Three minutes work, one
minute rest. Frankie noticed how slowly and carefully Milt was working
him, and how he watched the clock.

Frankie had nothing to do now but watch, as a spectator would; watch as
Milt moved him around. Milt could control every muscle, every move and
every reflex of his body. It had taken them five years to perfect this
routine. That was the training period at the College of Boxing, and was
prescribed by law.

In their first fight they had been at their peak. Frankie was Milt's
second boy and Milt knew boxing as only a Champion Welter with thirty
years of experience could know it. For fifteen years he had watched and
studied while a good veteran had directed his body. And for another
fifteen years he had been the guiding brain to a fine Middleweight.

As a Welterweight, Milt had learned to depend on speed and quick hands.
In Frankie he had found the dream of every Welter--a punch. Frankie's
body could really deliver the power. At first, it had been the heavy
hitting that had won the fights; lately, Milt had relied more and more
on the speed and deception he had developed in Frankie.

       *       *       *       *       *

Frankie felt the control ease out and knew the warm-up was over. He
slipped on his robe and he and Milt went to join the others in the TV
studio.

There would be no crowd. Just the cameras, the crews and officials. The
fight would be televised in 3-D and filmed in slow motion. If a decision
were needed to determine the winner, it would be given only after a
careful study had been made of the films.

There was little to be done in the studio and Milt had timed Frankie's
warm-up right to the minute. The fighters and their controllers took
their positions: the controllers seated in high chairs on opposite sides
of the ring; the fighters in opposite corners.

As the warning buzzer sounded, Frankie felt Milt take control. This one
he would watch closely.

At the bell Frankie rose and moved out slowly. He noticed how relaxed,
almost limp, Milt was keeping him. There was only a little more effort
used than in the pre-fight warm-up. His left hand had extra speed but
only enough power to command respect. The pattern was just about as he
had expected. As the fight went along the left would add up the points.
But his thoughts were centered on a single question. _How is it going to
be on my own?_

In the early rounds he was amazed at the extreme caution Milt was
employing. Nappy Gordon's face was beginning to redden from the
continual massage of Frankie's brisk left and occasional right. But
Frankie felt that his own face must be getting flushed with eagerness.
The glory of going in and trying to do it by himself; of beating Pop
Monroe without Milt's help. He wondered if Milt would have to clamp on
the controls again. He sure hoped not. But there wasn't anything to
really worry about. Milt could beat Pop Monroe and he wouldn't let
Frankie take a beating by himself.

Frankie's attention was caught by some odd thoughts in Milt's mind. Milt
didn't seem to be sending them, yet they were clear and direct: _You
really think you've got it, boy? That vital ingredient?_

_What you talking about?_
