
"We'll give them a reason to move, then ambush them. Right now we've a
lot of reorganizing to do, and I want you to get it started. We're
splitting this Force into Groups One and Two. Here's what I want."

       *       *       *       *       *

They cut drives and drifted in free fall while supplies were transferred
between ships, then Tulan held an inspection and found crews and
equipment proudly shipshape. Despite the proliferating rumors, morale
was excellent.

A few hours later the realignment began. Space was full of the
disc-shapes; thin, delicate-looking Lights with their projecting
external gear, and thicker, smoothly armored Mediums and Heavies. He had
twenty-three of the latter in Group One, with twice as many Mediums and
a swarm of smaller craft.

Group Two, composed of the supply ships and a small escort, was already
formed and diverging away. That was a vital part of his plan. From a
distance they'd look to telescope or radar like a full combat fleet.

He was almost ready to swerve toward the third planet and its moon, but
first he had a speech to make. It was time to squash all the rumors and
doubts with a dramatic fighting announcement.

He checked his appearance, stepped before the scanner, and nodded to
Communications to turn it on. "All hands," he said, then waited for
attention.

The small monitor screens showed a motley sampling of intent faces. He
permitted himself a tight smile. "You know I have orders to surrender
the Fleet." He paused for effect. "Those are the orders of the Council
of Four, and to disobey the Council would be unthinkable.

"Yet it is also unthinkable that a single ship of the Fleet should
surrender under any circumstances, at any time; therefore I am faced
with a dilemma in which tradition must be broken.

"The Council of Four has lost courage, and so, perhaps, have many of the
people of Sennech. We have ways of knowing that the people of Coar, far
more than our own, clamor at their government for any sort of peace.

"Coar's fleets are smashed and the remnants have fled from space.

"Clearly, courage has all but vanished from the Solar System; yet there
is one place where courage has not wavered. That place is in the Fleet
of Sennech.

"At this moment we are the only strength left in the Solar System. We
dominate the System!

"Would we have history record that the Fleet won its fight gloriously,
then cravenly shrank back from the very brink of victory?

"We left Sennech fully armed, though our orders were directly opposite.
I need not tell you that I have made the decision any man of the Fleet
would make.

"This is our final campaign. Within a short time we shall orbit Coar
herself and force her surrender. That is all."

There was a moment so quiet that the hum of the circuits grew loud, then
the monitors shook with a mighty cheer.

Later, alone, Jezef congratulated him amusedly. "They are certainly with
you a hundred percent now, if there was any doubt before. Yet there was
one argument you didn't even hint at; the strongest argument of all."

"What was that?"

"Why, you're offering them a chance at life and freedom, where they
might be going to imprisonment or execution."

That irritated Tulan. "I'm sure you're not so cynical about Fleet
loyalty and tradition as you pretend," he said stiffly. "I wouldn't
affront the men by using that kind of an argument."

Jezef grinned more widely. "Did it even occur to you to use it?"

Tulan flushed. "No," he admitted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Teyr and her moon Luhin, both in quarter-phase from here, moved steadily
apart in the viewers.

Group One's screen of light craft probed ahead, jamming enemy radar, and
discovering occasional roboscouts which were promptly vaporized. Far
behind, Group Two showed as a small luminescence. It would never be
visible to Luhin as anything else, and then only when Tulan was ready.

They reversed drives, matched speeds neatly, and went into forced orbit
around Luhin. On the flagship's first pass over the beleaguered oval of
ground held by Sennech's forces--unsupported and unreinforced since the
home planet's defection--Tulan sent a message squirting down. "Tulan
commanding. Is Admiral Galu commanding there? Report situation."

The next time around a long reply came up to them. "This is Captain Rhu
commanding. Galu killed. Twenty percent personnel losses. Six Lights
destroyed; moderate damage to several Mediums and one Heavy. Ground
lines under heavy pressure. Ships' crews involved in fighting at
perimeter. Food critical, other supplies low. Several thousand wounded.
Combat data follows." There was a good assessment of the struggle, with
some enemy positions that were known.

The Fleet Force that had escorted nearly one hundred thousand ground
troops included five Heavies and other craft in proportion, besides the
transports and supply ships. Alone, they'd been pinned down by superior
enemy ground forces and by a sizable fleet holed up all around the
satellite. With Tulan's support they could be taken off.

Tulan composed orders. "Withdraw ships' crews from lines and prepare to
lift. Get wounded aboard transports and prepare to evacuate troops. Set
up fire control network to direct our ground support."

The tedious job of shrinking the perimeter, a short stretch at a time,
began, harassed by the quickly adapting enemy.

During the first twenty hours the hostile fire was all from ground
projectors, the enemy ships not risking detection by joining in. By that
time one section of the front had pulled back to where several ships,
sheltered in a crater, would have to lift.

Lines of men and equipment converged on the ships and jammed aboard. The
actual lift was preceded by a diversion a few miles away, which
succeeded in pulling considerable enemy fire. The ships got off in
unison, slanting back across friendly territory and drawing only light
