way."

Rankin drew himself up and stared at Barrows. "I'm telling you all I
feel like telling you. You going to stand here and jaw all day? Seems to
me like you got work to do."

"Rankin," said Barrows, "I know you were a crook back in the Terran
Empire, and that you came out beyond the border to escape the law. Seems
to me, though, that even a crook, any man, would be willing to help his
only neighbor out on a lone planet like this. You might need help
yourself, sometime."

"You keep your thoughts about my past to yourself," said Rankin.
"Remember, I keep a gun. And you've got a wife and a whole bunch of kids
on that farm of yours. Be smart and let me alone."

"I'm going," said Barrows. He walked off the verandah and turned and
spat carefully into the dusty path. He climbed into his ground-car and
drove off.

Rankin, angry, watched him go. Then he heard a humming noise from
another direction.

He turned. A huge, white globe was descending across the sky. A space
ship, thought Rankin, startled.

Police? This planet was outside the jurisdiction of the Terran Empire.
When he'd cracked that safe and made off with a hundred thousand
credits, he'd headed here, because the planet was part of something
called the Clearchan Confederacy. No extradition treaties or anything.
Perfectly safe, if the planet was safe.

And the planet was more than safe. There had been a hundred robots
waiting when he landed. Where they came from he didn't know, but Rankin
prided himself on knowing how to handle robots. He'd appropriated their
services and started his farm. At the rate he was going, he'd be a
plantation owner before long.

That must be where the ship was from. The robot said they'd expected
visitors. Must be the Clearchan Confederacy visiting this robot outpost.
Was that good or bad?

From everything he'd read, and from what the robots had told him, they
were probably more robots. That was good, because he knew how to handle
robots.

The white globe disappeared into the jungle of _kesh_ trees. Rankin
waited.

A half hour later the column of his robot laborers marched out of the
forest. There were three more robots, painted grey, at the head. The new
ones from the ship, thought Rankin. Well, he'd better establish who was
boss right from the start.

"Stop right there!" he shouted.

The shiny robot laborers halted. But the three grey ones came on.
