reads anymore."

Afterward, his senile emotions betraying him, he broke down completely
and had to be led from the field. It is rumored he did not live long
after that.

The _Goddard_ drove on until Mars filled the viz-screen. It was planned
to make at least a half-dozen braking passes around the planet for
observational purposes before the actual business of bringing the ship
in for landfall began. As expected the atmosphere proved to be thin. The
speculated dead-sea areas, oddly enough, turned out to be just that. To
the surprise of some, it was soon evident that Mars possessed, or had
possessed, a high civilization. The _canali_ of Schiaparelli were indeed
broad waterways stretching from pole to pole, too regular to be anything
but the work of intelligence. But most wonderful of all were the
scattered, but fairly numerous large, walled cities that dotted the
world. Everybody was excited, eager to land and start exercising their
specialties.

One of the largest of these cities was selected more or less at random.
It was decided to set down just outside, yet far enough from the walls
to avoid any possibility of damage from the landing jets in the event
the city was inhabited. Even if deserted, the entire scientific
personnel would have raised a howl that would have been heard back on
Earth if just a section of wall was scorched. When planet-fall was
completed and observers had time to scan the surroundings it was seen
that the city was very much alive.

"What keeps them up!" marvelled Kopchainski, the aeronautics and
rocketry authority.

The sky swarmed with ships of strange design. The walls were crowded
with inhabitants, too far away for detailed observation. Even as they
looked an enormous gate opened and a procession of mounted figures
emerged. In the event the place was deserted, the Captain would have had
the honor of being the first to touch Martian soil. While atmospheric
and other checks were being run, he gave orders for the previously
decided alternative. Captain, semanticist and anthropologist would make
the First Contact.

With all checks agreeing that it was safe to open locks, soon the three
representatives of Earth were walking shoulder to shoulder down the
ramp. It was apparent that the two scientists purposely missed stride
inches from the end, so that it was the Captain's foot that actually
touched ground first.

The cavalcade--though these beasties were certainly not horses--was now
near enough to the ship for details to be seen. Surprise and wonderment
filled the crew, for while the multi-legged steeds were as alien as
anyone might expect to find on an alien world, the riders were very
definitely humanoid. Briefly, brightly and barbarically trapped as they
were by earthly standards, they seemed to be little distinguishable from
homegrown homo saps.

The approaching company appeared to be armed mainly with swords and
lances, but also in evidence were some tubular affairs that could very
