orange is such a homely color I feel ashamed to have it all the time."

As he said this, he turned green with shame, and Longtree laughed at the
paradox.

Channeljumper laughed too, glad that he had diverted his friend's
attention from the elusive and perhaps non-existent note. "Did you know
the space rocket is due pretty soon," he said, "perhaps even in time for
the Music Festival?"

"Space rocket?"

"Oh, I forgot you were busy composing and didn't get to hear about it,"
Channeljumper said. "Well, Bigwind, who has a telescope in his hole,
told me a rocket is coming through space toward us, possibly from the
third planet."

"Oh?" Longtree said, not particularly interested.

"I wonder if they'll look like us?" Channeljumper wondered.

"If they're intelligent, of course they will," Longtree said certainly,
not caring. "Their culture will probably be alien, though, and their
music--" He paused and turned a very deep yellow. "Of course! They might
even be able to furnish the note I need to complete my symphony!"

Channeljumper shook his head. "You've got to compose it all yourself,"
he reminded, "or you don't qualify. And if you don't qualify, you can't
win, and if you don't win, you can't marry Redsand."

"But just one little note--" Longtree said.

Channeljumper shrugged helplessly and turned sympathetically green. "I
don't make the rules," he said.

"No. Well," Longtree went on in sudden determination, "I'll find that
last note if I have to stay permanently purple."

Channeljumper shuddered jestingly at this but remained pleasantly
orange. "And I'll leave you alone so you can get to work," he said,
unfolding himself.

"Goodbye," Longtree said, but Channeljumper's long legs had already
taken him over to the nearest sand dune and out of sight.

Alone, Longtree picked up the blowstring once more, placed it against
his stomach, and gave out with a clear, beautiful, experimental note
which was again not the one he desired.

He still had not found it an hour later, when the Sound came. The Sound
was a low unpleasant rumble, a sound lower than any Longtree had ever
heard, and he wondered what it was. Thinking of it, he remembered he had
seen a large flash of fire in the sky a moment before the roar came. But
since this last was clearly not likely at all, he dismissed the whole
thing as imagination and tried again to coax some new note from the
blowstring.

A half hour later, Channeljumper came bounding excitedly over a sand
dune. "They're here," he cried, screeching to a halt and emitting yellow
flashes of color.

"Who's here?" Longtree demanded, turning violet in annoyance at the
interruption.

"The visitors from space," Channeljumper explained. "They landed near my
hole. They're little creatures, only half as big as we are, but thicker
and grey colored."

"Grey colored?" Longtree repeated incredulously, trying to picture the
improbability.

"But only on the outside," Channeljumper went on. "They have an outside
shell that comes off, and inside they're sort of pink-orange."

"Ah-ha," Longtree said, as though he'd suspected it all the time.
