a--a patient ..."

"A patient?" His expression grew quizzical. "Just what do you mean,
Sally?"

"You said you were pleased. If a patient is ill her doctor hopes that
she will get well. He is pleased when she does. If a woman has a baby a
doctor will say, 'I'm so pleased. The baby is doing fine. You don't have
to worry about him. I've put him on the scales and he's a bouncing,
healthy boy.'"

"Medicine is a sane and wise profession," Sally's husband said. "When I
look at my son that is exactly what I would say to the mother of my son.
He is healthy and strong. You have pleased me, Sally."

He bent as he spoke and picked Sally's son up. He held the infant in the
crook of his arm, smiling down at it.

"A healthy male child," he said. "His hair will come in thick and black.
Soon he will speak, will know that I am his father."

He ran his palm over the baby's smooth head, opened its mouth gently
with his forefinger and looked inside.

Sally rose on one elbow, her tormented eyes searching his face.

"He's your child, your son!" she sobbed. "A woman has a child and her
husband comes and puts his arms around her. He holds her close. If they
love each other they are so happy, so very happy, they break down and
cry."

"I am too pleased to do anything so fantastic, Sally," he said. "When a
child is born no tears should be shed by its parents. I have examined
the child and I am pleased with it. Does not that content you?"

"No, it doesn't!" Sally almost shrieked. "Why do you stare at your own
son as if you'd never seen a baby before? He isn't a mechanical toy.
He's our own darling, adorable little baby. _Our child!_ How can you be
so _inhumanly_ calm?"

He frowned, put the baby down.

"There is a time for love-making and a time for parenthood," he said.
"Parenthood is a serious responsibility. That is where medicine comes
in, surgery. If a child is not perfect there are emergency measures
which can be taken to correct the defect."

Sally's mouth went suddenly dry. "Perfect! What do you mean, Jim? Is
there something _wrong_ with Tommy?"

"I don't think so," her husband said. "His grasp is firm and strong. He
has good hearing and his eyesight appears to be all that could be
desired. Did you notice how his eyes followed me every moment?"

"I wasn't looking at his eyes!" Sally whispered, her voice tight with
alarm. "Why are you trying to frighten me, Jim? If Tommy wasn't a
normal, healthy baby do you imagine for one instant they would have
placed him in my arms?"

"That is a very sound observation," Sally's husband said. "Truth is
truth, but to alarm you at a time like this would be unnecessarily
cruel."

"Where does that put you?"

"I simply spoke my mind as the child's father. I had to speak as I did
because of my natural concern for the health of our child. Do you want
me to stay and talk to you, Sally?"

Sally shook her head. "No, Jim. I won't let you torture me any more."

Sally drew the baby into her arms again and held it tightly. "I'll
scream if you stay!" she warned. "I'll become hysterical unless you
leave."

"Very well," her husband said. "I'll come back tomorrow."

He bent as he spoke and kissed her on the forehead. His lips were ice
cold.

For eight years Sally sat across the table from her husband at
breakfast, her eyes fixed upon a nothingness on the green-blue wall at
his back. Calm he remained even while eating. The eggs she placed before
him he cracked methodically with a knife and consumed behind a tilted
newspaper, taking now an assured sip of coffee, now a measured glance at
the clock.

The presence of his young son bothered him not at all. Tommy could be
quiet or noisy, in trouble at school, or with an _A_ for good conduct
tucked with his report card in his soiled leather zipper jacket. It was
always: "Eat slowly, my son. Never gulp your food. Be sure to take
plenty of exercise today. Stay in the sun as much as possible."

Often Sally wanted to shriek: "Be a father to him! A real father! Get
down on the floor and play with him. Shoot marbles with him, spin one of
his tops. Remember the toy locomotive you gave him for Christmas after I
got hysterical and screamed at you? Remember the beautiful little train?
Get it out of the closet and wreck it accidentally. He'll warm up to you
then. He'll be broken-hearted, but he'll feel close to you, then you'll
know what it means to have a son!"

Often Sally wanted to fly at him, beat with her fists on his chest. But
she never did.

_You can't warm a stone by slapping it, Sally. You'd only bruise
yourself. A stone is neither cruel nor tender. You've married a man of
stone, Sally._

He hasn't missed a day at the office in eight years. She'd never visited
the office but he was always there to answer when she phoned. "I'm very
