what you say, she has caused the throne to totter. The throne was as
firm as the everlasting hills in the old King's day, Tatho."

"History has moved with pace since then, and Phorenice has spurred it.
You know her origin?"

"I know only the exact little I have told you."

"She was a swineherd's daughter from the mountains, though this is never
even whispered now, as she has declared herself to be a daughter of the
Gods, with a miraculous birth and upbringing. As she has decreed it a
sacrilege to question this parentage, and has ordered to be burnt all
those that seem to recollect her more earthly origin, the fable passes
current for truth. You see the faith I put in you, Deucalion, by telling
you what you wish to learn."

"There has always been trust between us."

"I know; but this habit of suspicion is hard to cast off, even with you.
However, let me put your good faith between me and the torture further.
Zaemon, you remember, was governor of the swineherd's province, and
Zaemon's wife saw Phorenice and took her away to adopt and bring up as
her own. It is said that the swineherd and his woman objected; perhaps
they did; anyway, I know they died; and Phorenice was taught the arts
and graces, and brought up as a daughter of the Priestly Clan."

"But still she was an adopted daughter only," I objected.

"The omission of the 'adopted' was her will at an early age," said Tatho
dryly, "and she learnt early to have her wishes carried into fact. It
was notorious that before she had grown to fifteen years she ruled not
only the women of the household, but Zaemon also, and the province that
was beyond Zaemon."

"Zaemon was learned," I said, "and a devout follower of the Gods, and
searcher into the higher mysteries; but, as a ruler, he was always a
flabby fellow."

"I do not say that opportunities have not come usefully in Phorenice's
way, but she has genius as well. For her to have raised herself at all
from what she was, was remarkable. Not one woman out of a thousand,
placed as she was, would have grown to be aught higher than a mere wife
of some sturdy countryman, who was sufficiently simple to care nothing
for pedigree. But look at Phorenice: it was her whim to take exercise
as a man-at-arms and practise with all the utensils of war; and then,
before any one quite knows how or why it happened, a rebellion had
broken out in the province, and here was she, a slip of a girl, leading
Zaemon's troops."

"Zaemon, when I knew him, was a mere derision in the field."

"Hear me on. Phorenice put down the rebellion in masterly fashion, and
gave the conquered a choice between sword and service. They fell into
her ranks at once, and were faithful to her from that moment. I tell
you, Deucalion, there is a marvellous fascination about the woman."

"Her present historian seems to have felt it."

"Of course I have. Every one who sees her comes under her spell. And
frankly, I am in love with her also, and look upon my coming here as
detestable exile. Every one near to Phorenice, high and low, loves her
just the same, even though they know it may be her whim to send them to
execution next minute."

Perhaps I let my scorn of this appear.

"You feel contempt for our weakness? You were always a strong man,
Deucalion."

"At any rate you see me still unmarried. I have found no time to palter
with the fripperies of women."

"Ah, but these colonists here are crude and unfascinating. Wait till you
see the ladies of the court, my ascetic."

"It comes to my mind," I said dryly, "that I lived in Atlantis before I
came out here, and at that time I used to see as much of court life as
most men. Yet then, also, I felt no inducement to marry."

Tatho chuckled. "Atlantis has changed so that you would hardly know the
country to-day. A new era has come over everything, especially over
the other sex. Well do I remember the women of the old King's time, how
monstrous uncomely they were, how little they knew how to walk or carry
themselves, how painfully barbaric was their notion of dress. I dare
swear that your ladies here in Yucatan are not so provincial to-day as
ours were then. But you should see them now at home. They are delicious.
And above all in charm is the Empress. Oh, Deucalion, you shall see
Phorenice in all her glorious beauty and her magnificence one of these
fine days soon, and believe me you will go down on your knees and
repent."

"I may see, and (because you say so) I may alter my life's ways. The
Gods make all things possible. But for the present I remain as I am,
celibate, and not wishful to be otherwise; and so in the meantime I
would hear the continuance of your history."

"It is one long story of success. She deposed Zaemon from his government
in name as well as in fact, and the news was spread, and the Priestly
Clan rose in its wrath. The two neighbouring governors were bidden join
forces, take her captive, and bring her for execution. Poor men! They
tried to obey their orders; they attacked her surely enough, but in
battle she could laugh at them. She killed both, and made some slaughter
amongst their troops; and to those that remained alive and became her
prisoners, she made her usual offer--the sword or service. Naturally
they were not long over making their choice: to these common people one
ruler is much the same as another: and so again her army was reinforced.

"Three times were bodies of soldiery sent against her, and three times
was she victorious. The last was a final effort. Before, it had been
customary to despise this adventuress who had sprung up so suddenly. But
then the priests began to realise their peril; to see that the throne
itself was in danger; and to know that if she were to be crushed, they
would have to put forth their utmost. Every man who could carry arms was
pressed into the service. Every known art of war was ordered to be put
into employment. It was the largest army, and the best equipped army
that Atlantis then had ever raised, and the Priestly Clan saw fit to put
in supreme command their general, Tatho."

"You!" I cried.

"Even myself, Deucalion. And mark you, I fought my utmost. I was not her
creature then; and when I set out (because they wanted to spur me to the
uttermost) the High Council of the priests pointed out my prospects. The
King we had known so long, was ailing and wearily old; he was so wrapped
up in the study of the mysteries, and the joy of closely knowing them,
that earthly matters had grown nauseous to him; and at any time he might
decide to die. The Priestly Clan uses its own discretion in the election
of a new king, but it takes note of popular sentiment; and a general who
at the critical time could come home victorious from a great campaign,
which moreover would release a harassed people from the constant
application of arms, would be the idol of the moment. These things were
pointed out to me solemnly and in the full council."

"What! They promised you the throne?"

"Even that. So you see I set out with a high stake before me. Phorenice
I had never seen, and I swore to take her alive, and give her to be the
sport of my soldiery. I had a fine confidence in my own strategy then,
Deucalion. But the old Gods, in whom I trusted then, remained old,
taught me no new thing. I drilled and exercised my army according to the
forms you and I learnt together, old comrade, and in many a tough fight
found to serve well; I armed them with the choicest weapons we knew of
then, with sling and mace, with bow and spear, with axe and knife, with
sword and the throwing fire; their bodies I covered with metal plates;
even their bellies I cared for, with droves of cattle driven in the rear
of the fighting troops.

"But when the encounter came, they might have been men of straw for all
the harm they did. Out of her own brain Phorenice had made fire-tubes
that cast a dart which would kill beyond two bowshots, and the fashion
in which she handled her troops dazzled me. They threatened us on one
flank, they harassed us on the other. It was not war as we had been
accustomed to. It was a newer and more deadly game, and I had to watch
my splendid army eaten away as waves eat a sandhill. Never once did I
get a chance of forcing close action. These new tactics that had come
from Phorenice's invention, were beyond my art to meet or understand. We
were eight to her one, and our close-packed numbers only made us so much
the more easy for slaughter. A panic came, and those who could fled.
Myself, I had no wish to go back and earn the axe that waits for the
unsuccessful general. I tried to die there fighting where I stood. But
death would not come. It was a fine melee, Deucalion, that last one."

"And so she took you?"

"I stood with three others back to back, with a ring of dead round us,
and a ring of the enemy hemming us in. We taunted them to come on. But
at hand-to-hand courtesies we had shown we could hold our own, and so
they were calling for fire-tubes with which they could strike us down
in safety from a distance. Then up came Phorenice. 'What is this to-do?'
says she. 'We seek to kill Lord Tatho, who led against you,' say they.
'So that is Tatho?' says she. 'A fine figure of a man indeed, and a
pretty fighter seemingly, after the old manner. Doubtless he is one
who would acquire the newer method. See now Tatho,' says she, 'it is my
custom to offer those I vanquish either the sword (which, believe me,
was never nearer your neck than now) or service under my banner. Will
you make a choice?'

"'Woman,' I said, 'fairest that ever I saw, finest general the world
has ever borne, you tempt me sorely by your qualities, but there is a
tradition in our Clan, that we should be true to the salt we eat. I am
the King's man still, and so I can take no service from you.'

"'The King is dead,' says she. 'A runner has just brought the tidings,
meaning them to have fallen into your hands. And I am the Empress.'

"'Who made you Empress?' I asked.

"'The same most capable hand that has given me this battle,' says she.
'It is a capable hand, as you have seen: it can be a kind hand also, as
you may learn if you choose. With the King dead, Tatho is a masterless
man now. Is Tatho in want of a mistress?'

"'Such a glorious mistress as you,' I said, 'Yes.' And from that moment,
Deucalion, I have been her slave. Oh, you may frown; you may get up from
this seat and walk away if you will. But I ask you this: keep back your
worst judgment of me, old friend, till after you have seen Phorenice
herself in the warm and lovely flesh. Then your own ears and your own
senses will be my advocates, to win me back your old esteem."




2. BACK TO ATLANTIS


The words of Tatho were no sleeping draught for me that night. I began
to think that I had made somewhat a mistake in wrapping myself up so
entirely in my government of Yucatan, and not contriving to keep more in
touch with events that were passing at home in Atlantis. For many years
past it had been easy to see that the mariner folk who did traffic
across the seas spoke with restraint, and that only what news the
Empress pleased was allowed to ooze out beyond her borders. But, as
I say, I was fully occupied with my work in the colony, and had no
curiosity to pull away a veil intentionally placed. Besides, it has
always been against my principles to put to the torture men who had
received orders for silence from their superiors, merely that they shall
break these orders for my private convenience.

However, the iron discipline of our Priestly Clan left me no choice
of procedure. As was customary, I had been deprived of my office at a
moment's notice. From that time on, all papers and authority belonged to
my successor, and, although by courtesy I might be permitted to remain
as a guest in the pyramid that had so recently been mine, to see another
sunrise, it was clearly enjoined that I must leave the territory then at
the topmost of my speed and hasten to report in Atlantis.

Tatho, to give him credit, was anxious to further my interests to the
utmost in his power. He was by my side again before the dawn, putting
all his resources at my disposal.

I had little enough to ask him. "A ship to take me home," I said, "and I
shall be your debtor."

The request seemed to surprise him. "That you may certainly have if you
wish it. But my ships are foul with the long passage, and are in need
of a careen. If you take them, you will make a slow voyage of it to
Atlantis. Why do you not take your own navy? The ships are in harbour
now, for I saw them there when we came in. Brave ships they are too."

"But not mine. That navy belongs to Yucatan."

"Well, Deucalion, you are Yucatan; or, rather, you were yesterday, and
have been these twenty years."

I saw what he meant, and the idea did not please me. I answered stiffly
enough that the ships were owned by private merchants, or belonged to
the State, and I could not claim so much as a ten-slave galley.

Tatho shrugged his shoulders. "I suppose you know your own policies
best," he said, "though to me it seems but risky for a man who has
attained to a position like yours and mine not to have provided himself
with a stout navy of his own. One never knows when a recall may be sent,
and, through lack of these precautions, a life's earnings may very well
be lost in a dozen hours."

"I have no fear for mine," I said coldly.

"Of course not, because you know me to be your friend. But had another
man been appointed to this vice-royalty, you might have been sadly
shorn, Deucalion. It is not many fellows who can resist a snug hoard
ready and waiting in the very coffers they have come to line."

"My Lord Tatho," I said, "it is clear to me that you and I have grown to
be of different tastes. All of the hoard that I have made for myself in
this colony, few men would covet. I have the poor clothes you see me
in this moment, and a box of drugs such as I have found useful to the
stomach. I possess also three slaves, two of them scribes and the third
a sturdy savage from Europe, who cooks my victual and fills for me the
bath. For my maintenance during my years of service, here, I have bled
the State of a soldier's ration and nothing beyond; and if in my name
any man has mulcted a creature in Yucatan of so much as an ounce of
bronze, I request you as a last service to have that man hanged for me
as a liar and a thief."

Tatho looked at me curiously. "I do not know whether I admire you most
or whether I pity. I do not know whether to be astonished or to despise.
We had heard of much of your uprightness over yonder in Atlantis, of
your sternness and your justice, but I swear by the old Gods that no
soul guessed you carried your fancy so far as this. Why, man, money is
power. With money and the resources money can buy, nothing could stop
a fellow like you; whilst without it you may be tripped up and trodden
down irrevocably at the first puny reverse."

"The Gods will choose my fate."

"Possibly; but for mine, I prefer to nourish it myself. I tell you with
frankness that I have not come here to follow in the pattern you have
made for a vice-royalty. I shall govern Yucatan wisely and well to the
best of my ability; but I shall govern it also for the good of Tatho,
the viceroy. I have brought with me here my navy of eight ships and a
personal bodyguard. There is my wife also, and her women and her slaves.
All these must be provided for. And why indeed should it be otherwise?
If a people is to be governed, it should be their privilege to pay
handsomely for their prince."

"We shall not agree on this. You have the power now, and can employ it
as you choose. If I thought it would be of any use, I should like to
supplicate you most humbly to deal with lenience when you come to tax
these people who are under you. They have grown very dear to me."

"I have disgusted you with me, and I am grieved for it. But even to
retain your good opinion, Deucalion--which I value more than that of any
man living--I cannot do here as you have done. It would be impossible,
even if I wished it. You must not judge all other men by your own
strong standard: a Tatho is by no means a colossus like a Deucalion. And
besides, I have a wife and children, and they must be provided for, even
if I neglect myself."

"Ah, there," I said, "it does seem that I possess the advantage. I have
no wife, to clog me."

He caught up my word quickly. "It seems to me you have nothing that
makes life worth living. You have neither wife, children, riches, cooks,
retinue, dresses, nor anything else in proportion to your station. You
will pardon my saying it, old comrade, but you are plaguey ignorant
about some matters. For example, you do not know how to dine. During
every day of a very weary voyage, I have promised myself when sitting
before the meagre sea victual, that presently the abstinence would be
more than repaid by Deucalion's welcoming feast. Oh, I tell you that
feast was one of the vividest things that ever came before my eyes. And
then when we get to the actuality, what was it? Why, a country farmer
every day sits down to more delicate fare. You told me how it was
prepared. Well, your savage from Europe may be lusty, and perchance is
faithful, but he is a devil-possessed cook. Gods! I have lived better on
a campaign.

"I know this is a colony here, without any of the home refinements; but
if in the days to come, the deer of the forest, the fish of the stream,
and the other resources of the place are not put to better use than
heretofore, I shall see it my duty as ruler to fry some of the
kitchen staff alive in grease so as to encourage better cookery. Gods!
Deucalion, have you forgotten what it is to have a palate? And have
