be on one level, so to speak. This may be easily compassed by imagining
the hoops as floating, one surrounding the other, with the ball in the
middle of all, upon the surface of still water. Such a set of objects
would be described in astronomical parlance as being _in the same
plane_. Suppose, on the other hand, that some of these floating hoops
are tilted with regard to the others, so that one half of a hoop rises
out of the water and the other half consequently sinks beneath the
surface. This indeed is the actual case with regard to the planetary
orbits. They do not by any means lie all exactly in the same plane. Each
one of them is tilted, or _inclined_, a little with respect to the plane
of the earth's orbit, which astronomers, for convenience, regard as the
_level_ of the solar system. This tilting, or "inclination," is, in the
larger planets, greatest for the orbit of Mercury, least for that of
Uranus. Mercury's orbit is inclined to that of the earth at an angle of
about 7 deg., that of Venus at a little over 3 deg., that of Saturn 2-1/2
deg.; while in those of Mars, Neptune, and Jupiter the inclination is less
than 2 deg. But greater than any of these is the inclination of the orbit
of the tiny planet Eros, viz. nearly 11 deg.

The systems of satellites revolving around their respective planets
being, as we have already pointed out, mere miniature editions of the
solar system, the considerations so far detailed, which regulate the
behaviour of the planets in their relations to the sun, will of
necessity apply to the satellites very closely. In one respect, however,
a system of satellites differs materially from a system of planets. The
central body around which planets are in motion is self-luminous,
whereas the planetary body around which a satellite revolves is not.
True, planets shine, and shine very brightly too; as, for instance,
Venus and Jupiter. But they do not give forth any light of their own, as
the sun does; they merely reflect the sunlight which they receive from
him. Putting this one fact aside, the analogy between the planetary
system and a satellite system is remarkable. The satellites are
spherical in form, and differ markedly in size; they rotate, so far as
we know, upon their axes in varying times; they revolve around their
governing planets in orbits, not circular, but elliptic; and these
orbits, furthermore, do not of necessity lie in the same plane. Last of
all the satellites revolve around their primaries at rates which are
directly comparable with those at which the planets revolve around the
sun, the rule in fact holding good that the nearer a satellite is to its
primary the faster it revolves.


[3] As there seems to be much difference of opinion concerning the
diameters of Uranus and Neptune, it should here be mentioned that the
above figures are taken from Professor F.R. Moulton's _Introduction to
Astronomy_ (1906). They are there stated to be given on the authority of
"Barnard's many measures at the Lick Observatory."




CHAPTER IV

CELESTIAL MECHANISM


As soon as we begin to inquire closely into the actual condition of the
various members of the solar system we are struck with a certain
distinction. We find that there are two quite different points of view
from which these bodies can be regarded. For instance, we may make our
estimates of them either as regards _volume_--that is to say, the mere
room which they take up; or as regards _mass_--that is to say, the
amount of matter which they contain.

Let us imagine two globes of equal volume; in other words, which take up
an equal amount of space. One of these globes, however, may be composed
of material much more tightly put together than in the other; or of
greater _density_, as the term goes. That globe is said to be the
greater of the two in mass. Were such a pair of globes to be weighed in
scales, one globe in each pan, we should see at once, by its weighing
down the other, which of the two was composed of the more tightly packed
materials; and we should, in astronomical parlance, say of this one that
it had the greater mass.

Volume being merely another word for size, the order of the members of
the solar system, with regard to their volumes, will be as follows,
beginning with the greatest:--the Sun, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
Neptune, the Earth, Venus, Mars, and Mercury.

With regard to mass the same order strangely enough holds good. The
actual densities of the bodies in question are, however, very different.
The densest or closest packed body of all is the Earth, which is about
five and a half times as dense as if it were composed entirely of water.
Venus follows next, then Mars, and then Mercury. The remaining bodies,
on the other hand, are relatively loose in structure. Saturn is the
least dense of all, less so than water. The density of the Sun is a
little greater than that of water.

This method of estimating is, however, subject to a qualification. It
must be remembered that in speaking of the Sun, for instance, as being
only a little denser than water, we are merely treating the question
from the point of view of an average. Certain parts of it in fact will
be ever so much denser than water: those are the parts in the centre.
Other portions, for instance, the outside portions, will be very much
less dense. It will easily be understood that in all such bodies the
densest or most compressed portions are to be found towards the centre;
while the portions towards the exterior being less pressed upon, will be
less dense.

We now reach a very important point, the question of Gravitation.
_Gravitation_, or _gravity_, as it is often called, is the attractive
force which, for instance, causes objects to fall to the earth. Now it
seems rather strange that one should say that it is owing to a certain
force that things fall towards the earth. All things seem to us to fall
so of their own accord, as if it were quite natural, or rather most
unnatural if they did not. Why then require a "force" to make them fall?

The story goes that the great Sir Isaac Newton was set a-thinking on
this subject by seeing an apple fall from a tree to the earth. He then
carried the train of thought further; and, by studying the movements of
the moon, he reached the conclusion that a body even so far off as our
satellite would be drawn towards the earth in the same manner. This
being the case, one will naturally ask why the moon herself does not
fall in upon the earth. The answer is indeed found to be that the moon
is travelling round and round the earth at a certain rapid pace, and it
is this very same rapid pace which keeps her from falling in upon us.
Any one can test this simple fact for himself. If we tie a stone to the
end of a string, and keep whirling it round and round fast enough, there
will be a strong pull from the stone in an outward direction, and the
string will remain tight all the time that the stone is being whirled.
If, however, we gradually slacken the speed at which we are making the
stone whirl, a moment will come at length when the string will become
limp, and the stone will fall back towards our hand.

It seems, therefore, that there are two causes which maintain the stone
at a regular distance all the time it is being steadily whirled. One of
these is the continual pull inward towards our hand by means of the
string. The other is the continual pull away from us caused by the rate
at which the stone is travelling. When the rate of whirling is so
regulated that these pulls exactly balance each other, the stone travels
comfortably round and round, and shows no tendency either to fall back
upon our hand or to break the string and fly away into the air. It is
indeed precisely similar with regard to the moon. The continual pull of
the earth's gravitation takes the place of the string. If the moon were
to go round and round slower than it does, it would tend to fall in
towards the earth; if, on the other hand, it were to go faster, it would
tend to rush away into space.

The same kind of pull which the earth exerts upon the objects at its
surface, or upon its satellite, the moon, exists through space so far as
we know. Every particle of matter in the universe is found in fact to
attract every other particle. The moon, for instance, attracts the earth
also, but the controlling force is on the side of the much greater mass
of the earth. This force of gravity or attraction of gravitation, as it
is also called, is perfectly regular in its action. Its power depends
first of all exactly upon the mass of the body which exerts it. The
gravitational pull of the sun, for instance, reaches out to an enormous
distance, controlling perhaps, in their courses, unseen planets circling
far beyond the orbit of Neptune. Again, the strength with which the
force of gravity acts depends upon distance in a regularly diminishing
proportion. Thus, the nearer an object is to the earth, for instance,
the stronger is the gravitational pull which it gets from it; the
farther off it is, the weaker is this pull. If then the moon were to be
brought nearer to the earth, the gravitational pull of the latter would
become so much stronger that the moon's rate of motion would have also
to increase in due proportion to prevent her from being drawn into the
earth. Last of all, the point in a body from which the attraction of
gravitation acts, is not necessarily the centre of the body, but rather
what is known as its _centre of gravity_, that is to say, the balancing
point of all the matter which the body contains.

It should here be noted that the moon does not actually revolve around
the centre of gravity of the earth. What really happens is that both
orbs revolve around their _common_ centre of gravity, which is a point
within the body of the earth, and situated about three thousand miles
from its centre. In the same manner the planets and the sun revolve
around the centre of gravity of the solar system, which is a point
within the body of the sun.

The neatly poised movements of the planets around the sun, and of the
satellites around their respective planets, will therefore be readily
understood to result from a nice balance between gravitation and speed
of motion.

The mass of the earth is ascertained to be about eighty times that of
the moon. Our knowledge of the mass of a planet is learned from
comparing the revolutions of its satellite or satellites around it, with
those of the moon around the earth. We are thus enabled to deduce what
the mass of such a planet would be compared to the earth's mass; that is
to say, a study, for instance, of Jupiter's satellite system shows that
Jupiter must have a mass nearly three hundred and eighteen times that of
our earth. In the same manner we can argue out the mass of the sun from
the movements of the planets and other bodies of the system around it.
With regard, however, to Venus and Mercury, the problem is by no means
such an easy one, as these bodies have no satellites. For information in
this latter case we have to rely upon such uncertain evidence as, for
instance, the slight disturbances caused in the motion of the earth by
the attraction of these planets when they pass closest to us, or their
observed effect upon the motions of such comets as may happen to pass
near to them.

Mass and weight, though often spoken of as one and the same thing, are
by no means so. Mass, as we have seen, merely means the amount of matter
which a body contains. The weight of a body, on the other hand, depends
entirely upon the gravitational pull which it receives. The force of
gravity at the surface of the earth is, for instance, about six times as
great as that at the surface of the moon. All bodies, therefore, weigh
about six times as much on the earth as they would upon the moon; or,
rather, a body transferred to the moon's surface would weigh only about
one-sixth of what it did on the terrestrial surface. It will therefore
be seen that if a body of given _mass_ were to be placed upon planet
after planet in turn, its _weight_ would regularly alter according to
the force of gravity at each planet's surface.

Gravitation is indeed one of the greatest mysteries of nature. What it
is, the means by which it acts, or why such a force should exist at all,
are questions to which so far we have not had even the merest hint of an
answer. Its action across space appears to be instantaneous.

The intensity of gravitation is said in mathematical parlance "to vary
inversely with the square of the distance." This means that at _twice_
the distance the pull will become only _one-quarter_ as strong, and not
one-half as otherwise might be expected. At _four_ times the distance,
therefore, it will be _one-sixteenth_ as strong. At the earth's surface
a body is pulled by the earth's gravitation, or "falls," as we
ordinarily term it, through 16 feet in one _second_ of time; whereas at
the distance of the moon the attraction of the earth is so very much
weakened that a body would take as long as one _minute_ to fall through
the same space.

Newton's investigations showed that if a body were to be placed _at
rest_ in space entirely away from the attraction of any other body it
would remain always in a motionless condition, because there would
plainly be no reason why it should move in any one direction rather than
in another. And, similarly, if a body were to be projected in a certain
direction and at a certain speed, it would move always in the same
direction and at the same speed so long as it did not come within the
gravitational attraction of any other body.

The possibility of an interaction between the celestial orbs had
occurred to astronomers before the time of Newton; for instance, in the
ninth century to the Arabian Musa-ben-Shakir, to Camillus Agrippa in
1553, and to Kepler, who suspected its existence from observation of the
tides. Horrox also, writing in 1635, spoke of the moon as moved by an
_emanation_ from the earth. But no one prior to Newton attempted to
examine the question from a mathematical standpoint.

Notwithstanding the acknowledged truth and far-reaching scope of the law
of gravitation--for we find its effects exemplified in every portion of
the universe--there are yet some minor movements which it does not
account for. For instance, there are small irregularities in the
movement of Mercury which cannot be explained by the influence of
possible intra-Mercurial planets, and similarly there are slight
unaccountable deviations in the motions of our neighbour the Moon.




CHAPTER V

CELESTIAL DISTANCES


Up to this we have merely taken a general view of the solar system--a
bird's-eye view, so to speak, from space.

In the course of our inquiry we noted in a rough way the _relative_
distances at which the various planets move around the sun. But we have
not yet stated what these distances _actually_ are, and it were
therefore well now to turn our attention to this important matter.

Each of us has a fair idea of what a mile is. It is a quarter of an
hour's sharp walk, for instance; or yonder village or building, we know,
lies such and such a number of miles away.

The measurements which have already been given of the diameters of the
various bodies of the solar system appear very great to us, who find
that a walk of a few miles at a time taxes our strength; but they are a
mere nothing when we consider the distances from the sun at which the
various planets revolve in their orbits.

The following table gives these distances in round numbers. As here
stated they are what are called "mean" distances; for, as the orbits are
oval, the planets vary in their distances from the sun, and we are
therefore obliged to strike a kind of average for each case:--

Mercury  about   36,000,000 miles.
Venus      "     67,200,000  "
Earth      "     92,900,000  "
Mars       "    141,500,000  "
Jupiter    "    483,300,000  "
Saturn     "    886,000,000  "
Uranus     "  1,781,900,000  "
Neptune    "  2,791,600,000  "

From the above it will be seen at a glance that we have entered upon a
still greater scale of distance than in dealing with the diameters of
the various bodies of the system. In that case the distances were
limited to thousands of miles; in this, however, we have to deal with
millions. A million being ten hundred thousand, it will be noticed that
even the diameter of the huge sun is well under a million miles.

How indeed are we to get a grasp of such distances, when those to which
we are ordinarily accustomed--the few miles' walk, the little stretch of
sea or land which we gaze upon around us--are so utterly minute in
comparison? The fact is, that though men may think that they can picture
in their minds such immense distances, they actually can not. In matters
like these we unconsciously employ a kind of convention, and we estimate
a thing as being two or three or more times the size of another. More
than this we are unable to do. For instance, our ordinary experience of
a mile enables us to judge, in a way, of a stretch of several miles,
such as one can take in with a glance; but in our estimation of a
thousand miles, or even of one hundred, we are driven back upon a mental
trick, so to speak.

In our attempts to realise such immense distances as those in the solar
system we are obliged to have recourse to analogies; to comparisons with
other and simpler facts, though this is at the best a mere self-cheating
device. The analogy which seems most suited to our purpose here, and one
which has often been employed by writers, is borrowed from the rate at
which an express train travels.

Let us imagine, for instance, that we possess an express train which is
capable of running anywhere, never stops, never requires fuel, and
always goes along at sixty miles an hour. Suppose we commence by
employing it to gauge the size of our own planet, the earth. Let us send
it on a trip around the equator, the span of which is about 24,000
miles. At its sixty-miles-an-hour rate of going, this journey will take
nearly 17 days. Next let us send it from the earth to the moon. This
distance, 240,000 miles, being ten times as great as the last, will of
course take ten times as long to cover, namely, 170 days; that is to
say, nearly half a year. Again, let us send it still further afield, to
the sun, for example. Here, however, it enters upon a journey which is
not to be measured in thousands of miles, as the others were, but in
millions. The distance from the earth to the sun, as we have seen in the
foregoing table, is about 93 millions of miles. Our express train would
take about 178 _years_ to traverse this.

Having arrived at the sun, let us suppose that our train makes a tour
right round it. This will take more than five years.

Supposing, finally, that our train were started from the sun, and made
to run straight out to the known boundaries of the solar system, that is
to say, as far as the orbit of Neptune, it would take over 5000 years to
traverse the distance.

That sixty miles an hour is a very great speed any one, I think, will
admit who has stood upon the platform of a country station while one of
the great mail trains has dashed past. But are not the immensities of
space appalling to contemplate, when one realises that a body moving
incessantly at such a rate would take so long as 10,000 years to
traverse merely the breadth of our solar system? Ten thousand years!
Just try to conceive it. Why, it is only a little more than half that
time since the Pyramids were built, and they mark for us the Dawn of
History. And since then half-a-dozen mighty empires have come and gone!

Having thus concluded our general survey of the appearance and
dimensions of the solar system, let us next inquire into its position
and size in relation to what we call the Universe.

A mere glance at the night sky, when it is free from clouds, shows us
that in every direction there are stars; and this holds good, no matter
what portion of the globe we visit. The same is really true of the sky
by day, though in that case we cannot actually see the stars, for their
light is quite overpowered by the dazzling light of the sun.

We thus reach the conclusion that our earth, that our solar system in
fact, lies plunged within the midst of a great tangle of stars. What
position, by the way, do we occupy in this mighty maze? Are we at the
centre, or anywhere near the centre, or where?

It has been indeed amply proved by astronomical research that the stars
are bodies giving off a light of their own, just as our sun does; that
they are in fact suns, and that our sun is merely one, perhaps indeed a
very unimportant member, of this great universe of stars. Each of these
stars, or suns, besides, may be the centre of a system similar to what
we call our solar system, comprising planets and satellites, comets and
meteors;--or perchance indeed some further variety of attendant bodies
of which we have no example in our tiny corner of space. But as to
whether one is right in a conjecture of this kind, there is up to the
present no proof whatever. No telescope has yet shown a planet in
attendance upon one of these distant suns; for such bodies, even if they
do exist, are entirely out of the range of our mightiest instruments. On
what then can we ground such an assumption? Merely upon analogy; upon
the common-sense deduction that as the stars have characteristics
similar to our particular star, the sun, it would seem unlikely that
ours should be the only such body in the whole of space which is
attended by a planetary system.

"The Stars," using that expression in its most general sense, do not lie
at one fixed distance from us, set here and there upon a background of
sky. There is in fact no background at all. The brilliant orbs are all
around us in space, at different distances from us and from each other;
and we can gaze between them out into the blackness of the void which,
perhaps, continues to extend unceasingly long after the very outposts of
the stellar universe has been left behind. Shall we then start our
imaginary express train once more, and send it out towards the nearest
of the stars? This would, however, be a useless experiment. Our
express-train method of gauging space would fail miserably in the
attempt to bring home to us the mighty gulf by which we are now faced.
Let us therefore halt for a moment and look back upon the orders of
distance with which we have been dealing. First of all we dealt with
thousands of miles. Next we saw how they shrank into insignificance when
we embarked upon millions. We found, indeed, that our sixty-mile-an-hour
train, rushing along without ceasing, would consume nearly the whole of
historical time in a journey from the sun to Neptune.

In the spaces beyond the solar system we are faced, however, by a new
order of distance. From sun to planets is measured in millions of miles,
but from sun to sun is measured in billions. But does the mere stating
of this fact convey anything? I fear not. For the word "billion" runs as
glibly off the tongue as "million," and both are so wholly unrealisable
by us that the actual difference between them might easily pass
unnoticed.

Let us, however, make a careful comparison. What is a million? It is a
thousand thousands. But what is a billion? It is a million millions.
Consider for a moment! A million of millions. That means a million, each
unit of which is again a million. In fact every separate "1" in this
million is itself a million. Here is a way of trying to realise this
gigantic number. A million seconds make only eleven and a half days and
nights. But a billion seconds will make actually more than thirty
thousand years!

Having accepted this, let us try and probe with our express train even a
little of the new gulf which now lies before us. At our old rate of
going it took almost two years to cover a million miles. To cover a
billion miles--that is to say, a million times this distance--would thus
take of course nearly two million years. Alpha Centauri, the nearest
star to our earth, is some twenty-five billions of miles away. Our
express train would thus take about fifty millions of years to reach it!

This shows how useless our illustration, appropriate though it seemed
for interplanetary space, becomes when applied to the interstellar
spaces. It merely gives us millions in return for billions; and so the
mind, driven in upon itself, whirls round and round like a squirrel in
its revolving cage. There is, however, a useful illustration still left
us, and it is the one which astronomers usually employ in dealing with
the distances of the stars. The illustration in question is taken from
the velocity of light.

Light travels at the tremendous speed of about 186,000 miles a second.
It therefore takes only about a second and a quarter to come to us from
the moon. It traverses the 93,000,000 of miles which separate us from
the sun in about eight minutes. It travels from the sun out to Neptune
in about four hours, which means that it would cross the solar system
from end to end in eight. To pass, however, across the distance which
separates us from Alpha Centauri it would take so long as about four
and a quarter years!

Astronomers, therefore, agree in estimating the distances of the stars
from the point of view of the time which light would take to pass from
them to our earth. They speak of that distance which light takes a year
to traverse as a "light year." According to this notation, Alpha
Centauri is spoken of as being about four and a quarter light years
distant from us.

Now as the rays of light coming from Alpha Centauri to us are chasing
one another incessantly across the gulf of space, and as each ray left
that star some four years before it reaches us, our view of the star
itself must therefore be always some four years old. Were then this star
to be suddenly removed from the universe at any moment, we should
