I looked up at the observation ramp's occupants--people who except for
their bizarre dress might well be of Earth--and saw no curiosity in the
eyes that sometimes swept across our position.

"Be that as it may, Harry, we certainly should cause a stir in these
pressure suits. Let's go!"

We walked up to a dour-looking individual at a counter at the ramp's
end. Clearing my throat, I said rather inanely, "Hello!"--but what
_does_ one say to an extrasolarian?

I realized then that my voice seemed thunderous, that the only other
sounds came from a distance: the city's noise, the atmosphere ships'
engines on the horizon--

       *       *       *       *       *

The Centaurian ignored us.

I looked at the atmosphere ships in the clear blue sky, at the
Centaurians on the ramp who appeared to be conversing--and there was no
sound from those planes, no sound from the people!

"It's impossible," Harry said. "The atmosphere's nearly Earth-normal. It
should be--well, damn it, it _is_ as sound-conductive; _we're_ talking,
aren't we?"

I looked up at the Centaurians again. They were looking excitedly
westward. Some turned to companions. Mouths opened and closed to form
words we could not hear. Wide eyes lowered, following something I could
not see. Sick inside, I turned to Albrecht and read confirmation in his
drawn, blanched face.

"Captain," he said, "I suspected that we might find something like this
when we first came out of hyperspace and the big sleep. The recorders
showed we'd exceeded light-speed in normal space-time just after the
transition. Einstein theorized that time would not pass as swiftly to
those approaching light-speed. We could safely exceed that speed in
hyperspace but should never have done so in normal space-time. Beyond
light-speed time must conversely accelerate!

"These people haven't seen _us_ yet. They certainly just observed our
landing. As we suspected, they probably do have speech and radio--but we
can't pick up either. We're seconds ahead of them in time and we can't
pick up from the past sounds of nearby origin or nearby signals radiated
at light-speed. They'll see and hear us soon, but we'll never receive an
answer from _them_! Our questions will come to them in their future but
we can never pick answers from their past!"

"Let's go, Harry," I said quickly.

"Where?" he asked. "Where can we ever go that will be an improvement
over this?" He was resigned.

