her hand and drag her into the pit.

With her play bollixed, she was confused and bewildered. She ain't a
fighter, and she sits back against the wall staring at us dead pan with
big expressionless eyes. She's a plenty pretty babe and I could see
exactly what had happened as far as Stillwell was concerned. His spots
had come to life in very adequate form so to speak.

       *       *       *       *       *

Stillwell goes over and sits down beside her and I'm very much on the
alert, because I know where his courage comes from. But I decide it's
all right, because I see the babe is not belligerent, just confused kind
of. And friendly.

And willing. Kind of a whipped-little-dog willing, and man oh man! She
was sure what Stillwell needed.

They kind of went together like a hand and a glove--natural-like. And
it followed--pretty natural--that when Stillwell got up and led her
around a wing of the pit, out of sight, she went willing--like that same
little dog.

Uhuh. No, you guys. Two's enough. I wouldn't rob you. Well, okay, and
thanks kindly.

Well, there I was, all alone, but happy for Stillwell, cause I know it's
what the kid needs, and in spots like that what difference does it make?
Yank--Ruskie--Mongolian--as long as she's willing.

Then, you guys, Stillwell comes back out--wall-eyed--real
wall-eyed--like being hit but not knocked out and still walking. I know
what it is--some kind of shock. I get up and walk over and take a look
at the babe where he'd left her--and I bust out laughing. I told you
guys there was a yak in this. I laughed like a fool--it was that funny.
As much as I had time to, before Stillwell cracked. It was enough to
crack him--the little thing that pushes a guy over the edge.

He lets out a yell and screams, "For crisake! For crisake! Nothing but a
bucket of bolts! Nothing but a couple of plastic lumps--"

That was when I hit him. I had to. He was for the birds, Stillwell was.
An hour later we got relieved and a couple of medicos carried him away
strapped to a stretcher--gone like a kite.

They took the robot too, and its clothes, but they forgot the brassiere,
so I took it and I been carrying it ever since, but I'll leave it with
you guys if you want--for the coffee. Might make you think about home.
After all, like the man says, we got to keep our sense of humor.

Well, so long, you guys--and thanks.


