     hour of a certain day (thereby giving its name to the day) Venus
     will rule the second hour, Mercury the third, and so on; the Sun
     will thus be found to rule the eighth, fifteenth, and twenty-second
     hour of that day, Venus the twenty-third, and Mercury the
     twenty-fourth hour; so the Moon will rule the first hour of the
     next day, which will therefore be Monday. On the same principle
     (numbering round the hours successively, with the arrows) the first
     hour of the next day will be found to be ruled by Mars, or by the
     Saxon deity corresponding thereto; the first hour of the day after,
     by Mercury (_Mercredi_), and so on (following the straight lines of
     the pattern).

     The order of the planets round the circle counter-clockwise, _i.e._
     the direction of their proper motions, is that quoted above in the
     text.

To explain the motion of the planets and reduce them to any sort of law
was a work of tremendous difficulty. The greatest astronomer of ancient
times was Hipparchus, and to him the system known as the Ptolemaic
system is no doubt largely due. But it was delivered to the world mainly
by Ptolemy, and goes by his name. This was a fine piece of work, and a
great advance on anything that had gone before; for although it is of
course saturated with error, still it is based on a large substratum of
truth. Its superiority to all the previously mentioned systems is
obvious. And it really did in its more developed form describe the
observed motions of the planets.

Each planet was, in the early stages of this system, as taught, say, by
Eudoxus, supposed to be set in a crystal sphere, which revolved so as to
carry the planet with it. The sphere had to be of crystal to account for
the visibility of other planets and the stars through it. Outside the
seven planetary spheres, arranged one inside the other, was a still
larger one in which were set the stars. This was believed to turn all
the others, and was called the _primum mobile_. The whole system was
supposed to produce, in its revolution, for the few privileged to hear
the music of the spheres, a sound as of some magnificent harmony.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--Order of ancient planets corresponding to the
days of the week.]

The enthusiastic disciples of Pythagoras believed that their master was
privileged to hear this noble chant; and far be it from us to doubt
that the rapt and absorbing pleasure of contemplating the harmony of
nature, to a man so eminently great as Pythagoras, must be truly and
adequately represented by some such poetic conception.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--Ptolemaic system.]

The precise kind of motion supposed to be communicated from the _primum
mobile_ to the other spheres so as to produce the observed motions of
the planets was modified and improved by various philosophers until it
developed into the epicyclic train of Hipparchus and of Ptolemy.

It is very instructive to observe a planet (say Mars or Jupiter) night
after night and plot down its place with reference to the fixed stars
on a celestial globe or star-map. Or, instead of direct observation by
alignment with known stars, it is easier to look out its right ascension
and declination in _Whitaker's Almanac_, and plot those down. If this be
done for a year or two, it will be found that the motion of the planet
is by no means regular, but that though on the whole it advances it
sometimes is stationary and sometimes goes back.[1]

[Illustration: FIG. 9.--Specimens of Apparent paths of Venus and of Mars
among the stars.]

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--Apparent epicyclic orbits of Jupiter and
Saturn; the Earth being supposed fixed at the centre, with the Sun
revolving in a small circle. A loop is made by each planet every year.]

These "stations" and "retrogressions" of the planets were well known to
the ancients. It was not to be supposed for a moment that the crystal
spheres were subject to any irregularity, neither was uniform circular
motion to be readily abandoned; so it was surmised that the main sphere
carried, not the planet itself, but the centre or axis of a subordinate
sphere, and that the planet was carried by this. The minor sphere could
be allowed to revolve at a different uniform pace from the main sphere,
and so a curve of some complexity could be obtained.

A curve described in space by a point of a circle or sphere, which
itself is carried along at the same time, is some kind of cycloid; if
the centre of the tracing circle travels along a straight line, we get
the ordinary cycloid, the curve traced in air by a nail on a
coach-wheel; but if the centre of the tracing circle be carried round
another circle the curve described is called an epicycloid. By such
curves the planetary stations and retrogressions could be explained. A
large sphere would have to revolve once for a "year" of the particular
planet, carrying with it a subsidiary sphere in which the planet was
fixed; this latter sphere revolving once for a "year" of the earth. The
actual looped curve thus described is depicted for Jupiter and Saturn in
the annexed diagram (fig. 10.)

     It was long ago perceived that real material spheres were
     unnecessary; such spheres indeed, though possibly transparent to
     light, would be impermeable to comets: any other epicyclic gearing
     would serve, and as a mere description of the motion it is simpler
     to think of a system of jointed bars, one long arm carrying a
     shorter arm, the two revolving at different rates, and the end of
     the short one carrying the planet. This does all that is needful
     for the first approximation to a planet's motion. In so far as the
     motion cannot be thus truly stated, the short arm may be supposed
     to carry another, and that another, and so on, so that the
     resultant motion of the planet is compounded of a large number of
     circular motions of different periods; by this device any required
     amount of complexity could be attained. We shall return to this at
     greater length in Lecture III.

     The main features of the motion, as shown in the diagram, required
     only two arms for their expression; one arm revolving with the
     average motion of the planet, and the other revolving with the
     apparent motion of the sun, and always pointing in the same
     direction as the single arm supposed to carry the sun. This last
     fact is of course because the motion to be represented does not
     really belong to the planet at all, but to the earth, and so all
     the main epicyclic motions for the superior planets were the same.
     As for the inferior planets (Mercury and Venus) they only appear
     to oscillate like the bob of a pendulum about the sun, and so it is
     very obvious that they must be really revolving round it. An
     ancient Egyptian system perceived this truth; but the Ptolemaic
     system imagined them to revolve round the earth like the rest, with
     an artificial system of epicycles to prevent their ever getting far
     away from the neighbourhood of the sun.

     It is easy now to see how the Copernican system explains the main
     features of planetary motion, the stations and retrogressions,
     quite naturally and without any complexity.

     [Illustration: FIG. 11.--Egyptian system.]

     Let the outer circle represent the orbit of Jupiter, and the inner
     circle the orbit of the earth, which is moving faster than Jupiter
     (since Jupiter takes 4332 days to make one revolution); then
     remember that the apparent position of Jupiter is referred to the
     infinitely distant fixed stars and refer to fig. 12.

     Let E_1, E_2, &c., be successive positions of the earth; J_1,
     J_2, &c., corresponding positions of Jupiter. Produce the lines
     E_1 J_1, E_2 J_2, &c., to an enormously greater circle
     outside, and it will be seen that the termination of these lines,
     representing apparent positions of Jupiter among the stars,
     advances while the earth goes from E_1 to E_3; is almost
     stationary from somewhere about E_3 to E_4; and recedes from
     E_4 to E_5; so that evidently the recessions of Jupiter are
     only apparent, and are due to the orbital motion of the earth. The
     apparent complications in the path of Jupiter, shown in Fig. 10,
     are seen to be caused simply by the motion of the earth, and to be
     thus completely and easily explained.

     [Illustration: FIG. 12.--True orbits of Earth and Jupiter.]

     The same thing for an inferior planet, say Mercury, is even still
     more easily seen (_vide_ figure 13).

     The motion of Mercury is direct from M'' to M''', retrograde from
     M''' to M'', and stationary at M'' and M'''. It appears to
     oscillate, taking 72.5 days for its direct swing, and 43.5 for its
     return swing.

     [Illustration: FIG. 13.--Orbit of Mercury and Earth.]

     On this system no artificiality is required to prevent Mercury's
     ever getting far from the sun: the radius of its orbit limits its
     real and apparent excursions. Even if the earth were stationary,
     the motions of Mercury and Venus would not be _essentially_
     modified, but the stations and retrogressions of the superior
     planets, Mars, Jupiter, &c., would wholly cease.

     The complexity of the old mode of regarding apparent motion may be
     illustrated by the case of a traveller in a railway train unaware
     of his own motion. It is as though trees, hedges, distant objects,
     were all flying past him and contorting themselves as you may see
     the furrows of a ploughed field do when travelling, while you
     yourself seem stationary amidst it all. How great a simplicity
     would be introduced by the hypothesis that, after all, these things
     might be stationary and one's self moving.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.--Copernican system as frequently represented.
But the cometary orbit is a much later addition, and no attempt is made
to show the relative distances of the planets.]

Now you are not to suppose that the system of Copernicus swept away the
entire doctrine of epicycles; that doctrine can hardly be said to be
swept away even now. As a description of a planet's motion it is not
incorrect, though it is geometrically cumbrous. If you describe the
motion of a railway train by stating that every point on the rim of each
wheel describes a cycloid with reference to the earth, and a circle with
reference to the train, and that the motion of the train is compounded
of these cycloidal and circular motions, you will not be saying what is
false, only what is cumbrous.

The Ptolemaic system demanded large epicycles, depending on the motion
of the earth, these are what Copernicus overthrew; but to express the
minuter details of the motion smaller epicycles remained, and grew more
and more complex as observations increased in accuracy, until a greater
man than either Copernicus or Ptolemy, viz. Kepler, replaced them all by
a simple ellipse.

One point I must not omit from this brief notice of the work of
Copernicus. Hipparchus had, by most sagacious interpretation of certain
observations of his, discovered a remarkable phenomenon called the
precession of the equinoxes. It was a discovery of the first magnitude,
and such as would raise to great fame the man who should have made it in
any period of the world's history, even the present. It is scarcely
expressible in popular language, and without some technical terms; but I
can try.

The plane of the earth's orbit produced into the sky gives the apparent
path of the sun throughout a year. This path is known as the ecliptic,
because eclipses only happen when the moon is in it. The sun keeps to it
accurately, but the planets wander somewhat above and below it (fig. 9),
and the moon wanders a good deal. It is manifest, however, in order that
there may be an eclipse of any kind, that a straight line must be able
to be drawn through earth and moon and sun (not necessarily through
their centres of course), and this is impossible unless some parts of
the three bodies are in one plane, viz. the ecliptic, or something very
near it. The ecliptic is a great circle of the sphere, and is usually
drawn on both celestial and terrestrial globes.

The earth's equator also produced into the sky, where it may still be
called the equator (sometimes it is awkwardly called "the equinoctial"),
gives another great circle inclined to the ecliptic and cutting it at
two opposite points, labelled respectively [Aries symbol] and [Libra
symbol], and together called "the equinoxes." The reason for the name is
that when the sun is in that part of the ecliptic it is temporarily also
on the equator, and hence is symmetrically situated with respect to the
earth's axis of rotation, and consequently day and night are equal all
over the earth.

Well, Hipparchus found, by plotting the position of the sun for a long
time,[2] that these points of intersection, or equinoxes, were not
stationary from century to century, but slowly moved among the stars,
moving as it were to meet the sun, so that he gets back to one of these
points again 20 minutes 23-1/4 seconds before it has really completed a
revolution, _i.e._ before the true year is fairly over. This slow
movement forward of the goal-post is called precession--the precession
of the equinoxes. (One result of it is to shorten our years by about 20
minutes each; for the shortened period has to be called a year, because
it is on the position of the sun with respect to the earth's axis that
our seasons depend.) Copernicus perceived that, assuming the motion of
the earth, a clearer account of this motion could be given. The ordinary
approximate statement concerning the earth's axis is that it remains
parallel to itself, _i.e._ has a fixed direction as the earth moves
round the sun. But if, instead of being thus fixed, it be supposed to
have a slow movement of revolution, so that it traces out a cone in the
course of about 26,000 years, then, since the equator of course goes
with it, the motion of its intersection with the fixed ecliptic is so
far accounted for. That is to say, the precession of the equinoxes is
seen to be dependent on, and caused by, a slow conical movement of the
earth's axis.

The prolongation of each end of the earth's axis into the sky, or the
celestial north and south poles, will thus slowly trace out an
approximate circle among the stars; and the course of the north pole
during historic time is exhibited in the annexed diagram.

It is now situated near one of the stars of the Lesser Bear, which we
therefore call the Pole star; but not always was it so, nor will it be
so in the future. The position of the north pole 4000 years ago is shown
in the figure; and a revolution will be completed in something like
26,000 years.[3]

[Illustration: FIG. 15.--Slow movement of the north pole in a circle
among the stars. (Copied from Sir R. Ball.)]

This perception of the conical motion of the earth's axis was a
beautiful generalization of Copernik's, whereby a multitude of facts
were grouped into a single phenomenon. Of course he did not explain the
motion of the axis itself. He stated the fact that it so moved, and I do
not suppose it ever struck him to seek for an explanation.

An explanation was given later, and that a most complete one; but the
idea even of seeking for it is a brilliant and striking one: the
achievement of the explanation by a single individual in the way it
actually was accomplished is one of the most astounding things in the
history of science; and were it not that the same individual
accomplished a dozen other things, equally and some still more
extraordinary, we should rank that man as one of the greatest
astronomers that ever lived.

As it is, he is Sir Isaac Newton.

We are to remember, then, as the life-work of Copernicus, that he placed
the sun in its true place as the centre of the solar system, instead of
the earth; that he greatly simplified the theory of planetary motion by
this step, and also by the simpler epicyclic chain which now sufficed,
and which he worked out mathematically; that he exhibited the precession
of the equinoxes (discovered by Hipparchus) as due to a conical motion
of the earth's axis; and that, by means of his simpler theory and more
exact planetary tables, he reduced to some sort of order the confused
chaos of the Ptolemaic system, whose accumulation of complexity and of
outstanding errors threatened to render astronomy impossible by the mere
burden of its detail.

There are many imperfections in his system, it is true; but his great
merit is that he dared to look at the facts of Nature with his own eyes,
unhampered by the prejudice of centuries. A system venerable with age,
and supported by great names, was universally believed, and had been
believed for centuries. To doubt this system, and to seek after another
and better one, at a time when all men's minds were governed by
tradition and authority, and when to doubt was sin--this required a
great mind and a high character. Such a mind and such a character had
this monk of Frauenburg. And it is interesting to notice that the
so-called religious scruples of smaller and less truly religious men did
not affect Copernicus; it was no dread of consequences to one form of
truth that led him to delay the publication of the other form of truth
specially revealed to him. In his dedication he says:--

"If there be some babblers who, though ignorant of all mathematics, take
upon them to judge of these things, and dare to blame and cavil at my
work, because of some passage of Scripture which they have wrested to
their own purpose, I regard them not, and will not scruple to hold their
judgment in contempt."

I will conclude with the words of one of his biographers (Mr. E.J.C.
Morton):--

"Copernicus cannot be said to have flooded with light the dark places of
nature--in the way that one stupendous mind subsequently did--but still,
as we look back through the long vista of the history of science, the
dim Titanic figure of the old monk seems to rear itself out of the dull
flats around it, pierces with its head the mists that overshadow them,
and catches the first gleam of the rising sun,

  "'... like some iron peak, by the Creator
    Fired with the red glow of the rushing morn.'"




DATES AND SUMMARY OF FACTS FOR LECTURE II


Copernicus lived from 1473 to 1543, and was contemporary with Paracelsus
and Raphael.

  Tycho Brahe     from 1546 to 1601.
  Kepler          from 1571 to 1630.
  Galileo         from 1564 to 1642.
  Gilbert         from 1540 to 1603.
  Francis Bacon   from 1561 to 1626.
  Descartes       from 1596 to 1650.

_A sketch of Tycho Brahe's life and work._ Tycho was a Danish noble,
born on his ancestral estate at Knudstorp, near Helsinborg, in 1546.
Adopted by his uncle, and sent to the University of Copenhagen to study
law. Attracted to astronomy by the occurrence of an eclipse on its
predicted day, August 21st, 1560. Began to construct astronomical
instruments, especially a quadrant and a sextant. Observed at Augsburg
and Wittenberg. Studied alchemy, but was recalled to astronomy by the
appearance of a new star. Overcame his aristocratic prejudices, and
delivered a course of lectures at Copenhagen, at the request of the
king. After this he married a peasant girl. Again travelled and observed
in Germany. In 1576 was sent for to Denmark by Frederick II., and
established in the island of Huen, with an endowment enabling him to
devote his life to astronomy. Built Uraniburg, furnished it with
splendid instruments, and became the founder of accurate instrumental
astronomy. His theories were poor, but his observations were admirable.
In 1592 Frederick died, and five years later, Tycho was impoverished and
practically banished. After wandering till 1599, he was invited to
Prague by the Emperor Rudolf, and there received John Kepler among other
pupils. But the sentence of exile was too severe, and he died in 1601,
aged 54 years.

A man of strong character, untiring energy, and devotion to accuracy,
his influence on astronomy has been immense.




LECTURE II

TYCHO BRAHE AND THE EARLIEST OBSERVATORY


We have seen how Copernicus placed the earth in its true position in the
solar system, making it merely one of a number of other worlds revolving
about a central luminary. And observe that there are two phenomena to be
thus accounted for and explained: first, the diurnal revolution of the
heavens; second, the annual motion of the sun among the stars.

The effect of the diurnal motion is conspicuous to every one, and
explains the rising, southing, and setting of the whole visible
firmament. The effect of the annual motion, _i.e._ of the apparent
annual motion, of the sun among the stars, is less obvious, but it may
be followed easily enough by observing the stars visible at any given
time of evening at different seasons of the year. At midnight, for
instance, the position of the sun is definite, viz. due north always,
but the constellation which at that time is due south or is rising or
setting varies with the time of year; an interval of one month producing
just the same effect on the appearance of the constellations as an
interval of two hours does (because the day contains twice as many hours
as the year contains months), _e.g._ the sky looks the same at midnight
on the 1st of October as it does at 10 p.m. on the 1st of November.

All these simple consequences of the geocentric as opposed to the
heliocentric point of view were pointed out by Copernicus, in addition
to his greater work of constructing improved planetary tables on the
basis of his theory. But it must be admitted that he himself felt the
hypothesis of the motion of the earth to be a difficulty. Its acceptance
is by no means such an easy and childish matter as we are apt now to
regard it, and the hostility to it is not at all surprising. The human
race, after having ridiculed and resisted the truth for a long time, is
apt to end in accepting it so blindly and unimaginatively as to fail to
recognize the real achievement of its first propounders, or the
difficulties which they had to overcome. The majority of men at the
present day have grown accustomed to hear the motion of the earth spoken
of: their acceptance of it means nothing: the attitude of the paradoxer
who denies it is more intelligent.

It is not to be supposed that the idea of thus explaining some of the
phenomena of the heavens, especially the daily motion of the entire
firmament, by a diurnal rotation of the earth had not struck any one. It
was often at this time referred to as the Pythagorean theory, and it had
been taught, I believe, by Aristarchus. But it was new to the modern
world, and it had the great weight of Aristotle against it.
Consequently, for long after Copernicus, only a few leading spirits
could be found to support it, and the long-established venerable
Ptolemaic system continued to be taught in all Universities.

The main objections to the motion of the earth were such as the
following:--

1. The motion is unfelt and difficult to imagine.

     That it is unfelt is due to its uniformity, and can be explained
     mechanically. That it is difficult to imagine is and remains true,
