floor-plate in the focus of the big atomic projector, with the
central lens of the apparatus levelled down upon him like a huge
searchlight. Around Powell's waist were strapped two Silver Belts,
and a cartridge belt with a holstered .45-calibre automatic on
either side. His wrist-watch was synchronized to the second with
Benjamin Marlowe's watch.

"Joan's twelve-hour time limit in Arret will expire at one o'clock
tomorrow morning." Powell reminded Marlowe. "That gives me nearly
six hours in which to find her and equip her with a Silver Belt. You
will broadcast the recall wave at exactly one o'clock. If I haven't
succeeded in finding Joan by then, I'll discard my own Belt and stay
on over there in Arret with her.... I'm ready to start now, whenever
you are."

Benjamin Marlowe raised his hand to the switch in the projector's
control panel. "Good-by, Larry,"--the old man's voice shook a trifle
in spite of himself--"and may God be with you!" He closed the
switch.

A great burst of roseate flame leaped toward Powell from the
projector. The laboratory was instantly blotted out in a swirling
chaos of ruddy radiance that swept him up and away like a chip upon
a tidal wave. There was a long moment during which he seemed to
hurtle helplessly through a universe of swirling tinted mists, while
great electric waves tingled with exquisite poignancy through every
atom of his body.

Then the mists suddenly cleared like the tearing away of a mighty
curtain, and with startling abruptness Powell found himself again in
a solid world of material things. For a moment as he gazed dazedly
about him he thought that the roseate glow of the projector must
still be playing tricks with his eyesight, for the landscape around
him was completely and incredibly red!

       *       *       *       *       *

He soon realized that the monochrome of scarlet was a natural aspect
of things in Arret. The weird vegetation all around him was of a
uniform glossy red. The sandy soil under his feet was dull
brick-red. High in the reddish-saffron sky overhead there blazed a
lurid orb of blood-red hue, the intense heat of its ruddy radiance
giving the still dry air a nearly tropical temperature. From this
orb's position in the sky and its size, Powell was forced to
conclude that it must be the Arretian equivalent of Earth's moon.

For a moment he stood motionless as he peered cautiously around him,
trying to decide what should be his first step in this scarlet world
that was so utterly alien in every way to his own. On every side the
landscape stretched monotonously away from him in low rolling dunes
like the frozen ground swell of a crimson sea--dunes covered with
vegetation of a kind never seen upon Earth.

Not a leaf existed in all that weird flora. Instead of leaves or
twigs the constituent units of bushes and grasses consisted of
globules, glossy spheres of scarlet that ranged in size from
pinheads to the bulk of large pumpkins. The branches of the
vegetation were formed from strings of the globules set edge to edge
and tapering in size like graduated beads strung upon wire,
dwindling in bulk until the tips of the branches were as fragile as
the fronds of maidenhair fern. The bulk of the shrubbery was
head-high, and so dense that Powell could see for only a couple of
yards into the thicket in any direction.

The stillness around Powell was complete. Not even a globular twig
stirred in the hot dry air. Powell decided to head for the crest of
one of the low dunes some fifty feet away. From its top he might be
able to sight something that would give a clue to the location of
the "Cave of Blue Flames" of which Joan had written.

       *       *       *       *       *

He arrived at the foot of the dune's slope without incident. But
there he came to an abrupt halt as the silence was suddenly
shattered by a strange sound from the shrubbery-covered crest just
above him. It was a musical, tinkling crash, oddly suggestive of a
handful of thin glass plates shattering upon a stone floor. A second
later there came the agonized scream of some creature in its death
throes.

The tinkling, crashing sound promptly swelled to a steady pulsing
song like that of a brittle river of crystalline glass surging and
breaking over granite boulders. There was an eery beauty in that
tinkling burst of melody, yet with the beauty there was an
intangible suggestion of horror that made Powell's flesh creep.

The crystalline song swelled to a crescendo climax. Then there came
another sound, a single resonant note like that given when a string
of a bass viol is violently plucked--and the tinkling melody
abruptly died. Immediately following the resonant twang some object
was ejected from the midst of the thicket on the dune's crest, and
came rolling and bounding down the gentle slope toward Powell.

It finally came to rest against the base of a bush almost at his
feet. He whistled softly in surprise as he saw the nature of the
thing. It was another of the yard-long egg-shaped crystals of
translucent amber like the one that had been materialized in
Benjamin Marlowe's laboratory. Imprisoned in the clear depths of
this amber egg was the sparkling, diamond-encrusted skeleton of what
had apparently been a small quadruped about the size of a fox.

Powell's eyes narrowed in speculation as he realized that he had
before him the first slight clue as to what might have happened to
Joan. Her Silver Belt had been enclosed in one of those amber,
crystalline eggs. Apparently her capture had been in some way
connected with that sinister, unseen Tinkling Death.

       *       *       *       *       *

Powell began cautiously working his way up the slope of the dune,
with an automatic pistol ready for use in his right hand. Silence
reigned unbroken now in the thicket on the crest, but with each
upward step that he took there came with constantly increasing force
a feeling of some vast, alien intelligence lurking up there,
watching and waiting.

Nearer and nearer the crest he worked his wary way, until he was so
close that he fancied he could see the vague outline of some
monstrous silvery bulk looming there in the heart of the red
thicket. He took another cautious step forward--and then his careful
stalking was sharply interrupted.

Without a second's warning there came the roaring rush of great
wings beating the air just above him. Powell tried to dive for
cover, but he was too late. A slender snaky tentacle came lashing
down and struck his shoulder with a force that sent him sprawling
forward upon his face. Before he could rise, two of the tentacles
twined around him, and he was jerked up into the air like a
wood-grub captured by a husky robin.

Again the great wings above him threshed the air in tremendous
power, as the unseen monster started away with its prey. Then the
tentacles from which he was dangling shifted their grip slightly,
turning Powell's body in the air so that he could look up and get
his first glimpse of the thing that had captured him. He shuddered
at what he saw. The creature was a hideous combination of octopus
and giant bat.

Naked wings of membrane spanned twenty feet from tip to tip. There
was a pursy sac-like body, ending in a head with staring, lidless
eyes and a great black beak that looked strong enough to shear sheet
steel. From the body descended half a dozen long writhing tentacles.

       *       *       *       *       *

Powell's one hundred and eighty pounds made a weight that was
apparently a burden for even this flying monster. It flew jerkily
along, scarcely a dozen feet from the ground, and there was
laborious effort obvious in every movement of its flapping wings.
Powell decided to make a prompt break for escape before the
octopus-bat succeeded in fighting its way any higher. His left arm
