
"What was he doing?"

"He was just sitting there in the middle of the yard, staring. I went
out and tried to bring him into the house. He told me he had to watch
for someone. When I asked him what he was talking about he told me that
I was crazy. That was when I phoned you, Mr. Hanstark."

"A very wise move, Mrs. Nest. And would you show me where your husband
is right now?"

She nodded her head and they both got up from the chairs. They walked
through the dining-room and kitchen. On the back porch Hanstark came to
a halt.

"You'd better stay here, Mrs. Nest." He walked to the door and opened
it.

"Mr. Hanstark," Mrs. Nest called.

Hanstark turned and saw her standing next to the automatic washing
machine. "Yes?"

"Please be careful."

Hanstark smiled. "I shall be, Mrs. Nest."

He walked out the door and down three concrete steps. Looking a little
to his right, he saw a man squatted on his heels. He walked up to the
man. "You are Mr. Christopher Nest?"

The man looked up and stared for a moment at Hanstark. "Yep," he
answered. Then he turned and stared at the grass again.

"And may I ask you what you are doing?"

Nest answered without looking up. "Guardin' the pass."

Hanstark scribbled something in his notebook. "And why are you guarding
the pass?"

Nest rose to his feet and stared down at Hanstark. "Just what are you
askin' all of these questions for, stranger?"

Hanstark saw Nest was bigger than he and decided to play along for a
while. After all, strategy ...

"I'm just interested in your welfare, Mr. Nest."

Nest shrugged his shoulders. He reached into his shirt pocket and pulled
out a sack of tobacco and some paper. Holding a piece of paper in one
hand, he carefully poured a little tobacco onto it. In one quick
movement he rolled the paper and tobacco into a perfect cylinder.

He put the sack of tobacco and paper back into his pocket and took out a
wooden kitchen match. He scraped it to life on the sole of his shoe and
applied the flame to the tip of the cigarette. He puffed it into life
and threw the match away. It burned for a few moments in the moist
grass, then went out. A thin trail of smoke rose from it, and then was
gone.

"Why are you guarding the pass?" Hanstark asked again.
