It was Iron Knife, she realized, whose eyes she had felt on her after
Wolf Paw ran away.

They started off for the camp. She heard the voices of men and women
raised, calling to one another. Wolf Paw must have given the alarm.

"How did you know I was out here?" she asked. "You were sleeping when I
left the wickiup."

"Father woke me," Iron Knife said, striding stolidly along, his
calf-high outer moccasins of buffalo hide breaking through the snow. "He
knew what you were going to do. He told me to go after you, to see you
came to no harm."

As they plowed steadily onward, Redbird saw figures moving about in the
village. They must be terribly sleepy, she thought. Dawn was still a
long way off. Still, more and more people were running back and forth
among the wickiups. They were crowding in this direction, coming to meet
Gray Cloud and Iron Knife and Redbird. A mass of people, dark against
the moonlit snow.

In the front rank walked Owl Carver himself. The sacred necklace of
megis shells swung on his chest. In one hand he held his medicine stick,
a cedar staff decorated with feathers and beads, topped with the carved
head of an owl. His long white hair spread out over his shoulders.

She could hear a murmuring of voices, and above them, the shaman, her
father, singing:

    "Let the people welcome him.
    He has walked the spirit trail.
    He comes back
    From the sky,
    From the water,
    From under the earth.
    He comes back from the seven directions.
    Let the people welcome him."

Owl Carver was dancing as he approached them, a slow, heavy shuffle
alternating with sidesteps, his upper body rising and falling. His
hands, one holding his medicine stick, the other a yellow and red gourd
rattle, were lifted high over his head. The necklace of small black and
white shells bounced on his chest.

Iron Knife, carrying Gray Cloud, came to a stop before Owl Carver.
Redbird, not wanting people to know how she cared for Gray Cloud, drew
away from Iron Knife and tried to melt into the crowd.

Taking a few more steps, Owl Carver placed himself facing east, with
Iron Knife and Gray Cloud on his right. He danced in a sunwise circle
around them, from east to south to west to north, bobbing his head and
singing.

    "The Great Wise One has sent him.
    He has walked the spirit trail.
    He brings wisdom
    From the sky,
    From the water,
    From under the earth.
    He comes back from the seven directions.
    The Great Wise One has sent him."

Nine times Owl Carver danced around Gray Cloud and Iron Knife in the
circle that represented the sun, the horizon and the cycles of life and
the seasons.

Then in his normal voice, not breaking step, he said, "Bring him to my
medicine wickiup."

He turned abruptly and danced through the crowd that had gathered. The
people parted to let him through and they stared at Gray Cloud's body in
Iron Knife's arms.

The people who had followed Owl Carver had stamped down a path through
the village. No longer needing Sun Woman's snowshoes, Redbird bent and
unstrapped them from her feet. She was suddenly so exhausted by her
efforts and by the fear and sleeplessness of two days that she could
hardly stumble along behind Iron Knife. She felt that at any moment she
might faint.

The light of the full moon, shining down from directly overhead and
reflecting on the snow, seemed to make the whole village almost as
bright as day. Sighing, Redbird looked up and saw Wolf Paw staring at
her from beside the path.

His black eyes pierced her like arrowheads. Under his sharp nose his
mouth was tight.

She nodded her head at him, hoping he would understand that she was
saying that they should keep each other's secrets.

"Redbird!" A hand seized her arm roughly, and pain shot through up to
her shoulder.

Her mother, Wind Bends Grass, glared at her furiously.

"Why did you leave our wickiup?"

Redbird felt that if she stopped walking to talk she would never be able
to move again. She pulled her arm free. Her sisters, clinging to either
side of her mother, stared up wide-eyed at her as if she herself had
returned from a spirit journey.

Her mother walked beside her, scolding her in a shrill voice, but her
words meant nothing to Redbird. She only wanted to see Gray Cloud
brought safely to the shaman's wickiup.

Someone else took her arm, squeezing it gently, and she looked up into
Sun Woman's face. Tears streaked the strong cheekbones.

"You saved his life," Sun Woman said, so softly only Redbird could hear
the words.

"I did nothing," Redbird protested. Silently, Sun Woman took the
snowshoes, the water bag and the blanket roll from her.

Owl Carver stopped at the doorway of the medicine wickiup. He danced
from one foot to the other, shaking his staff.

He nodded at Iron Knife, and motioned him to carry Gray Cloud into the
dark interior.

Redbird followed. The owl-headed stick barred her way.

"Go with your mother," Owl Carver said softly. "You have done enough
this night."

She could not tell whether he was praising or reproaching her.

_Will he live?_ she wanted to ask. But his solemn face forbade her to
speak.

She turned away from his remoteness and faced her mother's anger. Her
heart was still full of terror for Gray Cloud, but she knew that the
instant she lay down she would fall into an exhausted sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed that no time had passed when Wind Bends Grass shook her awake.

"Your father calls the people together," she said in a voice still hard
with anger.

Redbird's eyelids felt as if they were made of stone. She forced herself
to sit up, and then with immense effort got to her feet.

She was still fully dressed, even in her fur cloak and mittens. She had
collapsed in the wickiup without removing anything. The wickiup was now
empty. Her mother and her sisters had gone ahead without her.

Her heart hammered in her chest. Owl Carver might be calling the people
to tell them that Gray Cloud was dead.

Outside, the air was still deathly cold, but the sun was a bright yellow
disk rising above the distant gray line of trees that marked the bluffs
overlooking the Great River. The light made her blink, and she turned
away from it. She stumbled in the direction all the other people were
going--to the medicine wickiup in the center of the camp circle.

She found that the open area before the wickiup was crowded, and she
could not get close. The spaces between nearby wickiups were also filled
with people, all waiting for Owl Carver to speak.

She seated herself between two women, both of whom had small children on
their laps. Redbird knew one of the mothers, Water Flows Fast, a stout
woman with a round, cheerful face and shrewd eyes.

Water Flows Fast said, "You are the daughter of Owl Carver. You should
go up and sit close to him." Redbird sliced her hand flat across her
body to say no. She knew Water Flows Fast to be a keen observer and a
gossip, always looking for signs of trouble in other people's families.
The less Redbird said to her, the better.

Redbird looked over her shoulder and saw that now there were many more
people packed in behind her. Everyone was talking at once, and the
hundreds of voices beating upon her ears made her head hurt. About five
hundred people were here, everyone in this camp, which was one of four
that made up the British Band of the Sauk and Fox tribes that would come
together in Saukenuk after the winter snow and ice melted.

The medicine wickiup was built on a low hill in the center of the camp,
and when Owl Carver appeared, everyone who was standing sat down.
Redbird's eyes devoured Owl Carver's face, trying to read in it whether
Gray Cloud was alive or dead.

Another man emerged from the medicine wickiup to stand beside Owl
Carver. His head was bare even on this terribly cold day, and he wore
his hair in the manner of a brave, his dark brown scalp shaved except
for a long black scalplock that coiled down the side of his face. His
eyes were shadowed and sad-looking, and there were heavy blue-black
pouches under them. His cheekbones jutted out and his mouth was wide,
curving down at the corners where it met deep furrows that ran from nose
to chin.

Redbird's heart beat faster as she saw that to honor this moment he had
attached a string of eagle feathers to his scalplock and wore strings of
small white beads around the rim of each ear. He stood with his arms
folded under a buffalo robe, skin side out, painted with a red hand
proclaiming that he had killed and scalped his first enemy while still a
boy.

His sombre gaze fell upon Redbird like a stone striking her from a great
height. She felt as if the war chief of the British Band knew every one
of her secrets. She ducked her head and looked down at her mittened
hands in her lap.

Owl Carver raised his arms, and the people fell silent.

"I have called on Black Hawk, our war chief, to see Gray Cloud, and he
has heard great prophecies from Gray Cloud's lips," the shaman cried in
a high, chanting voice.

Then Gray Cloud had lived through the night!

Owl Carver blurred in Redbird's sight, and if she had not already been
seated, she might have collapsed. Relief made her heart swell up in her
chest, feeling as if it might burst.

The people around her murmured in surprise, pleasure and curiosity.

The shaman stretched out his hand. "Sun Woman, stand before the people."

Nothing happened for a long moment. Then Owl Carver beckoned
insistently. There was another silence. Then Black Hawk's hand emerged
from under his buffalo mantle, and he crooked his finger.

A tall woman wrapped in a buffalo robe rose from among the seated
people. People sighed happily and called out a welcome to her.

Sun Woman turned to face the crowd. To Redbird she seemed calm and
unruffled, even though she had hesitated about standing up.

"This woman brought her son to me and asked me to train him as a
shaman," Owl Carver declared. "I did not want to, because he is not a
pure Sauk. She said to me, only try him for a little time and see what
he can be. I tried him for a little time and I saw something in him. I
saw sleeping powers!"

The people murmured in wonder. Water Flows Fast and the woman with her
whispered to each other, darting curious glances at Redbird, who
carefully kept her face as impassive as Sun Woman's.

"I tested him and saw that his dreams could foretell the future, that he
could send his spirit walking while his body lay still, that he could
talk to the spirits in trees and birds. I saw that he had the power to
be a shaman and more ..."

Owl Carver paused and stared at them fiercely.

"And so I sent him up to the sacred cave, knowing that he might meet
spirits so powerful that to encounter them destroys the souls of men.

"And Gray Cloud went into the sacred cave, and he met the great spirits,
and he journeyed with them," Owl Carver cried. People gasped.

"He has met the White Bear. He has spoken with the Turtle, father of the
Great River. He has brought back a message for Black Hawk," said Owl
Carver. "The Turtle told Gray Cloud that Black Hawk might tell others as
he saw fit." The rumble of voices rose at this, and then quieted as Owl
Carver raised his medicine stick.

"After the Turtle created our Mother the Earth, he mated with her, and
all tribes were born in her womb," Owl Carver said. "They lived there in
a warm darkness, but they had to go forth and find their way out of our
Mother. Then there came to our ancestors an elder spirit, the White
Bear, who led them out the womb of our Mother.

"When they were in the light, they found themselves in the midst of a
ring of fiery mountains. Our people are called Osaukawug, or Sauk, the
People of the Place of Fire, because that fiery place is where we first
walked in the world. There was nothing to eat. There was nothing around
the people but stones and fire. And they were hungry and greatly afraid,
and they were angry at the White Bear for leading them out of our Mother
to this place.

"But the White Bear showed them a way through the fiery mountains and
over many fields of snow and ice, until he brought our ancestors to this
good land where there is fish and game, where the grasslands are green
and the woods are full of berries and fruit. And our friends the Fox,
the Yellow Earth People, came to be our allies and to unite with us. And
the Turtle opened his heart and the Great River flowed forth. Our
ancestors hunted and fished in the land where the Rock River flows into
the Great River. On the Rock River they built our village of Saukenuk,
where they would dwell in the summer and their women would grow the
Three Sisters, corn, beans and squash, in the fields around the village.
And there at Saukenuk, as our ancestors died, they were buried.

"The White Bear told us we should spend our summers in that land east of
the Great River. In the winter it should be our custom to cross to the
west of the Great River and hunt here in the Ioway Country. And here by
the Great River we Sauk, the People of the Place of Fire, have lived
ever since."

Redbird felt warmth on her back through her buffalo robe. The sun had
risen higher.

Owl Carver called out in his high voice of prophecy, "The White Bear has
come again. He has led Gray Cloud on his spirit journey. Now Gray Cloud
is a true shaman. He still must be trained to use his powers, but his
powers no longer sleep. And in sign that he is a shaman with another
self, he shall have a new name. Let him be known to all the people as
White Bear!"

Redbird heard cries of assent from the people around her.

Owl Carver crossed his arms before his chest to show that he was
finished speaking, and turned to Black Hawk.

"So let it be," said Black Hawk in his harsh, grating voice. "Earthmaker
has willed that the British Band shall be blessed with a mighty new
spirit walker. Let his name hereafter be White Bear."

_If I could make a spirit journey_, Redbird thought, _I too could stand
before the people and advise them_.

She came to a sudden resolve. _One day I will._

"Now you shall see our new shaman," Owl Carver declared. He stepped back
and pulled aside the buffalo-fur curtain that covered the door of his
wickiup.

A tall young man came out, stooping to pass through the doorway and then
standing straight before the people. Redbird's heart beat faster, and
she half rose to her feet.

His slender body, despite the cold, was bare to the waist. Redbird
gasped as she saw what was on his chest.

Five long, deep scratches, side by side. The blood had dried and turned
black. Five long black marks down the middle of his pale chest, running
almost from the base of his neck to the bottom of his rib cage.

Cries of awe and wonder arose from the people. They had all seen such
marks, sometimes scratched in the bark of trees, sometimes on the
half-eaten bodies of animals found in the forest in summer.

The claw marks of a bear.

And now his name was White Bear. She whispered it to herself. Her eyes
saw nothing but the shining slender form, and her ears heard nothing but
the sound of his name.




4

Master of Victoire


Raoul threw himself into the lake, the giant Potawatomi chief Black
Salmon roaring behind him. The water resisted his legs like molasses.
Black Salmon seized Raoul's neck, cutting off his breath. Strangling, he
was helpless as the Potawatomi dragged him back to shore.

The huge Indian's whip tore into Raoul's back. Raoul felt the skin
ripping and the blood running. He was nothing but a helpless lump of
bleeding flesh, paralyzed with pain.

Other Potawatomi had torn Helene's clothes off. The warriors danced
around her on the beach as she cowered, white skin, shining blond hair,
trying to cover herself.

The Indian bucks were naked, too, and flaunted their erect purple cocks,
big as war clubs. One of them darted into the circle and bit a piece out
of poor Helene's shoulder. Bright red blood flowed down her arm.

Raoul ran to save his sister. He broke away from Black Salmon and fought
his way through the Potawatomi warriors around her. She lay on her back
on the sand, twisting her body from side to side in pain. Hideous bite
wounds all over her body lay open like red mouths silently screaming.
One breast was covered with blood.

The Indians fell upon Raoul. They had their scalping knives out and they
threw him down on the ground beside Helene. Black Salmon caught up with
him and whipped him till every inch of his body was slashed. The
redskins tore away the last few rags of Raoul's clothing.

A circle of grimacing dark faces painted with yellow and black stripes
closed in on him. They bared sharp teeth like snarling dogs. They were
going to eat him alive.

Raoul's father and Raoul's brother, Pierre, faces marble and calm,
appeared in the midst of the Indians. They looked down at Raoul's agony.
Just curious.

Raoul tried to cry out, "Papa! Pierre! Help us! They're killing us!"

No sound came out of his mouth but a useless little wheeze. He had lost
his voice.

"You should not have angered them," Papa said.

One of the savages, holding high a long, thin skinning knife, seized
Raoul's balls. He brought the knife down, slowly.

Raoul kept trying to scream at his father and brother. Again and again
he forced air through his aching throat. Nothing came but a silly
squeak. Then a groan, a little louder.

Pierre reached out a marble hand to him. Thank God!

Just as their fingers touched, Pierre jerked his hand away and
disappeared.

Raoul felt the Indian's blade like cold fire slicing through the sac
between his legs. At last he let out a full-throated scream.

"Raoul!"

His body cold and wet with sweat, he sat up in darkness. He felt arms
clutching at him and fought them off.

"Raoul! Wake up."

Panting, he said his name in his mind. _I am Raoul Francois Philippe
Charles de Marion._ He repeated it over and over again to himself.

He was sitting in bed in the dark, someone beside him. Not an Indian,
and not his long-dead sister Helene. He gasped again and again, as if he
had run a race.

He tried to pull his mind together. His heart was still pounding against
the wall of his chest, his hands trembling, his skin ice cold. That
terrible dream! He hadn't had it in a year or more.

"Lordy, what a nightmare you must have had! You did a right smart of
hollerin'."

In the dim light seeping in through cracks in the shuttered window,
Raoul saw a woman with long blond hair sitting up beside him, staring at
him with pale blue eyes.

Clarissa. Clarissa Greenglove. He looked down at her. A warmth began to
creep back into his body, rising first in his loins, as he remembered
what they had done together the night before. Five times! No--six! Never
before had he done it that many times in one night.

He was still panting in the aftermath of the horror, but the sight of
her naked body was helping him get the dream out of his mind.

Never done it with such a good-looking woman.

She looked down at herself and drew up the sheet to cover her breasts.

"Don't do that," he said, and pulled the sheet down again, none too
gently.

He began to rub her breast with the palm of his hand, feeling the nipple
get bigger and harder. She closed her eyes and gave a little murmur of
pleasure.

How she'd enjoyed it last night! She'd sighed and groaned and whimpered
and screamed and licked him and bit him and twisted her body from side
to side like a soul in perdition. Her frenzy had fired him up like never
before. No wonder he'd been able to mount her so many times. And
somewhere near the end of it all she'd sobbed into his shoulder for what
seemed like an hour. He figured that was a tribute to what he had done
to her. The sheets were still damp with their sweat, and the air in the
little bedroom was thick with the musky odors of their secret juices.

But the redskins were still stalking in his brain, and he was still a
little frightened. He didn't want to sit here in the dark.

"Light a candle, will you?" he said. "The striker's on that table."

She hesitated. "Can I get dressed first?"

"Hell no," he laughed. "What difference would that make after last
night? I know you outside and in, Clarissa."

She giggled and got out of bed while he sat hugging his knees watching
her.

"It's cold out here," she whined.

"Well, hurry and get that candle lit and get back in bed." The March air
whistled in through chinks in the log walls and shutters, and even
though the inn's chimney ran up through this room it didn't seem to
help. He guessed that downstairs in the taproom someone had let the fire
die.

Clarissa's pale, rounded shape as she moved through the shadows made
him feel stronger by the moment. The women he'd had up to now--many of
them right here in this bed--had been older and well-used, and he hadn't
enjoyed the look of their bodies that much. Clarissa was just the right
age, old enough to be filled out, young enough to be slender and firm.
He guessed she must be sixteen or seventeen. Raoul had been bedding
women since he was sixteen, for seven years now, and he'd never had a
better night than this last one, with Clarissa.

Then why, after such a shining night, did he have _that_ dream?

As the oil-soaked cotton ball flared up and Clarissa held a candlewick
to the flame, the nightmare came back to him, and out of the roiling
images of red limbs and painted faces and blood and torn white bodies,
he dragged the reason for what he had dreamed. When he remembered it, he
slumped a little, his delight in waking up next to a pretty young woman
wiped away.

He heard again the stunning, infuriating words that had tumbled out of
Armand Perrault's bushy brown beard.

_I overheard your brother, Monsieur Pierre, talking to your father this
morning. He spoke of how he has always felt that he had abandoned his
Sauk Indian wife and their son, when he came back here and married
Madame Marie-Blanche. Now that he is a widower, he says, he wants to "do
right by her and the boy."_

This thing about having a Sauk woman and a son--Pierre had never said
anything about that.

To call some Indian whore a _wife_!

_My brother, the master of Victoire, a squaw-man! Father of a mongrel
son!_

Armand had remarked sourly to Raoul, "It seems Monsieur Pierre is a
great one for doing _wrong_ by women."

Raoul knew what he meant. He'd heard the rumor that after Marie-Blanche
had died, Pierre, a little crazy in his grief, had taken Armand's wife
to bed a time or two, to comfort himself.

But that was nothing compared to what Pierre was threatening now.

_Indians living in our home! A squaw in the bed where Pierre slept with
good Marie-Blanche!_

How could Pierre do such a thing, after what the Indians had done to
Helene? After Raoul had spent two years beaten and enslaved by Black
Salmon? How could Papa permit it?

Clarissa turned, holding out before her a lighted white candle in a
little pewter dish. She didn't seem so shy now about letting him see her
naked. He let his eyes linger over her melon-shaped breasts, narrow
waist, the brown puff of hair where her long legs joined her wide hips.

He'd often felt a hankering for Clarissa since he'd hired her father,
Eli Greenglove, to help him run the trading post. But he'd thought it
unwise to get mixed up with her. Eli was a dangerous man. Last night
that hadn't seemed to matter.

After Armand had brought him the bad news, he'd turned to Kentucky
whiskey--Old Kaintuck--and to Clarissa, dancing with her to Registre
Bosquet's fiddle in the taproom to take his mind off this sudden insult
Pierre had flung at him. Late in the evening he'd stumbled upstairs
behind Clarissa to his bedroom in the inn, his hands up her skirts,
feeling the satiny skin of her legs.

And then down on the bed, and--whiskey and all--six times!

But this morning his pleasure in her was spoiled by this treachery of
Pierre's.

A squaw and a redskinned mongrel. Raoul wouldn't want Indians on the
estate even as servants. Now Pierre was talking about these savages
living in Victoire as part of the family.

He felt a sudden, stinging bite down near his rear end, under the
covers. Angrily, he slapped at himself. Damned fleas and bedbugs. Levi
Pope's wife made a piss-poor job of laundering the bedding for the inn.

_If I had a wife I'd make sure she kept the bugs out of my sheets._

Clarissa set the candle down on the table and climbed back into bed. She
ran her hand over his back.

She brought her face close to his, and he decided that, though he liked
her arms and legs and hips and breasts, he didn't care for her weak
chin, her washed-out blond hair and light blue eyes and the brown stain
on one of her front teeth.

She said, "You've got scars all over your back. Somebody beat you. Your
paw?"

"My papa?" The thought made him smile. "No, the old man's not that
sort."

_But he's the kind of man who might forget about me for a while. Who
might let me be captured by Indians in 1812 and not manage to find me
and ransom me till 1814._

_The kind of man who might actually let my brother bring Indians into
our home._

The scars. The scars reminded him every day of Fort Dearborn, August
1812. The memories left scars inside. Memories of being ten years old,
cowering in an Indian encampment with the other white captives from Fort
Dearborn while the warriors with their clubs and tomahawks approached,
grinning.

It hadn't happened the way he dreamed it. The Potawatomi had pulled a
man, an army private, to his feet, while he begged for his life, and
dragged him over to the campfire. In an agony of terror Raoul had
pressed against Helene, seated beside him on the ground. She put her arm
around his shoulders and held him tight.

His sister Helene had seen her husband's throat cut and his scalp
slashed away that very morning, when the Indians fell upon the
retreating soldiers of Fort Dearborn and the civilians fleeing the tiny
village called Checagou. But somehow Helene kept herself calm and strong
after witnessing Henri's terrible death. Raoul knew it was for his sake.

Raoul had shut his eyes, and heard the clubs thud into the head and body
of the soldier at the campfire, heard his screams, heard the silence of
death when the screams stopped. A man's life had ended, just like that.
Raoul trembled, hiding his face in Helene's side. Around him the other
prisoners, men and women, sobbed and prayed.

The Indians took another soldier. They tied him to a stake and cut away
bits of his flesh with the sharpened edges of clam shells. They worked
at him for hours, until he bled to death.

The warriors came back for their next victim, sauntering among the
prisoners, eyes aglow, painted faces like masks of monsters, stinking of
the whiskey they'd been drinking all night. This time he was sure they
were coming for him.

But they took Helene.

He had never forgotten her last words to him, spoken serenely as the
Potawatomi seized her arms.

"I am going to join Henri. Pray to the Mother of God for me, Raoul."

The Indians dragged Helene into the woods. They took another woman as
well.

The Potawatomi squaws, seated around a nearby campfire, chattered among
themselves. They laughed whenever one of the women in the woods
screamed. Raoul could not believe that any of those sounds were coming
from his sister's throat.

The helpless white prisoners covered their faces and prayed and
wept--and the men cursed.

He had hated himself for not trying to help Helene, but he was too
frightened to move. Too frightened even to cry out. Brooding about it
now, nearly thirteen years later, he told himself once again that if
he'd tried to help Helene the Indians would have clubbed him to death.
He told himself that he had been only ten years old. That did not make
any difference to the shame he felt when he remembered that night. He
should have gone to her. He should have fought to the death for her. He
could never forgive himself.

_Why didn't we all fight and die? Wouldn't it have been better to attack
the Indians barehanded and be killed than to let that happen?_

But neither could he forgive Papa and Pierre. His father and brother had
left Raoul in Helene's care at Fort Dearborn, where her husband, Henri
Vaillancourt, ran the trading post of Papa's Illinois Fur Company. When
it became apparent that a second war between England and the United
States was about to break out, Papa declared that land prices in
Illinois were now as low as they would ever be, and he set off in search
of likely land to buy for a family seat. Pierre had gone to the Sauk and
Fox Indians on the Rock River to talk about trade and land purchases
with them. Raoul had been happy enough to be left with Helene, who had
been a mother to him as far back as he could remember. His own mother,
Helene had gently explained to him, had gone to Heaven when he was born.

When Raoul heard no more screams from the woods, he knew Helene had gone
to Heaven, too.

The next morning, as the Indians began the march back to their village,
dragging their bound captives, Raoul had seen Helene's naked body, with
stab wounds in a hundred places, lying face down, half submerged in Lake
Michigan's surf. He saw a round, red patch on top of her head. Later he
saw a brave who had tied to his belt a long hank of silver-blond hair,
surely Helene's, a circular piece of skin dangling down.

The Indians had chosen not to kill Raoul, perhaps because at ten he was
too young to be a satisfying victim, but old enough to work. And so
Black Salmon had taken him for his slave. It made no difference whether
he worked well or poorly; Black Salmon let not a day go by without
whipping him, and fed him entrails and hominy grits. Only after Raoul
had endured two years of slavery did his father, Elysee, find him and
ransom him from Black Salmon.

And when Raoul was older he came to understand the full horror of what
the Indians had done to Helene. They must have raped her over and over
again. And he hated himself and Pierre and Elysee all the more for
letting it happen.

But most of all he hated Indians.

Indians living at Victoire? He had to kill that notion of Pierre's right
now. He would put on his clothes and saddle Banner and ride up to the
chateau and set his father and brother straight.

But would they understand? Pierre, with his oh-so-tender conscience, who
had lived with the damned Sauk and Fox for years and slept with one of
their dirty squaws? Elysee, buried in his books? Raoul remembered their
marble faces, as he had seen them in his dream.

They'd never understood him.

"Where did you get them scars?" Clarissa asked, interrupting his
thoughts as she ran her fingers lightly over the hard ridges on his
back.

Raoul told her about Black Salmon. "He liked whipping me even better
than he liked whiskey. And when he got hold of whiskey he liked beating
me even better."

"Poor Raoul! And such a little boy." Clarissa's face drew down with
sympathy. "I'm powerful sorry for you." She pulled him to her.

He lowered his head to her breast and drew the nipple into his mouth,
pressing it with his teeth. They lay back together, and he enjoyed the
feel of the soft, feather-filled mattress and pillows billowing up
around them.

By God, if he didn't feel himself getting big and hard to do it again.
Proudly he threw back the sheet and let her see what he had for her. She
smiled up at him, welcoming, her pale blue eyes shining in the
candlelight.

He could use her to help him forget a little longer about Pierre and his
redskin wife and son.

A sharp rapping at the bedroom door brought an end to his new surge of
desire.

Clarissa gasped and pulled away from Raoul, dragging the bedclothes
toward her.

Raoul put his finger to his lips and called out, "Who's there?"

"It's Eli," said a voice through the door.

Raoul's heart began hammering again, as hard as when he woke from his
nightmare.

"Oh, Lord, my paw," whispered Clarissa.

She sounded frightened--but only a _touch_ frightened, and Raoul eyed
her suspiciously. Her eyes were wide, like a child trying to deny
mischief after being caught red-handed. Could Eli and his daughter have
planned this?

Did Eli know that Clarissa was in here? Raoul had been too drunkenly
careless to worry about who was watching when he took her upstairs last
night.

Feeling a quaking in his stomach, Raoul walked over to the door. "What,
Eli?" He hoped his voice sounded strong. He no longer took pleasure and
pride in his nakedness.

"Thought you should know about something I heard over to the fur store,
Raoul."

"Who's minding the furs now?" The place was full of bundles of pelts,
beaver, badger, fox, raccoon, skunk. And valuable trade goods. Indian
bucks walking in and out all the time, this time of year. Raoul had been
happy to turn most of the fur trade work over to Eli. He couldn't
stomach dealing with Indians.

"I left Otto Wegner there. Raoul, there's Injuns out digging in your
lead mine."

At once Raoul forgot his fear of being caught with Clarissa. In its
place he felt a rage so powerful his body seemed to fill up with boiling
oil. Indians, more Indians! Worming their way into his family, and now
stealing from his mine.

"Came looking for lead, did they?" he growled. "We'll give them lead.
Round me up a couple of good marksmen and I'll meet you down in the
taproom."

He heard no sound for a moment, and wondered what Eli was doing and
thinking on the other side of the plank door.

Then Eli's voice came, "I'll be a-waiting for you, Raoul."

_That gets him away from here for now._

But if Eli and Clarissa were planning to try to push him into a
marriage, he knew he wouldn't get out of this that easy.

Pierre bringing an Indian wife and son home, Clarissa trying to trap him
into a marriage--he began to feel as if he had walked into some kind of
an ambush.

And Indians at the mine.

He eyed Clarissa, who sat with a pillow between her bare back and the
rough-hewn log wall, sheet and blanket pulled up to her shoulders. He
walked over to her to make sure he could not be heard from outside.

"I'm going to have to ride out to the mine, and I'll be taking your
father with me," he said, keeping his voice soft. "Wait till you hear us
ride away, then get out of here. And make sure nobody sees you."

She was still wide-eyed. "Oh, Raoul, if he was to catch me with you he'd
beat me worse'n that Injun ever beat you."

Raoul leaned forward and put his hand, gently but firmly, on her throat.
"If he ever finds out from you that you and I were together," he said
softly, "I'll beat you even worse than that."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the taproom on the first floor of the inn, Eli, a short, skinny man
whose thinning blond hair was turning gray, gave no sign of knowing that
Clarissa was in the room upstairs. Where did he think she was? Raoul
wondered. Maybe he knew, but was biding his time.

"Winnebago with a bundle of beaver pelts come in this morning," Eli
said. "Said that for an extra cupful of whiskey he'd tell me a thing I
might like to know. I obliged, and he told me riding over here yesterday
he'd seen smoke rising from the prairie. He went for a look-see and it
was three Sauk bucks carrying galena out of the mine and smelting it
down."

Eli had rounded up three big men to ride out with Raoul. Levi Pope, a
tall, hatchet-faced Sucker, an Illinois man, carried a Kentucky rifle
that almost came up to his shoulder. Otto Wegner, a veteran of the army
of the King of Prussia, was six foot three with broad shoulders. He wore
his brown mustache thick and let it grow back over his cheeks to join
his sideburns. Hodge Hode, like Eli, was a Puke, a Missourian. Huge as a
grizzly bear, he dressed in fringed buckskins. Under his coonskin cap
red hair, wild and knotted, hung down to his shoulders, and his red
beard hid three quarters of his face. Besides their long rifles, Eli,
Levi, Hodge and Otto had pistols stuck through their belts, powder horns
slung over their shoulders, hunting knives sheathed in pockets in the
front of their buckskin shirts.

Raoul let them each have a glass of whiskey, his good whiskey, Old
Kaintuck from a canvas-wrapped stone jug, not the terrible-tasting corn
liquor he dispensed from the barrel in the taproom. Then the five of
them went out to mount their horses in the courtyard of the trading
post. Raoul rode his chestnut stallion, Banner.

_My domain_, Raoul thought proudly, as he looked around. Surrounding the
trading post was a palisade twenty feet high made of logs set
vertically, with a catwalk running all around it and a guard tower in
each corner. From a pole atop the southwest tower flew the flag of the
United States, thirteen stripes and twenty-four stars, and below it the
flag of the de Marions' Illinois Fur Company, an arrow and a musket
