started."

"You mean there are others here, too?"

"Oh, yes, there are several million of us here in the United States
already--and more are on the way."

"There are only about a hundred and seventy million people in the United
States, Mrs. Dunny," I said. "If there are several million Martians
among us, one out of every hundred would have to be a Martian."

"One out of every ten!" said Mrs. Dunny. "That's what the boss said just
the other day. 'We're getting pretty close to the number we need to
take over Earth.'"

"What do you need?" I asked. "One to one? One Martian for every
Earthman?"

"Oh, no," said Mrs. Dunny, "one Martian is worth ten Earthmen. The only
reason we're waiting is we don't want any trouble."

"You don't look any different from us Earth people, Mrs. Dunny. How does
one tell the difference between a Martian and an Earthman when one sees
one?"

"Oh, we don't _look_ any different," said Mrs. Dunny. "Some of the kids
don't even know they're Martians. Most mothers don't tell their children
until they're grown-up. And there are other children who are never told
because they just don't develop their full powers."

"What powers?"

"Oh, telepathy, thought control--that sort of thing."

"You mean that Martians can read people's thoughts?"

"Sure! It's no trouble at all. It's very easy really, once you get the
hang of it."

"Can you read my mind?" I asked, smiling.

"Sure!" said Mrs. Dunny, smiling up at me. "That's why I said that I'd
know the answers. I'll be able to read the answers from your mind when
you look at that sheet of paper."

"Now, that's hardly sporting, is it, Mrs. Dunny?" I said, turning to the
camera. The audience laughed. "Everybody else has to do it the hard way
and here you are reading it from my mind."

"All's fair in love and war," said Mrs. Dunny.

"Tell me, Mrs. Dunny. Why are you telling me about all this? Isn't it
supposed to be a secret?"

"I have my reasons," said Mrs. Dunny. "Nobody believes me anyhow."

"Oh, I believe you, Mrs. Dunny," I said gravely. "And now, let's see how
you do on the questions. Are you ready?"

She nodded.

"Name the one and only mammal that has the ability to fly," I asked,
reading from the script.

