
Mr. Shipley drew a deep breath. The safe disappearances he had read
about flashed through his mind. But he didn't believe it. It couldn't
be! Yet, there was the empty corner with the birch panels forming the
back of the show-windows, and no safe. In a daze, he walked over to
the corner, intending to feel about with his hands and make sure the
safe was really gone. Before he got there, there flashed into sight in
place of the safe, a barrel of dark wood; and in a moment there was a
strong odor of vinegar.

Things spun around with Mr. Shipley for a few moments. He grasped a
counter and looked wildly about him. Clerks were hurrying with the
covering of counters; no one seemed to have noticed anything. He stood
a moment, gritted his teeth, and breathed deeply, and soon was master
of himself. He stood and waited until the last customer was gone, and
then called several clerks and pointed to where the safe had stood.

Within the space of a month, thirteen safes and three million dollars
worth of money or property had disappeared. The police were dazed and
desperate, and business was in a panic. Scientific men were appealed
to, to help solve the riddle, but were helpless. Many of them agreed
that though in theory such things were explainable, science was as yet
far from any known means of bringing them about in actuality.
Insurance companies spent fabulous sums on investigation, and, failing
to get results, raised their premiums to impossible levels.


PART III

_The Lady of the Picture_

Phil Hurren, often known as "Zip" Hurren, reporter on the _Examiner_,
felt, on the day the managing editor called him into the sanctum, that
fortune could smile on him no more brightly. There wasn't anything
brighter.

"You stand well with the detective bureau," his boss had said; "and
you've followed this safe-disappearing stuff pretty closely. You're
relieved of everything else for the time being. Get on that business,
and see that the public hears from the _Examiner_!"

Phil knew better than to say any more, for before he recovered from
his surprise, the editor had turned his back, buried himself in his
work on the desk, and forgotten that Phil was there. Nor did Phil
waste any real time in rejoicing. That is why he was called "Zip."
When things happened, whether it was luck or system, Phil was usually
there. In sixty seconds more, Phil was in a taxicab, whirling toward
police headquarters.

Luck or system, he didn't know, but he struck it again. The big wagon
was just starting away from the station door when he arrived, crowded
inside with bluecoats and plainclothes-men. The burly, red-faced man
with chevrons on his sleeve, sitting beside the driver, saw Phil jump
out, and motioned with his hand. Phil leaped up on the back step of
the vehicle and hung on for dear life with his fingers through the
wire grating as they careened through the streets. The men on the
inside grinned at him; a number of them knew him and liked him.
Gradually the door was opened and he crowded in. He found Sergeant
Johnson and eyed him mutely.

"How the hell do you find these things out, I'd like to know," the
sergeant exclaimed. "Are you a mind-reader?"

"I don't really know anything," Phil admitted with that humility which
the police like on the part of newspaper men and seldom meet with. "Do
you mind?"

"No objection," grunted the sergeant. "Been watching all the old
crooks since these safes have been popping. Nothin' much on any of
them, except this slippery wop, Tony Costello. No, we haven't caught
him at anything. Seems to be keeping close and minding his own
business. Working in his laboratory. Ought to make a good living if he
turned honest; clever guy, he seems. But he's been too prosperous
lately. Lots of machinery delivered to his place; we traced it to the
manufacturers and find it cost thousands. Big deposits in his banks.
But, no trace of his having sold anything or worked at anything
outside his own place. So, we're running over to surprise him and help
him get the cobwebs out of his closets."

       *       *       *       *       *

The raid on Tony Costello's shop and laboratory disclosed nothing
whatever. They surrounded the place effectively and surprised Tony
genuinely. But a thorough search of every nook and cranny revealed
nothing whatever of a suspicious nature. There was merely a tremendous
amount of apparatus and machinery that none of the raiding party
understood anything about. Tony's person was also thoroughly searched,
and the leather-framed photograph of the beautiful unknown girl was
found.

"Who's this?" the sergeant demanded. "She don't look like anyone that
might belong to your crowd."

"I don't know," Tony replied.

"Whad'ya mean, don't know?" The sergeant gave him a rough shake.
"What'ya carryin' it for, then?"

"I had really forgotten that it was in my pocket," Tony replied
calmly, at his ease. "I found it in a hotel room one day, and liked
the looks of it."

"I know you're lying there," the sergeant said, "though I'm ready to
believe that you don't know her. Too high up for you. Well, it looks
suspicious and we'll take the picture."

"Boy!" gasped Phil. "What a girl she must be in person! Even the
picture would stand out among a thousand. May I have the picture,
Sergeant?"

"You can come and get a copy of it to-morrow. We'll have it copied and
see if we can trace the subject of it. That might tell us something."

       *       *       *       *       *

The following morning Phil was at Police Headquarters to pick up
further information, and to get a copy of the girl's photograph. Like
the police, he could not keep his mind off the idea that there was
some association between the crooked engineer and the disappearance of
the safes. It seemed to fit too well. The scientific nature of the
phenomena, Tony Costello's well known reputation for scientific
brilliance, and his recent affluence; what else could it mean? In some
way, Tony was getting at these safes. But how? And how prove it? Most
exhaustive searches failed to reveal any traces of the safes anywhere.
If any fragment of one of them had appeared in New York or San
Francisco, the news would have come at once, such was the sensation
all over the country that the series of disappearances had caused.
Tony's calm insolence during the raid, his attitude of waiting
patiently till the police should have had their fun and have it over
with so that he might be left at peace again, showed that he must be
guilty, for anyone else would have protested and felt deeply injured
and insulted. He seemed to be enjoying their discomfiture, and
absolutely confident of his own safety.

"There's got to be some way of getting him," Phil mused; and he mused
almost absent-mindedly, for he was gazing at the photograph of the
girl. For many minutes he looked at it, and then put it silently into
his pocket.

Five o'clock in the evening of that same day came the news of another
safe disappearance. Phil got his tip over the phone, and in fifteen
minutes was at the scene. It was too much like the others to go into
detail about; a six-foot portable safe had suddenly disappeared right
in front of the eyes of the office staff of The Epicure, a huge
restaurant and cafeteria that fed five thousand people three times a
day. In its place stood a ragged, rusty old Ford coupe body. He went
away from there, shaking his head.

Then suddenly in the midst of his dinner, he jumped up, and ran. An
idea had leaped into his head.

