
"For how long?" Lee demanded.

"It should not seem many days. Soon we shall go fast. Please watch it at
the window--he would want that. You have been taught some science?"

"Yes. I guess so."

To Lee it was a weird, unnatural exchange between captor and captive.
The voice, intoning the English words so slowly, so carefully, seemed
gentle, concerned with his welfare ... and afraid of him.

Abruptly the doorslide closed again, and then at once it reopened.

"He would want you to understand what you see," the man said. "You will
find it very wonderful--we did, coming down here. This was his room--so
long ago when he used it. His dials are there--you can watch them and
try to understand. Dials to mark our distance and our size. The
size-change will start soon."

Size-change? Lee's numbed mind turned over the words and found them
almost meaningless.

"From the window there--what you can see will be very wonderful," the
man said again. "He would want you to study it. Please do that."

The doorslide closed....

What you can see from the window will be very wonderful. No one, during
the days that followed could adequately describe what Lee Anthony and
Thomas Franklin and Vivian saw through that lens-window. A vast panorama
in monochrome ... a soundless drama of the stars, so immense, so awesome
that the human mind could grasp only an infinitesimal fragment of its
wonders....

They found the little door which led into another apartment. There were
tables and chairs of earth-style, quaintly old-fashioned. Food and drink
were shoved through the doorslide; the necessities of life and a fair
comfort of living were provided. But their questions, even as the time
passed and lengthened into what on Earth might have been a week or more,
remained unanswered. There was only that gentle but firm negation:

"We have decided that he would want us to say nothing. We do not know
about this girl and this smaller man. We brought them so that they could
not remain on Earth to talk of having seen us. We are sorry about that.
He probably won't like it."

"He? Who the devil are you talking about?" Franklin demanded. "See here,
if I had you fellows back on Earth now I'd slam you into jail. Damned
brigands. You can't do this to me! My--my father's one of the most
important men in New York--"

But now the doorslide quietly closed.

A week? It could have been that, or more. In a wall recess of the room
Lee found a line of tiny dials with moving pointers. Miles--thousands of
miles. A million; ten millions; a hundred million. A light-year; tens,
thousands. And, for the size-change, a normal diameter, Unit 1--and then
up into thousands.

For hours at a time, silent, awed beyond what he had ever conceived the
emotion of awe could mean, he sat at the lens-window, staring out and
trying to understand.

       *       *       *       *       *

The globe-ship was some five-hundred thousand miles out from Earth when
the size-change of the weird little vehicle began. It came to Lee with a
sudden shock to his senses, his head reeling, and a tingling within him
as though every fibre of his being were suddenly stimulated into a new
activity.

"Well, my Gawd," Vivian gasped. "What're they doin' to us now?"

The three of them had been warned by a voice through the doorslide, so
that they sat together on one of the couches, waiting for what would
happen.

"This--I wish they wouldn't do it," Franklin muttered. "Damn them--I
want to get out of here."

Fear seemed to be Franklin's chief emotion now--fear and a petty sense
of personal outrage that all this could be done to him against his will.
Often, when Lee and the girl were at the window, Franklin had sat
brooding, staring at his feet.

"Easy," Lee said. "It evidently won't hurt us. We're started in
size-change. The globe, and everything in it, is getting larger."

Weird. The grey metal walls of the room were glowing now with some
strange current which suffused them. The starlight from the window-lens
mingled with an opalescent sheen from the glowing walls. It was like an
aura, bathing the room--an aura which seemed to penetrate every smallest
cell-particle of Lee's body--stimulating it....

Size-change! Vaguely, Lee could fathom how it was accomplished; his mind
went back to many scientific articles he had read on the theory of
it--only theory, those imaginative scientific pedants had considered it;
and now it was a reality upon him! He recalled the learned phrases the
writers had used.... The _state of matter_. In all the Universe, the
inherent factors which govern the state of matter yield most readily to
a change. An electronic charge--a current perhaps akin to, but certainly
not identical with electricity, would change the state of all organic
and inorganic substances ... a rapid duplication of the fundamental
entities within the electrons--and electrons themselves, so
unsubstantial--mere whirlpools of nothingness!

A rapid duplication of the fundamental whirlpools--that would add size.
The complete substance--with shape unaltered--would grow larger.

All just theory, but here, now, it was brought to an accomplished fact.
Within himself, Lee could feel it. But as yet, he could not see it. The
glowing room and everything in it was so weirdly luminous, there was no
alteration in shape. These objects, the figure of Vivian beside him, and
the pallid frightened Franklin, relative to each other they were no
different from before. And the vast panorama of starry Universe beyond
the lens-window, the immense distances out there, made any size-change
as yet unperceivable.

       *       *       *       *       *

But the size-change had begun, there was no question of it. With his
senses steadying, Lee crossed the room. A weird feeling of lightness was
upon him; he swayed as he stood before the little line of dials in the
wall-recess. Five hundred thousand miles from Earth. More than twice the
distance of the Moon. The globe had gone that far with accelerating
velocity so that now the pointers marked a hundred thousand miles an
hour--out beyond the Moon, heading for the orbit-line of Mars. Now the
size-change pointers were stirring. Unit One, the size this globe had
been as it rested on Earth, fifty feet in height, and some thirty feet
at its mid-section bulge. Already that unit was two, a globe--which, if
it were on Earth, would be a hundred feet high. And Lee himself? He
would be a giant more than twelve feet tall now.... He stood staring at
the dials for a moment or two. That little pointer of the first of the
size-change dials was creeping around. An acceleration! Another moment
and it had touched Unit four. A two hundred foot globe. And Lee, if he
had been on Earth, would already be a towering human nearly twenty-five
feet in height!

Behind him, he heard Franklin suddenly muttering, "If only I could
change without everything else changing! Damn them all--what I could
do--"

"You're nuts," Vivian said. "I don't see anything growing
bigger--everything here--jus' the same." Her laugh was abruptly
hysterical. "This room--you two--you look like ghosts. Say, maybe we're
all dead an' don't know it."

Queerly her words sent a shiver through Lee. He turned, stared blankly
at her. This weird thing! The electronic light streaming from these
walls had a stroboscopic quality. The girl's face was greenish,
putty-colored, and her teeth shone phosphorescent.

Maybe we're all dead and don't know it.... Lee knew that this thing was
a matter of cold, precise, logical science.... Yet who shall say but
what mysticism is not mingled with science? A thing, which if we
understood it thoroughly, would be as logical, as precise as the
mathematics of science itself? Death? Who shall say what, of actuality,
Death may be. A leaving of the mortal shell? A departure from earthly
substance? A new state of being? Surely some of those elements were here
now. And, logically, why could there not be a state of being not all
Death, but only with some of its elements?

"I--I don't like this," Franklin suddenly squealed. On the couch he sat
hunched, trembling. "Something wrong here--Lee--damn you Lee--don't you
feel it?"

Lee tried to smile calmly. "Feel what?"

"We're not--not alone here," Franklin stammered. "Not just you and
Vivian and me--something else is here--something you can't see, but you
can almost feel. An' I don't like it--"

A presence. Was there indeed something else here, of which now in this
new state of being they were vaguely aware? Something--like a fellow
voyager--making this weird journey with them? Lee's heart was so wildly
beating that it seemed smothering him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Unit Ten ... Twenty ... a Hundred.... With steady acceleration, the
lowest size-change pointer was whirling, and the one above it was
moving. The globe was five thousand feet high now. And on Earth Lee
would have been a monstrous Titan over six hundred feet tall. A globe,
and humans in that tremendous size--the very weight of them--in a moment
more of this growth--would disarrange the rotation of the Earth on its
axis!...

And then abruptly Lee found himself envisaging the monstrous globe out
here in Space. A thing to disarrange the mechanics of all the Celestial
Universe! In an hour or two, with this acceleration of growth, the globe
would be a huge meteorite--then an asteroid....

He stared at the distance dials. With the growth had come an immense
augmentation of velocity. A hundred thousand miles an hour--that had
been accelerated a hundred fold now. Ten million miles an hour....
Through the window-lens Lee gazed, mute with awe. The size-change was
beginning to show! Far down, and to one side the crescent Earth was
dwindling ... Mars was far away in another portion of its orbit--the
Moon was behind the Earth. There were just the myriad blazing giant
worlds of the stars--infinitely remote, with vast distances of inky void
between them. And now there was a visible movement to the stars! A sort
of shifting movement....
