"Well, the seeds have hatched," said Professor Wentworth at length, in
a strained voice. "I am afraid some of the curious who have been
gathering those meteorites so eagerly have paid a dear price for
them."

"Yes, I'm afraid so," echoed Jim. "We were lucky. If Joan hadn't
happened to spot those things just when she did--" He broke off and
pressed her hand fondly. "But somehow I can't believe it, even yet.
What do you think the things are, Professor?"

"God knows! As I told you, those seeds, should they germinate, would
produce something quite alien to our experience; and as I feared, it
is a form of life that will not blend well with humanity."

Jim shuddered.

"But look, father!" exclaimed Joan. "They're flying away! They seem to
be way up among the stars. Maybe they've left the earth altogether."

Professor Wentworth following his daughter's gaze, saw that many of
the monsters were now mere orange pinpoints against the night.

"Let us hope so!" he said fervently.

But in his heart there was no conviction, nor in Jim's, strangely.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the way back to New York, Jim had plenty to heighten his
uneasiness. The scene below him everywhere was red with
conflagrations, the sky everywhere orange with the wings of those
fiery moths.

More than one swept perilously close, as he pushed his auto-plane on
at top speed; but they showed no inclination to attack, for which he
was devoutly thankful.

Over the metropolitan area, the scene was one beggaring description.
All the five boroughs were a blazing checker-board. New Jersey,
Connecticut, Westchester--all were raging. Hundreds of those deadly
bombs must have burst in Manhattan alone.

But the fire department there seemed to have the situation in hand, he
noticed as he swept down onto the Plaza landing platform.

Leaving his plane with an attendant, he took the first elevator to the
street level, and crossing hastily to the Press tower, mounted to the
city room.

There absolute pandemonium raged. Typewriters were sputtering,
telegraph keys clicking, phones buzzing, reporters coming and going in
a steady stream, mingled with the frantic orders of editors,
sub-editors, copy readers, composing-room men and others.

Carter fought through the bedlam to the city editor's desk.

"Sorry I couldn't bring you that egg, Chief," he said, with a grim
smile. "I had one right in my hand, but it hatched out on me."

Overton looked up wearily. He was a man who had seen a miracle, a
godless miracle that restored his faith in the devil.

"Don't talk--just write!" he growled. "I've seen and heard too much
to-night. We're all going to hell, I guess--unless we're already
there."

But Jim wasn't ready to write yet.

"What's the dope elsewhere? The same?"

"All over the map! We're frying, from coast to coast."

"And abroad?"

"Cooked, everywhere!" He paused, and turned an imploring face to Jim.
"Tell me, Carter--what's happening? You've seen Wentworth, I suppose.
What's he make of it?"

"He--doesn't know."

"God help us! Well, go write your story. If we've got a plant by press
time, we'll have something on page one to-morrow--if there's anyone to
read it."

       *       *       *       *       *

By morning the fires in the metropolitan area had been brought under
control and it was found that neither the loss of life nor the damage
was as great as had at first been feared. Mainly it was the older
types of buildings that had suffered the most.

The same thing was true in other parts of the country and elsewhere in
the world; and elsewhere, as in New York, people pulled themselves
together, cleared up the debris, and went ahead with their
occupations. Business was resumed, and rebuilding operations were
begun.

Meanwhile, where were those fiery moths that had sprung so
devastatingly from their strange cocoons?

For a while no one knew and it was believed they had indeed winged off
into interstellar space, as Joan had suggested that night on
Observatory Hill.

Then came rumors that damped these hopes, followed by eye-witness
reports that altogether dashed them. The bat-like monsters had flown,
not off into space, but to the world's waste-lands.

Strange, it was, the instinct that had led them unerringly to the
remotest point of each continent. In North America it was the great
Arizona desert, in South America the pampas of Argentina, in Europe
the steppes of Russia, in Asia the Desert of Gobi, in Africa the
Sahara, in Australia the Victoria; while in the British Isles,
Philippines, New Zealand, Madagascar, Iceland, the East Indies, West
Indies, South Seas and other islands of the world, the interiors were
taken over by the demons, the populace fleeing for their lives.

As for the oceans, no one knew exactly what had happened there, though
it was obvious they, too, had received their share of the bombardment
on that fateful night; but, while temperatures were found to be
somewhat above normal, scientists were of the opinion that the deadly
spawn that had fallen there had failed to incubate.

       *       *       *       *       *

Immediately the presence of the monsters in the Arizona desert was
verified, Overton called Jim Carter to his desk.

"Well, I've got a big assignment for you, boy," he said, rather more
gently than was his fashion. "Maybe you know what, huh?"

"You want me to buzz out and interview those birds?"

"You guessed it. And photograph 'em!"

"Okay, Chief," said Carter, though he knew this would be the toughest
job yet.

Overton knew it, too.

"It won't be easy," he said. "And it may be dangerous. You don't have
to take the assignment unless you want."

"But I want."

"Good! I thought you would." He regarded the younger man admiringly,
almost enviously. "Now, about those photos. The Television News people
haven't been able to get a thing, nor the War Department--not so much
as a still. So those photos will be valuable."

Overton paused, to let that sink in.

"They'll be worth a million, in fact, in addition to what the War
Department offers. And to you they'll be worth ten thousand dollars."

"How come?"

"Because that's what the Old Man said."

"Well, I can use it!" said Jim, thinking of Joan.

"All right. Then go to it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Leaving New York late that night, Carter timed his flight to arrive
over the eastern edge of the desert just before dawn.

The trip was uneventful till he crossed the Rockies over New Mexico
and eased down into Arizona. Then, flying low and fast, he suddenly
caught a glow of color off ahead.

