had once been the greatest of all Earthly deserts--but a poisonous
blanket of strange plant mutations, some of them poisonous beyond
belief.

Truly, Bliss thought, he belonged to a remarkable species. Man had
conquered his environment, he had even, within the limits of the Solar
System, conquered space. He had planted, and successfully, his own kind
on a neighboring planet and made it grow. But man had never, at least
on his home planet, conquered himself.

Overpopulation had long since ceased to be a problem--the atomic wars
had seen to that. But, thanks to the miracles of science--atomics and
automation--man had quickly rebuilt the world into a Garden of Eden with
up-to-date plumbing. He might have won two planets, but he had turned
his Eden into an arbor of deadly nightshade.

Oddly, it had not been the dreadful detonations of thermo-nuclear bombs
that had poisoned his paradise--though, of course, they had helped. It
had been the constant spillage of atomic waste into the upper atmosphere
that had spelled ruin. Now, where four billion people had once lived in
war and want, forty million lived in poisoned plenty. He was chancellor
of a planet whose ruling species could not longer breed without
disaster.

His was the last generation. It should have been a peaceful generation.
But it was not.

For, as population decreased, so did the habitable areas of Earth. The
formerly overpopulated temperate regions were now ghastly jungles of
self-choking mutant plant growth. Only what had been the waste
areas--Antarctica, the Gobi, Australia, Patagonia and the Sahara-Arabia
districts--could still support even the strange sorts of human life that
remained.

And the forty millions still alive were restless, frightened, paranoiac.
Each believed his own group was being systematically exterminated in
favor of some other. None had yet faced the fact that humanity, for all
practical purposes, was already dead on Earth.

He sensed another presence in the room. It was Myra, his secretary,
bearing a sheaf of messages in one hand, a sheaf of correspondence for
him to sign in the other. She said, "You look beat, chancellor. Sit
down."

Bliss sat down. Myra, as his faithful and efficient amanuensis for more
than fifteen years, had her rights. One of them was taking care of him
during working hours. She was still rather pretty, he noted with
surprise. An Afro-Asian with skin like dark honey and smooth, pleasant,
rather flat features. It was, he thought, a pity she had that third eye
in her forehead.

She stood beside him while he ran through the letters and signed them.
"Meeting of the regional vice-chancellors tomorrow, eh?" he said as he
handed them back to her.

"Right, chancellor," she said crisply. "Ten o'clock. You may have to
take another whirlwind trip to tell them the situation is well in hand."

He grunted and glanced at the messages, scanned them quickly, tossed
them into the disposal vent beside his desk. Myra looked moderately
disapproving. "What about that possible ship from Mars?" she asked.
"Shouldn't you look into it?"

He grunted again, looked up at her, said, "If I'd looked into every
'ship from Mars' astronomy has come up with in the nine years I've held
this office, I'd never have had time for anything else. You can lay odds
it's a wild asteroid or something like that."

"They sound pretty sure this time," Myra said doubtfully.

"Don't they always?" he countered. "Come on, Myra, wrap it up. Time to
go home."

"Roger, boss," she said, blinking all three eyes at him.

Bliss turned on the autopi and napped while the gyrojet carried him to
his villa outside Dakar. Safely down on the roof of the comfortable,
automatic white house, he took the lift down to his second-floor suite,
where he showered and changed into evening sandals and clout. He
redonned his gloves, then rode down another two flights to the terrace,
where Elise was waiting for him in a gossamer-thin iridescent eggshell
sari. They kissed and she patted the place on the love-seat beside her.
She had a book--an old-fashioned book of colored reproductions of
