
"Then, father, the invaders killed off all the Earth-lings?"

"Not all. They killed many, but many others were enslaved. Just as the
humans had used horses and cattle, the newcomers so used the humans.
They made workers out of some, others they slaughtered for food."

"Papa, what sort of language did these Star-beings talk?"

"A very simple language, but the humans were never able to master it.
So, the invaders, being so much smarter, mastered all the languages of
the globe."

"What did the Earth-lings call the invaders, father?"

"'An-vils'. Half angels, half devils."

"Then, papa, everything was peaceful on Earth after the An-vils enslaved
the humans?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"For a little while. Then, some of the most daring of the humans, led by
a man named Knowall, escaped into the interior of Greenland. This
Knowall was a psychiatrist, the foremost on Earth."

"What's a psychiatrist?"

"A dealer in ideas."

"Then, he was very rich?"

"He'd been the richest human on Earth. After some profound thought,
Knowall figured a way to rid the earth of the An-vils."

"How, papa?"

"He perfected a method, called the Knowall-Hughes, Ilinski technique, of
imbuing these An-vils with human emotions."

"What does 'imbuing' mean?"

"He filled them full of and made them aware of."

Zenia interrupted, "Aren't you talking a bit above the child's
understanding, Drake?"

"No, mama," said Zoe. "I understand what papa explained. Now, don't
interrupt."

"So, Knowall," continued Drake, "filled the An-vils with human feelings
such as Love, Hate, Ambition, Jealousy, Malice, Envy, Despair, Hope,
Fear, Shame and so on. Very soon the An-vils were acting like humans,
and in ten days, terrible civil wars wiped out the An-vils' population
by two-thirds."

"Then, papa, the An-vils finally killed off each other?"

"Almost, until among them a being named Zalibar, full of saintliness and
persuasion, preached the brotherhood of all An-vils. The invaders,
