
"Planet? Oh, _that_ Mars. Sure, I've heard of it--you gotta go by
spaceship. What's your name?"

"Gerri Kin. Look, Lane, holding me is no good. It'll just get you in
worse trouble. What are you trying to do?"

"I wanna see the Mayor. Me and my buddies, we just come back from
fighting in Chi, Gerri. We won. They got a new Mayor out there in Chi.
He takes orders from Newyork."

Gerri Kin said, "That's what the force-domes did. The perfect defense.
But also the road to the return to city-states. Anarchy."

Lane said, "Yeah? Well, we done what they wanted us to do. We did the
fighting for them. So we come back home to Newyork and they lock us up
in the Armory. Won't pay us. Won't let us go nowhere. They had cops
guarding us. City cops." Lane sneered. "I busted out. I wanna see the
Mayor and find out why we can't have time off. I don't play games,
Gerri. I go right to the top."

Lane broke off. There was a hum outside the window. He whirled and
stared out. The rounded black hulls of the two police paragrav-boats
were nosing toward the force-screen. Lane could read the white numbers
painted on their bows.

A loudspeaker shouted into the room: "Come out of there, Lane, or we'll
blast you out."

"You can't," Lane called. "This girl from Mars is here."

"I repeat, Lane--come out or we'll blast you out."

Lane turned to the girl. "I thought you were important."

       *       *       *       *       *

She stood there with her hands together, calmly looking at him. "I am.
But you are too, to them. Mars is millions of miles away, and you're
right across the Square from the Mayor's suite."

"Yeah, but--" Lane shook his head and turned back to the window. "All
right, look! Move them boats away and I'll let this girl out!"

"No deal, Lane. We're coming in." The police boats backed away slowly,
then shot straight up, out of the line of vision.

Lane looked down at the Square. Far below, the long, gleaming barrel of
a blaster cannon caught the dim light filtering down through Newyork's
Shell. The cannon trundled into the Square on its olive-drab, box-shaped
caterpillar mounting and took up a position equidistant from the bases
of the three towers.

Now a rumble of many voices rose from below. Lane stared down to see a
large crowd gathering in Tammany Square. Sound trucks were rolling to a
stop around the edges of the crowd. The people were all looking up.

Lane looked across the Square. The windows of the tower opposite, the
ones he could see clearly, were crowded with faces. There were white dot
faces on the balcony that Gerri Kin had pointed out as the Mayor's
suite.

The voice of a 3V newscaster rolled up from the Square, reechoing
against the tower walls.

"Lane is holding the Martian Ambassador, Gerri Kin, hostage. You can see
the Martian tricolor behind his force-globe. Police are bringing up
blaster cannon. Lane's defense is a globe of energy similar to the one
which protects Newyork from aerial attack."

Lane grinned back at Gerri Kin. "Whole town's down there." Then his grin
faded. Nice-looking, nice-talking girl like this probably cared a lot
more about dying than he did. Why the hell didn't they give him a chance
to let her out? Maybe he could do it now.

Cybrain said no. It said the second he dropped his force-screen, they'd
blast this room to hell. Poor girl from Mars, she didn't have a chance.

Gerri Kin put her hand to her forehead. "Why did you have to pick my
room? Why did they send me to this crazy city? Private soldiers. Twenty
million people living under a Shell like worms in a corpse. Earth is
sick and it's going to kill me. What's going to happen?"

Lane looked sadly at her. Only two kinds of girls ever went near a
Trooper--the crazy ones and the ones the city paid. Why did he have to
be so near getting killed when he met one he liked? Now that she was
showing a little less fear and anger, she was talking straight to him.
She was good, but she wasn't acting as if she was too good for him.

"They'll start shooting pretty quick," said Lane. "I'm sorry about you."

"I wish I could write a letter to my parents," she said.

"What?"

