in the size of any object which the atoms formed. They would cause
anything, living or dead, to shrink to inconceivably microscopic
dimensions--or restore it to its former size, depending upon the exact
wave-length used.

"And time passes far more swiftly for the tiny objects--probably
because the electrons move faster in their smaller orbits. That is
what suggested to Dr. Whiting that he would be able to watch the
entire life of a planet, in the laboratory. And so, at first, we
experimented merely with solitary specimens or colonies of animals.

"But on the Pygmy Planet, we have watched the life of a world--the
whole panorama of evolution--"

       *       *       *       *       *

"It seems too wonderful!" Larry muttered. "Could Dr. Whiting actually
decrease his size and become a dwarf?"

"No trick at all," Agnes assured him. "All you have to do is stand in
the violet beam, to shrink. And move over in the red one, when you
want to grow. I have been several times with Dr. Whiting to the Pygmy
Planet."

"Been--" Larry stopped, breathless with astonishment.

"See the little airplane," Agnes said, pointing under the table.

Larry gasped.

Beneath the table stood a toy airplane. The spread of its glistening,
perfect wings was hardly three feet. A wonderful, delicate toy,
accurate in every detail of propeller, motor and landing gear, of
brace and rudder and aileron. Then he realized that it was no toy at
all, but a faithful miniature of a commercial plane. A complete, tiny
copy of one of the latest single-motor, cabin monoplane models.

"It looks like it would fly," he said "a friend of mine his a big
one, just like it! Taught me to fly it, last summer vacation. This is
the very image of it!"

"It will fly!" Agnes assured him, now composed enough to smile at his
amazement. "I have been with the doctor to the Pygmy Planet in it.

"You stand in the violet ray until you're about three inches high,"
she explained, "and then get into the plane. Then you fly up and into
the violet ray at the point where it touches the planet, and remain
there while you grow smaller. When you are the right size, all you
have to do is drop to the surface, and land. To come away, you rise
into the red ray and stay in it till you grow to proper size, when you
come down and land."

"You--you've actually done that?" he gasped. "It sounds like a fairy
story!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yes, I've done it," she assured him. Then she shuddered
apprehensively. "And the things--the machine-monsters, Dr. Whiting
called them--have learned to do it, too. One of them came down the red
ray, and attacked him. The doctor had a gun--but what could he do
against one of those?" She shivered.

"It carried him back up the violet beam. Just a few minutes ago, I
started to phone you. Then I was afraid you would be hurt--"

"Me, hurt?" Larry burst out. "What about you, here alone?"

"It was my business. Dr. Whiting told me there might be danger, when
he hired me."

"And now, what can we do?" Larry demanded.

"I don't know," she said slowly. "I'm afraid one of the monsters will
be back after a new victim. We could smash the apparatus, but it is
too wonderful to be destroyed. And besides, Dr. Whiting may have
escaped. He may be alive there, in the deserts!"

"We might fly up, in the little plane," Larry proposed, doubtfully. "I
think I could pilot it. If you want--"

The girl's body stiffened. Her brown eyes widened with sudden dread,
and her small face went pale. She slipped quickly from the stool,
drawing in her breath with a sort of gasp. The hand that gripped the
automatic trembled a little.

"What's the matter?" Larry cried.

"I thought--" she gasped, "I think I see something in the ray! The
machine-monster is coming back!"

Her lips tightened. She lifted the little automatic and began to shoot
into the pillar of crimson fire beside the tiny, spinning globe.

Larry, watching tensely, saw a curious, bird-like something fluttering
about in the red ray, _swiftly growing larger_!

Deliberately, and pausing to aim carefully for each shot, the girl
emptied the little gun at the figure. Her body was rigid, her small
face was firmly set, though she was breathing very fast.

       *       *       *       *       *

A curious numbness had come over Larry. His only physical sensations
were the quick hammering of his heart, and a parching dryness in his
throat. Terror stiffened him. Though he would not have admitted it, he
was paralyzed with fear.

The glittering thing that fluttered about in the crimson ray was not
an easy target. When the gun was empty, it seemed still unharmed. And
its wings had increased to a span of a foot.

"Too late!" Agnes gasped. "Why didn't we do _something_?"

Trembling, horror-stricken, she shrank toward Larry.

He was staring at the thing in the pillar of scarlet light.

It had dropped to the crystal disk upon which the red ray fell from
the huge, glowing tube above. It stood there, motionless except for
the swift increase of its size.

Larry gazed at it, lost in fear and wonder. It was like nothing he had
ever seen. What was it that Agnes had said, of machine-monsters, of
human brains in mechanical bodies? His brain reeled. He strained his
eyes to distinguish the monstrosity more clearly. It was veiled in
crimson flame; he could not see it distinctly.

But suddenly, when it was as tall as himself, it sprang out into the
room, toward Larry and the shuddering girl. Just off the crystal disk,
beyond the scarlet pillar of fire, it paused for long seconds, seeming
to regard them with malevolent eyes.

For the first time, Larry could see it plainly.

Its body, or its central part, was a tube of transparent crystal; an
upright cylinder, rounded at upper and lower ends. It was nearly a
foot in diameter, and four feet long. It seemed filled with a
luminous, purple liquid.

About the cylinder were three bands of greenish, glistening metal.
Attached to the lower band were four jointed legs of the same bright
green metal, upon which the strange thing stood.

Set in the middle band were two glittering, polished lenses, which
seemed to serve as eyes, and Larry felt that they were gazing at him
with malevolent menace. Behind the eyes, two wings sprang from the
green band. Ingenious, folding wings, of thin plates and bars of green
metal.

And from the upper band sprang four slender, glistening, whip-like
tentacles, metallic and brilliantly green, two yards in length. They
writhed with strange life!

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed a long time to Larry that the thing stood, motionless,
seeming to stare evilly at them with eye-like lenses. Then, lurching
forward a little, it moved toward them upon legs of green metal. And
now Larry saw another amazing thing about it.

Floating in the brilliant violet liquid that filled the crystal tube
was a gray mass, wrinkled and corrugated. This was divided by deep
clefts into right and left hemispheres, which, in turn were separated
into larger upper and smaller lower segments. White filaments ran
