
"Carse, our whole situation's changed by this. We intended to go
straight to my laboratory, but we may not be able to. The laboratory
may already be closed to us. And even if not, there'd be a big risk in
going there."

"Closed to us by what?" the Hawk demanded sharply. "At risk from
what?"

Old Leithgow pressed his hands over his face. "Let me think a moment,"
he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were very good reasons why Eliot Leithgow maintained his chief
laboratory on the dangerous Satellite III. Other planets might have
offered more friendly locations, but III possessed stores of
accessible minerals valuable to the scientist's varied work, and its
position in the solar system was most convenient, being roughly
halfway between Earth and the outermost frontiers. Leithgow had
counterbalanced the inherent peril of the laboratory's location by
ingenious camouflage, intricate defenses and hidden underground
entrances; had, indeed, hidden it so well that none of the scavengers
and brigands and more personal enemies who infested Port o' Porno
remotely suspected that his headquarters was on the satellite at all.
Ships, men, could pass over it a score of times with never an inkling
that it lay below.

After a short silence, Eliot Leithgow began his explanation.

"You'll remember," he told the intent Hawk, "that Ku Sui's men
kidnapped me from our friend Kurgo's house in Porno. There were five
of them: robot-coolies. They took us entirely by surprise, and killed
Kurgo and bore me to Ku Sui's asteroid.

"Well, I had come to Kurgo's house in the first place to arrange for
supplies for building an addition to my laboratory, and I had with me
a sheaf of papers containing plans for this addition. The plans are
not important; they tell nothing--but there was a figure on one of the
papers that might reveal everything! The figure 5,576.34. Do you know
what that stands for?"

The adventurer thought for a moment, then shook his head. Leithgow
nodded. He went on:

"Few would. _But among the few would be Ku Sui!_

"You'll remember that on building my laboratory we considered it
extremely important to have it on the other side of the globe from
Port o' Porno--diametrically opposite--so that the movements of our
ships to and from it would be hidden from that pirate port.
Diametrically opposite--remember? Well, the diameter of Satellite III
is 3,550 miles. This diameter multiplied by 3.1416 gives 11,152.63
miles as the circumference, and one half the circumference is 5,576.34
miles--the exact distance of my laboratory from Port o' Porno!"

"I see," Carse murmured. "I see."

"That figure meant nothing to you, nor would it to the average person;
but to a mathematician and astronomer--to Dr. Ku Sui--it would be a
challenge! He would be studying the paper on which it is written down.
One of Eliot Leithgow's papers. Plans for an addition to a laboratory.
Therefore, Eliot Leithgow's laboratory. And then the figure: half the
circumference of Satellite III. Why, he would at once deduce that it
gave the precise location of my laboratory!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Hawk rose quickly. "If those papers fell into Dr. Ku's hands--"

"He would know exactly where the laboratory is," Leithgow finished.
"He would search. Its camouflage would not hold him long. And that
would be the end of my laboratory--and us too, if we were caught
inside."

"Yes," snapped the Hawk. "You imply that the papers were left in
Kurgo's house?"

"I had them in the bottom drawer of the clothes-chest in the room I
always use. The coolies did not take them. At that time they wanted
nothing but me."

Friday, rubbing his woolly crown, interjected: "But, even if Ku Sui's
still alive, he wouldn't know about them papers. Far's _I_ can see,
they're safe."

"No!" Leithgow cried. "That's it! They're not! Follow it logically,
point by point. Assuming that Dr. Ku's alive, he has one point of
contact with us--Kurgo's house, in Porno, where I was kidnapped. He
wants us badly. He will anticipate that one of us will go back to that
house: to care for Kurgo's body, to get my belongings--for several
reasons. So he will radio down--he probably can't come himself--for
henchmen to station themselves at the house and to ransack it
thoroughly for anything pertaining to me. The papers would fall into
their hands!"

"All right," said Carse levelly. "We must get those papers. They will
either be still in the house or in the possession of Dr. Ku's men at
Porno. But whichever it is--_we must get them before Ku Sui does_." He
paused.

"Well," he said, "that means me." He turned and looked down at the old
man and smiled. "There's no use risking the three of us. I'll go to
Kurgo's house myself."

"If the papers are gone, suh?" asked Friday.

"I don't know. What I do will depend on what I discover there."

"But," said Leithgow, "there may be guards! There may be an ambush!"

"I have a powerful weapon. M. S. Unknown, so far; new to Satellite
III. Ku Sui himself supplied it. This space-suit."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Hawk scanned the "western" sky and began giving brisk orders.

"Eliot, you've got to go to some place of safety until this is all
over. You too, Eclipse, to take care of him. Let me see.... There's
Cairnes, and Wilson.... Wilson's the one. He should be at his ranch
now. You remember it: Ban Wilson's ranch, on the Great Briney Lake?
Right. Both of you will go there and wait. I'll meet you there when
I'm finished. And at that time I'll either have the papers or know
that Ku Sui has found the laboratory."

Again on his feet, the old Master Scientist regarded anxiously this
slender, coldly calculating man who was his closest friend. He was
afraid. "Carse," he said, "you're going back alone into probable
danger. The papers--the laboratory--they're important--but not so
important as your life."

There was visible now in the Hawk's face that hard, unflinching
will-to-do that had made him the spectacular adventurer that he was.
"Did you ever know me to run from danger?" he asked softly. "Did you
ever know me to run from Ku Sui?..." And Eliot Leithgow knew that the
course was set, no matter what it might hold.

Carse again glanced at Jupiter, hanging massive in the blue overhead.
"About three hours of daylight left," he observed. "Now, close
face-plates. We must go up--far up--to get our bearings."

Altitude swept back the horizon as they arrowed up through the warm,
glowing air. From far in the heavens, perhaps twenty miles, Carse saw
what he looked for--a bright gleam of silver in the monochrome of the
terrain, where Jupiter's light struck on the smooth metal hides of a
group of space-ships resting in the satellite's lone port, Porno.
Eighty, a hundred miles away--some such distance. Into the helmet's
tiny microphone he said:

"That's Porno, over to the 'north,' and there to one side is the Great
Briney. It's not far: you won't have to hurry, Eliot. Head straight
for the lake and follow the near shoreline toward Porno, and you'll
come to Ban Wilson's ranch. Now we part."

The three clinging, giant forms separated. The direction-rods for
horizontal movement were out-hinged. A last touch of mitten-gloves on
the bloated suits fabric; a nod and a smile through the face-plates;
and a few parting words:

"Good luck, old comrade!"--in Leithgow's soft voice; and the Negro's
deep, emphatic bass: "Don't know how far these little sets work, suh,
but if you need me, call. I'll keep listenin'!"

And then white man and black were speeding away in the ruddy flood of
Jupiter-light, and Hawk Carse faced the danger trail alone, as was his
wont.

       *       *       *       *       *

Caution rather than speed had to mark his journey, Carse knew. Several
ranches lay scattered in the jungle smother between him and the
port--stations where the weed isuan was collected and refined into the
deadly finished product. They were worked for the most part by
Venusians allied with Ku Sui: the Eurasian practically controlled the
drug trade; and therefore, if any alarm had been broadcast, many men
would already be on the lookout for him.

So the Hawk dropped low, and chose a course through the screening
walls of the jungle. It did not take him long to attain full mastery
of the suit's controls, and soon he was gliding cleanly through the
hollows created by the mammoth outthrusting treetops in a course crazy
and twisted, but one which kept him pointing always towards Porno.
Presently he found an easier highway and a faster--a sluggish, dirty
yellow stream, quite broad, which ended, he was sure, in a swamp
within a mile of his destination.

Flanked by the jungle growth which sprouted thickly from each bank, a
gray, ghostly shape in the shadows lying over the water, he sped
through the dying afternoon. He kept at least ten feet above the
surface, well out of reach of such water beasts as from time to time
reared up through the placid surface to scan him. Once a huge gantor,
gulping a drink from the bank, snorted and went trumpeting away at the
grotesque sight of him--flying without wings!--and once too, on rising
cautiously above the treetops to reconnoiter, Carse saw life far more
perilous to him: a small party of men, stooping over a swamp-brink and
plucking the ripe isuan weed. At this he dived steeply and fled on;
and he knew he had gone unobserved, for there came no outcry of
