low, and it is safe enough to walk outside.... The life boat is lying
beside a small stream which empties into a circular pool of blue water
in the center of a small meadow. The fiery trail of the jets and rockets
has burned a hundred-foot-wide path across the meadow, and the upper
edge of the pool, and ends in a broad, blackened circle surrounding the
boat. I came down too fast the last few feet, and the drive tubes are a
crumpled mess inextricably fused with the bent landing pads. This boat
will never fly again without extensive repairs which I cannot perform.
But the hull is otherwise sound, and I am comfortable enough except for
a few rapidly healing bruises and contusions. In a few days I should be
well enough to explore....

I am surprised that this world is so capable of supporting human life.
The consensus of scientific opinion has been that less than one out of
50,000 planets would be habitable. Yet I have struck paydirt on the
first try. Perhaps I am lucky. At any rate I am alive, and my lifeboat,
while somewhat damaged by an inept landing, is still sufficiently intact
to serve as a shelter, and the survival kits are undamaged, which should
make my stay here endurable if not pleasant ... and we are learning a
great deal about our galaxy with the development of the interstellar
drive--not the least of which is that authoritative opinion is mere
opinion and far from authoritative.

This world on which I find myself is in every respect but one similar to
Earth. There is no animate life--only plants. No birds fly, no insects
buzz, no animals rustle the silent underbrush. The only noise is the
wind in the trees and grasses. I am utterly alone. It is a strange
feeling, this loneliness. There is a feeling of freedom in it, a release
from the too-close proximity of my fellow men. There is the pleasure of
absolute privacy. But this will undoubtedly pall. Already I find that I
am anxious for someone to talk to, someone with whom I can share ideas
and plans. There ...

... which I cannot explain. But one thing is certain. My first
impression of this place was wrong. The life here, if not animate, is at
least intelligent--and it is not friendly. Yet neither does it hate. It
observes me with a slow, methodical curiosity that I can sense at the
very threshold of consciousness. It is a peculiar sensation that is
quite indescribable--unpleasant--but hardly terrifying. I suppose I can
feel it more than a normal person because I am a biologist and it is
part of my training and specialized skill to achieve a certain rapport
with my surroundings. I first noticed it yesterday. It came suddenly,
without warning, a vague uneasiness, like the feeling when one awakens
from a partially remembered but unpleasant dream. And it has been
increasing ever since.

       *       *       *       *       *

The principal impressions I received from this initial contact were an
awareness of self and a recognizance of identity--the concept of _cogito
ergo sum_ came through quite clearly. I wonder what Descartes would
think of an alien intelligence quoting his dogma.... I think it is
animal, despite the absence of animal life in this area. The thought
patterns are quick and flexible. And they have been increasing in power
and precision at an appreciable rate. I am sure that it is aware of me.
I shall call the feeling "it" until I can identify the source more
accurately. Certainly "it" appears to be as good a description as any,
since there is no consciousness of sex in the thought patterns. I wonder
what sort of ... and to my surprise I _swore_! I do not ordinarily
curse or use obscenities--not because they are obscene but because they
are a poor and inexact means of conveying ideas or impressions. But in
this case they were particularly appropriate. No other words could so
precisely describe my feelings. Me, a rational intelligence, succumbing
to such low-level emotional stimuli! If this keeps on, the next thing I
know I will be seeing little green men flitting through the trees.... Of
course, this world is unnatural, which makes its effect on the nervous
system more powerful, yet that does not explain the feeling of tension
which I have been experiencing, the silent straining tension of an
overloaded cable, the tension of a toy balloon overfull with air. I have
a constant feeling of dreadful expectancy, of imminent disaster, mixed
with a sense of pain and a lively--almost childlike--curiosity. To say
that this is disquieting would be a complete understatement, this state
of chronic disease, mixed with occasional rushes of terror. I am certain
that my nervous system and emotional responses are being examined, and
catalogued like a visceral preparation in an anatomy laboratory. There
is something infinitely chilling about this mental dissection.

