Professor Apsox Zalpha comes out with a statement the next morning. He
says the quake confirms his theory that the inside of the Earth is as
hot as a Venutian calypso number, and that gases are being generated by
the heat and that we haven't volcanoes enough on the surface to allow
them to escape.

Exmud R. Zmorro comes and asks me if I have an opinion.

"Ha," I laugh. "I have many on file in the Neuropsychiatorium. Just go
and take your pick. However, I will give you one ad lib and sub rosa.
There is more downstairs than Professor Zalpha dreams about. Who is he
to say there is no civilization in inner space as well as outer? How do
we know that there is not a globe inside a globe with some kind of space
or atmosphere in between?"

Exmud R. Zmorro says thanks and leaves in quite a hurry. I snap off the
gadget and head for my rocket jeep, and fifteen seconds later I am
walking into the factory where a hundred citizens are already at work on
the inner spaceship. It is listing a little to port from the quake but
the head mech says it will be all straightened out in a few hours. It
is just a skeleton ship at the moment with the auger already in place
and the point about three feet into the ground.

D'Ambrosia Zahooli comes in and says he has been to see Commander
Bizmuth Aquinox. "He will give just enough of the atom pile for seventy
million miles," he says. "And only enough superhydrogenerated radium to
push us twenty million miles, Sep. I think we should write to Number
One. I explained to the space brass that we have got to come up again
after going down and have to reverse the blast tubes. It is radium we
have to have to make the return trip. I says a half a pound would do it.
You know what I think? I bet they don't believe we'll ever git back. And
was their laughs dirty!"

"Skeptics have lived since the beginnin' of time," I scoff. "They
laughed at Leonardo da Vinci, Columbus, Edison, a guy named Durante.
Even the guy who first sat down at a pianer. We will take what we can
git, pal, and then come back and laugh at them."

"I wish you was more convincin'," D'Ambrosia says. "I have
claustrophobia and would hate to git stuck in an over-sized fountain pen
halfway to the middle of this earth."

"Hand me those plans," I says sharply. "And stop scarin' me."

Three months later we have it made. Technicians come from four planets
to look at the Magnificent Mole. The area is alive with members of the
Interplanetary Press, the Cosmic News Bureau, and the Universe Feature
Service. Two perspiring citizens arrive and tear up two insurance
policies right in front of my eyes. An old buddy of mine in the war
against the Nougatines says he wants to go with me. His name is Axitope
Wurpz. He has been flying cargo between Earth and Parsnipia and says he
is quite unable to explain certain expense items in his book. A
Parsnipian D.A. is trying to serve him a subpoena.

"You are in, Axie," I says. "A crew of three is enough as that is about
all the oxygen we can store up. Meet D'Ambrosia Zahooli."

"Why is he wearing a mask?" Wurpz quips.

"You are as funny as a plutonium crutch," Zahooli says.

"No hard feelin's," Wurpz says, and takes a small flask out of his
pocket. "We will drink to Operation Earthworm."

As might have been expected, we run into some snags. The Euthanasia
Society serve us with papers as they maintain nobody can commit suicide
in the year 2022 without permission from the Board. Gulflex and other
oil companies protest to Number One as they say we might open up a hole
that will spill all the petroleum out of the earth all at once, so fast
they couldn't refine it. A spark could ignite it and set the globe on
fire like it was a brandied Christmas pudding. But then another
earthquake shakes Earth from the rice fields of China to the llamas in
Peru just when it looks as if we were about to be tossed into an outer
space pokey.

The seismologists get together and agree that they can't possibly figure
out the depth of the focus and state that the long waves have to pass
through the epicenter or some such spot underground. Anyway, all the
brass agrees that something is going on in inner space not according to
Hoyle or Euclid or anybody else and that we three characters might just
hit on something of scientific value.

The Magnificent Mole is built mostly of titanium, a metal which is only
about half as heavy as steel and twice as rugged. It is not quite as big
in diameter as the auger, for if it was any Martian moron knows we would
scrape our sides away before we got down three miles. We store
concentrated chow to last six months and get the acceleration couches
ready. We are to blast down at eighteen point oh-four hours, Friday, May
26th, 2022. Today is Wednesday. The big space brass, the fourteenth
estate haunt the spot marked X.

We get it both barrels from the jokers carrying press cards. They call
it Operation Upside Down. At last three characters were really going to
dig a hole and pull it in after them. Three hours before Dig-day, Exmud
R. Zmorro interviews us. We are televised around the orbit.

"Laying all joking aside, Spink," the news analyst says dolefully, "you
don't expect this to work."

"Of courst!" I says emphatically. "You forget the first man to reach New
Mu was a Spink. A Spink helped Columbus wade ashore in the West Indies.
The first man to invent a road-map all citizens could unfold and
understand was a Spink."

Zmorro turns to Zahooli and Wurpz. "Don't ask us anythin'!" they yelp in
unison. "You would only git a silly answer."
