attracts the sun enough to disturb the tilt of the earth's axis, but not
enough to pull the earth out of its orbit. Such a device should give out
a wave that can be detected, if we get a receiver delicate enough and
operating on the right wave length."

       *       *       *       *       *

He spent hours improving and refining the apparatus, but in the end he
confessed himself beaten.

"It's no use, Carnes," he said the day after Cape Kanin faded from view
to the north. "Either the apparatus we are seeking gives out no wave
that we can detect or my apparatus is faulty. Luckily we have other
things to guide us."

"What are they, Doctor?"

"The facts that Saranoff must have easy transportation and a source of
power. The first precludes him from locating his station far from the
sea-coast and the second indicates that it will be near a river or other
source of power. The only Russian points on the sixty-fifth parallel
that are open to water transport are the Gulf of Anadyr, north of
Kamchatka, and the vicinity of Archangel. I passed up Kamchatka because
it would mean too long a haul through unfriendly waters from Leningrad
and because there is not much water power. Archangel is easy of access
at this time of the year and it has the Dwina river for power. That will
be our first line of search."

"We will explore by plane, of course?"

"Certainly. We wouldn't get far on foot, especially as neither of us
speaks Russian. We'll head south for another day and then-- What's that?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He paused and listened. From the distance came a dull drone of sound
which brought him to his feet with a start. He raced out onto deck with
Carnes at his heels. Far overhead in the blue, a tiny speck of black
hovered.

"We're on the right trail, Carnes," he said grimly. The plane passed
over them. In huge circles it sank toward the ground. Dr. Bird turned to
Captain Evans. Orders flew from the bridge and a detail of marines
rapidly stripped the covers from the two forward anti-aircraft rifles.

"I dislike to fire on that craft before it makes a hostile
demonstration, Dr. Bird," demurred Captain Evans. "We are at peace with
Russia. My action in firing might precipitate a war, or in any event,
serious diplomatic misunderstandings."

"Allow me to correct you, Captain Evans, we are at war with Russia. The
whole world is at war with the man who has pulled the earth out of her
course. In any event, your orders are positive and the responsibility is
mine. Wait until that plane gets within easy range and then shoot it
down. Do not fail to get it; it must not get back to shore with word of
our approach."

Captain Evans bowed gravely. Shells came up from the magazines and were
piled by the guns. From the fire control stations came a monotonous
calling of firing data. The guns slowly changed direction as the plane
descended. Nearer and nearer it came, intent on positive identification
of the war vessel below it. It passed over the _Denver_ less than five
thousand feet up. As it passed it swung off to one side and began to
climb sharply. Dr. Bird glanced at the fighting top of the cruiser and
swore softly. From the top the stars and stripes had been broken to the
breeze.

"Fire at once!" he cried, "and then court-martial the fool who broke out
that flag!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The two three-inch rifles barked their message of death into the sky.
For agonizing seconds nothing happened. The guns roared again. Below and
behind the fleeing plane, two puffs of white smoke appeared in the sky.
The staccato calls of the observers came from the control station and
the guns roared again and again. Now above and now below the Russian
plane appeared the white puffs that told of bursting shells, but the
plane droned on, unharmed.

"It's away safely," groaned the doctor. "Now the fat _is_ in the fire.
Saranoff will know in an hour that we are coming. If we had a pursuit
plane ready to take off, we might catch him, but we haven't. Oh, well,
there's no use in crying over spilt milk. How soon will that amphibian
be ready to take off?"

"In twenty minutes. Doctor," replied the Engineering Officer. "As soon
as we finish filling the tanks and test the motor, she'll be ready to
ramble."

"Hurry all you can. Hang a half dozen hundred-pound bombs and a few
twenty-fives on the racks. Lower her over the side as soon as she's
ready. Where's Lieutenant McCready?"

"Below, getting into his flying togs, Doctor."

"Good enough. Come on, Carnes, we'll go below and put on our fur-lined
panties, too. We'll probably need them."

       *       *       *       *       *

In half an hour the amphibian rose from the water. Lieutenant McCready
was at the controls, with Carnes and the doctor at the bomb racks. The
plane rose in huge spirals until the altimeter read four thousand feet.
The pilot straightened it out toward the south. The plane was alone in
the sky. For two hours it flew south and then veered to the east,
following the line of the Gulf of Archangel. The town came in sight at
last.

"Better drop down a couple of thousand, Lieutenant," said Dr. Bird into
the speaking tube. "We can't see much from this altitude."

The plane swung around in a wide circle, gradually losing altitude.
Carnes and the doctor hung over the side watching the ground below them.
As they watched a puff of smoke came from a low building a mile from the
edge of the town. Dr. Bird grabbed the speaking tube.

"Bank, McCready!" he barked, "They're firing at us."

The plane lurched sharply to one side. From a point a few yards below
them and almost directly along their former line of flight, a burst of
flame appeared in the air. The plane lurched and reeled as the blast of
the explosion reached it. From other points on the ground came other
puffs.

"Get out of here," shouted Dr. Bird. "There must be a dozen guns firing
at us. One of them will have the range directly."

From all around them came flashes and the roar of explosions. The plane
lurched and yawed in a sickening fashion. Lieutenant McCready fought
heroically with the controls, trying to prevent the sideslips which were
costing him altitude. Gradually the plane came under control and started
to climb. The shells burst nearer as the plane took a straighter course
and strove to fly out of the danger zone. Dr. Bird looked at the
air-speed meter.

"A hundred and eighty," he shouted to Carnes. "We'll be safely out of
range in a minute."

       *       *       *       *       *

The bursts were mostly behind them now. Suddenly a blast of air struck
them with terrific force. Half a dozen holes appeared in the fabric of
the wings. A bit of high explosive shell plowed a way through the after
compartment and wrecked the duplicate instrument board. In another
moment they were out of range. Lieutenant McCready turned the nose of
his plane toward the north.

"We came out of that well," cried Carnes. Dr. Bird dropped the speaking
tube which he had held pressed to his ear and smiled grimly at the
detective.

"I wish we had," he replied. "Our main gas tank is punctured."

An expression of alarm crossed the detective's face.

"Is it injured badly?" he asked.

"I don't know yet. McCready says that the gauge is dropping pretty
rapidly. I'm going to go out and see what I can do."

"Can't I go, Doctor? I'm a good deal lighter than you are."

"You're not as strong or as agile, Carnes, and you haven't the
mechanical ability to make the repair. Hand me that line."

He fastened one end of a coil of manila rope which Carnes handed him to
his waist, while the detective fastened the other end to one of the
safety belt hooks. With a word of farewell, he climbed out of the
