
He caught a flash of metal from his briefcase, and, still running,
looked at it. He was shocked to see a metal plate fixed to the cowhide,
over the place where his initials had been. The man on his left must
have done that when he slapped the briefcase.

Dennison dug at the plate with his fingertips, but it would not come
off.

It read, _Property of Edward James Flaherty, Smithfield Institute_.

Perhaps a policeman wouldn't be so much help, after all.

But the problem was academic, for Dennison saw no policeman along the
crowded Bronx street. People stood aside as he ran past, staring
open-mouthed, offering neither assistance nor interference. But the men
behind him were still screaming, "Stop the thief! Stop the thief!"

The entire long block was alerted. The people, like some sluggish beast
goaded reluctantly into action, began to make tentative movements toward
Dennison, impelled by the outraged cries of his pursuers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Unless he balanced the scales of public opinion, some do-gooder was
going to interfere soon. Dennison conquered his shyness and pride, and
called out, "Help me! They're trying to rob me! Stop them!"

But his voice lacked the moral indignation, the absolute conviction of
his two shrill-voiced pursuers. A burly young man stepped forward to
block Dennison's way, but at the last moment a woman pulled him back.

"Don't get into trouble, Charley."

"Why don't someone call a cop?"

"Yeah, where are the cops?"

"Over at a big fire on 178th Street, I hear."

"We oughta stop that guy."

"I'm willing if you're willing."

Dennison's way was suddenly blocked by four grinning youths, teen-agers
in black motorcycle jackets and boots, excited by the chance for a
little action, delighted at the opportunity to hit someone in the name
of law and order.

[Illustration]

Dennison saw them, swerved suddenly and sprinted across the street. A
bus loomed in front of him.

He hurled himself out of its way, fell, got up again and ran on.

His pursuers were delayed by the dense flow of traffic. Their
high-pitched cries faded as Dennison turned into a side street, ran down
its length, then down another.

He was in a section of massive apartment buildings. His lungs felt like
a blast furnace and his left side seemed to be sewed together with
red-hot wire. There was no help for it, he had to rest.

It was then that the first bullet, fired from a silenced weapon, chipped
a granite wall not three inches from his head. That was when Dennison
realized the full extent of his carelessness.

He pulled the bottle out of his pocket. He had hoped to carry out more
experiments on the serum before trying it on human beings. Now there was
no choice.

Dennison yanked out the stopper and drained the contents.

Immediately he was running again, as a second bullet scored the granite
wall. The great blocks of apartments loomed endlessly ahead of him,
silent and alien. There were no walkers upon the streets. There was only
Dennison, running more slowly now past the immense, blank-faced
apartments.

       *       *       *       *       *

A long black car came up behind him, its searchlight probing into doors
and alleys. Was it the police?

"That's him!" cried the shrill, unnerving voice of one of Dennison's
pursuers.

Dennison ducked into a narrow alley between buildings, raced down it and
into the next street.
