Before we took off, they did something to our minds to make sure. What
they did, it doesn't last forever. It lasts for two years and then it
wears off. That's long enough, you see, because that gets you to Mars
and back; and it's plenty long enough, in another way, because it's like
a strait-jacket.

You know how to make a baby cry? Hold his hands. It's the most basic
thing there is. What they did to us so we couldn't kill each other, it
was like being tied up, like having our hands held so we couldn't get
free. Well. But two years was long enough. Too long.

The bartender came over and said, "Pal, I'm sorry. See, I turned the
air-conditioning down. You all right? You look so--"

I said, "Sure, I'm all right."

He sounded worried. I hadn't even heard him come back. The girl was
looking worried, too, I guess because I was shaking so hard I was
spilling my drink. I put some money on the table without even counting
it.

"It's all right," I said. "We were just going."

"We were?" She looked confused. But she came along with me. They always
do, once they find out you've been to Mars.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the next place, she said, between trips to the powder room, "It must
take a lot of courage to sign up for something like that. Were you
scientifically inclined in school? Don't you have to know an awful lot
to be a space-flyer? Did you ever see any of those little monkey
characters they say live on Mars? I read an article about how they lived
in little cities of pup-tents or something like that--only they didn't
make them, they grew them. Funny! Ever see those? That trip must have
been a real drag, I bet. What is it, nine months? You couldn't have a
baby! Excuse me-- Say, tell me. All that time, how'd you--well, manage
things? I mean didn't you ever have to go to the you-know or anything?"

"We managed," I said.

She giggled, and that reminded her, so she went to the powder room
again. I thought about getting up and leaving while she was gone, but
what was the use of that? I'd only pick up somebody else.

It was nearly midnight. A couple of minutes wouldn't hurt. I reached in
my pocket for the little box of pills they give us--it isn't refillable,
but we get a new prescription in the mail every month, along with the
pension check. The label on the box said:

    CAUTION

    _Use only as directed by physician. Not to be taken by persons
    suffering heart condition, digestive upset or circulatory disease.
    Not to be used in conjunction with alcoholic beverages._

I took three of them. I don't like to start them before midnight, but
anyway I stopped shaking.

I closed my eyes, and then I was on the ship again. The noise in the bar
became the noise of the rockets and the air washers and the sludge
sluicers. I began to sweat, although this place was air-conditioned,
too.

I could hear Wally whistling to himself the way he did, the sound
muffled by his oxygen mask and drowned in the rocket noise, but still
perfectly audible. The tune was _Sophisticated Lady_. Sometimes it was
_Easy to Love_ and sometimes _Chasing Shadows_, but mostly
_Sophisticated Lady_. He was from Juilliard.

Somebody sneezed, and it sounded just like Chowderhead sneezing. You
know how everybody sneezes according to his own individual style?
Chowderhead had a ladylike little sneeze; it went _hutta_, real quick,
all through the mouth, no nose involved. The captain went _Hrasssh_;
Wally was Ashoo, ashoo, _ashoo_. Gilvey was _Hutch_-uh. Sam didn't
sneeze much, but he sort of coughed and sprayed, and that was worse.

Sometimes I used to think about killing Sam by tying him down and having
Wally and the captain sneeze him to death. But that was a kind of a
joke, naturally, when I was feeling good. Or pretty good. Usually I
thought about a knife for Sam. For Chowderhead it was a gun, right in
the belly, one shot. For Wally it was a tommy gun--just stitching him up
and down, you know, back and forth. The captain I would put in a cage
with hungry lions, and Gilvey I'd strangle with my bare hands. That was
probably because of the cough, I guess.

       *       *       *       *       *

She was back. "Please tell me about it," she begged. "I'm _so_ curious."

I opened my eyes. "You want me to tell you about it?"

"Oh, please!"

"About what it's like to fly to Mars on a rocket?"
