He said, "You're way off, schizo. My hitting the road has nothing to do
with those split-heads. Nothing, you understand? There's nothing foggy
or dreamy about me. I wouldn't be here with you guys if I hadn't been so
interested in a wasp catching a caterpillar that I never saw the Bohas
sneaking up on me."

While Jack described the little tragedy, the other allowed an
understanding smile to bend his lips. He seemed engrossed, however, and
when Jack had finished, he said:

"That was probably an ammophila wasp. _Sphex urnaria_ Klug. Lovely, but
vicious, little she-demon. Injects the poison from her sting into the
caterpillar's central nerve cord. That not only paralyzes but preserves
it. The victim is always stowed away with another one in an underground
burrow. The wasp attaches one of her eggs to the body of a worm. When
the egg hatches, the grub eats both of the worms. They're alive, but
they're completely helpless to resist while their guts are gnawed away.
Beautiful idea, isn't it?

"It's a habit common to many of those little devils: _Sceliphron
cementarium_, _Eumenes coarcta_, _Eumenes fraterna_, _Bembix spinolae_,
_Pelopoeus_ ..."

Jack's interest wandered. His informant was evidently one of those
transies who spent long hours in the libraries. They were ready at the
slightest chance to offer their encyclopaedic but often useless
knowledge. Jack himself had abandoned his childhood bookwormishness. For
the last three years his days and evenings had worn themselves out on
the streets, passed in a parade of faces, flickered by in plate-glass
windows of restaurants and department stores and business offices, while
he hoped, hoped....

"Did you say you spied on the camp?" Jack interrupted the sonorous,
almost chanting flow of Greek and Latin.

"Huh? Oh, yeah. For two weeks. I saw plenty of transies trucked in, but
I never saw any taken out. Maybe they left in the rocket."

"Rocket?"

The youth was looking straight before him. His face was hard as bone,
but his voice trembled.

"Yes. A big one. It landed and discharged about a dozen men."

"You nuts? There's been only one man-carrying rocket invented, and it
lands by parachute."

"I saw it, I tell you. And I'm not so nutty I'm seeing things that
aren't there. Not yet, anyway!"

"Maybe the government's got rockets it's not telling anybody about."

"Then what connection could there be between rehabilitation camps and
rockets?"

Jack shrugged and said, "Your rocket story is fantastic."

"If somebody had told you four years ago that you'd be a bum hauled off
to a concentration camp, you'd have said that was fantastic too."

Jack did not have time to reply. The truck stopped outside a high,
barbed wire fence. The gate swung open; the truck bounced down the bumpy
dirt road. Jack saw some black-uniformed Bohas seated by heavy machine
guns. They halted at another entrance; more barbed wire was passed. Huge
Dobermann pinschers looked at the transies with cold, steady eyes. The
dust of another section of road swirled up before they squeaked to a
standstill and the engine turned off.

This time, agents began to let down the back of the truck. They had to
pry the pitiful schizo's fingers loose from the wood with a crow-bar and
carry him off, still in his half-crouch.

A sergeant boomed orders. Stiff and stumbling, the transies jumped off
the truck. They were swiftly lined up into squads and marched into the
enclosure and from there into a huge black barracks. Within an hour each
man was stripped, had his head shaven, was showered, given a grey
uniform, and handed a tin plate and spoon and cup filled with beans and
bread and hot coffee.

Afterwards, Jack wandered around, free to look at the sandy soil
underfoot and barbed wire and the black uniforms of the sentries, and
free to ask himself where, where, wherewherewhere? Twelve years ago it
had been, but where, where, where, was...?


III

How easy it would have been to miss all this, if only he had obeyed his
father. But Mr. Crane was so ineffectual....

"Jackie," he had said, "would you please go outside and play, or stay in
some other room. It's very difficult to discuss business while you're
whooping and screaming around, and I have a lot to discuss with Mr.--"

"Yes, Daddy," Jack said before his father mentioned his visitor's name.
But he was not Jack Crane in his game; he was Uncas. The big chairs and
the divan were trees in his imaginative eyes. The huge easy chair in
which Daddy's caller (Jack thought of him only as "Mister") sat was a
fallen log. He, Uncas, meant to hide behind it in ambush.

Mister did not bother him. He had smiled and said in a shrill voice that
he thought Jack was a very nice boy. He wore a light grey-green Palm
Beach suit and carried a big brown leather briefcase that looked too
heavy for his soda straw-thin legs and arms. He was queer-looking
because his waist was so narrow and his back so humped. And when he took
off his tan Panama hat, a white fuzz exploded from his scalp. His face
was pale as the moon in daylight. His broad smile showed teeth that Jack
knew were false.

But the queerest thing about him was his thick spectacles, so heavily
tinted with rose that Jack could not see the eyes behind them. The
afternoon light seemed to bounce off the lenses in such a manner that no
matter what angle you looked at them, you could not pierce them. And
they curved to hide the sides of his eyes completely.
