"That's right," Micheals said, smiling faintly.

"Driver," the general said over his shoulder. "Ride over it."

Micheals started to protest, but stopped himself. The military mind
would have to find out in its own way.

The driver put his jeep in gear and shot forward, jumping the leech's
four-inch edge. The jeep got to the center of the leech and stopped.

"I didn't tell you to stop!" the general bellowed.

"I didn't, sir!" the driver protested.

The jeep had been yanked to a stop and had stalled. The driver started
it again, shifted to four-wheel drive, and tried to ram forward. The
jeep was fixed immovably, as though set in concrete.

"Pardon me," Micheals said. "If you look, you can see that the tires are
melting down."

The general stared, his hand creeping automatically toward his pistol
belt. Then he shouted, "Jump, driver! Don't touch that gray stuff."

White-faced, the driver climbed to the hood of his jeep, looked around
him, and jumped clear.

There was complete silence as everyone watched the jeep. First its tires
melted down, and then the rims. The body, resting on the gray surface,
melted, too.

The aerial was the last to go.

The general began to swear softly under his breath. He turned to the
driver. "Go back and have some men bring up hand grenades and dynamite."

The driver ran back to the convoy.

"I don't know what you've got here," the general said. "But it's not
going to stop a U.S. Army convoy."

Micheals wasn't so sure.

       *       *       *       *       *

The leech was nearly awake now, and its body was calling for more and
more food. It dissolved the soil under it at a furious rate, filling it
in with its own body, flowing outward.

A large object landed on it, and that became food also. Then suddenly--

A burst of energy against its surface, and then another, and another. It
consumed them gratefully, converting them into mass. Little metal
pellets struck it, and their kinetic energy was absorbed, their mass
converted. More explosions took place, helping to fill the starving
cells.

It began to sense things--controlled combustion around it, vibrations of
wind, mass movements.

There was another, greater explosion, a taste of _real_ food! Greedily
it ate, growing faster. It waited anxiously for more explosions, while
its cells screamed for food.

But no more came. It continued to feed on the soil and on the Sun's
energy. Night came, noticeable for its lesser energy possibilities, and
then more days and nights. Vibrating objects continued to move around
it.

It ate and grew and flowed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Micheals stood on a little hill, watching the dissolution of his house.
The leech was several hundred yards across now, lapping at his front
porch.

Good-by, home, Micheals thought, remembering the ten summers he had
spent there.

The porch collapsed into the body of the leech. Bit by bit, the house
crumpled.

The leech looked like a field of lava now, a blasted spot on the green
Earth.

"Pardon me, sir," a soldier said, coming up behind him. "General
O'Donnell would like to see you."

"Right," Micheals said, and took his last look at the house.

He followed the soldier through the barbed wire that had been set up in
a half-mile circle around the leech. A company of soldiers was on guard
around it, keeping back the reporters and the hundreds of curious people
who had flocked to the scene. Micheals wondered why he was still allowed
inside. Probably, he decided, because most of this was taking place on
his land.

The soldier brought him to a tent. Micheals stooped and went in.
General O'Donnell, still in suntans, was seated at a small desk. He
motioned Micheals to a chair.

"I've been put in charge of getting rid of this leech," he said to
Micheals.

Micheals nodded, not commenting on the advisability of giving a soldier
a scientist's job.

"You're a professor, aren't you?"

"Yes. Anthropology."

"Good. Smoke?" The general lighted Micheals' cigarette. "I'd like you to
stay around here in an advisory capacity. You were one of the first to
see this leech. I'd appreciate your observations on--" he smiled--"the
enemy."

"I'd be glad to," Micheals said. "However, I think this is more in the
line of a physicist or a biochemist."

"I don't want this place cluttered with scientists," General O'Donnell
said, frowning at the tip of his cigarette. "Don't get me wrong. I have
the greatest appreciation for science. I am, if I do say so, a
scientific soldier. I'm always interested in the latest weapons. You
can't fight any kind of a war any more without science."

       *       *       *       *       *

