
As swiftly as his numbed feet would allow him, he stumbled toward the
house. The muzzle of the rifle again projected from the loophole and
with its crack the doctor staggered for a moment and then fell. Walter's
rifle spoke again and the rifle disappeared through the loophole with a
spasmodic jerk. Carnes stumbled over the doctor.

"Are you hit badly?" he gasped through chattering teeth.

"I'm not hit at all," muttered the doctor. "I stumbled and fell just as
he fired. Look out! He's going to shoot again!"

The rifle barrel came slowly into view through the loophole. Walter
fired, but his bullet went wild. Carnes threw himself behind a rock for
protection.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rifle swung in Walter's direction and paused. As it did so, from the
house came a strangled cry and a sound as of a blow. The rifle barrel
disappeared, and the sounds of a struggle came from the building.

"Come on!" cried Carnes as he rose to his feet, and made his stumbling
way forward, the others following at the best speed which their numbed
limbs would allow.

As they reached the door they were aware of a struggle which was going
on inside. With an oath the doctor threw his massive frame against the
door. It creaked, but the solid oak of which it was composed was proof
against the attack, and he drew back for another onslaught. From the
house came a pistol shot, followed by a despairing cry and a guttural
shout. Reinforced by Carnes, the doctor threw his weight against the
door again. With a rending crash it gave, and they fell sprawling into
the cabin. The doctor was the first one on his feet.

"Who are you?" asked a voice from one corner. The doctor whirled like a
flash and covered the speaker with his pistol.

"Put them up!" he said tersely.

"I am unarmed," the voice replied. "Who are you?"

"We're from the United States Secret Service," replied Carnes who had
gained his feet. "The game is up for you, and you'd better realize it."

"Secret Service! Thank God!" cried the voice. "Get Koskoff--he has the
plans. He has gone out through the tunnel!"

"Where is it?" demanded Carnes.

"The entrance is that iron plate on the floor."

Carnes and the doctor jumped at the plate and tried to lift it, without
result. There was no handle or projection on which they could take
hold.

"Not that way," cried the voice. "That cover is fastened on the inside.
Go outside the building; he'll come out about two hundred yards north.
Shoot him as he appears or he'll get away."

The three men nearly tumbled over each other to get through the doorway
into the bitter cold outside. As they emerged from the cabin the gaze of
the guide swept the surrounding hills.

"There he goes!" he cried.

"Get him!" said Carnes sharply.

Walter ran forward a few feet and dropped prone on the ground, cuddling
the stock of his rifle to his cheek. Two hundred yards ahead a figure
was scurrying over the rocks away from the cabin. Walter drew in his
breath and his hand suddenly grew steady as his keen gray eyes peered
through the sights. Carnes and the doctor held their breath in
sympathy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly the rifle spoke, and the fleeing man threw up his arms and fell
forward on his face.

"Got him," said Walter laconically.

"Go bring the body in, Carnes," exclaimed the doctor. "I'll take care of
the chap inside."

"Did you get him?" asked the voice eagerly, as the doctor stepped
inside.

"He's dead all right," replied the doctor grimly. "Who the devil are
you, and what are you doing here?"

"There is a light switch on the left of the door as you come in," was
the reply.

Dr. Bird found the switch and snapped on a light. He turned toward the
corner from whence the voice had come and recoiled in horror. Propped in
the corner was the body of a middle-aged man, daubed and splashed with
blood which ran from a wound in the side of his head.

"Good Lord!" he ejaculated. "Let me help you."

"There's not much use," replied the man rather faintly. "I am about done
in. This face wound doesn't amount to much, but I am shot through the
body and am bleeding internally. If you try to move me, it may easily
kill me. Leave me alone until your partners come."

The doctor drew a flask of brandy from his pocket and advanced toward
the corner.

"Take a few drops of this," he advised.

With an effort the man lifted the flask to his lips and gulped down a
little of the fiery spirit. A sound of tramping feet came from the
outside and then a thud as though a body had been dropped. Carnes and
Walter entered the cabin.

"He's dead as a mackerel," said Carnes in answer to the doctor's look.
"Walter got him through the neck and broke his spinal cord. He never
knew what hit him."

"The plans?" came in a gasping voice from the man in the corner.

"We got them, too," replied Carnes. "He had both packets inside his
coat. They have been opened, but I guess they are all here. Who the
devil are you?"

"Since Koskoff is dead, and I am dying, there is no reason why I
shouldn't tell you," was the answer. "Leave that brandy handy to keep up
my strength. I have only a short time and I can't repeat.

       *       *       *       *       *

"As to who I am or what I was, it doesn't really matter. Koskoff knew me
as John Smith, and it will pass as well as any other name. Let my past
stay buried. I am, or was, a scientist of some ability; but fortune
frowned on me, and I was driven out of the world. Money would
rehabilitate me--money will do anything nowadays--so I set out to get
it. In the course of my experimental work, I had discovered that cold
was negative heat and reacted to the laws which governed heat."

"I knew that," cried Dr. Bird; "but I never could prove it."

"Who are you?" demanded John Smith.

"Dr. Bird, of the Bureau of Standards."

"Oh, Bird. I've heard of you. You can understand me when I say that as
heat, positive heat is a concomitant of ordinary light. I have found
that cold, negative heat, is a concomitant of cold light. Is my
apparatus in good shape outside?"

"The reflector is smashed."

"I'm sorry. You would have enjoyed studying it. I presume that you saw
that it was a catenary curve?"

"I rather thought so."

"It was, and it was also adjustable. I could vary the focal point from a
few feet to several miles. With that apparatus I could throw a beam of
negative heat with a focal point which I could adjust at will. Close to
the apparatus, I could obtain a temperature almost down to absolute
zero, but at the longer ranges it wasn't so cold, due to leakage into
the atmosphere. Even at two miles I could produce a local temperature of
three hundred degrees below zero."

"What was the source of your cold?"

"Liquid helium. Those cylinders contain, or rather did contain, for I
expect that Koskoff has emptied them, helium in a liquid state."

"Where is your compressor?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"I didn't have to use one. I developed a cold light under whose rays
helium would liquefy and remain in a state of equilibrium until exposed
to light rays. Those cylinders had merely enough pressure to force the
liquid out to where the sun could hit it, and then it turned to a gas,
dropping the temperature at the first focal point of the reflector to
absolute zero. When I had this much done, Koskoff and I packed the whole
apparatus here and were ready for work.

"We were on the path of the transcontinental air mail, and I bided my
time until an especially valuable shipment was to be made. My plans,
which worked perfectly, were to freeze the plane in midair and then rob
the wreck. I heard of the jewel shipment the T. A. C. was to carry and I
planned to get it. When the plane came over, Koskoff and I brought it
down. The unsuspected presence of another plane upset us a little, and I
started to bring it down. But we had been all over this country and knew
there was no place that a plane could land. I let it go on in safety."

"Thank you," replied Carnes with a grimace.

"We robbed the wreck and we found two packets, one the jewels I was
after, and the other a sealed packet, which proved to contain certain
War Department plans. That was when I learned who Koskoff was. I had
hired him in San Francisco as a good mechanic who had no principles. He
was to get one-fourth of the loot. When we found these plans, he told me
who he was. He was really a Russian secret agent and he wanted to
deliver the plans to Russia. I may be a thief and a murderer, but I am
not yet ready to betray my country, and I told him so. He offered me
almost any price for the plans; but I wouldn't listen. We had a serious
quarrel, and he overpowered me and bound me.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We had a radio set here and he called San Francisco and sent some code
message. I think he was waiting here for someone to come. Had we
followed our original plans, we would have been miles from here before
you arrived.

"He had me bound and helpless, as he thought, but I worked my bonds a
little loose. I didn't let him know it, for I knew that the plane I had
let get away would guide a party here and I thought I might be able to
help out. When you came and attacked the house, I worked at my bonds
until they were loose enough to throw off. I saw Koskoff start my cold
apparatus to working and then he quit, because he ran out of helium.
When he started shooting again, I worked out of my bonds and tackled
him.

"He was a better man than I gave him credit for, or else he suspected
me, for about the time I grabbed him he whirled and struck me over the
head with his gun barrel and tore my face open. The blow stunned me, and
when I came to, I was thrown into this corner. I meant to have another
try at it, but I guess you rushed him too fast. He turned and ran for
the tunnel, but as he did so, he shot me through the body. I guess I
didn't look dead enough to suit him. You gentlemen broke open the door
and came in. That's all."

"Not by a long shot, it isn't," exclaimed Dr. Bird. "Where is that cold
light apparatus of yours?"

"In the tunnel."

"How do you get into it?"

"If you will open that cupboard on the wall, you'll find an open knife
switch on the wall. Close it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Bird found the switch and closed it. As he did so the cabin rocked
on its foundations and both Carnes and Walter were thrown to the ground.
The thud of a detonation deep in the earth came to their ears.

"What was that?" cried the doctor.

"That," replied Smith with a wan smile, "was the detonation of two
hundred pounds of T.N.T. When you dig down into the underground cave
where we used the cold light apparatus, you will find it in fragments.
It was my only child, and I'll take it with me."

As he finished his head slumped forward on his chest. With an
exclamation of dismay Dr. Bird sprang forward and tried to lift the
prostrate form.

In an agony of desire the Doctor tightened his grip on the dying man's
shoulder. But Smith collapsed into a heap. Dr. Bird bent forward and
tore open his shirt and listened at his chest. Presently he straightened
up.

"He is gone," he said sadly, "and I guess the results of his genius have
died with him. He doesn't strike me as a man who left overmuch to
chance. Carnes, is your case completed?"

"Very satisfactorily, Doctor. I have both of the lost packets."

"All right, then, come back to the wreck and help me pack my burros. I
can make my way back to Fallon without a guide."

"Where are you going, Doctor?"

"That, Carnes, old dear, is none of your blankety blanked business.
Permit me to remind you that I am on my vacation. I haven't decided yet
just where I am going, but I can tell you one thing. It's going to be
some place where you can't call me on the telephone."




Brigands of the Moon

(The Book of Gregg Haljan)
BEGINNING A FOUR-PART NOVEL

_By Ray Cummings_

    Black mutiny and brigandage stalk the Space-ship Planetara as
    she speeds to the Moon to pick up a fabulously rich cache of
    radium-ore.

[Illustration: _I stood on the turret-balcony of the Planetara with Dr.
Frank, watching the arriving passengers._]


_Foreword by Ray Cummings_

I have been thinking that if, during one of those long winter evenings
at Valley Forge, someone had placed in George Washington's hands one of
our present day best sellers, the illustrious Father of our Country
would have read it with considerable emotion. I do not mean what we call
a story of science, or fantasy--just a novel of action, adventure and
romance. The sort of thing you and I like to read, but do not find
amazing in any way at all.

But I fancy that George Washington would have found it amazing. Don't
you? It might picture, for instance, a factory girl at a sewing machine.
George Washington would be amazed at a sewing machine. And the girl,
journeying in the subway to and from her work! Stealing an opportunity
to telephone her lover at the noon hour; going to the movies in the
evening, or listening to a radio. And there might be a climax, perhaps,
with the girl and the villain in a transcontinental railway Pullman, and
the hero sending frantic telegrams, or telephoning the train, and then
chasing it in his airplane.

George Washington would have found it amazing!

And I am wondering how you and I would feel if someone were to give us
now a book of ordinary adventure of the sort which will be published a
hundred and fifty years hence. I have been trying to imagine such a book
and the nature of its contents.

Let us imagine it together. Suppose we walk down Fifth Avenue, a
pleasant spring morning of May, 2080. Fifth Avenue, no doubt, will be
there. I don't know whether the New York Public Library will be there or
not. We'll assume that it is, and that it has some sort of books,
printed, or in whatever fashion you care to imagine.

The young man library attendant is surprised at our curiously antiquated
aspect. We look as though we were dressed for some historical costume
ball. We talk old-fashioned English, like actors in an historical play
of the 1930 period.

But we get the book. The attendant assures us it is a good average story
of action and adventure. Nothing remarkable, but he read it himself, and
found it interesting.

We thank him and take the book. But we find that the language in which
