off immediately on your return," he said as if he hadn't heard.

But the strangeness of Coulora tempered bad feelings then. The blue
_hensorr_ trees were actually not trees at all but a huge cat-tail-like
growth, the stalks of which were quite transparent. In between the
stalks grew curious cabbage-like plants that changed from red to yellow
as an intruder approached and back to red again after he had passed.
Rock outcroppings were everywhere, but all were eroded and in places
polished smooth as glass.

There was a strange kind of dust that acted as though endowed with life.
It quivered when trod upon, and the outline of our footsteps slowly
rose into the air, so that looking back I could see our trail floating
behind us in irregular layers.

Above us the star that was this planet's sun shown bright but faintly
red as if it were in the first stages of dying. The air though thin was
fit to breathe, and we found it unnecessary to wear space suits. We
marched down the corridors of _hensorr_ trees, until we came to an open
spot, a kind of glade. And that was the first time Mason tuned his
organic surveyor and received absolutely nothing.

There was no animal life on Coulora!

       *       *       *       *       *

Within an hour we had blasted off again. The forward-impact delivered by
the Ganeth-Klae booster was terrific, and nausea and vertigo struck us
all simultaneously. But again, with all ports and observation shields
sealed shut, Norris held the secret of our destination.

On July twenty-second, the ship gave that sickening lurch and came once
again to a standstill.

"Same procedure as before," Norris said, stepping out of the airlock.
"Those of you who desire to have their wives accompany you may do so.
Mason, you'll make a final correlation on the organic surveyors. If
there is no trace of animal life return here before dark."

Once our group was out of sight of the ship, Mason threw down his
packsack, sat down on a boulder and lighted a cigarette.

"Bagley," he said to me, "has the Old Man gone loco?"

"I think not," I said, frowning. "He's one of the most evenly balanced
persons I know."

"Then he's hiding something," Mason said. "Why else should he be so
concerned with finding animal life?"

"You know the answer to that," I said. "We're here to colonize, to start
a new life. We can't very well do that on a desert."

"That's poppycock," Mason replied, flinging away his cigarette. "When
the Albertson expedition first landed on Mars, there was no animal life
on the red planet. Now look at it. Same thing was true when Breslauer
first settled Pluto. The colonies there got along. I tell you Norris has
got something up his sleeve, and I don't like it."

Later, after Mason had taken his negative surveyor reading, the flame of
trouble reached the end of its fuse!

Norris had given orders to return to the _Marie Galante_, and the rest
of us were sullenly making ready to start the back trail. Mason,
however, deliberately seized his pick and began chopping a hole in the
rock surface, preparatory apparently to erecting his plastic tent.

"We'll make temporary camp here," he said calmly. "Brandt, you can go
back to the ship and bring back the rest of the women." He turned and
smiled sardonically at Navigator Norris.

Norris quietly knocked the ashes from his pipe and placed it in his
pocket. He strode forward, took the pick from Mason's hands and flung it
away. Then he seized Mason by the coat, whipped him around and drove his
fist hard against the younger man's jaw.

"When you signed on for this voyage, you agreed to obey my orders," he
said, not raising his voice. "You'll do just that."

Mason picked himself up, and there was an ugly glint in his eyes. He
could have smashed Norris to a pulp, and none knew it better than the
Navigator. For a brief instant the younger man swayed there on the balls
of his feet, fists clenched. Then he let his hands drop, walked over and
began to put on his packsack.

But I had seen Mason's face, and I knew he had not given in as easily as
it appeared. Meanwhile he began to circulate among the passengers,
making no offers, yet subtly enlisting backers for a policy, the
significance of which grew on me slowly. It was mutiny he was plotting!
And with his personal charm and magnetism he had little trouble in
winning over converts. I came upon him arguing before a group of the
women one day, among them his own wife, Estelle. He was standing close
to her.

"We have clothing and equipment and food concentrate," Mason said.
"Enough to last two generations. We have brains and intelligence, and we
certainly should be able to establish ourselves without the aid of other
vertebrate forms of life.

"Coulora, Jama, Tenethon, Mokrell, R-9, and Stragella. We could have
settled on any one of those planets, and apparently we should have, for
conditions have grown steadily worse at each landing. But always the
answer is no. Why? Because Norris says we must go on until we find
animal life."

He cleared his throat and gazed at the feminine faces before him. "Go
where? What makes Norris so sure he'll find life on any planet in this
system? And incidentally where in the cosmos is this system?"

One of the women, a tall blonde, stirred uneasily. "What do you mean?"
she said.

"I mean we don't know if our last landing was on Stragella or Coulora. I
