smoothly into the ceiling. "My theatre ... The usual tri-di stereo, of
course, but I've had a couple of the new tight beams installed to
channel Moon and Mars on the cube. Much better than the usual staged
bilge. Say, that reminds me, a couple hours ago Mars projector had a
scanner on one of the exploration parties caught out in a psychosonic
storm. Jove, did they wriggle! Even in atomsuits they were better than
Messalina Magdalen working on her last G-string. Here, I'll switch it
on. Maybe the rescue team's--"

Building up inside the hundreds of thousands of layers of crystallized
plastic came a reddish, three-dimensional landscape, as if viewed from a
height. Orange dust swirled across a gaunt, clawed plain under a
transparent pink haze. A feeling as of sub-visual vibration, emanating
from the cube, tugged at Jason's eyelids.

No life.

"--Nope; they've cleaned up the carcasses already. Too bad. Tell you
what, though. Next time I catch it happening, I'll phone you and--"

"Don't bother."

"Suit yourself." Lonnie shifted and went on, lightly. "I'm not at all
satisfied with the color, are you? It's off a little, don't you
think?... Well?... Well!"

Unwillingly, Jason moved his attention to the cube. Eyes widening, he
studied it. "No. You're wrong. That's good! The tech who poured that
stereo did a damned good job. It's--"

"Not good enough for me! That's not exactly what I saw up at Vulcan
City. If those lazy--"

"Look, you can't expect exactly the same reflectivity from crystallized
plastic that you get from molecules of atmosphere, no matter how
scientifically the pouring and layering is controlled. It's--they're two
different materials. Leaving aside the ion-index differential and
quality of incident light, you still can't--"

"_I_ can ..." As the pause lengthened, Jason's gaze was finally drawn to
Lonnie's face. "You still haven't changed a bit, have you, Jasey? Still
all wrapped up in _how_ any collection of doodads work instead of just
for what it'll do. You know, I wouldn't be surprised if that hasn't
always been the difference between us. Where's it got you?"

Jason strode for the door.

"Wait a minute." Lonnie's voice came louder. "Better wait, copper. I'm
not through ... That's better."

From behind Jason came the sound of rubbing palms. "We've come a long
way from Gimlet Street, haven't we, Jasey? You particularly. Captain.
Promotions. Pay raises ..." Then Lonnie was in front of him, staring up.
"You're quite a substantial citizen now. Yes? Well, look at that. Go on,
look at it."

Against the side wall stood a gigantic triptych. More than life size,
the central panel canopied the statue of a Mongol potentate; the two
side wings, a pair of guards in bas-relief. All three wrought in
chryselephantine gold and ivory; the gold with flowing pallid
highlights. Damascened armor, encrusted with jewels, girdled the chest
of the Asiatic Prince; helmeted the sullen head carved from a single
immensity of ivory.

Ruby eyes glared arrogantly under ebon brows. Against the statue's
folded shins, its pommel negligently gripped by one immovable, ivory
hand, leaned a short Turkish scimitar of watered steel. Beneath the
carved hassock upon which the statue sat, a dais of three steps fell
away to the floor.

"That's Genghis Khan," Lonnie said. "I had him made. That isn't gold
he's made of; that's aureum--and it cost plenty to have the silver mixed
in. It makes it better. And I get the best! A hundred thousand, it cost
me. And thirty-six thousand more to brace the wall and floor. It's good.
It's the best that's made!"

He came up on tiptoe, thrusting his chin as close as possible to Jason's
averted face. "Why don't you buy one for your place, Captain?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Jason stared into the malevolent eyes of the statue.

"Huh ... hu-hu ... hu-ha-ha-ha ..." At the dais, Lonnie put his foot on
the second step and patted Genghis Khan familiarly on one ivory knee. "I
like this old boy. He had the right idea. I have it. You haven't. You
never had. If you had, you'd'a listened to the proposition I made you
way back then. Remember when Aggie told you about it? Say, I wonder
what's become of her, anyway. Do you know? What? What'd you say?"

Jason cleared his throat. Hard.

"Well?"

Jason swallowed. Blood pounded in his temples.

"Jasey, you're stupid."

Jason made his eyes close. Let them re-open slowly.

"You were born stupid and you've stayed stupid."

Still Jason held back an answer.

"You're nothing but a stupid, go-where-you're-sent, do-what-you're-told
cop! What do you say to that! If you want to keep on being one, answer
me! Answer me!"

Deliberately, Jason jerked his chin at the statue. "That's another
example of what I mean."

"_What?!!_" screamed Lonnie.

"Reflectivity. The silver in the gold. Two different metals and where
they're not well fused. That sword blade, too. Just the misalignment of
molecules in the surface of the steel makes it look wavy, and ripple
when the light changes or you move. Different even in two parts of the
same material. That's why you can't get the stereo cube to reproduce
color-feel exactly." Breathing heavily, Jason had to let his voice fade
out.

"Gaaa ..." Lonnie convulsed. "Who cares!" Laugh sounds rolled out of his
throat. "You'll never change."

He flicked his hand at Jason, brushing him away.

But, as Jason, white-faced, herded his men out through the costly
grandeurs of the vestibule, Lonnie called from the inner hall:
"Copper ..."

Jason turned, waited.

"You amused me, so it's all right this time. You can keep your
penny-ante job. But don't try for me again. You cross my path again,
I'll smear you. And what's more, I'll use whatever you're trying, to
smear you with. Get that! Get it good! Now get out!"

Back in Jason's office, the desk sergeant reported as Jason came in.
"Funny thing. That there tracer started to hum again soon after you was
out for a while. Quit again 'bout five minutes ago, though."

Jason gritted his teeth, banished the sergeant, and spent five minutes
alone gripping the edge of his desk. Then he yanked Lab Nine's silent
genius down to his office. That didn't help for the tracer stayed
asleep. Not even a hiccup rewarded Moglaut's most active efforts on
Lonnie's wave length. On others, fine. Through the night and on into the
next day, Jason kept Moglaut at work.

Late in the morning, Authority at Peiping televised publicly that the
Mace of Alexander was gone from its satin pillow in the proof-glass case
in the alarm-wired room off the machine-weapon-guarded main corridor of
the security-policed Temple of Mankind.
