"It's being worn by--by I don't know what."

"Look at their ornaments."

Necklaces, made of pierced colored stones, hung about many of the brown
necks. Shell bracelets were to be seen, and here and there a carved
piece of turquoise appeared.

"Look at the Indian over there," George urged.

Sidney looked to the side where George indicated, and croaked, "It's a
girl!"

It was a girl indeed. She stood straight and magnificent in body
completely bare except for the brief apron at her loins. Between her
beautiful full copper breasts there hung a gleaming piece of turquoise
carved in the shape of a coyote.

At her side stood a tall young Indian with a handsome face set with
great pride. On her other side was a wizened little old fellow with a
wrinkled face and ribs corrugated like a saguaro.

Sidney turned back and demanded, "What do you make of this? Are we
seeing things?" Hopefully, he suggested, "A mirage or sort of a mutual
hallucination?"

In a considered, gauging tone George replied, "They're real."

"Real?" cried Sidney. "What do you mean, real?"

"Real in a way. I mean, Sidney, these--I sound crazy to myself saying
it--but I think these are--well, Sid, maybe they're actual prehistoric
Indians."

"Huh?"

"Well, let's put it this way: We asked for them and we got them."

Sidney stared, shocked at George's statement. "You're crazy, all right,"
he said. "Hohokams in the middle of the Twentieth Century?"

"I didn't say they're Hohokams, though they probably are, of the village
here."

"You said they're prehistoric," Sidney accused. He quavered, "Just how
could they be?"

"Sid, you remember in our Indian studies, again and again, we meet the
medicine man who has visions. Even modern ones have done things that are
pretty impossible to explain. I believe they have spiritual powers
beyond the capability of the white man. The prehistoric medicine men may
have developed this power even more. I think the old man there is their
medicine man."

"So?" Sidney invited.

"I'm just supposing now, mind you," George went on. He rubbed his bald
pate again as though afraid of what thoughts were taking place under it.
"Maybe way back--a good many hundreds of years ago--this medicine man
decided to have a vision of the future. And it worked. And here he is
now with some of his people."

"Wait a minute," Sidney objected. "So he had this vision and transported
these people to this moment in time. But if it was hundreds of years ago
they're already dead, been dead for a long time, so how could they--"

"Don't you see, Sid? They can be dead, but their appearance in the
future--for them--couldn't occur until now because it's happened with us
and we weren't living and didn't come along here at the right time until
this minute."

Sidney swallowed. "Maybe," he muttered, "maybe."

"Another thing," George said. "If we can talk with them we can learn
everything we've tried to know in all our work and solve in a minute
what we're ready to spend the whole summer, even years, digging for."

Sidney brightened. "That's what we wanted to do."

George studied the Indians again. "I think they're just as surprised as
we are. When they discovered themselves here and saw us--and you must
remember we're the first white men they've ever seen--their immediate
instinct was to attack. Now that we don't fight back they're waiting for
us to make a move."

"What do we do?"

"Take it easy," advised George. "Don't look scared and don't look
belligerent. Look friendly and hope some of the modern Indian dialects
we know can make connection with them."

       *       *       *       *       *

The two scientists began, at a gradual pace, to make their way toward
the old man, the young man, and the girl. As they approached, the girl
drew back slightly. The young man reached over his shoulder and from the
furred quiver slung on his back drew an atlatl lance and fitted it to
his throwing stick, holding it ready. The other warriors, all about,
followed suit.

The medicine man alone stepped forward. He held up a short colored stick
to which bright feathers were attached and shook it at the two white
men. They stopped.
