It felt right to him. He decided that the rest of his memory would
return.

"Are you able to rise?" asked the other, extending a helpful
tentacle.

The Earthman managed to haul himself stiffly to his feet.

"Say, my name is Holmes," he introduced himself dizzily.

"I am Kho Theki. In your language, learned years since from other
spacemen, I might say 'Fiery Canalman.'"

"_Has_ to be Mars," muttered Charlie under his breath. "What a bump!
When can you show me what's left of the ship?"

"There will be no time," answered the Martian.

Bunches of small muscles twitched here and there across the front of
his round, pudgy head. Charlie was getting used to the single eye,
half the size of an orange and not much duller. With imagination, the
various lumps and organs surrounding it might be considered a face.

"The priestesses will lead the crowd here," predicted Kho. "They know
I took an Earthman, and I fear they have finished with the others."

"Finished with--_What_?" demanded the Earthman, shaking his head in
hopes of clearing it enough to figure out what was wrong.

"It has been an extremely dry season." Kho rippled his tentacles and
moved lissomely to the doorway, assuming a grotesquely furtive posture
as he peered out. "The people are maddened by the drought. The will be
aroused to sacrifice you to the Canal Gods, like the others who
survived."

"Canal gods!" croaked Charlie. "This can't be right! Aren't you
civilized here? I can't be the only Earthman they've seen!"

"It is true that Earthmen are perfectly safe at most times."

"But the laws! The earth consul--"

Kho snapped the tip of a tentacle at him.

"The canals are low. You can feel the heat and dryness for yourself.
The crowds are inflamed by temple prophecies. And then, your ship,
flaming down from the skies--"

He snapped all this tentacle tips at once.

       *       *       *       *       *

From somewhere outside, a threatening murmur became audible. It was an
unholy blend of rasping shouts and shriller chanting, punctuated by
notes of a brassy gong. As Charlie listened, the volume rose
noticeably.

Kho reached out with one tentacle and wrapped six inches about the
Earthman's wrist. When he plunged through the doorway, Charlie
perforce went right with him.

Whipping around a corner of the hut, he had time for a quick squint at
the chanters. Kho alone had looked weirdly alien. Two hundred like
him--!
