The Colonel spoke then. "Robbie, do you remember reading four years ago
that our radar system was able to beam signals to the moon and have them
returned?"

"Sure," said Crawford. "It got a big play in all the newspapers."

"Well, our scientists are now ready to conduct a similar experiment,"
said Colonel Meadows. "This time to Mars."

"To Mars!" repeated Crawford, wondering what it had to do with him.

"Only this time we plan to send a _voice_, a human voice that can travel
through interstellar space," said Dr. Shalt.

"But that's impossible!" Crawford exclaimed.

"With the average voice, yes," said Dr. Shalt. "Cosmic disturbances
would drown out a normal voice amplified a thousand times beyond its
regular frequency. But a voice in a higher octave--like your second
voice ... Well, we believe there's a certain resonant intonation which
can be curved and regulated in any direction, in the voice you use for
your dummy."

Crawford nodded.

"Spud's voice contains that quality," continued Dr. Shalt. "I believe it
can reach Mars and bounce back. I'm asking you to be the first man ever
to throw his voice to another planet."

There was quiet for a moment when he finished. Crawford's cigarette had
gone out and he relit it. The smoke steadied him. Outside, in the
auditorium the orchestra had begun to rehearse again.

"Where's the station set-up?" asked Crawford finally.

"It's right here on the field, Robbie," Colonel Meadows said quickly.
"We've had it under wraps for the last eight months. It'll be a
tremendous thing if it works."

Crawford dragged on his cigarette a last time and stamped it out. He
walked over to Spud, lifted the dummy into position in the crook of his
arm.

"What do you say, Crawford?" asked Dr. Shalt. There was a note of
urgency in his voice.

"I don't know," said Crawford slowly. "My crazy voice is my bread and
butter. Can't you use somebody else? Somebody whose voice isn't his
life?"

"We've wasted weeks testing every man on this field," said Dr. Shalt
solemnly. "The average voice becomes static as soon as it gets past
Earth's atmosphere. But your voice can break through. I've studied every
vibration, every quiver of it. It bends and flexes with each cosmic
pressure. You _must_ let us try."

Crawford looked at Colonel Meadows.

"Robbie, I promise you there's no danger involved," the Colonel said.
"There's been a great deal of time and effort put into this project and
we'd like to see it work. This week Mars and Earth are the closest
they'll be for the next three years, so it must be done _now_. It's your
duty to help in this important project."

Crawford nodded. The matter of patriotism and duty had not occurred to
him. "Of course, Colonel, I'll be glad to help."

He looked down at the dummy. "What do you say, Spud? Want to be the
first voice to reach Mars?"

"Sounds crazy," came the high, squeaking reply. "But it ought to put us
in the history books." Spud's glass eyes shifted to the other two men in
the room and one lid winked. "Calling Mars! This is Spud O'Malley, old
quiver voice himself, coming in for a landing."

"Good! You'll do it," said Dr. Shalt excitedly. "And if we succeed the
publicity will be worldwide."

"Sure," said Crawford. "An actor likes publicity. But are you sure my
voice won't be strained?"

"I'm sure," Dr. Shalt said. "You'll be talking into a microphone in the
same tone you use for a broadcast. Nothing more."

"How long will it take?" asked Crawford.

Dr. Shalt checked his watch. "Fifteen minutes for the voice to reach
Mars and fifteen minutes for its return." He took out a black notebook
from his jacket pocket and began to outline the plan while Colonel
Meadows put through a call to the laboratory.

Spud's voice was to be relayed directly to a giant amplifying unit which
would project it into space. Those regulating the voice in the control
room would hear nothing but vibrations because of the high frequency it
would immediately attain while passing through. Only on its return from
Mars would Spud's voice become audible on Earth. It sounded fantastic
but Dr. Shalt spoke of it as if it were a certainty and Crawford knew he
was recognized as a great scientist.
