immediately."

"Eh--oh, yes. Do that. Do that by all means."

Coving left. Joshua Lake put his head against the back rest of the chair
and closed his eyes. He dozed, drifting into a haze from weariness.
_It's been so long--so very long. Seven years--eight--ten. Ten years.
Good heavens! Was it possible? It didn't seem that long. Ten years to
make a dream succeed._

_Or fail._

Joshua slept and again--as in the past--his rest was plagued with
visions. The torment of his days took many forms in an alert
subconscious too taut to relax. He had seen before him mountains too
steep to cross--chasms too deep and wide to bridge. Often, when a great
problem was solved, he would look back, nights later, to see the
mountain or the chasm from the other side.

Now his vision was different. No mountain before him, but a face--the
stern craggy face of an obstacle in his path.

Lee Gorman.

The face was of clay--yet it lived. The eyes were cold, disdainful. And
a weird, green creation of Joshua's own mind was sketching Gorman in the
numbers, signs, and symbols of a rocket that would never reach the Moon.

Joshua awoke with a start and found Lucy bending over him. "You didn't
answer the buzzer, Mr. Lake. I was worried."

"I must have dozed off, Lucy. Sorry."

"I'm going home now--if there's nothing else."

"Nothing else. I'm going home myself. Good night."

Joshua paused beside his car in the parking lot to stare at the lighted
windows of the big hangar. The second shift had come on. They would work
all night; then, tomorrow, they would line up with the others at the pay
window. But there wouldn't be any money. The next night the hangar
windows would be dark.

He got into the car and drove home.

Myra was waiting for him. She took his hat. After he kissed her, she
said, "Your eyes are red, dear. You've been working much too hard. Shall
we have dinner in the patio?"

"That would be nice."

Joshua had little to say during the meal, and Myra was quiet
also--adjusting herself, as she had always done, to his mood. Finally,
she said, "That will be all, Bertha. Leave the coffee pot."

The maid left. A slight chill was coming in off the desert. Joshua
shivered and said, "We're through, Myra."

"Through? I don't understand."

"The Moon trip. I can't swing it. The money's run out. There's no place
I can raise another dime."

"But you've worked so hard--and so long! And you are so close to
success."

"We've made a lot of progress, but the rocket isn't ready yet. Now it's
too late."

They were silent for a time. Then Myra said, "In a way, I'm glad. You
should have stopped long ago. You aren't strong enough to stand this
pace forever. Now we can go away--get a small place somewhere. That Moon
rocket was killing you, Joshua."

Joshua pondered the point. "Killing me? No, I don't think so. I think it
has been keeping me alive."

"Don't say that, dear! You make it sound so--so brutal! Year in and
year out. Fighting disappointment--failure. Aging before my eyes while I
sit here night after night!"

_Fighting disappointment--failure._ Yes. That was the kind of fight it
had been. How many failures? The first big one had come six years
before....

"Acceleration, Monsieur, must be achieved in the first two thousand
miles of flight. After that, the speed of the ship remains constant. You
follow me?" Tardeau, the half-mad French genius had explained it so
logically. And Joshua had believed in him. That's where you made your
big gamble in a project of this kind. You selected your men and then
believed in them. Others dissented, of course. There are always
dissenters. And always points that could not be proven or disproven on
the drawing boards or in the test pits....

       *       *       *       *       *

"I follow you, Henri. The booster units will be in three sections."

"Exactly, Msieu. The primary--ah, booster, as you say, breaks free at
twelve miles. That one, and the secondary, we control with radar. We
touch a button and Voila! they are free!"

"In case of the men in the ship blacking out, I think you said."

"Exactly. But the third will be disengaged from within the ship and she
will be free as a bird to fly to your most illusive Moon!"

"And the return?"

"There we have a much lighter ship, Monsieur. The smaller boosters will
lift her easily. The return trip will be slower--much slower, but she
will return!"

Michael Bernard was the dissenter. "The Frenchman's crazy! Mad as a
hatter, Chief."

"You think it won't work, then?"

"Too damn complicated. A dozen units of time and mechanism have to mesh
perfectly. The odds are against that happening. After all, you've got to
remember, what we're attempting has never been done before."

"But if it did work--?"

"It would be a beauty."
