
"Fighting again," the father said, in a would-be fierce voice. His eyes
fell under the peculiar fire in the boy's stare. "Damn fool--"

A woman came in from the kitchen. She was tall and thin. In a flat voice
she said to the man: "Get out of here." The man hiccupped and said:
"Your brat spilled my bottle. Gimme a dollar."

In the same flat voice: "I have to buy food."

"_I said gimme a dollar!_" The man slapped her face--it did not
change--and wrenched a small purse from the string that suspended it
around her neck. The boy suddenly was a demon, flying at his father with
fists and teeth. It lasted only a second or two. The father kicked him
into a corner where he lay, still glaring, wordless and dry-eyed. The
mother had not moved; her husband's handmark was still red on her face
when he hulked out, clutching the money bag.

Mrs. Grayson at last crouched in the corner with the eight-year-old boy.
"Little Tommy," she said softly. "My little Tommy! Did you cross the
line again?"

He was blubbering in her arms, hysterically, as she caressed him. At
last he was able to say: "I didn't cross the line, Mom. Not this time.
It was in school. They said our name was really Krasinsky. God-damn
him!" the boy shrieked. "They said his grandfather was named Krasinsky
and he moved over the line and changed his name to Grayson! God-damn
him! Doing that to us!"

"Now, darling," his mother said, caressing him. "Now, darling." His
trembling began to ebb. She said: "Let's get out the spools, Tommy. You
mustn't fall behind in school. You owe that to me, don't you, darling?"

"Yes, Mom," he said. He threw his spindly arms around her and kissed
her. "Get out the spools. We'll show him. I mean them."

       *       *       *       *       *

President Folsom XXIV lay on his death-bed, feeling no pain, mostly
because his personal physician had pumped him full of morphine. Dr.
Barnes sat by the bed holding the presidential wrist and waiting,
occasionally nodding off and recovering with a belligerent stare around
the room. The four wire-service men didn't care whether he fell asleep
or not; they were worriedly discussing the nature and habits of the
President's first-born, who would shortly succeed to the highest office
in the Republic.

"A firebrand, they tell me," the A.P. man said unhappily.

"Firebrands I don't mind," the U.P. man said. "He can send out all the
inflammatory notes he wants just as long as he isn't a fiend for
exercise. I'm not as young as I once was. You boys wouldn't remember the
_old_ President, Folsom XXII. He used to do point-to-point hiking. He
worshipped old F.D.R."

The I.N.S. man said, lowering his voice: "Then he was worshipping the
wrong Roosevelt. Teddy was the athlete."

Dr. Barnes started, dropped the presidential wrist and held a mirror to
the mouth for a moment. "Gentlemen," he said, "the President is dead."

"O.K.," the A.P. man said. "Let's go, boys. I'll send in the flash.
U.P., you go cover the College of Electors. I.N.S., get onto the
President Elect. Trib, collect some interviews and background--"

The door opened abruptly; a colonel of infantry was standing there,
breathing hard, with an automatic rifle at port. "Is he dead?" he asked.

"Yes," the A.P. man said. "If you'll let me past--"

"Nobody leaves the room," the colonel said grimly. "I represent General
Slocum, Acting President of the Republic. The College of Electors is
acting now to ratify--"

A burst of gunfire caught the colonel in the back; he spun and fell,
with a single hoarse cry. More gunfire sounded through the White House.
A Secret Serviceman ducked his head through the door: "President's dead?
You boys stay put. We'll have this thing cleaned up in an hour--" He
vanished.

The doctor sputtered his alarm and the newsmen ignored him with
professional poise. The A.P. man asked: "Now who's Slocum? Defense
Command?"

I.N.S. said: "I remember him. Three stars. He headed up the Tactical
Airborne Force out in Kansas four-five years ago. I think he was retired
since then."

A phosphorus grenade crashed through the window and exploded with a
globe of yellow flame the size of a basketball; dense clouds of
phosphorus pentoxide gushed from it and the sprinkler system switched
on, drenching the room.

"Come on!" hacked the A.P. man, and they scrambled from the room and
slammed the door. The doctor's coat was burning in two or three places,
and he was retching feebly on the corridor floor. They tore his coat off
and flung it back into the room.

The U.P. man, swearing horribly, dug a sizzling bit of phosphorus from
the back of his hand with a pen-knife and collapsed, sweating, when it
was out. The I.N.S. man passed him a flask and he gurgled down half a
pint of liquor. "Who flang that brick?" he asked faintly.

"Nobody," the A.P. man said gloomily. "That's the hell of it. None of
this is happening. Just the way Taft the Pretender never happened in
'03. Just the way the Pentagon Mutiny never happened in '67."
