expenses--monthly payments for the suit, cabin rent, costly liquor--had
forced him to place his nights of escape on strict ration. He could not
go on this way, he realized. Not now. Not since he had met the girl. He
had to have more money. Perhaps he could not afford the luxury of
leaving the wine bottle longer upon the shelf....

Riverside Club, where Hyrel arrived by bus and a hundred yards of
walking, was exclusive. It catered to a clientele that had but three
things in common: money, a desire for utter self-abandonment, and a
sales slip indicating ownership of a telporter suit. The club was of
necessity expensive, for self-telportation was strictly illegal, and
police protection came high.

Herbert Hyrel adjusted his white, silken mask carefully at the door and
shoved his sales slip through a small aperture where it was thoroughly
scanned by unseen eyes. A buzzer sounded an instant later, the lock on
the door clicked, and Hyrel pushed through into the exhilarating warmth
of music and laughter.

The main room was large. Hidden lights along the walls sent slow beams
of red, blue, vermillion, green, yellow and pink trailing across the
domed ceiling in a heterogeneous pattern. The colored beams mingled,
diffused, spread, were caught up by mirrors of various tints which
diffused and mingled the lights once more until the whole effect was an
ever-changing panorama of softly-melting shades.

The gay and bizarre costumes of the masked revelers on the dance floor
and at the tables, unearthly in themselves, were made even more so by
the altering light. Music flooded the room from unseen sources.
Laughter--hysterical, drunken, filled with utter abandonment--came from
the dance floor, the tables, and the private booths and rooms hidden
cleverly within the walls.

Hyrel pushed himself to an unoccupied table, sat down and ordered a
bottle of cheap whiskey. He would have preferred champagne, but his
depleted finances forbade the more discriminate taste.

When his order arrived, he poured a glass tumbler half full and consumed
it eagerly while his eyes scanned the room in search of the girl. He
couldn't see her in the dim swirl of color. Had she arrived? Perhaps she
was wearing a different costume than she had the night before. If so,
recognition might prove difficult.

He poured himself another drink, promising himself he would go in search
of her when the liquor began to take effect.

A woman clad in the revealing garb of a Persian dancer threw an arm
about him from behind and kissed him on the cheek through the veil which
covered the lower part of her face.

"Hi, honey," she giggled into his ear. "Havin' a time?"

He reached for the white arm to pull her to him, but she eluded his
grasp and reeled away into the waiting arms of a tall toreador. Hyrel
gulped his whiskey and watched her nestle into the arms of her partner
and begin with him a sinuous, suggestive dance. The whiskey had begun
its warming effect, and he laughed.

This was the land of the lotus eaters, the sanctuary of the escapists,
the haven of all who wished to cast off their shell of inhibition and
become the thing they dreamed themselves to be. Here one could be among
his own kind, an actor upon a gay stage, a gaudy butterfly metamorphosed
from the slug, a knight of old.

The Persian dancing girl was probably the wife of a boorish oaf whose
idea of romance was spending an evening telling his wife how he came to
be a successful bank president. But she had found her means of escape.
Perhaps she had pleaded a sick headache and had retired to her room. And
there upon the bed now reposed her shell of reality while her inner
self, the shadowy one, completely materialized, became an exotic thing
from the East in this never-never land.

The man, the toreador, had probably closeted himself within his library
with a set of account books and had left strict orders not to be
disturbed until he had finished with them.

Both would have terrific hangovers in the morning. But that, of course,
would be fully compensated for by the memories of the evening.

Hyrel chuckled. The situation struck him as being funny: the shadowy
self got drunk and had a good time, and the outer husk suffered the
hangover in the morning. Strange. Strange how a device such as the
telporter suit could cause the shadow of each bodily cell to leave the
body, materialize, and become a reality in its own right. And yet ...

