Or had had them. It had solved the problem of intimate communication and
driven back the tides of loneliness. It had lessened the dangers of
mental and physical illnesses in the material bodies and assured a
prolongation of the life of each body, which was important in itself,
for this trip had proven to be a lot longer than even the most
pessimistic had anticipated.

The Crew, pulsing in its tank, Kelly thought oddly, is a new life form.
One that had evolved to meet the exigencies of deep space which had
proven to be alien to any adaptability common to any world that rotated
through it.

But maybe they were too damn happy, Kelly thought. Too contented. If
they ran into a real emergency now, the ship would be finished. The Crew
in the tank was, itself, incapable of action of any overt kind. It could
not manipulate anything. It could only be happy.

And the bodies here in the bunkroom could not rally fast enough to meet
a sudden crisis.

And they had agreed that the first law was survival.

But to survive this way might well mean destruction in another.

So Kelly walked and thought about it, and weighed the precarious
balance.

He slipped through the silent ship and to the control room. He peered
into the viewscope. Some galaxy or other spun its giant pinwheel outward
toward some destiny of its own. The high noon of the endlessness had
been unfamiliar for years. He checked the ship's instruments. The Crew
in the big tank simmered and throbbed in its introspective bliss,
utterly oblivious to Kelly now.

Kelly saw the red dwarf a few hundred million kilos away. Three planets
ground their familiar path around it. The second in distance had a
breathable oxygen, according to the scopes, but little else to recommend
it.

Kelly straightened up. He had no idea when the plan had really started
forming, but now it was formed. When Kelly made up his mind to a thing,
there was no other course but to conclude it. He knew what he had to do.

Somehow, even as part of the Crew, some part of Kelly had been able to
keep that forming plan a secret. Which was a lucky miracle, for if the
Crew had known his intentions it would certainly not have let him out
this time.

Even if you wanted out, Kelly reasoned, the Crew would keep you in. And
maybe after long enough you did not care to get out. But once out, he
wondered, could it keep you out if it decided to blackball a man for one
reason or another?

Like wrecking the ship?

       *       *       *       *       *

In the chrome strip above the control panel, Kelly saw his face grinning
strangely back at him, a bearded, hollowed, paled face with an
unfamiliar glitter in the eyes. Every time he had left the Crew to enter
and reactivate his own body, that body had seemed a little less
familiar. This time it seemed to be almost entirely someone else.

He stared at the face in the chrome, then whispered the hell with that
and he flipped the controls over to manual. He sat down. Behind him, the
Crew whispered in its tank, protoplasm developed in the labs and
quivering now with some unified sensation that was purely subjective and
blissfully unconcerned with what happened outside itself.

"It's sick," Kelly concluded, with an emphatic clamp of his jaws. "It's
not right!"

True, sharing the intimate sensations of alien life forms like Kew, the
female Venusian, had been exciting. Especially the sex experiences
which, in a flower of Kew's type, was certainly something. There were
interesting things to being a part of the Crew all right. But the main
purpose, survival, had been forgotten. Now being the Crew was an end in
itself. Kelly could imagine the Crew business going on and on until
finally even the material bodies in the bunkroom would be forgotten
entirely and allowed to rot away to dust about which the Crew would no
longer care.

And that was very bad. It should not have worked out this way. But it
was not too late to do something, shake them out of the Lotus dream.

He checked the scopes again. Now the second planet revealed plenty of
breathable atmosphere settled in the lower valleys. He headed straight
for it.

