those of men long dead. Some of the aliens seemed to heal almost
instantly; others took days. Some operated completely alone; some seemed
to have joined with others. But they were legion.

Lack of a clearer pattern of attack made him consider the possibility of
human mutation, but such tissue was too wildly different, and the
invasion had begun long before atomics or X-rays. He gave up trying to
understand their alien motivations. It was enough that they existed in
secret, slowly growing in numbers while mankind was unaware of them.

When his proof was complete and irrefutable, he took it to his
editor--to be fired, politely but coldly. Other editors were less
polite. But he went on doggedly trying and failing. What else could he
do? Somehow, he had to find the few people who could recognize facts and
warn them. The aliens would get him, of course, when the story broke,
but a warned humanity could cope with them. _Ye shall know the truth,
and the truth shall make you free._

Then he met Sylvia by accident after losing his fifth job--a girl who
had inherited a fortune big enough to spread his message in paid ads
across the country. They were married before he found she was
hard-headed about her money. She demanded a full explanation for every
cent beyond his allowance. In the end, she got the explanation. And
while he was trying to cash the check she gave him, she visited Dr.
Buehl, to come back with a squad of quiet, refined strong-arm boys who
made sure Dane reached Buehl's "rest home" safely.

Hydrotherapy ... Buehl as the kindly firm father image ... analysis ...
hypnosis that stripped every secret from him, including his worst
childhood nightmare.

His father had committed a violent, bloody suicide after one of the many
quarrels with Dane's mother. Dane had found the body.

[Illustration]

Two nights after the funeral, he had dreamed of his father's face,
horror-filled, at the window. He knew now that it was a normal
nightmare, caused by being forced to look at the face in the coffin, but
the shock had lasted for years. It had bothered him again, after his
discovery of the aliens, until a thorough check had proved without doubt
that his father had been fully human, with a human, if tempestuous,
childhood behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Buehl was delighted. "You see, Dane? You _know_ it was a nightmare,
but you don't really believe it even now. Your father was an alien
monster to you--no adult is quite human to a child. And that
literal-minded self, your subconscious, saw him after he died. So there
are alien monsters who return from death. Then you come to from a
concussion. Harding is sprawled out unconscious, covered with
blood--probably your blood, since you say he wasn't wounded, later.

"But after seeing your father, you can't associate blood with
yourself--you see it as a horrible wound on Harding. When he turns out
to be alive, you're still in partial shock, with your subconscious
dominant. And that has the answer already. There are monsters who come
back from the dead! An exaggerated reaction, but nothing really
abnormal. We'll have you out of here in no time."

No non-directive psychiatry for Buehl. The man beamed paternally,
chuckling as he added what he must have considered the clincher.
"Anyhow, even zombies can't stand fire, Dane, so you can stop worrying
about Harding. I checked up on him. He was burned to a crisp in a hotel
fire two months ago."

It was logical enough to shake Dane's faith, until he came across Milo
Blanding's picture in a magazine article on society in St. Louis.
According to the item, Milo was a cousin of _the_ Blandings, whose
father had vanished in Chile as a young man, and who had just rejoined
the family. The picture was of Harding!

An alien could have gotten away by simply committing suicide and being
carried from the rest home, but Dane had to do it the hard way, watching
his chance and using commando tactics on a guard who had come to accept
him as a harmless nut.

In St. Louis, he'd used the "Purloined Letter" technique to hide--going
back to newspaper work and using almost his real name. It had seemed to
work, too. But he'd been less lucky about Harding-Blanding. The man had
been in Europe on some kind of a tour until his return only this last
week.

Dane had seen him just once then--but long enough to be sure it was
Harding--before he died again.

This time, it was in a drunken auto accident that seemed to be none of
his fault, but left his body a mangled wreck.
