"Did you reset the trap switch at the house entry?"

Halder slowed the cab, turning it into one of the cross-city traffic
lines above Draise. "No," he said. "Knocking out a few more Federation
agents wouldn't give us any advantage. It'll be eight or nine hours
before Atteo will be able to talk; and, with any luck at all, we'll be
clear of the planet by that time."

The dark woman who was Kilby and a controlled devil's swarm of microlife
looked over at him and asked in Kilby's voice, "Halder, do you think we
should still go on trying to find the others now?"

"Of course. Why stop?"

Kilby hesitated, said, "It took you three months to find me. Four months
later, we located Rane Rellis ... and Santin, at almost the same time.
Since then we've drawn one blank after another. A year and a half gone,
and a year and a half left."

She paused, and Halder said nothing, knowing she was fighting to keep
her voice steady. After a few seconds, Kilby went on. "Almost twelve
hundred still to find, scattered over a thousand worlds. Most of them
probably in hiding, as we were. And with the Federation on our trail ...
even if we get away this time, what chance is there now of contacting
the whole group before time runs out?"

Halder said patiently, "It's not an impossibility. We've been forced to
spend most of the past year and a half gathering information, studying
the intricate functioning of this gigantic civilization--so many things
that our mentors on Kalechi either weren't aware of or chose not to tell
us. And we haven't done too badly, Kilby. We're prepared now to conduct
the search for the group in a methodical manner. Nineteen hours in
space, and we'll be on another world, under cover again, with new
identities. Why shouldn't we continue with the plan until ..."

Kilby interrupted without change of expression. "Until we hear some day
that billions of human beings are dying on the Federation's worlds?"

Halder kept his eyes fixed on the traffic pattern ahead. "It won't come
to that," he said.

"Won't it? How can you be sure?" Kilby asked tonelessly.

"Well," Halder asked, "what else can we do? You aren't suggesting that
we give ourselves up--"

"I've thought of it."

"And be picked apart mentally and physically in the Federation's
laboratories?" Halder shook his head. "In their eyes we'd be Kalechi's
creatures ... monsters. Even if we turn ourselves in, they'll think it's
some trick, that we'd realized we'd get caught anyway. We couldn't
expect much mercy. No, if everything fails, we'll see to it that the
Federation gets adequate warning. But not, if we can avoid it, at the
expense of our own lives." He glanced over at her, his eyes troubled.
"We've been over this before, Kilby."

"I know." Kilby bit her lip. "You're right, I suppose."

Halder let the cab glide out of the traffic lane, swung it around
towards the top of a tall building three miles to their left. "We'll be
at the club in a couple of minutes," he said. "If you're too disturbed,
it would be better if you stayed in the car. I'll pick up our
flighthiking outfits and we can take the cab on to the city limits
before we dismiss it."

Kilby shook her head. "We agreed we shouldn't change any details of the
escape plan unless it was absolutely necessary. I'll straighten out.
I've just let this situation shake me too much."

       *       *       *       *       *

They set the aircab to traffic-safe random cruise control before getting
out of it at their club. It lifted quietly into the air again as soon as
the door had closed, was out of sight beyond the building before they
reached the club entrance. The driver's records had indicated that his
shift would end in three hours. Until that time he would not be missed.
More hours would pass after the cab was located before the man returned
to consciousness. What he had to say then would make no difference.

In one of the club rooms, rented to a Mr. and Mrs. Anley, they changed
to shorts and flighthiking equipment, then took a tube to the outskirts
of Draise where vehicleless flight became possible. Forest parks
interspersed with small residential centers stretched away to the east.
They set their flight harnesses to Draise's power broadcast system,
moved up fifty feet and floated off into the woods, energizing drive and
direction units with the measured stroking motion which made
flighthiking one of the most relaxing and enjoyable of sports. And
one--so Halder had theorized--which would be considered an improbable
occupation for a couple attempting to escape from the Federation's
man-hunting systems.

For an hour and a half, they held a steady course eastwards, following
the contours of the rolling forested ground, rarely emerging into the
open. Other groups of vehicleless fliers passed occasionally; as members
of a sporting fraternity, they exchanged waves and shouted greetings. At
last, a long, wild valley opened ahead, showing no trace of human
habitation; at its far end began open land, dotted with small tobacco
farms where automatic cultivators moved unhurriedly about. Kilby,
glancing back over her shoulder at Halder for a moment, swung around
towards one of the farms, gliding down close to the ground, Halder
twenty feet behind her. They settled down beside a hedge at the foot of
a slope covered with tobacco plants. A small gate in the hedge
immediately swung open.

"All clear here, folks!" a voice curiously similar to Halder's addressed
them from the gate speaker.

Rane Rellis, a lanky, red-headed man with a wide-boned face, was
striding down the slope towards them as they moved through the gate. "We
got your alert," he said, "but as it happens, we'd already realized that
something had gone wrong."

[Illustration]

