This seemed to bring them out of their bemusement. "Of course,
Professor. Would you care to come aboard?"

The other made a try at congenial levity. "You must be pretty hungry
after twenty years."

"Really--has it been that long? I tried to keep track at first...."

"We can blast off anytime you say. You're probably pretty anxious to get
back."

"Indeed, I am. The changes, in twenty years--must be breathtaking. I
wonder if they'll remember me?"

A short time later, the Professor said, "It's amazing. A ship of this
size handled by only two men." Then he sat down to a repast laid out by
one of the awed spacemen.

But, after nibbling a bit of this, a forkful of that, he found that
satisfaction lay in the anticipation more so than in the eating.

"We'll look around and see what we can find in the way of clothing for
you, Professor," one of the spacemen said. Then the man's bemusement
returned. His eyes traveled over the magnificent physique before him.
The perfect giant of a man; the great, Apollo-like head with the calm,
clear eyes; the expression of complete contentment and serenity.

The space man said, "Professor--to what do you attribute the changes in
your body. What is there about this planet--?"

"I really don't know." Professor Pettibone looked down his torso with an
impersonal eye. "I think the greenish skin pigmentation is a result of
mineral-heavy vapors that occur during certain seasons. The growth. As
to my body--I really don't know."

But the two spacemen, though they didn't refer to it--were not concerned
with the body so much as the aura of completeness, the radiation of
contentment which came from somewhere within.

And it was passing strange that nothing more was said about the
Professor returning to Earth. No great revelation, suddenly arrived at,
that he would not go. Rather, they discussed various things, that three
gentlemen, meeting casually, would discuss.

Then Professor Pettibone arose from his chair and said, "It was kind of
you to drop off and see me."

And one of the spacemen replied, "A pleasure, sir. A real pleasure
indeed."

Then the Professor left the ship and watched it lift up on a tail of red
fire and go away. He raised an arm and waved. "Say 'hello' for me," he
called. Then he turned away and, from force of habit, he began again to
polish the hull, knowing that he would keep it shining, and be proud of
it, for many years to come.

