it--maybe with silver iodide. But it'll rain. Wouldn't it have been
simpler to get him to air-condition the house, Alice?"

"That's a good idea," said Alice thoughtfully. "We should have had him
do it before."

       *       *       *       *       *

Herbert had not quite completed the task of air-conditioning the house
when the other spaceship crashed. They all rushed out to the smoking
site--the four women and Herbert.

It was a tiny scoutship, and its single occupant was alive.

He was unconscious, but he was alive. And he was a man!

They carted him back to the house, tenderly, and put him to bed. They
hovered over him like four hens over a single chick, waiting and
watching for him to come out of his coma, while Herbert scurried about
creating and administering the necessary medicines.

"He'll live," said Thera happily. Thera had been a space nurse. "He'll
be on his feet and walking around in a few weeks."

"A man!" murmured Betsy, with something like awe in her voice. "I could
almost believe Herbert brought him here in answer to our prayers."

"Now, girls," said Alice, "we have to realize that a man brings
problems, as well as possibilities."

There was a matter-of-fact hardness to her tone which almost masked the
quiver behind it. There was a defiant note of competition there which
had not been heard on this little planet before.

"What do you mean?" asked Thera.

"I know what she means," said Marguerite, and the new hardness came
natural to her. "She means, which one of us gets him?"

Betsy, the youngest, gasped, and her mouth rounded to a startled O.
Thera blinked, as though she were coming out of a daze.

"That's right," said Alice. "Do we draw straws, or do we let him
choose?"

"Couldn't we wait?" suggested Betsy timidly. "Couldn't we wait until he
gets well?"

Herbert came in with a new thermometer and poked it into the unconscious
man's mouth. He stood by the bed, waiting patiently.

"No, I don't think we can," said Alice. "I think we ought to have it all
worked out and agreed on, so there won't be any dispute about it."

"I say, draw straws," said Marguerite. Marguerite's face was thin, and
she had a skinny figure.

Betsy, the youngest, opened her mouth, but Thera forestalled her.

