
"Darling, your boredom's showing."

He squeezed her hand reassuringly. "Don't let me spin you, lovely. I've
got the answer."

"Oh?"

"Yeah. I applied for a DP this morning."

"Al--_no_!"

"Why not?" He put it like the needle thrust of a fighting knife, daring
her to find a reason, half hoping she could.

"I--" She glanced at him once, quickly, then away. Then she drew a deep
breath and let it sigh out. "How about Mars, Al? There aren't many
service machines, and they even let women do lots of little detailed
things. I almost went, once."

He was watching her shrewdly. "Why didn't you?" He had fought this one
out with himself before.

"Oh--I don't know. Just never did."

"I'll tell you why you really didn't. It'd be too different. When the
Government provides every convenience, every comfort you can think of
here, you can't stand having to work in a mine, with an oxygen helmet,
stuffed into heavy clothes. You can't stand the danger and the fear--and
somehow, inside, you must know it. I'm pretty strong, and I never met a
man I was afraid of, but I know I couldn't stand Mars." He gripped the
rail and stared out over the wide, swarming street. "But Earth is a
trap, Nedda. A big comfortable trap where you walk around endlessly
without being any use at all."

She trod the brake and barely missed bumping a couple who had stopped to
embrace. "_I'm_ some use, hon. Wait'll we get home." Her eyes held a
promise she could barely restrain.

Automatically, he caressed her with a practiced hand--and grabbed the
wheel when she suddenly strained against him, trembling, pressing eager
lips against his neck.

Christ, how long had she been protected? He felt a mounting anger
against the social ennui which drove men's minds to such inhuman
activity. Departure was the only escape from this kind of thing, and
from the city--from any city.

But the Departees had always been only a tiny minority. Did that mean
they--and he--were wrong? He brooded about it for seemingly the googolth
time, guiding the scooter without conscious thought, turning as Nedda
directed.

A trap, he'd told her. Well, he could see no reason to change that. The
blazingly glorious sensotheaters, cafes, gymnasiums, dancing salons,
amusement rides and hypnodream houses, crowding every main thoroughfare
with their fantastically ornate architecture, were--when you thought
about it--designed to trap people's minds, keep them from thinking of
anything but a gossamer, useless pursuit of personal pleasure. And
wasn't the design faulty when everyone was bored, when some chose
Departure and others sank to the unnatural practice of protection to
whet their sated appetites?

Nor was there any apparent hope for the future. Theatre productions,
dream tapes, even the elaborate home teleview shows were all historical.
Why? Was Government admitting there was nothing but staleness in the
present? Why the concern with backtime?

Because of Government entertainment diet, Allen could probably, with a
bit of practice, fish skillfully from an outrigger, make and use a
longbow expertly, run a store profitably in the Money Ages, weave cloth
correctly, build complete wooden houses--oh, any number of ancient
things.

But he couldn't even talk the same language as the relative handful of
trained men who built and operated the unbelievably intricate
robomachinery which activated and maintained the complex cities of
Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nedda's soft voice broke into his thoughts. "Al--Dan Halgersen's coming
up behind us on a single. He's one of Jeff's--"

"Hold on." Allen swung the scooter hard right and adroitly darted across
traffic toward an emblazoned theatre entrance. Here, now, was a
situation he knew how to deal with. He said rapidly, out of the side of
his mouth, "Jump off when I stop at the entry and kiss me like good-by.
Register your plaque in the ID slot and head for the door--then look
back. If I'm down, go on in and lose yourself. If he's down, come back."

He made a wrenching stop at the very edge of the crowd, swung Nedda
through the opening between front and side rails and gave her a hard,
sterile kiss.

She clung to him a moment. Without letting her eyes stray she said,
"Slowing down right behind you. Luck, lover." Then she turned and
started to pick her way across the walk.

Allen swung the scooter in a fast, tight circle to the left. Assuming
his opponent to be right-handed, this would help avoid a knife slash
from the rear if the other rammed his scooter--further assuming the man
had _not_ been tricked into thinking his presence was unnoticed.

He hadn't. When Allen whipped his head around to look at him, there was
