on that rag. It's a flimsy thing, composed of absorbent plastic and
gooed up with a little unpolymerized resin, weighing about fifty
grams. It is apparently floating harmlessly in space, just beyond the
orbit of Uranus, looking as innocuous as a rag can look. But it is
moving sunward at eight hundred million centimeters per second.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Persephone_ was approaching turnover. The ship's engineer
reported that the engines were humming along smoothly, so there was no
need to shut them off; the ship would simply flip over as she ran,
making her path a slightly skewed, elongated S-curve--a sort of
orbital hiccup.

[Illustration]

Except that she never quite made it through the hiccup. The ship was
almost perpendicular to her line of flight when she was sideswiped.

Her meteor detectors hadn't failed; they were still functioning
perfectly. But meteor detectors are built to look for solid chunks of
metal and rock--not thin, porous bits of cloth.

The rag had traveled a good many millions of miles since it had been
cast overboard; it was moving sunward with almost the same velocity
with which the _Persephone_ was moving Plutowards. The combined
velocities were such that, if it had hit the _Persephone_ dead on, it
would have delivered close to seventeen thousand kilowatt-hours of
energy in one grand burst of incandescence.

Fortunately, the tip of the rag merely gave the ship a slap on the
tail as it passed. The plastic meteor-bumper wasn't built to take that
sort of thing. The plastic became an expanding cloud of furiously
incandescent gas in a small fraction of a second, but the velocity of
that bit of rag was so great that the gas acted as a solid block of
superheated fury as it leaped across the hundred feet of vacuum which
separated the bumper hull from the inner hull.

A rocket-driven missile carrying a shaped-charge warhead weighing
several hundred pounds might have done almost as much damage.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jayjay Kelvin moved his arms to pick himself up off the floor and
found that there was no necessity for doing so. He was floating in the
air of the lounge, and, strictly speaking, there was no floor anyway.
He opened his eyes and saw that that which had been the floor was now
just another wall, except that it had chairs bolted to it. It rose on
his left, reached the zenith, and set on his right, to be replaced by
another wall, and then by what had been the ceiling. The second time
the floor came round, Jayjay began to wonder whether he was spinning
around his longitudinal axis or whether the ship was actually rotating
about him. He closed his eyes again.

He didn't feel more than a little dizzy, but he couldn't be sure
whether the dizziness was caused by his spinning or the blow on his
head. He opened his eyes again and grabbed at the book that was
orbiting nearby, then hurled it as hard as he could toward the
sometime ceiling. "The Pride of the Pecos" zoomed rapidly in one
direction while Jayjay moved sedately in the other.

The ship was spinning slightly, all right. When he finally grabbed a
chair, he found that there was enough spin to give him a weight of an
ounce or two. He sat down as best he could and took a good look
around.

Aside from "The Pride of the Pecos" and a couple of other books, the
air was remarkably free from clutter. There hadn't been much loose
stuff laying around. A pencil, a few sheets of paper--nothing more.

There was one object missing. Jayjay looked around more carefully, and
this time he saw a hand protruding from the space "beneath" the low
table. He bent down for a better look and saw that Jeffry Hull was
unconscious. Blood from his nose was spreading slowly over his face,
and one eye looked rather battered. Jayjay grasped the protruding
wrist and felt for a pulse. It was pumping nicely. He decided that
Hull was in no immediate danger; very few people die of a bloody nose.

The lighting in the lounge was none too good; the low-power emergency
system had come on automatically when the power from the ship's
engines had died. Jayjay wondered just what had happened. There had
been a hell of an explosion; that was all he knew.

He wondered if anyone else aboard was alive and conscious, and decided
he might as well find out. He took a long dive toward the central
stairwell that ran the length of the ship's long axis and looked down.
The emergency door to the cargo hold was closed. No air, most likely.
The way up looked clear, so he scrambled up the spiral stairway.

A few feet farther up, he found that he had passed the center of the
ship's rotation. The _Persephone_ was evidently toppling end-over-end,
and the center of rotation was in the lounge itself. The heavy cargo in
the hold was balancing the lighter, but longer, part of the ship above the
lounge. He began climbing down the stairwell toward the navigation and
control sections.

Somewhere down there, somebody was cursing fluently in Arabic.

"Illegitimate offspring of a mangy she-camel! Eater of dogs! Wallower
in carrion!" And then, with hardly a break: "Allah, All-Merciful,
All-Compassionate! Have mercy on Thy servant! I swear by the beard of
Thy holy Prophet that I will attend more closely to my duties to Thee
if Thou wilt get me loose from this ill-begotten monstrosity! Help me
or I perish!" The last words were a wail.

"I'm coming!" boomed Jayjay in the same tongue. "Save thy strength!"

       *       *       *       *       *

There was silence from the control room as Jayjay clambered on down
the stairwell. Fortunately, the steps had been built so that it was
possible to use them from either side, no matter which way the gravity
pull happened to be. By the time he reached the control room, he
weighed a good fifteen pounds.

Captain Atef al-Amin was staring up at the stairs as Jayjay came down.
He was jammed tightly into a space between two of the big control
cabinets, hanging head downward and looking more disheveled than
Jayjay had ever seen the usually immaculately-uniformed captain.

"Oh," said Captain Al-Amin, in English, "it's you. For a moment I
thought--" Then he waved his free hand. "Never mind. Can you get me
out of here?"

What had been the floor of the control room was now the ceiling. The
two steel cabinets which housed parts of the computer unit now
appeared to be bolted to the ceiling. They were only about five feet
high, and the space between them was far too narrow for a man to have
got in there by himself--especially a man of the captain's build. None
the less, he was in there--jammed in up to his waist. Only his upper
torso and one arm was free. The other arm was jammed in against the
wall.

Jayjay took the leap from the stairs and grabbed on to the chair that
hung from the ceiling nearby. When you only weigh fifteen pounds, you
can make Tarzan look like an amateur.

"You hurt?" he asked.

"It isn't comfortable, sure as hell," said Al-Amin. "I think my arm's
broken. Think you can get me loose?"

"I can try. Give me your hand." Jayjay took the captain's free hand
and gave it a tug. Then he released the chair he was holding, braced
both feet against the panels of the computer housings, and gave a good
pull. The captain didn't budge, but he winced a little.

"That hurt?"

"Just my arm. The pressure has cut off my blood circulation; my legs
are numb, and I can't tell if they hurt or not."

Jayjay grabbed the chair again and surveyed the situation. "Where's
your First Officer?"

"Breckner? Down in the engine room."

Jayjay didn't comment on that. If the hold was airless, it was likely
that the engine room was, too, and there was no need to worry Al-Amin
any more than necessary just now.

"Can you use a cutting torch?" the captain asked.

"Yes, but I don't think it'll be necessary," Jayjay said. "Hold on a
minute." He went back up the stairs to the officers' washroom and,
after a little search, got a container of liquid soap from the
supplies. Then he went back down to the control room. He made the jump
