
Blair said, "Well, I'll be damned!"

"We figure this will save you a lot of money in construction work," Bill
said. "You can get along without riveters. You just have a man put holes
in girders with this and push the rivets through. You also make holes
for the beam-ends, and your entire building will be anchored in the
fourth dimension."

"Do it again," Blair said.

Ted made another hole and put another pencil into it. Blair grasped the
pencil and applied leverage. The pencil snapped at the point it entered
the next dimension but the broken end of the far piece was not to be
seen.

Blair asked, "You say you two invented this gadget?"

"That's right," Bill said. "We've got a workshop in my basement. We
invent in the evenings after we come home from work."

"What do you work at?"

"I read gas meters. He's a clerk in a supermarket."

"I suppose you want money for this thing."

"We'd like to sell it, yes, sir."

"How much do you want for it?"

"Well, we don't know. What's it worth to you?"

"Nothing probably. Leave it here a few days. I'll look it over and let
you know."

"But--"

"And don't call me--I'll call you."

"But--"

"Leave your address and phone number with my secretary."

After Ted and Bill left, Blair yelled, "Get me Jake Steadman in the
engineering department!" He didn't bother using the intercom, but his
secretary heard him anyhow.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ted and Bill went to work on an idea they had for the treatment of
leather. You dipped your shoes in a solution and they lasted forever.
The thing didn't work too well, however. It was full of bugs. They tried
to eliminate the bugs and once in a while they thought of H. Joshua
Blair.

"Don't you think it's about time he called us?" Ted asked.

"Don't be so impatient. He's a big man. He owns a big company. It takes
time."

"He's had over a month."

"Relax. We'll hear from him."

       *       *       *       *       *

Another week passed, and another, until one evening Ted came galloping
into the workshop with news. "That big new addition to the City Hall!
They're working on it! H. Joshua Blair Construction Company. A big sign
says so!"

"Relax. You'll blow a tube."

"Relax hell! He's using our invention to put up the steel girders. Just
