her shoulder--or rather, through her own eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lenny started with the fives first, and worked his way up to the larger
denominations.

"Five, ten, fifteen, twenty, twenty-five, thirty--forty, fifty, sixty...."
he muttered happily to himself. "Two fifty, three, three-fifty, four,
four-fifty."

It was all there, so he smiled benevolently at the man in the pay window.
"Thank you muchly." Then he stepped aside to let another lucky man cash a
winning ticket.

His horse had come in at fifteen, six-ten, four-fifty for Straight, Place,
and Show, and sixty bucks on the nose had paid off very nicely.

Lenny Poe took out his copy of the _Daily Racing Form_ and checked over
the listing for the next race.

_Hm-m-m, ha. Purse, $7500. Four-year-olds and up: handicap. Seven
furlongs. Turf course. Hm-m-m, ha._

Lenny Poe had a passion for throwing his money away on any unpredictable
event that would offer him odds. He had, deep down, an artistic soul, but
he didn't let that interfere with his desire to lay a bet at the drop of
an old fedora.

He had already decided, several hours before, that Ducksoup, in the next
race, would win handily and would pay off at something like twenty or
twenty-five to one. But he felt it his duty to look one last time at the
previous performance record, just to be absolutely positive.

Satisfied, he folded the _Racing Form_, shoved it back into his pocket,
and walked over to the fifty-dollar window.

"Gimmie nine tickets on Ducksoup in the seventh," he said, plonking the
handful of bills down on the counter.

But before the man behind the window grating could take the money, a huge,
hamlike, and rather hairy hand came down on top of his own hand, covering
it and the money at the same time.

"Hold it, Lenny," said a voice at the same time.

Lenny jerked his head around to his right and looked up to see a largish
man who had "cop" written all over him. Another such individual crowded
past Lenny on his left to flash a badge on the man in the betting window,
so that he would know that this wasn't a holdup.

"Hey!" said Lenny. His mind was thinking fast. He decided to play his
favorite role, that of the indignant Italian. "Whatsa da matta with you,
hah? Thisa no a free country? A man gotta no rights?"

"Come on, Mr. Poe," the big man said quietly, "this is important."

"Poe? You outta you mind? Thatsa name of a river----or a raven. I'm a
forgetta which. My namesa Manelli!"

"_Scusi, signore_," the big man said with exaggerated politeness, "_ma se
lei e veramente italiano, non' e l'uomo che cerchiamo._"

Lenny's Italian was limited to a handful of words. He know he was trapped,
but he faced the situation with aplomb. "Thatsa lie! I was inna Chicago
that night!"

"_Ah! Cose credero. Avanti, saccentone._" He jerked his thumb toward the
gate. "Let's go."

Lenny muttered something that the big man didn't quite catch.

"What'd you say?"

"Upper United States--the northern United States," Lenny said calmly
shoving his four hundred fifty dollars into his pocket. "That's where
Chicago is. Never mind. Come in, boys; back to the drawing board."

The two men escorted Lenny to a big, powerful Lincoln; he climbed into the
back seat with the big one while the other one got behind the wheel.

As soon as they had left the racetrack and were well out on the highway,
the driver said: "You want to call in, Mario? This traffic is pretty
heavy."

The big man beside Lenny leaned forward, over the back of the front seat,
unhooked the receiver of the scrambler-equipped radiophone, and sat back
down. He thumbed a button on the side of the handset and said: "This is
Seven Oh Two." After a short silence, he said: "You can call off the net.
You want him brought in?" He listened for a moment. "O.K. Are we cleared
through the main gate? O.K. Off."

He leaned forward to replace the receiver, speaking to the driver as he
did so. "Straight to the Air Force base. They've got a jet waiting there
for him."

He settled back comfortably and looked at Lenny. "You could at least tell
people where you're going."

"Very well," said Lenny. He folded his arms, closed his eyes, and relaxed.
"Right now, I'm going off to dreamland."

He waited a short while to see if the other would say anything. He didn't,
so Lenny proceeded to do exactly what he had promised to do.

He went off to dreamland.

He had not been absolutely sure, when he made the promise, that he would
actually do just that, but the odds were in favor of it. It was now one
o'clock in the morning in Moscow, and Lenny's brother, Raphael, was a man
of regular habits.

Lenny reached out. When he made contact, all he got was a jumble of hash.
It was as though someone had made a movie by cutting bits and snippets
from a hundred different films, no bit more than six or seven frames long,
with a sound track that might or might not match, and projected the result
through a drifting fog, using an ever-changing lens that rippled like the
surface of a wind-ruffled pool. Sometimes one figure would come into sharp
focus for a fraction of a second, sometimes in color, sometimes not.

Sometimes Lenny was merely observing the show, sometimes he was in it.

_Rafe! Hey, Rafe! Wake up!_

The jumble of hash began to stabilize, becoming more coherent--

       *       *       *       *       *

Lenny sat behind the far desk, watching his brother come up the primrose
path in a unicycle. He pulled it to a halt in front of the desk, opened
the pilot's canopy, threw out a rope ladder, and climbed down. His gait
was a little awkward, in spite of the sponge-rubber floor, because of the
huge flowered carpetbag he was carrying. A battered top hat sat
precariously on his blond, curly hair.

"Lenny! Boy, am I glad to see you! I've got it! The whole trouble is in
the wonkler, where the spadulator comes across the trellis grid!" He
lifted the carpetbag and sat it down on the lab table. "Connect up the
groffle meter! We'll show those pentagon pickles who has the push-and-go
here!"

"Rafe," Lenny said gently, "wake up. You're dreaming. You're asleep. I
want to talk to you."

"I know." He grinned widely. "And you don't want any back talk from me!
Yok-yok-yok! Just wait'll I show you!"

In his hands, he held an object which Lenny did not at first understand.
Then Rafe's mind brought it into focus.

"This"--Rafe held it up--"is a rocket motor!"

"Rafe, wake up!" Lenny said.

The surroundings stabilized a little more.

"I will in just a minute, Lenny." Rafe was apologetic. "But let me show
you this." It did bear some resemblance to a rocket motor. It was about as
long as a man's forearm and consisted of a bulbous chamber at one end,
which narrowed down into a throat and then widened into a hornlike exhaust
nozzle. The chamber was black; the rest was shiny chrome.

Rafe grasped it by the throat with one hand. The other, he clasped firmly
around the combustion chamber. "Watch! Now watch!"

He gave the bulbous, rubbery chamber a hard squeeze--

"_SQUAWK!_" went the horn.

"Rafe!" Lenny shouted. "Wake up! WAKE UP!"

Rafe blinked as the situation clarified. "What? Just A Second. Lenny.
Just...."

       *       *       *       *       *

"... _A second._"

Raphael Poe blinked his eyes open. The moon was shining through the dirty
windows of the dingy little room that was all he could call home--for a
while, at least. Outside the window were the gray streets of Moscow.

His brother's thoughts resounded in his fully awake brain. _Rafe! You
awake?_

_Sure. Sure. What is it?_

The conversation that followed was not in words or pictures, but a weird
combination of both, plus a strong admixture of linking concepts that were
neither.

In essence, Lenny merely reported that he had taken the day off to go to
the races and that Colonel Spaulding was evidently upset for some reason.
He wondered if Rafe were in any kind of trouble.

_No trouble. Everything's fine at this end. But Dr. Malekrinova won't be
back on the job until tomorrow afternoon--or,_ this _afternoon,
