
       *       *       *       *       *

"My lady," said Sir Pierre gently, "the Duke's Investigators have
arrived."

My Lady Alice, Countess D'Evreux, was seated in a gold-brocade
upholstered chair in the small receiving room off the Great Hall.
Standing near her, looking very grave, was Father Bright. Against the
blaze of color on the walls of the room, the two of them stood out
like ink blots. Father Bright wore his normal clerical black,
unrelieved except for the pure white lace at collar and cuffs. The
Countess wore unadorned black velvet, a dress which she had had to
have altered hurriedly by her dressmaker; she had always hated black
and owned only the mourning she had worn when her mother died eight
years before. The somber looks on their faces seemed to make the black
blacker.

"Show them in, Sir Pierre," the Countess said calmly.

Sir Pierre opened the door wider, and three men entered. One was
dressed as one gently born; the other two wore the livery of the Duke
of Normandy.

The gentleman bowed. "I am Lord Darcy, Chief Criminal Investigator for
His Highness, the Duke, and your servant, my lady." He was a tall,
brown-haired man in his thirties with a rather handsome, lean face. He
spoke Anglo-French with a definite English accent.

"My pleasure, Lord Darcy," said the Countess. "This is our vicar,
Father Bright."

"Your servant, Reverend Sir." Then he presented the two men with him.
The first was a scholarly-looking, graying man wearing pince-nez
glasses with gold rims, Dr. Pateley, Physician. The second, a tubby,
red-faced, smiling man, was Master Sean O Lochlainn, Sorcerer.

As soon as Master Sean was presented he removed a small, leather-bound
folder from his belt pouch and proffered it to the priest. "My
license, Reverend Father."

Father Bright took it and glanced over it. It was the usual thing,
signed and sealed by the Archbishop of Rouen. The law was rather
strict on that point; no sorcerer could practice without the
permission of the Church, and a license was given only after careful
examination for orthodoxy of practice.

"It seems to be quite in order, Master Sean," said the priest, handing
the folder back. The tubby little sorcerer bowed his thanks and
returned the folder to his belt pouch.

Lord Darcy had a notebook in his hand. "Now, unpleasant as it may be,
we shall have to check on a few facts." He consulted his notes, then
looked up at Sir Pierre. "You, I believe, discovered the body?"

"That is correct, your lordship."

"How long ago was this?"

Sir Pierre glanced at his wrist watch. It was 9:55. "Not quite three
hours ago, your lordship."

"At what time, precisely?"

"I rapped on the door precisely at seven, and went in a minute or two
later--say 7:01 or 7:02."

"How do you know the time so exactly?"

"My lord the Count," said Sir Pierre with some stiffness, "insisted
upon exact punctuality. I have formed the habit of referring to my
watch regularly."

"I see. Very good. Now, what did you do then?"

Sir Pierre described his actions briefly.

"The door to his suite was not locked, then?" Lord Darcy asked.

"No, sir."

"You did not expect it to be locked?"

"No, sir. It has not been for seventeen years."

Lord Darcy raised one eyebrow in a polite query. "Never?"

"Not at seven o'clock, your lordship. My lord the Count always rose
promptly at six and unlocked the door before seven."

"He did lock it at night, then?"

"Yes, sir."

Lord Darcy looked thoughtful and made a note, but he said nothing more
on that subject. "When you left, you locked the door?"

"That is correct, your lordship."

"And it has remained locked ever since?"

Sir Pierce hesitated and glanced at Father Bright. The priest said:
"At 8:15, Sir Pierre and I went in. I wished to view the body. We
touched nothing. We left at 8:20."

       *       *       *       *       *

Master Sean O Lochlainn looked agitated. "Er ... excuse me, Reverend
Sir. You didn't give him Holy Unction, I hope?"

"No," said Father Bright. "I thought it would be better to delay that
until after the authorities has seen the ... er ... scene of the
crime. I wouldn't want to make the gathering of evidence any more
difficult than necessary."

"Quite right," murmured Lord Darcy.

"No blessings, I trust, Reverend Sir?" Master Sean persisted. "No
exorcisms or--"

"Nothing," Father Bright interrupted somewhat testily. "I believe I
crossed myself when I saw the body, but nothing more."

"Crossed _yourself_, sir. Nothing else?"

"No."

"Well, that's all right, then. Sorry to be so persistent, Reverend
Sir, but any miasma of evil that may be left around is a very
important clue, and it shouldn't be dispersed until it's been checked,
you see."

"_Evil?_" My lady the Countess looked shocked.

"Sorry, my lady, but--" Master Sean began contritely.

But Father Bright interrupted by speaking to the Countess. "Don't
distress yourself, my daughter; these men are only doing their duty."

"Of course. I understand. It's just that it's so--" She shuddered
delicately.

Lord Darcy cast Master Sean a warning look, then asked politely, "Has
my lady seen the deceased?"

"No," she said. "I will, however, if you wish."

"We'll see," said Lord Darcy. "Perhaps it won't be necessary. May we
go up to the suite now?"

"Certainly," the Countess said. "Sir Pierre, if you will?"

"Yes, my lady."

As Sir Pierre unlocked the emblazoned door, Lord Darcy said: "Who else
sleeps on this floor?"

"No one else, your lordship," Sir Pierre said. "The entire floor is ...
was ... reserved for my lord the Count."

"Is there any way up besides that elevator?"

Sir Pierre turned and pointed toward the other end of the short
hallway. "That leads to the staircase," he said, pointing to a massive
oaken door, "but it's kept locked at all times. And, as you can see,
there is a heavy bar across it. Except for moving furniture in and out
or something like that, it's never used."

"No other way up or down, then?"

Sir Pierre hesitated. "Well, yes, your lordship, there is. I'll show
you."

"A secret stairway?"

"Yes, your lordship."

"Very well. We'll look at it after we've seen the body."

Lord Darcy, having spent an hour on the train down from Rouen, was
anxious to see the cause of the trouble at last.

He lay in the bedroom, just as Sir Pierre and Father Bright had left
him.

"If you please, Dr. Pateley," said his lordship.

He knelt on one side of the corpse and watched carefully while Pateley
knelt on the other side and looked at the face of the dead man. Then
he touched one of the hands and tried to move an arm. "Rigor has set
in--even to the fingers. Single bullet hole. Rather small caliber--I
should say a .28 or .34--hard to tell until I've probed out the
bullet. Looks like it went right through the heart, though. Hard to
tell about powder burns; the blood has soaked the clothing and dried.
Still, these specks ... hm-m-m. Yes. Hm-m-m."

Lord Darcy's eyes took in everything, but there was little enough to
see on the body itself. Then his eye was caught by something that gave
off a golden gleam. He stood up and walked over to the great canopied
four-poster bed, then he was on his knees again, peering under it. A
coin? No.

He picked it up carefully and looked at it. A button. Gold,
intricately engraved in an Arabesque pattern, and set in the center
with a single diamond. How long had it lain there? Where had it come
from? Not from the Count's clothing, for his buttons were smaller,
engraved with his arms, and had no gems. Had a man or a woman dropped
it? There was no way of knowing at this stage of the game.

Darcy turned to Sir Pierre. "When was this room last cleaned?"

"Last evening, your lordship," the secretary said promptly. "My lord
was always particular about that. The suite was always to be swept and
cleaned during the dinner hour."

"Then this must have rolled under the bed at some time after dinner.
Do you recognize it? The design is distinctive."

The Privy Secretary looked carefully at the button in the palm of
Lord Darcy's hand without touching it. "I ... I hesitate to say," he
said at last. "It looks like ... but I'm not sure--"

"Come, come, Chevalier! Where do you think you _might_ have seen it?
Or one like it." There was a sharpness in the tone of his voice.

"I'm not trying to conceal anything, your lordship," Sir Pierre said
with equal sharpness. "I said I was not sure. I still am not, but it
can be checked easily enough. If your lordship will permit me--" He
turned and spoke to Dr. Pateley, who was still kneeling by the body.
"May I have my lord the Count's keys, doctor?"

Pateley glanced up at Lord Darcy, who nodded silently. The physician
detached the keys from the belt and handed them to Sir Pierre.

The Privy Secretary looked at them for a moment, then selected a small
gold key. "This is it," he said, separating it from the others on the
ring. "Come with me, your lordship."

       *       *       *       *       *

Darcy followed him across the room to a broad wall covered with a
great tapestry that must have dated back to the sixteenth century. Sir
