A strange and abrupt change. Impossibly strange! I walked toward one
of the trees, stopped at a reddish boulder to examine it. And surprise
caught at my throat. It was an artifact--a crumbling ruin, the remnant
of an ancient structure whose original appearance I could not fathom.
The stone seemed iron-hard. There were traces of inscription on it,
but eroded to illegibility. And I never did learn the history of those
enigmatic ruins.... They did not originate on Earth.

There was no sign of the native girl, and the resilient moss retained
no tracks. I stood there, staring around, wondering what to do now. I
was tense with excitement. But there was little to see. Just that
valley covering perhaps a half-mile before the fog closed in around
it.

Beyond that--I did not know what lay beyond that.

I went on, into the valley, eyeing my surroundings curiously in the
shadowless light that filtered through the shifting roof of fog.
Foolishly, I expected to discover Incan artifacts. The crumbled red
stones should have warned me. They were, I think, harder than metal,
yet they had been here long enough for the elements to erode them into
featureless shards. Had they been of earthly origin they would have
antedated Mankind--antedated even the Neanderthaler man.

Curious how our minds are conditioned to run in anthropomorphic lines.
I was, though I did not know it, walking through a land that had its
beginnings outside the known universe. The blue trees hinted at that.
The crimson ruins told me that clearly. The atmospheric
conditions--the fog, the warmth high up in the Cordilleras--were
certainly not natural. Yet I thought the explanation lay in some
geological warp, volcanic activity, subterranean gas-vents....

My vision reached a half-mile, no farther. As I went on, the misty
horizon receded. The valley was larger than I had imagined. It was
like Elysium, where the shades of dead men stroll in the Garden of
Proserpine. Streamlets ran through the blue moss at intervals, chill
as death from the snowy plains hidden in the fog. "A sleepy world of
streams...."

The ruins altered in appearance as I went on. The red blocks were
still present, but there were now also remnants of other structures,
made by a different culture, I thought.

The blue trees grew more numerous. Leafy vines covered most of them
now, saffron-tinted, making each strange tree a little room, screened
by the lattice of the vines. As I passed close to one a faint clicking
sounded, incongruously like the tapping of typewriter keys, but
muffled. I saw movement and turned, my hand going to the pistol in my
belt.

The Thing came out of a tree-hut and halted, watching me. I _felt_ it
watching me--though _it had no eyes_!

It was a sphere of what seemed to be translucent plastic, glowing with
shifting rainbow colors. And I sensed sentience--intelligence--in its
horribly human attitude of watchful hesitation. Four feet in diameter
it was, and featureless save for three ivory elastic tentacles that
supported it and a fringe of long, whip-like cilia about its
diameter--its waist, I thought.

It looked at me, eyeless and cryptic. The shifting colors crawled over
the plastic globe. Then it began to roll forward on the three
supporting tentacles with a queer, swift gliding motion. I stepped
back, jerking out my gun and leveling it.

"Stop," I said, my voice shrill. "Stop!"

It stopped, quite as though it understood my words or the gesture of
menace. The cilia fluttered about its spherical body. Bands of lambent
color flashed. I could not rid myself of the curious certainty, that
it was trying to communicate with me.

Abruptly it came forward again purposefully. I tensed and stepped
back, holding the gun aimed. My finger was tightening on the trigger
when the Thing stopped.

I backed off, nervously tense, but the creature did not follow. After
I had got about fifty yards away it turned back and retreated into the
hut-like structure in the banyan tree. After that I watched the trees
warily as I passed them, but there were no other visitations of that
nature.

Scientists are reluctant to relinquish their so-called logic. As I
walked I tried to rationalize the creature, to explain it in the light
of current knowledge. That it had been alive was certain. Yet it was
not protoplasmic in nature. A plant, developed by mutation? Perhaps.
But that theory did not satisfy me for the Thing had possessed
intelligence, though of what order I did not know.

But there were the seven native girls, I reminded myself. My job was
to find them, and quickly, too.

I did, at last, find them. Six of them, anyway. They were sitting in a
row on the blue moss, facing one of the red blocks of stone, their
backs toward me. As I mounted a little rise I saw them, motionless as
bronze statues, and as rigid.

I went down toward them, tense with excitement, expectancy. Odd that
six native girls, sitting in a row, should fill me with such feeling.
They were so motionless that I wondered as I approached them, if they
were dead....

But they were not. Nor were they--in the true sense of the
word--alive.

I gripped one by the bare shoulder, found the flesh surprisingly cold
and the girl seemed not to feel my touch. I swung her around to face
me, and her black, empty eyes looked off into the far distance. Her
lips were tightly compressed, slightly cyanosed. The pupils of her
eyes were inordinately dilated, as if she was drugged.

Indian style, she squatted cross-legged, like the others. As I pulled
her around, she toppled down on the moss, making no effort to stop
herself. For a moment she lay there. Then with slow, puppet-like
motions, she returned to her former position and resumed that blank
staring into space.

I looked at the others. They were alike in their sleep-like
withdrawal. It seemed as if their minds had been sucked out of them,
that their very selves were elsewhere. It was a fantastic diagnosis,
of course. But the trouble with those girls was nothing a physician
could understand. It was psychic in nature, obviously.

I turned to the first one and slapped her cheeks. "Wake up!" I
commanded. "You must obey me! Waken--"

But she gave no sign of feeling, of seeing. I lit a match, and her eyes
focused on the flame. But the size of her pupils did not alter....

