to start. Navigating the mountains by night isn't child's play, let me
tell you."

"I shall not forget," said Corpang.

Maskull gazed down at the boat. "Are we to get in?"

"Gently, my friend. It's only canework and skin."

"First of all, you might enlighten me as to how you have contrived to
dispense with the laws of gravitation."

Haunte smiled sarcastically. "A secret in your ear, Maskull. All laws
are female. A true male is an outlaw--outside the law."

"I don't understand."

"The great body of the earth is continually giving out female particles,
and the male parts of rocks and living bodies are equally continually
trying to reach them. That's gravitation."

"Then how do you manage with your boat?"

"My two male stones do the work. The one underneath the boat prevents it
from falling to the ground; the one in the stem shuts it off from solid
objects in the rear. The only part of the boat attracted by any part
of the earth is the bow, for that's the only part the light of the male
stones does not fall on. So in that direction the boat travels."

"And what are these wondrous male stones?"

"They really are male stones. There is nothing female in them; they
are showering out male sparks all the time. These sparks devour all the
female particles rising from the earth. No female particles are left
over to attract the male parts of the boat, and so they are not in the
least attracted in that direction."

Maskull ruminated for a minute.

"With your hunting, and boatbuilding, and science, you seem a very
handy, skilful fellow, Haunte.... But the sun's sinking, and we'd better
start."

"Get down first, then, and shift that carcass farther forward. Then you
and your gloomy friend can sit amidships."

Maskull immediately climbed down, and dropped himself into the boat; but
then he received a surprise. The moment he stood on the frail bottom,
still clinging to the rock, not only did his weight entirely disappear,
as though he were floating in some heavy medium, like salt water, but
the rock he held onto drew him, as by a mild current of electricity, and
he was able to withdraw his hands only with difficulty.

After the first moment's shock, he quietly accepted the new order of
things, and set about shifting the carcass. Since there was no weight
in the boat this was effected without any great labour. Corpang then
descended. The astonishing physical change had no power to disturb his
settled composure, which was founded on moral ideas. Haunte came last;
grasping the staff which held the upper male stone, he proceeded to
erect it, after removing the cap. Maskull then obtained his first near
view of the mysterious light, which, by counteracting the forces of
Nature, acted indirectly not only as elevator but as motive force. In
the last ruddy gleams of the great sun, its rays were obscured, and it
looked little more impressive than an extremely brilliant, scintillating
blue-white jewel, but its power could be gauged by the visible, coloured
mist that it threw out for many yards around.

The steering was effected by means of a shutter attached by a cord to
the top of the staff, which could be so manipulated that any segment of
the male stone's rays, or all the rays, or none at all, could be shut
off at will. No sooner was the staff raised than the aerial vessel
quietly detached itself from the rock to which it had been drawn, and
passed slowly forward in the direction of the mountains. Branchspell
sank below the horizon. The gathering mist blotted out everything
outside a radius of a few miles. The air grew cool and fresh.

Soon the rock masses ceased on the great, rising plain. Haunte withdrew
the shutter entirely, and the boat gathered full speed.

"You say that navigation among the mountains is difficult at night,"
exclaimed Maskull. "I would have thought it impossible."

Haunte grunted. "You will have to take risks, and think yourself
fortunate if you come off with nothing worse than a cracked skull. But
one thing I can tell you--if you go on disturbing me with your chitchat
we shan't get as far as the mountains."

Thereafter Maskull was silent.

The twilight deepened; the murk grew denser. There was little to look
at, but much to feel. The motion of the boat, which was due to
the never-ending struggle between the male stones and the force of
gravitation, resembled in an exaggerated fashion the violent tossing
of a small craft on a choppy sea. The two passengers became unhappy.
Haunte, from his seat in the stern, gazed at them sardonically with one
eye. The darkness now came on rapidly.

About ninety minutes after the commencement of the voyage they arrived
at the foothills of Lichstorm. They began to mount. There was no
daylight left to see by. Beneath them, however, on both sides of
them and in the rear, the landscape was lighted up for a considerable
distance by the now vivid blue rays of the twin male stones. Ahead,
where these rays did not shine, Haunte was guided by the self-luminous
nature of the rocks, grass, and trees. These were faintly
phosphorescent; the vegetation shone out more strongly than the soil.

The moon was not shining and there were no stars; Maskull therefore
inferred that the upper atmosphere was dense with mist. Once or twice,
from his sensations of choking, he thought that they were entering a
fogbank, but it was a strange kind of fog, for it had the effect of
doubling the intensity of every light in front of them. Whenever this
happened, nightmare feelings attacked him; he experienced transitory,
unreasoning fright and horror.

Now they passed high above the valley that separated the foothills from
the mountains themselves. The boat began an ascent of many thousands
of feet and, as the cliffs were near, Haunte had to manoeuvre carefully
with the rear light in order to keep clear of them. Maskull watched the
delicacy of his movements, not without admiration. A long time went
by. It grew much colder; the air was damp and drafty. The fog began to
deposit something like snow on their persons. Maskull kept sweating with
terror, not because of the danger they were in, but because of the cloud
banks that continued to envelop them.

They cleared the first line of precipices. Still mounting, but this time
with a forward motion, as could be seen by the vapours illuminated by
the male stones through which they passed, they were soon altogether out
of sight of solid ground. Suddenly and quite unexpectedly the moon broke
through. In the upper atmosphere thick masses of fog were seen crawling
hither and thither, broken in many places by thin rifts of sky, through
one of which Teargeld was shining. Below them, to their left, a gigantic
peak, glittering with green ice, showed itself for a few seconds, and
was then swallowed up again. All the rest of the world was hidden by the
mist. The moon went in again. Maskull had seen quite enough to make him
long for the aerial voyage to end.

The light from the male stones presently illuminated the face of a new
cliff. It was grand, rugged, and perpendicular. Upward, downward, and on
both sides, it faded imperceptibly into the night. After coasting it a
little way, they observed a shelf of rock jutting out. It was square,
measuring about a dozen feet each way. Green snow covered it to a depth
of some inches. Immediately behind it was a dark slit in the rock, which
promised to be the mouth of a cave.

Haunte skilfully landed the boat on this platform. Standing up, he
raised the staff bearing the keel light and lowered the other; then
removed both male stones, which he continued to hold in his hand. His
face was thrown into strong relief by the vivid, sparkling blue-white
rays. It looked rather surly.

"Do we get out?" inquired Maskull.

"Yes. I live here."

"Thanks for the successful end of a dangerous journey."

"Yes, it has been touch-and-go."

Corpang jumped onto the platform. He was smiling coarsely. "There
has been no danger, for our destinies lie elsewhere. You are merely a
ferryman, Haunte."

"Is that so?" returned Haunte, with a most unpleasant laugh. "I thought
I was carrying men, not gods."

"Where are we?" asked Maskull. As he spoke, he got out, but Haunte
remained standing a minute in the boat.

"This is Sarclash--the second highest mountain in the land."

"Which is the highest, then?"

"Adage. Between Sarclash and Adage there is a long ridge--very difficult
in places. About halfway along the ridge, at the lowest point, lies the
top of the Mornstab Pass, which goes through to Barey. Now you know the
lay of the land."

"Does the woman Sullenbode live near here?"

"Near enough." Haunte grinned.

He leaped out of the boat and, pushing past the others without ceremony,
walked straight into the cave.

Maskull followed, with Corpang at his heels. A few stone steps led to
a doorway, curtained by the skin of some large beast. Their host pushed
his way in, never offering to hold the skin aside for them. Maskull made
no comment, but grabbed it with his fist and tugged it away from its
fastenings to the ground. Haunte looked at the skin, and then stared
hard at Maskull with his disagreeable smile, but neither said anything.

The place in which they found themselves was a large oblong cavern, with
walls, floor, and ceiling of natural rock. There were two doorways:
that by which they had entered, and another of smaller size directly
opposite. The cave was cold and cheerless; a damp draft passed from
door to door. Many skins of wild animals lay scattered on the ground.
A number of lumps of sun-dried flesh were hanging on a string along the
wall, and a few bulging liquor skins reposed in a corner. There were
tusks, horns, and bones everywhere. Resting against the wall were two
short hunting spears, having beautiful crystal heads.

Haunte set down the two male stones on the ground, near the farther
door; their light illuminated the whole cave. He then walked over to the
meat and, snatching a large piece, began to gnaw it ravenously.

"Are we invited to the feast?" asked Maskull.

Haunte pointed to the hanging flesh and to the liquor skins, but did not
pause in his chewing.

"Where's a cup?" inquired Maskull, lifting one of the skins.

Haunte indicated a clay goblet lying on the floor. Maskull picked it up,
undid the neck of the skin, and, resting it under his arm, filled the
cup. Tasting the liquor, he discovered it to be raw spirit. He tossed
off the draught, and then felt much better.

The second cupful he proffered to Corpang. The latter took a single sip,
swallowed it, and then passed the cup back without a word. He refused to
drink again, as long as they were in the cave. Maskull finished the cup,
and began to throw off care.

Going to the meat line, he took down a large double handful, and sat
down on a pile of skins to eat at his ease. The flesh was tough
and coarse, but he had never tasted anything sweeter. He could not
understand the flavour, which was not surprising in a world of strange
animals. The meal proceeded in silence. Corpang ate sparingly, standing
up, and afterward lay down on a bundle of furs. His bold eyes watched
all the movements of the other two. Haunte had not drunk as yet.

At last Maskull concluded his meal. He emptied another cup, sighed
pleasantly, and prepared to talk.

"Now explain further about your women, Haunte."

Haunte fetched another skin of liquor and a second cup. He tore off the
string with his teeth, and poured out and drank cup after cup in quick
succession. Then he sat down, crossed his legs, and turned to Maskull.

"Well?"

"So they are objectionable?"

"They are deadly."

"Deadly? In what way can they possibly be deadly?"

"You will learn. I was watching you in the boat, Maskull. You had some
bad feelings, eh?"

"I don't conceal it. There were times when I felt as if I were
struggling with a nightmare. What caused it?"

"The female atmosphere of Lichstorm. Sexual passion."

"I had no passion."

"That was passion--the first stage. Nature tickles your people into
marriage, but it tortures us. Wait till you get outside. You'll have a
return of those sensations--only ten times worse. The drink you've had
will see to that.... How do you suppose it will all end?"

"If I knew, I wouldn't be asking you questions."

Haunte laughed loudly. "Sullenbode."

"You mean it will end in my seeking Sullenbode?"

"But what will come of it, Maskull? What will she give you? Sweet,
fainting, white-armed, feminine voluptuousness?"

Maskull coolly drank another cup. "And why should she give all that to a
passerby?"

"Well, as a matter of fact, she hasn't it to give. No, what she will
give you, and what you'll accept from her, because you can't help it,
is--anguish, insanity, possibly death."

"You may be talking sense, but it sounds like raving to me. Why should I
accept insanity and death?"

"Because your passion will force you to."

"What about yourself?" Maskull asked, biting his nails.

"Oh, I have my male stones. I am immune."

"Is that all that prevents you from being like other men?"

"Yes, but don't attempt any tricks, Maskull."

Maskull went on drinking steadily, and said nothing for a time. "So
men and women here are hostile to each other, and love is unknown?" he
proceeded at last.

"That magic word.... Shall I tell you what love is, Maskull? Love
between male and female is impossible. When Maskull loves a woman, it is
Maskull's female ancestors who are loving her. But here in this land the
men are pure males. They have drawn nothing from the female side."

"Where do the male stones come from?"

"Oh, they are not freaks. There must be whole beds of the stuff
somewhere. It is all that prevents the world from being a pure female
world. It would be one big mass of heavy sweetness, without individual
shapes."

"Yet this same sweetness is torturing to men?"

"The life of an absolute male is fierce. An excess of life is dangerous
to the body. How can it be anything else than torturing?"

Corpang now sat up suddenly, and addressed Haunte. "I remind you of your
promise to tell about Muspel."

Haunte regarded him with a malevolent smile. "Ha! The underground man
has come to life."

"Yes, tell us," put in Maskull carelessly.

Haunte drank, and laughed a little. "Well, the tale's short, and hardly
worth telling, but since you're interested.... A stranger came here five
years ago, inquiring after Muspel-light. His name was Lodd. He came from
the east. He came up to me one bright morning in summer, outside this
very cave. If you ask me to describe him--I can't imagine a second man
like him. He looked so proud, noble, superior, that I felt my own blood
to be dirty by comparison. You can guess I don't have this feeling for
everyone. Now that I am recalling him, he was not so much superior as
different. I was so impressed that I rose and talked to him standing. He
inquired the direction of the mountain Adage. He went on to say, 'They
say Muspel-light is sometimes seen there. What do you know of such a
thing?' I told him the truth--that I knew nothing about it, and then he
went on, 'Well, I am going to Adage. And tell those who come after me
on the same errand that they had better do the same thing.' That was the
whole conversation. He started on his way, and I've never seen him or
heard of him since."

"So you didn't have the curiosity to follow him?"

"No, because the moment he had turned his back all my interest in the
man somehow seemed to vanish."

"Probably because he was useless to you."

Corpang glanced at Maskull. "Our road is marked out for us."

"So it would appear," said Maskull indifferently.

The talk flagged for a time. Maskull felt the silence oppressive, and
grew restless.

"What do you call the colour of your skin, Haunte, as I saw it in
daylight? It struck me as strange."

"Dolm," said Haunte.

"A compound of ulfire and blue," explained Corpang.

"Now I know. These colours are puzzling for a stranger."

"What colours have you in your world?" asked Corpang.

"Only three primary ones, but here you seem to have five, though how it
comes about I can't imagine."

"There are two sets of three primary colours here," said Corpang, "but
as one of the colours--blue--is identical in both sets, altogether there
are five primary colours."

"Why two sets?"

"Produced by the two suns. Branchspell produces blue, yellow, and red;
Alppain, ulfire, blue, and jale."

"It's remarkable that explanation has never occurred to me before."

"So here you have another illustration of the necessary trinity
of nature. Blue is existence. It is darkness seen through light; a
contrasting of existence and nothingness. Yellow is relation. In
yellow light we see the relation of objects in the clearest way. Red
is feeling. When we see red, we are thrown back on our personal
feelings.... As regards the Alppain colours, blue stands in the middle
and is therefore not existence, but relation. Ulfire is existence; so it
must be a different sort of existence."

Haunte yawned. "There are marvellous philosophers in your underground
hole."

Maskull got up and looked about him.

"Where does that other door lead to?"

"Better explore," said Haunte.

Maskull took him at his word, and strolled across the cave, flinging the
curtain aside and disappearing into the night. Haunte rose abruptly and
hurried after him.

Corpang too got to his feet. He went over to the untouched spirit skins,
untied the necks, and allowed the contents to gush out on to the floor.
Next he took the hunting spears, and snapped off the points between
his hands. Before he had time to resume his seat, Haunte and Maskull
reappeared. The host's quick, shifty eyes at once took in what had
happened. He smiled, and turned pale.

"You haven't been idle, friend."

Corpang fixed Haunte with his bold, heavy gaze. "I thought it well to
draw your teeth."

Maskull burst out laughing. "The toad's come into the light to some
purpose, Haunte. Who would have expected it?"

Haunte, after staring hard at Corpang for two or three minutes, suddenly
uttered a strange cry, like an evil spirit, and flung himself upon him.
The two men began to wrestle like wildcats. They were as often on the
floor as on their legs, and Maskull could not see who was getting the
better of it. He made no attempt to separate them. A thought came
into his head and, snatching up the two male stones, he ran with them,
