fueling station.

Benny put the vials away and he went into the bar. There was the usual
jostling crowd of hard-bitten Earth miners, and of the metal people
who come to lose their loneliness. I recognized many, though I spend
very little time in these places, preferring solitary pursuits, such
as the distillation of Moon Glow, and improving my mind by study and
contemplation out in the barrens.

Jon Rogeson and I saw each other at the same time, and I did not like
the expression in his eye as he crooked a finger at me. I went over to
his table. He was pleasant looking, as Builders go, with blue eyes
less dull than most, and a brown, unruly topknot of hair such as is
universally affected by them.

"Sit down," he invited, revealing his white incisors in greeting.

I never sit, but this time I did so, to be polite. I was wary; ready
for anything. I knew that there was something unpleasant in the air. I
wondered if he had seen me passing the Moon Glow to Benny somehow.
Perhaps he had barrier-penetrating vision, like the Z group of metal
people ... but I had never heard of a Builder like that. I knew that
he had long suspected that I made Moon Glow.

"What do you want?" I asked cautiously.

"Come on now," he said, "loosen up! Limber those stainless steel
hinges of yours and be friendly."

That made me feel good. Actually, I am somewhat pitted with rust, but
he never seems to notice, for he is like that. I felt young, as if I
had partaken of my own product.

"The fact is, B-12," he said, "I want you to do me a favor, old pal."

"And what is that?"

"Perhaps you have heard that there is some big brass from Earth
visiting Phobos this week."

"I have heard nothing," I said. It is often helpful to appear ignorant
when questioned by the Builders, for they believe us to be incapable
of misrepresenting the truth. The fact is, though it is an acquired
trait, and not built into us, we General Purposes can lie as well as
anyone.

"Well, there is. A Federation Senator, no less. Simon F. Langley. It's
my job to keep them entertained; that's where you come in."

I was mystified. I had never heard of this Langley, but I know what
entertainment is. I had a mental image of myself singing or dancing
before the Senator's party. But I can not sing very well, for three of
my voice reeds are broken and have never been replaced, and lateral
motion, for me, is almost impossible these days. "I do not know what
you mean," I said. "There is J-66. He was once an Entertainment--"

"No, no!" he interrupted, "you don't get it. What the Senator wants is
a guide. They're making a survey of the Dumps, though I'll be damned
if I can find out why. And you know the Dumps better than any metal
person--or human--on Phobos."

So that was it. I felt a vague dread, a premonition of disaster. I had
such feelings before, and usually with reason. This too, was an
acquired sensibility, I am sure. For many years I have studied the
Builders, and there is much to be learned of their mobile faces and
their eyes. In Jon's eyes, however, I read no trickery--nothing.

Yet, I say, I had the sensation of evil. It was just for a moment; no
longer.

I said I would think it over.

       *       *       *       *       *

Senator Langley was distinguished. Jon said so. And yet he was
cumbersomely round, and he rattled incessantly of things into which I
could interpret no meaning. The she who was his wife was much younger,
and sullen, and unpleasantly I sensed great rapport between her and
Jon Rogeson from the very first.

There were several other humans in the group--I will not call them
Builders, for I did not hold them to be, in any way, superior to my
own people. They all wore spectacles, and they gravitated about the
round body of the Senator like minor moons, and I could tell that they
were some kind of servitors.

I will not describe them further.

MS-33 I will describe. I felt an unconscionable hatred for him at
once. I can not say why, except that he hung about his master
obsequiously, power pack smoothly purring, and he was slim limbed,
nickel-plated, and wore, I thought, a smug expression on his
viziplate. He represented the new order; the ones who had displaced us
on Earth. He knew too much, and showed it at every opportunity.

We did not go far that first morning. The half-track was driven to the
edge of the Dumps. Within the Dumps one walks--or does not go. Phobos
is an airless world, and yet so small that rockets are impractical.
The terrain is broken and littered with the refuse of half a dozen
worlds, but the Dumps themselves--that is different.

Imagine, if you can, an endless vista of death, a sea of rusting
corpses of space ships, and worn-out mining machinery, and of those of
my race whose power packs burned out, or who simply gave up, retiring
into this endless, corroding limbo of the barrens. A more sombre sight
was never seen.

But this fat ghoul, Langley, sickened me. This shame of the Builder
race, this atavism--this beast--rubbed his fat, impractical hands
together with an ungod-like glee. "Excellent," he said. "Far, far
better, in fact, than I had hoped." He did not elucidate.

I looked at Jon Rogeson. He shook his head slowly.

"You there--robot!" said Langley, looking at me. "How far across this
place?" The word was like a blow. I could not answer.

MS-33, glistening in the dying light of Mars, strode over to me,
