frantic urging to "Get them!"

Once in the clear, Bert ran with his wife. There was no question of
destination. They came to a metal shed. Inside it, beside the small
spaceboat, they found Lawler who had anticipated where Bert would go.

The two men spoke to each other with their helmet radios shut off to
avoid eaves-dropping. They clasped hands so that the sound-waves of
their voices would have a channel over which to pass, in the absence
of a sufficiently dense atmosphere.

"All of a sudden I'm a little worried, Bert," Lawler growled. "About
the Big Pill. Maybe Lauren is half right about its being so dangerous.
After all it has never been tested on a large scale before. And there
are two hundred people here on Titan. Well, you know what's got to be
done now. When you get to the _Prometheus_, tell Doc Kramer that I'm
squeezing my thumbs...."

Lawler sounded almost plaintive at the end.

Bert felt the tweak of that same worry, too, but his course was set.
He grinned in the darkness that surrounded them.

"Nuts!" he said. "Even Lauren admits that everything is a gamble,
remember? And you can pile all of the people into the space ship here
in camp, and blast off with them, and hover at a safe distance from
Titan till we're absolutely sure. I'd better hurry now, Lawler.
Lauren's cops'll be on my tail any second. Gotta go."

"With your wife along?" Lawler demanded.

"Sure," Bert answered. "Allie's a fine shot with a blaster. Often I
wish she wasn't such a good shot with her tongue. But I guess that
with Lauren she cleared the atmosphere. Right, Allie?"

With a small hand on the shoulder of each man, Alice had been
listening in. "I think so," she answered grimly. "Let's dash."

Ten seconds later Bert Kraskow and his wife went rocketing up into the
weird and glorious Titanian night, which was nearing its end. They
thought of Doc Kramer, the little physicist, waiting for them out in
the desert, in the space ship, _Prometheus_, with its terrible and
wonderful cargo. Bert thought, too, of his contact and contract with
the new colonists' supply company, which was also called Prometheus.
Yeah, Prometheus, the educator, the fire-bringing god of the ancient
Greeks. The symbol of progress. At that moment Bert Kraskow felt very
right. He'd been hired secretly to help carry the torch against the
stiff and smug forces of conservative obstructionism, with its awkward
and now antiquated methods.

Alice kept looking behind through the windows of the spaceboat's
cabin. She spoke, now, with her helmet face-window open, for there was
breathable air around them.

"I was thinking that Lauren might want us to run like this, Bert, so
that we'd lead the cops to the hiding place of the _Prometheus_. So
far there's no pursuit."

Bert growled, "I'm not worried that the Patrol boys won't be along.
What really scares me is that some of Lauren's men may already have
found the _Prometheus_. We'll just have to wait and see."

Beneath the spaceboat the desert rolled. Vast Saturn and his multiple
moons, hung against the black and all-but-airless star-curtain. Then,
all of a sudden, before the eastward hurtling craft, it was daylight,
as the tiny sun burst over the horizon. Its wan rays fell on pale,
stratified mists of air, all but frozen in the cold of night.

Those mists, cupped between the hills, were the last of Titan's
atmosphere. Once, eons ago, when monster Saturn had been hot enough to
supplement the far-off sun's heat with radiation of its own, those
hills had been, for a few brief ages, verdant with primitive, mossy
growths.

Bert followed the dry bed of an ancient river, till he came to the
rocky cleft where the _Prometheus_ had been concealed.

Just as they glimpsed the ship, Alice gave a sharp gasp, as they saw
another spaceboat dart unhurriedly away. Bert landed in the rocky
gorge, and on foot they approached the _Prometheus_ cautiously, the
blasters from the cabin of the spaceboat gripped in their gauntleted
hands.

They found the ship's airlock securely bolted. But someone had tried
to cut through its tough, heat-resistant shell with a blaster for the
metal was still hot.

"A break," Bert breathed raggedly. "We got here just in time to scare
them off.... Hey!..."

That was when they found Doc Kramer. He lay behind a boulder, a
pathetic little figure who seemed to be merely sleeping. There wasn't
a mark on him that could be easily discovered. There was no time to
figure out how he had died--by poisoned needle, overstrong paralyzer
beam, or whatever. His body, within its spacesuit, was just beginning
to develop rigor mortis.

Alice's eyes were wet, her small jaw set hard. "Your brother's death
was at least an unintentional accident caused by carelessly made
equipment, Bert," she said. "But Doc was murdered."

"Yeah," Bert grated thickly. "Only murder is awful hard to prove as
far from civilization as this. Come on, we can't do a thing about it
right now."

       *       *       *       *       *

Double rage and grief drove him on toward what he must do with greater
insistence than before. With a key from his hip-pouch, he opened the
airlock of the _Prometheus_. With great caution they went inside but
found no one in the ship.

The mood of its interior was brooding and sullen. Every cubic foot of
space not taken up by its machinery and fuel was packed with black
ingots of an alloy, a large proportion of which was fissionable metal,
quiescent now, and harmless, but under the right kind of primer,
capable of bursting into a specialized hell of energy. Five thousand
tons of the stuff, Earth-weight!

But even all this was the secondary part of the purpose for which the
_Prometheus_ had been fitted. Bert and Alice followed a narrow catwalk
to a compartment along the keel of the ship which was fitted like a
huge bomb-bay. And the monster that rested there, gripped by
mechanically operated claws, would certainly have fitted the
definition of a bomb as well as anything that had ever been made by
Earth-science. Child, it was, of the now ancient H-bomb.

It was a tapered cylinder, a hundred feet long and thirty feet thick.
For one grim, devilish moment Bert Kraskow paused to pat its flank, to
feel the solid metallic slap of its tremendous shellcase under his
palm, to be aware of the intricacies of its hidden parts: The forklike
masses of fissionable metals that could dovetail and join instantly;
the heavy-water, the lead, the steel, the beryllium.
