I said: "Please, may I have a Spam sandwich on Rye Krisp and some
coffee for Room Fifteen Forty-one?"

"Please, you go to hell!" the voice snarled. "What do you think this
is, some damn delicatessen? You want liquor, we'll get you liquor.
That's what room service is for!"

       *       *       *       *       *

I hung up. What was the use of arguing? Arthur was clacking peevishly:

WHATS THE MATTER SAM YOU THINKING OF YOUR BELLY AGAIN Q Q

"You would be if you--" I started, and then I stopped. Arthur's
feelings were delicate enough already. I mean suppose that all you had
left of what you were born with was a brain in a kind of sardine can,
wouldn't you be sensitive? Well, Arthur was more sensitive than you
would be, believe me. Of course, it was his own foolish fault--I mean
you don't get a prosthetic tank unless you die by accident, or
something like that, because if it's disease they usually can't save
even the brain.

The phone rang again.

It was the desk clerk. "Say, did you get what you wanted?" he asked
chummily.

"No."

"Oh. Too bad," he said, but cheerfully. "Listen, buddy, I forgot to
tell you before. That Miss Engdahl you were expecting, she's on her
way up."

I dropped the phone onto the cradle.

"Arthur!" I yelled. "Keep quiet for a while--trouble!"

He clacked once, and the typewriter shut itself off. I jumped for the
door of the bathroom, cursing the fact that I didn't have cartridges
for the gun. Still, empty or not, it would have to do.

I ducked behind the bathroom door, in the shadows, covering the hall
door. Because there were two things wrong with what the desk clerk had
told me. Vern Engdahl wasn't a "miss," to begin with; and whatever
name he used when he came to call on me, it wouldn't be Vern Engdahl.

There was a knock on the door. I called: "Come in!"

The door opened and the girl who called herself Vern Engdahl came in
slowly, looking around. I stayed quiet and out of sight until she was
all the way in. She didn't seem to be armed; there wasn't anyone with
her.

I stepped out, holding the gun on her. Her eyes opened wide and she
seemed about to turn.

"Hold it! Come on in, you. Close the door!"

She did. She looked as though she were expecting me. I looked her
over--medium pretty, not very tall, not very plump, not very old. I'd
have guessed twenty or so, but that's not my line of work; she could
have been almost any age from seventeen on.

The typewriter switched itself on and began to pound agitatedly. I
crossed over toward her and paused to peer at what Arthur was yacking
about: SEARCH HER YOU DAMN FOOL MAYBE SHES GOT A GUN

I ordered: "Shut up, Arthur. I'm _going_ to search her. You! Turn
around!"

       *       *       *       *       *

She shrugged and turned around, her hands in the air. Over her
shoulder, she said: "You're taking this all wrong, Sam. I came here to
make a deal with you."

"Sure you did."

But her knowing my name was a blow, too. I mean what was the use of
all that sneaking around if people in New York were going to know we
were here?

I walked up close behind her and patted what there was to pat. There
didn't seem to be a gun.

"You tickle," she complained.

I took her pocketbook away from her and went through it. No gun. A lot
of money--an _awful_ lot of money. I mean there must have been two or
three hundred thousand dollars. There was nothing with a name on it in
the pocketbook.

She said: "Can I put my hands down, Sam?"

"In a minute." I thought for a second and then decided to do it--you
know, I just couldn't afford to take chances. I cleared my throat and
ordered: "Take off your clothes."

Her head jerked around and she stared at me. "_What?_"

"Take them off. You heard me."

"Now wait a minute--" she began dangerously.

I said: "Do what I tell you, hear? How do I know you haven't got a
knife tucked away?"

She clenched her teeth. "Why, you dirty little man! What do you
think--" Then she shrugged. She looked at me with contempt and said:
"All right. What's the difference?"

Well, there was a considerable difference. She began to unzip and
unbutton and wriggle, and pretty soon she was standing there in her
underwear, looking at me as though I were a two-headed worm. It was
interesting, but kind of embarrassing. I could see Arthur's eye-stalk
waving excitedly out of the opened suitcase.

I picked up her skirt and blouse and shook them. I could feel myself
blushing, and there didn't seem to be anything in them.

I growled: "Okay, I guess that's enough. You can put your clothes back
on now."

"Gee, thanks," she said.

She looked at me thoughtfully and then shook her head as if she'd
never seen anything like me before and never hoped to again. Without
another word, she began to get back into her clothes. I had to admire
her poise. I mean she was perfectly calm about the whole thing. You'd
have thought she was used to taking her clothes off in front of
strange men.

Well, for that matter, maybe she was; but it wasn't any of my
business.

       *       *       *       *       *

Arthur was clacking distractedly, but I didn't pay any attention to
him. I demanded: "All right, now who are you and what do you want?"

She pulled up a stocking and said: "You couldn't have asked me that in
the first place, could you? I'm Vern Eng--"

"_Cut it out!_"

She stared at me. "I was only going to say I'm Vern Engdahl's partner.
We've got a little business deal cooking and I wanted to talk to you
about this proposition."

Arthur squawked: WHATS ENGDAHL UP TO NOW Q Q SAM IM WARNING YOU I DONT
LIKE THE LOOK OF THIS THIS WOMAN AND ENGDAHL ARE PROBABLY
DOUBLECROSSING US

I said: "All right, Arthur, relax. I'm taking care of things. Now
start over, you. What's your name?"

She finished putting on her shoe and stood up. "Amy."

"Last name?"

She shrugged and fished in her purse for a cigarette. "What does it
matter? Mind if I sit down?"

"Go ahead," I rumbled. "But don't stop talking!"

"Oh," she said, "we've got plenty of time to straighten things out."
She lit the cigarette and walked over to the chair by the window. On
the way, she gave the luggage a good long look.

Arthur's eyestalk cowered back into the suitcase as she came close.
She winked at me, grinned, bent down and peered inside.

"My," she said, "he's a nice shiny one, isn't he?"

The typewriter began to clatter frantically. I didn't even bother to
look; I told him: "Arthur, if you can't keep quiet, you have to expect
people to know you're there."

She sat down and crossed her legs. "Now then," she said. "Frankly,
he's what I came to see you about. Vern told me you had a pross. I
want to buy it."

The typewriter thrashed its carriage back and forth furiously.

"Arthur isn't for sale."

"No?" She leaned back. "Vern's already sold me his interest, you know.
And you don't really have any choice. You see, I'm in charge of
materiel procurement for the Major. If you want to sell your share,
fine. If you don't, why, we requisition it anyhow. Do you follow?"

I was getting irritated--at Vern Engdahl, for whatever the hell he
thought he was doing; but at her because she was handy. I shook my
head.

"Fifty thousand dollars? I mean for your interest?"

"No."

"Seventy-five?"

"No!"

"Oh, come on now. A hundred thousand?"

It wasn't going to make any impression on her, but I tried to explain:
"Arthur's a friend of mine. He isn't for sale."

       *       *       *       *       *

She shook her head. "What's the matter with you? Engdahl wasn't like
this. He sold his interest for forty thousand and was glad to get it."

Clatter-clatter-clatter from Arthur. I didn't blame him for having
hurt feelings that time.

Amy said in a discouraged tone: "Why can't people be reasonable? The
Major doesn't like it when people aren't reasonable."

I lowered the gun and cleared my throat. "He doesn't?" I asked, cuing
her. I wanted to hear more about this Major, who seemed to have the
city pretty well under his thumb.

"No, he doesn't." She shook her head sorrowfully. She said in an
accusing voice: "You out-of-towners don't know what it's like to try
to run a city the size of New York. There are fifteen thousand people
here, do you know that? It isn't one of your hick towns. And it's
worry, worry, worry all the time, trying to keep things going."

"I bet," I said sympathetically. "You're, uh, pretty close to the
Major?"

She said stiffly: "I'm not married to him, if that's what you mean.
Though I've had my chances.... But you see how it is. Fifteen thousand
people to run a place the size of New York! It's forty men to operate
the power station, and twenty-five on the PX, and thirty on the hotel
here. And then there are the local groceries, and the Army, and the
Coast Guard, and the Air Force--though, really, that's only two
men--and--Well, you get the picture."

"I certainly do. Look, what kind of a guy _is_ the Major?"

She shrugged. "A guy."
