It was darkness that met his eyes when they opened, the eery darkness of
the floor of the Polar Sea.

Darkness! Half-conscious as he was, he started in surprise. He looked
for the torp's shaded control board-lights, but could not find them.
Bewildered, he wondered what had happened, and then remembered the
whale. In its flurry it had smashed him down.

Pain was thumping his forehead where he had struck the control levers;
with a groan he twisted his body around and felt for his hand-flash. At
any rate, there was no water inside the body compartment. The seams had
resisted the blow. But why were there no lights?

He found his hand-flash, and its beam showed him the reason. Playing it
on the small water-tight door which separated the main compartment from
that in which the machinery was contained, he looked through its fused
quartz peep-hole. He gaped in consternation.

There was, after all, a leak in the torpoon's shell, and a bad one. The
machinery compartment was full of water.

"Gosh!" he muttered. "That means no light, no radio--no power! Guess I'm
stranded!"

He considered the situation. It was not serious, for he had been in
touch with the _Narwhal_ after bagging the first whale and had given his
position. The submarine would proceed to the kill immediately; then,
after a while, not hearing from him, they would scour the neighborhood,
just as they had hunted for Chan Beddoes when he did not return.

But they'd find him, Ken told himself--and soon. He had no idea how long
he had lain unconscious, but probably by now the mother ship had already
hooked onto the first whale; maybe she was already hunting for him.

"Well, I'd better get out and be ready to signal to 'em with the flash,"
he reflected. "They may miss me here in the mud."

      *      *      *      *      *

Taking his sea-suit from a long narrow locker, he drew the stiff-woven
fabric over his body, turned the air-units on, clamped the face-shield
shut, and then, gripping his hand-flash, slowly opened the port in the
shell's side.

A weird figure he was, fit for the mysterious gloom into which he came.
With casque of steel and lead-weighted feet, staring face-shield and
metal belt, and equipped with a knife and two or three emergency tools,
the sea-suit transformed him into a clumsy, grotesque giant. He sloshed
into the muddy sea bottom, stumbling at first from the heavy water
resistance and hardly able to see anything. The torpoon itself was a
hazy blur at a short distance, but up above the light was better, being
almost bright next to the ice ceiling. He adjusted the air pressure
inside his suit, floating his feet off the bottom. A few clumsy
armstrokes and he went drifting gently upward.

Knowing that the "bends"--bubbles of air in a diver's veins--come from
too rapidly changing pressures when rising, he made his ascent
carefully. Up twenty feet, then a pause; twenty feet more and another
pause. So he rose some ninety feet, and finally arrived at the underside
of the ice floe.

Here he found the water a pale blue-green, increasing, at the limit of
his vision, to impenetrable black. Nearby was a great dark blur which he
recognized as the killer whale that had struck him down. It bobbed
lifelessly against the smooth, light ceiling of ice. Slowly, he swam
over towards it.

There was no mark of the havoc his last shot must have wreaked inside.
He examined the body with interest, fingering the two inch-long teeth,
which even the mighty sperm whale fears and flees from.

"Pretty wicked," he said aloud, just for the companionship of his voice.
"And there's a lot of oil in this brute. Streight'll be glad to get him.
Maybe he won't need a third to fill the tanks."

Thought of his captain made him look up and around, hoping to see the
_Narwhal's_ light-beams come threading through the distant murk. He did
not see them, but what he did see caused his mouth to drop open, and his
veins to chill with a cold that was not that of the sea nor the ice
above.

"Good Lord!" he whispered. "That thing--again!"

Like a specter from the deep, some hundred feet away was a form,
seal-like in appearance, yet not wholly seal. It poised there
motionless, apparently looking straight at him.

Fear came over Ken as he studied it. Its body was perhaps ten feet long,
and sleek and fat under a brown-colored hide. But its flippers were not
those of a seal; they were too long and slender, especially the hind
ones. They unquestionably bore a remote resemblance to human arms and
legs.

"Yet it can't be anything but some kind of seal," Ken whispered to
himself. "It must be!"

But then, too, it did not have the ordinary seal's bullet head, set
squat between smoothly tapering shoulders, but rather something bulbous,
half like that of a man, in spite of the layers of fat that stream-lined
from it to the broad shoulders. It did have, however, two large, staring
eyes, and slitted holes inches below them for nostrils--which showed
that it breathed air and was therefore warm-blooded.

Quite motionless, each stared at the other, while minutes passed. Then
the creature moved slowly up and forward, impelled by a graceful and
hardly perceptible roll of its queer flippers. Very gradually it came
towards Kenneth Torrance; and he, peering with fear-tinged curiosity at
the animal's bold advance, saw two creases of fat that must have been
lips slide open in the smooth brown face, baring strong, pointed teeth.

Not knowing whether it was an attack or merely inquisitiveness, he
unsheathed his knife. At this the figure stopped and poised motionless
again, perhaps fifty feet away, and after a moment turned its sleek head
first to the left and then to the right. Automatically, Ken gazed around
likewise. He drew in his breath with a sharp hiss.

Like shadows, additional figures had appeared in the distant murk.
Silently they had come; he could see eleven--twelve--even more. He was
surrounded! No longer doubting their purpose, he gripped his knife
firmly. He knew he could never get down to the torpoon in time.

And then the circle began to close.

There was little he could do to resist them, he realized, for what he
had seen of their movements told him that they were swift, effortless
swimmers. But he braced himself as best he could against the dead whale,
to protect his back. He would at least go down fighting.

As their spectral shapes slid slowly closer he noted something that had
escaped his eyes before. Four or five of them were holding dim objects
in their arm-like flippers. Spears, he made them out to be, rudely
fashioned from bone. And others held dark-colored loops, which they were
slowly forming into nooses.

"They're intelligent, all right," Ken muttered. "Spears--of whalebone, I
guess. And ropes--probably seaweed. Weapons! Good Lord, what kind of
seals are these?"

Easily, gracefully, the silent circle drew in to perhaps twenty feet of
him, where they paused again, hanging motionless at regular intervals in
the eery, wavering half-light. Ken licked his lips nervously. Then the
one whom he had seen first moved its head slightly, in what was
apparently a signal. And in a concerted movement, so bewilderingly rapid
that his eyes could not hold them, they rushed him.

He had expected speed, but not speed such as this. He had barely swung
his knife-arm up when the wave engulfed him.

Doubling, curving shapes looped around him; blubbery bodies pressed
against him; eyes flashed by in streaks of brown; he knew that he was
being tumbled and tossed and that his knife and hand-flash had fallen
under the shock of the attack. And then there was a sharper sensation.
As he struggled to break free, taut cords trussed his legs and arms like
any captive animal's.

The stream of moving bodies slowed in movement and fell back from a
breathless, dazed Kenneth Torrance. He then got his first clear view
since the assault was unleashed.

He was upright, many feet away from the killer whale's carcass, his arms
bound strongly to his sides with seaweed-rope, his legs locked close
together. To one side he glimpsed several of the creatures fastening
other rope strands to the whale's flukes. When they had finished, with
smoothly thrusting flippers they began to haul the carcass forward, and
he felt himself move feet first in the same direction.

He forced a wry smile to his lips. "A swell fight I put up!" he grunted.
"Hold 'em off! Yeah--I bet I held 'em for a full tenth of a second."

      *      *      *      *      *

He still could hardly believe what had so rapidly befallen him. It was
difficult to credit eyes that showed him creatures whose bodies were
mainly seal-like, and yet whose weapons and co-ordinated movements spoke
