Niobians didn't realize what concessions they could wring from the BIT.
The Confederation had sunk billions into Niobe and was prepared to sink
many more if necessary. They would go to almost any lengths to keep the
natives happy. If that meant star-freighter loads of oysters, then it
would be star-freighter loads of oysters. The Confederation needed the
gerontin that grew on Niobe.

The commercial worlds needed the anti-aging drug more and more as the
exploration of space continued--not to mention the popular demand. Niobe
was an ideal herbarium for growing the swampland plant from which the
complex of alkaloids was extracted.

So Hartmann made a note of it, and the subject was dropped.

I didn't think anything more about it. Kron was happy, Harl was happy,
and Hartmann was feeling pleased with himself. There was no reason to
keep the oyster question alive.

But it didn't die there. By some sort of telepathy the Niobians
scattered along the long tables found out what had been getting talked
about at the upper end.

By this time I was on the ball again. When the orders went in I slipped
a note to the cooks to use tabasco or vanaka on the Niobian orders. It
was fortunate that there was an ample supply of oysters available,
because the banquet dissolved shortly thereafter into an outright oyster
feed. The Niobians dropped all pretense. They wanted oysters--with
vanaka, with tabasco or with Kala berries. The more effete Earth
preparations didn't rouse the slightest enthusiasm, but the bivalve
found its place in the hearts and stomachs of the natives. The oysters
ultimately ran out, but one thing was certain. There was a definite bond
of affection between our two utterly dissimilar species.

The era of good feeling persisted for several hours. There was no more
quiet undertone of polite suffering among our guests. They were enjoying
themselves. The Agreement was signed with hardly an exception being
taken to its clauses and wording.

Niobe became a full member of the Confederation, with sovereign
planetary rights, and the viscaya concentrate began flowing aboard the
ships waiting at the polar bases.

A day later I got orders to start winding up the BEE's installations on
Niobe. The consular service would take over after I had finished....

       *       *       *       *       *

Lanceford looked at his watch. "Well, we're going to have time. It looks
like they'll be late. Want to hear the rest of it?"

"Naturally," Perkins said. "I certainly wouldn't want you to stop here."

"Well," Lanceford continued, "the next four years weren't much."

       *       *       *       *       *

We spent most of the time closing down the outpost and regional
installations, but it took longer than I expected what with the
difficulty in getting shipping space to move anything but viscaya
concentrate off the planet. Of course, like any of the Confederation
bureaus, the BEE died hard. With one thing and another, there were still
a lot of our old people left. We still had the three main bases on the
continental land masses in operating condition, plus a few regional
experiment stations on Alpha Continent and the Marine Biology Labs on
Varnel Island. I'd just closed the last regional stations on Beta and
Gamma when Heinz Bergdorf paid me an official call.

Heinz was the senior biologist on Varnel. He was a good looking lad of
Teutonic ancestry, one of those big blond kids who fool you. He didn't
look like a scientist, but his skull held more knowledge of Niobe's
oceans than was good for a man. He would have to unlearn a lot of it
before he took his next job, or so I thought at the time.

Anyway, Heinz came into my office looking like someone had stolen his
favorite fishnet. The expression of Olympian gloom on his beak-nosed
face would have done credit to Zeus. It didn't take any great amount of
brains to see that Heinz was worried. It stuck out all over him. He
draped himself limply in the chair beside my desk.

"We've got troubles, Chief," he announced.

I grinned at him. I knew perfectly well why he was here. Something had
come up that was too big for him to handle. That was Heinz's only fault,
a belief in the omnipotence of higher authority. If he couldn't handle
it, it was a certainty that I could--even though I knew nothing of
either his specialty or his problems. However, I liked the man. I did my
best to give him the fatherly advice he occasionally needed, although he
would have been better off half the time if he hadn't taken it.

"Well, what's the trouble now?" I asked. "From the look on your face it
must be unpleasant. Or maybe you're just suffering from indigestion."

"It's not indigestion, Chief."

"Well, don't keep me in suspense. Tell me so I can worry too."

I didn't like the way he looked. Of course, I'd been expecting trouble
for the past year. Things had been going far too smoothly.

"Oysters!" Bergdorf said laconically.

"Oysters?"

I looked at him incredulously. Bergdorf sat straight up in his chair and
faced me. There was no humor in his eyes. "For God's sake! You
frightened me for a moment. You're joking, I hope."

"Far from it," Bergdorf replied. "I said oysters and I mean oysters.
It's no joke! Just who was the unutterable idiot who planted them here?"

It took a minute before I remembered. "Hartmann," I said. "Of the BIT.
He ordered them delivered at the request of Kron Avar and Tovan Harl. I
suppose Harl planted them. I never paid very much attention to it."

"You should have. It would have been better if they had imported Bengal
tigers! How long ago did this infernal insanity happen?"

"Right after the Agreement was signed, I guess. I'm sure it was no
earlier than that, because Niobians met up with oysters for the first
time at that affair." I still didn't get it, but there was no doubt that
Heinz was serious. I tried to remember something about oysters, but
other than the fact that they were good to eat and produced pearls I
could think of nothing. Yet Bergdorf looked like the end of the world
was at hand. There was something here that didn't add up. "Well, get on
with it," I said. "As far as marine biology is concerned I'm as innocent
as a Lyranian virgin. Tell me--what's wrong with the oysters?"

"Nothing! That's the trouble. They're nice healthy specimens of
terrestrial _Ostrea lurida_. We found a floating limb with about a dozen
spat clinging to it."

"Spat?"

"Immature oysters."

"Oh. Is that bad?"

"Sure it's bad. I suppose I'd better explain," Bergdorf said. "On Earth
an oyster wouldn't be anything to worry about, even though it produces
somewhere between sixteen and sixty million fertile eggs every year. On
Earth this tremendous fertility is necessary for survival, but here on
Niobe where there are no natural enemies to speak of, it's absolutely
deadly!

"Just take these dozen spat we found. Year after next, they'd be
breeding size, and would produce about three hundred million larvae. If
everything went right, some three years later those three hundred
million would produce _nine thousand trillion_ baby oysters! Can you
image how much territory nine thousand trillion oysters would cover?"

