recalling every sight, sound, smell, feel and taste."

"So what happened earlier than six months that's so important?"

"Probably nothing of great interest," Hardy granted, "but the further
back I go, the more intense is the reality of all my memories. For
instance, right now I can return to the day, hour, minute and second I
went to school for the first time. I can remember the look on the
teacher's face and hear the screams of twenty-six kindergarten kids. I
can smell the freshly oiled floors and the newly painted walls. I can
feel the wart on my mother's finger, the one I was holding onto for dear
life."

The almost fanatic glow in his eager, young face impressed me. Realism
of memory! Could that be the essence of his successful first play? Did
his down-to-earth touch account for _Updraft's_ surprising audience
appeal?

I pleaded, "Don't let me down now, Hillary. I gambled thousands of
dollars on your first play. If you can repeat we'll both enjoy an even
better pay-off. Besides, have you looked into what your taxes will be?"

"Taxes? No, I really haven't, but I'm sure I have enough to last another
year. Sorry, Mr. Crocker. Maybe later, but right at the moment--"

His broad-shouldered, lean athletic form drifted through my door and was
gone.

Two weeks later _Parodisiac_ arrived, typed on fools-cap, uncorrected,
with pencil notations and coffee-spots on it, but it was by-lined,
"Hillary Hardy," and after a single, quick scanning I was overjoyed to
pay the expense of transcribing it to more durable paper. The play was
powerful, witty and emotion-stirring. It was a work of art.

And on the last page was scribbled in the border: "I looked into my tax
bill, and found you were right. I'm almost broke after Uncle Sam takes
his cut, so here is the play you asked for. Hope you like it. (signed)
H. H."

There was a P.S. "Expect to hit _birth_ this week."

When I phoned him at the sanitarium, asking for Sam Buckle, the name he
had left originally with Ellie, he refused to come to the phone. So I
wired him. "Quit worrying about taxes. I accept your earlier offer to be
your agent as well as producer. Good luck on your experiments."

_Parodisiac_ was much too good to hold for the closing of _Updraft_.
Indeed, the first play was showing no signs of weakening, so I began
rounding up talent outside the original cast. This was a cinch. Meredith
Crawley finished Act I, Scene I, and accepted the male lead without
turning another page. So did Alicia Pennington, even though it meant
giving up a personal appearance tour to publicize her latest Hollywood
release that was supposed to win her an Oscar.

Not that I had to go after talent like this to put _Parodisiac_ across.
It was so potent I believe I could have made it a hit with a cast out of
a burleycue revue.

The season was getting late, so I did the unthinkable. I cut normal
rehearsal time in half and slammed it at the big town without even a
trial run in the back-country. Nobody connected with the show
objected--not even Hec Blankenship, my publicity manager. In fact it was
he who suggested the sleeper treatment.

With nothing more than last-minute newspaper notices we opened the
box-office to a completely uninformed public, and did it knock the
critics for a loop! Only a couple showed up for the first performance,
along with less than a third-full house of casual first-nighters.

       *       *       *       *       *

People wandered out stunned. A substitute drama-critic from the _Times_
looked me up after the show, and there were tears of gratitude in his
eyes. "My review of this play will establish my reputation," he told me.
"If the boss had had any notion of what you were pulling, he'd have been
here himself. But what about the author? I thought you were going to
have to call the police when you failed to produce the author."

       *       *       *       *       *

It had been rough. The skimpy crowd had milled about for a half hour
screaming "Author, author!" Meanwhile, I was too choked up after the
last heart-wrenching scene to get up and make a speech.

Everything had gone perfectly. Even the brief rehearsal time failed to
leave any rough edges. Crawley and Pennington were so carried away with
their parts that they easily doubled their considerable dramatic stature
that first performance. The supporting cast caught fire, too, and,
well--the likes of it is rarely seen anywhere.

The lines seemed to come out of the actors' hearts, not their mouths.
Cue-lines blended with the dialogue interplay, the artificiality of
stage-sets, costumery and make-up disappeared, and the simple, yet
profound drama unreeled like a bolt of vividly printed silk, flowing
smoothly, strongly, absorbingly to the tragic-comical climax that left
the emotions reeling from the suspense and warm with relief.

Two days later I looked at the figures on advance ticket sales and could
find only one conceivable complaint. _Parodisiac_ would make Hillary
Hardy so much money that not even taxes could force him to produce
another for a great while.

What promised to be a major irritation, fending off the press from Hardy
and protecting his anonymity, was converted into a master
publicity-stroke by Hec Blankenship. He swore the few of us who knew
about Hardy's youth and whereabouts, to complete secrecy, then he
proceeded to build his publicity around the "mystery-author."

"But he's got a past!" I objected when Hec first presented the scheme.
"Old friends and relatives will spill the beans."

"Have you really looked into Hillary's past?" Hec asked.

