Their drinks came and they watched Marco go through his act in a rather
gloomy silence. Marco was skillful, but not especially unusual. He did
the usual stuff: calling out things that people wrote on slips of paper,
calling out dates on coins, and even engaging in mental duels wherein
the challenger wrote a phrase, concealed it from Marco, and then
deliberately tried to keep him from reading it telepathically. He had
the usual hypnotism session with volunteers who were certain they could
resist. He made them hop around the stage like monkeys, burn their
fingers on pieces of ice, and so on. The audience roared with laughter.
Pell and Ciel just kept staring.

When Marco had finished his act and the thundering applause had faded
the Venusian dancing girls came back on the stage again.

Ciel yawned.

Pell said, "Me, too. Let's get out of here."

It wasn't until they were home in their underground apartment and
getting ready for bed that Ciel turned to him and said, "You see?"

He was buttoning his pajamas. "See what?"

"It's _us_, Dick. It's not the floor show, or the meth, or
anything--it's _us_. We can't enjoy _anything_ together any more."

He said, "Now wait a minute...."

But she had already stepped into the bedroom and slammed the door. He
heard the lock click.

"Hey," he said, "what am I supposed to do, sleep out here?"

He took the ensuing silence to mean that he was.

And he did.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning, as he came into the office, Pell scowled deeply and
went to his desk without saying good morning to anybody. Ciel had kept
herself locked in the bedroom and he had made his own breakfast. How it
was all going to end he didn't know. He had the feeling that she was
working herself up to the decision to leave him. And the real hell of it
was that he couldn't exactly blame her.

"Morning, partner," said a voice above him. He looked up. Way up. Steve
Kronski was built along the general lines of a water buffalo. The usual
battered grin was smeared across his face. "I see we got a new
assignment."

"Oh--did Larkin brief you on it already?"

"Yeah. Before I could get my hat off. Funny set-up, all right. I punched
for basic data before you got in. Hardly any."

"Maybe that means something in itself. Maybe somebody saw to it that the
information never got into the central banks."

The C.I.B. computers could be hooked into the central banks which stored
information on nearly everything and everybody. If you incorporated,
filed for a patent, paid taxes, voted, or just were born, the central
banks had an electronic record of it.

Kronski jerked his thumb toward the computer room. "I punched for names
of Supremist members coupla minutes ago. Thought maybe we could start in
that way."

Pell followed, his mind not really on the job yet. He wasn't at his best
working with the computers, and yet operating them was ninety per cent
of investigation. He supposed he'd get used to it sometime.

Three walls of the big computer room were lined with control racks,
consisting mostly of keyboard setups. Code symbols and index cards were
placed in handy positions. The C.I.B. circuits, of course, were adapted
to the specialized work of investigation. In the memory banks of tubes
and relays there was a master file of all names--aliases and nicknames
included--with which the organization had ever been concerned.
Criminals, witnesses, complaints, everyone. Code numbers linked to the
names showed where data on their owner could be found. A name picked at
random might show that person to have data in the suspect file, the
arrest file, the psychological file, the modus operandi file, and so
forth. Any of the data in these files could be checked, conversely,
against the names.

Kronski walked over to where letter sized cards were flipping from a
slot into a small bin. He said, "Didn't even have to dial in Central
Data for these. Seems we got a lot of Supremist members right in our own
little collection."

Pell picked up one of the cards and examined it idly. Vertical columns
were inscribed along the card, each with a heading, and with further
sub-headed columns. Under the column marked _Modus Operandi_, for
instance, there were subcolumns titled _Person Attacked_, _Property
Attacked_, _How Attacked_, _Means of Attack_, _Object of Attack_, and
_Trademark_. Columns of digits, one to nine, were under each item. If
the digits 3 and 2 were punched under _Trademark_ the number 32 could be
fed into the Operational Data machine and this machine would then give
back the information on a printed slip that number 32 stood for the
trademark of leaving cigar butts at the scene of the crime.

"Got five hundred now," said Kronski. "I'll let a few more run in case
we need alternates."

"Okay," said Pell. "I'll start this batch through the analyzer."

He took the cards across the room to a machine about twenty feet long
and dropped them into the feeder at one end. Channels and rollers ran
along the top of this machine and under them were a series of vertical
slots into which the selected cards could drop. He cleared the previous
setting and ran the pointer to _Constants_. He set the qualitative dial
to 85%. This meant that on the first run the punch hole combinations in
the cards would be scanned and any item common to 85% of the total would
be registered in a relay. Upon the second run the machine would select
the cards with this constant and drop them into a slot corresponding
with that heading. Further scanning, within the slot itself, would pick
out the constant number.

Pell started the rollers whirring.

Kronski came over. He rubbed his battered nose. "Hope we get outside on
this case. I'm gettin' sick o' the office. Haven't been out in weeks."

Pell nodded. Oh, for the life of a C.I.B. man. In teleplays they
cornered desperate criminals in the dark ruins of the ancient cities
topside, and fought it out with freezers. The fact was, although
regulations called for them to carry freezers in their shoulder
holsters, one in a thousand ever got a chance to use them.

Pell said, "Maybe you need a vacation."

"Maybe. Only I keep putting my vacation off. Got a whole month saved up
now."

"Me, too." Pell sighed. Ciel would probably be pacing the floor back
home now, trying to make up her mind. To break it up, or not to break it
up? There would be no difficulty, really: she had been a pretty good
commercial artist before they were married and she wouldn't have any
trouble finding a job again somewhere in World City.

The rollers kept whirring and the cards flipping along with a whispering
sound.

"Wonder what we're looking into these Supremists for?" asked Kronski. "I
always thought they were some kind of harmless crackpots."

"The Chief doesn't think so. Neither does Theodor Rysland." He told
Kronski more about the interview last night.

Presently the machine stopped, clicked several times and began rolling
the other way.

"Well, it found something," said Kronski.

They kept watching. Oh, for the life of a C.I.B. man. Cards began to
drop into one of the slots. The main heading was _Physical_ and the
sub-heading _Medical History_. Pell frowned and said, "Certainly didn't
expect to find a constant in this department." He picked up a few of the
first cards and looked at them, hoping to catch the constant by eye. He
caught it. "What's 445 under this heading?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Kronski said, "I'll find out," and stepped over to the Operational Data
board. He worked it, took the printed slip that came out and called
back: "Record of inoculation."

"That's a funny one."

"Yup. Sure is." Kronski stared at the slip and scratched his neck. "It
must be just any old kind inoculation. If it was special--like typhoid
or tetanus or something--it'd have another digit."

"There must be some other boil-downs, if we could think of them." Pell
was frowning heavily. Some of the other men, used to the machines, could
grab a boil-down out of thin air, run the cards again and get another
significant constant. The machine, however, inhibited Pell. It made him
feel uneasy and stupid whenever he was around it.

"How about location?" suggested Kronski.

Pell shook his head. "I checked a few by eye. All different numbers
under location. Some of 'em come from World City, some from Mars
Landing, some from way out in the sticks. Nothing significant there."

"Maybe what we need is a cup of coffee."

Pell grinned. "Best idea all morning. Come on."

Some minutes later they sat across from each other at a table in the big
cafeteria on the seventy-third level. It was beginning to be crowded now
with personnel from other departments and bureaus. The coffee urge came
for nearly everybody in the government offices at about the same time.
Pell was studying by eye a handful of spare data cards he'd brought
along and Kronski was reading faxpaper clippings from a large manila
envelope marked _Supremist Party_. Just on a vague hunch Pell had
viewplated Central Public Relations and had them send the envelope down
by tube.

"_Prominent Educator Addresses Supremist Rally_," Kronski muttered.
"_Three Spaceport Cargomen Arrested at Supremist Riot. Young Supremists
Form Rocket Club._ Looks like anybody and everybody can be a Supremist.
And his grandmother. Wonder how they do it?"

"Don't know." Pell wasn't really listening.

"And here's a whole town went over to the Supremists. On the moon."

"Uh-huh," said Pell.

Kronski sipped his coffee loudly. A few slender, graceful young men from
World Commerce looked at him distastefully. "Happened just this year.
New Year they all went over. Augea, in the Hercules Mountains. Big
celebration."

Pell looked up and said, "Wait a minute...."

"Wait for what? I'm not goin' anywhere. Not on this swivel-chair of a
job, damn it."

"New Year they all become Supremists. And the last week of December
everybody on the moon gets his inoculations, right?"

"Search me."

"But I know that. I found that out when I was tailing those two gamblers
who had a place on the moon, remember?"

"So it may be a connection." Kronski shrugged.

