gravity--it was Arkalion who first swam through air to the viewport
and pointed out the huge crescent earth, green and gray and brown,
sparkling with patches of dazzling silver-white. "You will observe it
is a crescent," Arkalion had said. "It is closer to the sun than we
are, and off at an angle. As I suspected, our destination is Mars."

       *       *       *       *       *

Then everyone was saying goodbye to earth. Fantastic, it seemed. There
were tears, there was laughter, cursing, promises of return, awkward
verbal comparisons with the crescent moon, vows of faithfulness to
lovers and sweethearts. And there was Arkalion, with an avid
expression in the old eyes, Arkalion with his boyish face, not saying
goodbye so much as he was calling hello to something Temple could not
fathom.

Now, as he struggled awkwardly with weightlessness, Temple called it
his imagination. His thought-patterns shifted vaguely, without
motivation, from the gleaming, polished interior of the ship with its
smell of antiseptic and metal polish to the clear Spring air of Earth,
blue of sky and bright of sun. The unique blue sky of Earth which he
somehow knew could not be duplicated elsewhere. Elsewhere--the word
itself bordered on the meaningless.

And Stephanie. The brief warm ecstasy of her--once, forever. He
wondered with surprising objectivity if a hundred other names, a
hundred other women were not in a hundred other minds while everyone
stared at the crescent Earth hanging serenely in space--with each name
and each woman as dear as Stephanie, with the same combination of fire
and gentle femininity stirring the blood but saddening the heart.
Would Stephanie really forget him? Did he want her to? That part of
him burned by the fire of her said no--no, she must not forget him.
She was his, his alone, roped and branded though a universe separated
them. But someplace in his heart was the thought, the understanding,
the realization that although Stephanie might keep a small place for
him tucked someplace deep in her emotions, she must forget. He was
gone--permanently. For Stephanie, he was dead. It was as he had told
her that last stolen day. It was.... _Stephanie, Stephanie, how much I
love you...._

Struggling with weightlessness, he made his way back to the small room
he shared with Arkalion. Hardly more than a cubicle, it was, with
sufficient room for two beds, a sink, a small chest. He lay down and
slept, murmuring Stephanie's name in his sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

He awoke to the faint hum of the air-pumps, got up feeling rested,
forgot his weightlessness and floated to the ceiling where only an
outthrust arm prevented a nasty bump on his head. He used hand grips
on the wall to let himself down. He washed, aware of no way to prevent
the water he splashed on his face from forming fine droplets and
spraying the entire room. When he crossed back to the foot of his bed
to get his towel he thrust one foot out too rapidly, lost his balance,
half-rose, stumbled and fell against the other bed which, like all
other items of furniture, was fastened to the floor. But his elbow
struck sleeping Arkalion's jaw sharply, hard enough to jar the man's
teeth.

"I'm sorry," said Temple. "Didn't mean to do that," he apologized
again, feeling embarrassed.

Arkalion merely lay there.

"I said I'm sorry."

Arkalion still slept. It seemed inconceivable, for Temple's elbow
pained him considerably. He bent down, examined his inert companion.

Arkalion stirred not a muscle.

Vaguely alarmed, Temple thrust a hand to Arkalion's chest, felt
nothing. He crouched, rested the side of his head over Arkalion's
heart. He listened, heard--nothing.

What was going on here?

"Hey, Arkalion!" Temple shook him, gently at first, then with savage
force. Weightless, Arkalion's body floated up off the bed, taking the
covers with it. His own heart pounding furiously, Temple got it down
again, fingered the left wrist and swallowed nervously.

Temple had never seen a dead man before. Arkalion's heart did not
beat. Arkalion had no pulse.

Arkalion was dead.

Yelling hoarsely, Temple plunged from the room, soaring off the floor
in his haste and striking his head against the ceiling hard enough to
make him see stars. "This guy is dead!" he cried. "Arkalion is dead."

Men stirred in the companionway. Someone called for one of the armed
guards who were constantly on patrol.

"If he's dead, you're yelling loud enough to get him out of his
grave." The voice was quiet, amused.

Arkalion.

"What?" Temple blurted, whirling around and striking his head again. A
little wild-eyed, he reentered the room.

"Now, who is dead, Kit?" demanded Arkalion, sitting up and stretching
comfortably.

"Who--is dead? Who--?" Open-mouthed, Temple stared.

       *       *       *       *       *

A guard, completely at home with weightlessness, entered the cubicle
briskly. "What's the trouble in here? Something about a dead man, they
said."

"A dead man?" demanded Arkalion. "Indeed."

"Dead?" muttered Temple, lamely and foolishly. "Dead...."

Arkalion smiled deprecatingly. "My friend must have been talking in
his sleep. The only thing dead in here is my appetite. Weightlessness
doesn't let you become very hungry."

"You'll grow used to it," the guard promised. He patted his paunch
happily. "I am. Well, don't raise the alarm unless there's some
trouble. Remember about the boy who cried wolf."

"Of course," said Temple. "Sure. Sorry."

He watched the guard depart.

"Bad dream?" Arkalion wanted to know.

"Bad dream, my foot. I accidentally hit you. Hard enough to hurt. You
didn't move."

"I'm a sound sleeper."

"I felt for your heart. It wasn't beating. It wasn't!"

"Oh, come, come."

"Your heart was not beating, I said."

"And I suppose I was cold as a slab of ice?"

"Umm, no. I don't remember. Maybe you were. You had no pulse, either."

Arkalion laughed easily. "And am I still dead?"

"Well--"

"Clearly a case of overwrought nerves and a highly keyed imagination.
What you need is some more sleep."

"I'm not sleepy, thanks."

"Well, I think I'll get up and go down for breakfast." Arkalion
climbed out of bed gingerly, made his way to the sink and was soon
gargling with a bottle of prepared mouthwash, occasionally spraying
weightless droplets of the pink liquid up at the ceiling.

Temple lit a cigarette with shaking fingers, made his way to
Arkalion's bed while the man hummed tunelessly at the sink. Temple let
his hands fall on the sheet. It was not cold, but comfortably cool.
Hardly as warm as it should have been, with a man sleeping on it all
night.

Was he still imagining things?

"I'm glad you didn't call for a burial detail and have me expelled
into space with yesterday's garbage," Arkalion called over his
shoulder jauntily as he went outside for some breakfast.

Temple cursed softly and lit another cigarette, dropping the first one
into a disposal chute on the wall.

       *       *       *       *       *

Every night thereafter, Temple made it a point to remain awake after
Arkalion apparently had fallen asleep. But if he were seeking
repetition of the peculiar occurrence, he was disappointed. Not only
did Arkalion sleep soundly and through the night, but he snored.
Loudly and clearly, a wheezing snore.

Arkalion's strange feat--or his own overwrought imagination, Temple
thought wryly--was good for one thing: it took his mind off Stephanie.
The days wore on in endless, monotonous routine. He took some books
from the ship's library and browsed through them, even managing to
find one concerned with traumatic catalepsy, which stated that a
severe emotional shock might render one into a deep enough trance to
have a layman mistakenly pronounce him dead. But what had been the
severe emotional disturbance for Arkalion? Could the effects of
weightlessness manifest themselves in that way in rare instances?
Temple naturally did not know, but he resolved to find out if he could
after reaching their destination.

One day--it was three weeks after they left the space station, Temple
realized--they were all called to assembly in the ship's large main
lounge. As the men drifted in, Temple was amazed to see the progress
they had made with weightlessness. He himself had advanced to handy
facility in locomotion, but it struck him all the more pointedly when
he saw two hundred men swim and float through air, pushing themselves
along by means of the hand-holds strategically placed along the walls.

The ever-present microphone greeted them all. "Good afternoon, men."

"Good afternoon, mac!"

"Hey, is this the way to Ebbetts' Field?"

"Get on with it!"

"Sounds like the same man who addressed us in White Sands," Temple
told Arkalion. "He sure does get around."

"A recording, probably. Listen."

"Our destination, as you've probably read in newspapers and magazines,
is the planet Mars."

Mutterings in the assembly, not many of surprise.

"Their suppositions, based both on the seven hundred eighty day lapse
between Nowhere Journeys and the romantic position in which the planet
Mars has always been held, are correct. We are going to Mars.

"For most of you, Mars will be a permanent home for many years to
come--"

"Most of us?" Temple wondered out loud.

Arkalion raised a finger to his lips for silence.

"--until such time as you are rotated according to the policy of
rotation set up by the government."

Temple had grown accustomed to the familiar hoots and catcalls. He
almost had an urge to join in himself.

"Interesting," Arkalion pointed out. "Back at White Sands they claimed
not to know our destination. They knew it all right--up to a point.
The planet Mars. But now they say that all of us will not remain on
Mars. Most interesting."

"--further indoctrination in our mission soon after our arrival on the
red planet. Landing will be performed under somewhat less strain than
the initial takeoff in the Earth-to-station ferry, since Mars exerts
less of a gravity pull than Earth. On the other hand, you have been
weightless for three weeks and the change-over is liable to make some
of you sick. It will pass harmlessly enough.

"We realize it is difficult, being taken from your homes without
knowing the nature of your urgent mission. All I can tell you
now--and, as a matter of fact, all I know--"

"Here we go again," said Temple. "More riddles."

"--is that everything _is_ of the utmost urgency. Our entire way of
life is at stake. Our job will be to safeguard it. In the months which
follow, few of you will have any big, significant role to play, but
all of you, working together, will provide the strength we need. When
the _cadre_--"

"So they call their guards teachers," Arkalion commented dryly.

"--come around, they will see that each man is strapped properly into
his bunk for deceleration. Deceleration begins in twenty-seven
minutes."

_Mars_, thought Temple, back in his room with Arkalion. _Mars._ He did
not think of Stephanie, except as a man who knows he must spend the
rest of his life in prison might think of a lush green field, or the
cool swish of skis over fresh, powdery snow, or the sound of yardarms
creaking against the wind on a small sailing schooner, or the tang of
wieners roasting over an open fire with the crisp air of fall against
your back, or the scent of good French brandy, or a woman.

Deceleration began promptly. Before his face was distorted and his
eyes forced shut by a pressure of four gravities, Temple had time to
see the look of complete unconcern on Arkalion's face. Arkalion, in
fact, was sleeping.

He seemed as completely relaxed as he did that morning Temple thought
he was dead.



CHAPTER IV

"Petrovitch, S. A.!" called the Comrade standing abreast of the head
of the line, a thin, nervous man half a head shorter than the girl
herself. Sophia Androvna Petrovitch strode forward, took a pair of
trim white shorts from the neat stack at his left.

"Is that all?" she said, looking at him.

"Yes, Comrade. Well, a woman. Well."

Without embarrassment, Sophia had seen the men ahead of her in line
strip and climb into the white shorts before they disappeared through
a portal ahead of the line, depositing their clothing in a growing
pile on the floor. But now it was Sophia's turn, after almost a two
hour wait. Not that it was chilly, but....

"Is that all?" she repeated.

"Certainly. Strip and move along, Comrade." The nervous little man
appraised her lecherously, she thought.

"Then I must keep some of my own clothing," she told him.

"Impossible. I have my orders."

"I am a woman."

"You are a volunteer for the Stalintrek. You will take no personal
property--no clothing--with you. Strip and advance, please."

Sophia flushed slightly, while the men behind her began to call and
taunt.

"I like this Stalintrek."

"Oh, yes."

"We are waiting, Comrade."

Quickly and with an objective detachment which surprised her, Sophia
unbuttoned her shirt, removed it. Her one wish--and an odd one, she
thought, smiling--was for wax for her ears. She loosened the three
snaps of her skirt, watched it fall to the floor. She stood there
briefly, lithe-limbed, a tall, slim girl, then had the white shorts
over her nakedness in one quick motion. She still wore a coarse
halter.

"All personal effects, Comrade," said the nervous little man.

"No," Sophia told him.

"But yes. Definitely, yes. You hold up the line, and we have a
schedule to maintain. The Stalintrek demands quick, prompt obedience."

"Then you will give me one additional item of clothing."

The man looked at Sophia's halter, at the fine way she filled it. He
shrugged. "We don't have it," he said, clearly enjoying himself.

In volunteering for the Stalintrek, Sophia had invaded man's domain.
She had watched not with embarrassment but with scorn while the men in
front of her got out of their clothing. She had invaded man's domain,
and as she watched them, the short, flabby ones, the bony ones with
protruding ribs and collar-bones, those of milky white skin and soft
hands, she knew most of them would bite off more than they could chew
if ever they tried what was the most natural thing for men to try with
a lone woman in an isolated environment. But she _was_ in a man's
world now, and if that was the way they wanted it, she would ask no
quarter.

She reached up quickly with one hand and unfastened the halter,
catching it with her free hand and holding it in front of her breasts
while the nervous little man licked his lips and gaped. Sophia grabbed
another pair of the white shorts, tore it quickly with her strong
fingers, fashioning a crude covering for herself. This she pulled
around her, fastening it securely with a knot in back.

"You'll have to give that back to me," declared the nervous little
Comrade.

"I'll bet you a samovar on that," Sophia said quietly, so only the man
heard her.

He reached out, as if to rip the crude halter from her body, but
Sophia met him half-way with her strong, slim fingers, wrapping them
around his biceps and squeezing. The man's face turned quickly to
white as he tried unsuccessfully to free his arm.

"Please, that hurts."

"I keep what I am wearing." She tightened her grip, but gazed serenely
into space as the man stifled a whimper.

"Well--" the man whispered indecisively as he gritted his teeth.

"Fool!" said Sophia. "Your arm will be black and blue for a week.
While you men grow soft and lazy, many of the women take their
gymnastics seriously, especially if they want to keep their figures
with the work they must do and the food they must eat. I am stronger
than you and I will hurt you unless--" And her hand tightened around
his scrawny arm until her knuckles showed white.

"Wear what you have and go," the man pleaded, and moaned softly when
Sophia released his numb arm and strode through the portal, still
drawing whistles and leers from the other men, who missed the by-play
completely.

       *       *       *       *       *

"So we're on Mars!"

"It ain't Nowhere after all, it's Mars."

"Wait and see, buster. Wait and see."

"Kind of cold, isn't it? Well, if this was Venus and some of them
beautiful one-armed dames was waiting for us--"

"That's just a statue, stupid."

"Lookit all them people down there, will you?"

"You think they're Martians?"

"Stupid! We ain't the first ones went on the Nowhere Journey."

"What are we waiting for? It sure will feel good to stretch your
legs."

"Let's go!"

"Look out, Mars, here I come!"

It would have been just right for a Hollywood epic, Temple thought.
The rusty ochre emptiness spreading out toward the horizon in all
directions, spotted occasionally with pale green and frosty white, the
sky gray with but a shade of blue in it, distant gusts of Martian wind
swirling ochre clouds across the desert, the spaceship poised on its
ungainly bottom, a great silver bowling ball with rocket tubes for
finger holes, and the Martians from Earth who had been here on this
alien world for seven-hundred-eighty days or twice seven-eighty or
three times, and who fought in frenzied eagerness, like savages, to
reach the descending gangplank first.

Earth chorus: Hey, Martians, any of you guys speak English? Hah-ha, I
said, any of you guys....

Where are all them canals I heard so much about?

You think maybe they're dangerous? (Laughter)

No dames. Hey, no dames....

Who were you expecting, Donna Daunley?

What kind of place is Mars with no women?

What do they do here, anyway, just sit around and wait for the next
rocket?

I'm cold.

Get used to it, brother, get used to it.

Look out, Mars, here I come!

Martian chorus: Who won the Series last year, Detroit?

Hey, bud, tell me, are dames still wearing those one piece things, all
colors, so you see their legs up to about here and their chests down
to about here? (Gestures lewdly)

Which one of you guys can tell me what it's like to take a bath? I
mean a real bath in a real bath tub.

Hey, we licked Russia yet?

We heard they were gonna send some dames!

Dames--ha-ha, you're breaking my heart.

Tell me what a steak tastes like. So thick.

Me? Gimme a bowl of steamed oysters. And a dame.

Dames. Girls. Women. Females. Chicks. Tomatoes. Frails. Dames. Dames.
Dames....

They did not seem to mind the cold, these Earth-Martians. Temple
guessed they never spent much time out of doors (above ground, for
there were no buildings?) because all seemed pale and white. While the
sun was weaker, so was the protection offered by a thinner atmosphere.
The sun's actinic rays could burn, and so could the sand-driving wind.
But pale skins could not be the result of staying indoors, for Temple
noted the lack of man-made structures at once. Underground, then. The
Earth-Martians lived underground like moles. Doing what? And for what
reason? With what ultimate goal, if any? And where did those men who
did not remain on Mars go? Temple's head whirled with countless
questions--and no answers.

Shoulder to shoulder with Arkalion, he made his way down the
gangplank, turning up the collar of his jumper against the stinging
wind.

"You got any newspapers, pal?"

"Magazines?"

"Phonograph records?"

"Gossip?"

"Newsfilm?"

"Who's the heavyweight champ?"

"We lick those Commies in Burma yet?"

"Step back! Watch that man. Maybe he's your replacement."

"Replacement. Ha-ha. That's good."

All types of men. All ages. In torn, tattered clothing, mostly. In
rags. Even if a man seemed more well-groomed than the rest, on closer
examination Temple could see the careful stitching, the patches, the
fades and stains. No one seemed to mind.

"Hey, bud. What do you hear about rotation? They passed any laws yet?"

"I been here ten years. When do _I_ get rotated?"

"Ain't that something? Dad Jenks came here with the first ship. Don't
you talk about rotation. Ask Dad."

"Better not mention that word to Dad Jenks. He sees red."
