I strove to quiet him down. "Never mind, Bag Ears--"

But Joy evinced great interest. "Tell me--"

"Babe--the kid could be the next heavyweight champ in a breeze. I mind
me one night a monkey comes into the tavern rodded--"

Joy held up a hand. "Just a moment. I don't like to appear stupid,
but--"

"A moke wid a heater--a goon wid a gat."

"Oh--you mean a man with a gun."

"Sure--that's what I said. Anyhow, this droolie makes a crack about
Tessie's beak--"

"An insult relative to her nose?"

"Sure--sure. And Tessie's hot to kiss him wid a bottle when he pulls the
iron."

"Imagine that," Joy said, and I felt a slight shiver go through her
body.

"Then Homer here, gets off his stool and says very polite-like, 'That
remark, sir, was in bad taste and entirely uncalled-for. I believe an
apology is in order.' And the monkey standing there with the gat in his
mitt. What Homer meant was the jerk'd cracked out o' turn and to eat his
words fast."

"I gathered that was what he meant."

"But the screwball raises the hardware and--wham--Homer hits him. What a
sock! The goon back-pedals across the room and into a cardboard wall
next to the door marked 'ladies'. He busts right through the wall and
lands in a frail's lap inside who's--"

"Powdering her nose?"

"That's right! What a sock!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Joy's eyes were upon mine.

"Darling! I didn't have the least idea. Why, it's going to be wonderful!
Never a dull moment!"

I kissed my bride, after which she said, "I think I could do with a
drink, sweetheart."

"Your wish is my command."

I got up and started toward the liquor supply inside the house. Joy's
soft call stopped me.

"What is it, angel?" I inquired.

"Not just a drink, sweet. Bring the bottle."

I went into the kitchen and got a bottle of brandy. But upon returning,
I discovered I'd neglected to bring glasses.

But Joy took the bottle from me in a rather dazed manner, knocked off
the neck against a leg of the bench and tipped the bottle to her
beautiful lips. She took a pull of brandy large enough to ward off the
worst case of pneumonia and then passed the bottle to Bag Ears.

"Drink hearty, pal," she murmured, and sort of sank down into herself.

I never got my turn at the bottle because, just at that moment, Aunt
Gretchen came sailing like a pink cloud along the conservatory walk. She
was no longer the old familiar Aunt Gretchen. Her eyes were glazed and
her face was drawn and weary.

Bag Ears looked up politely and asked, "Who's the fat sack?"

I was hoping Aunt Gretchen hadn't heard the question because she would
fail to understand that while his words were uncouth, he had a heart of
gold and meant well. And I don't think she _did_ hear him. She didn't
even hear Joy, who replied,

"That's the dame that owns the joint."

Aunt Gretchen fixed her accusing eyes upon me to the exclusion of
everyone else. Her button of a chin quivered. "Please understand,
Homer--I'm not criticizing. Things have gotten past that stage. I've
merely come to report that the house is filling up with an astounding
assortment of characters. Johnson resigned a half-hour ago. But before
he left, he suggested a man who could handle the situation far better
than he himself. A man named Frank Buck."

"But, my dear aunt," I protested. "There must be some mistake. I did not
invite any unusual people to this reception. I issued only three
invitations. I invited Willie Shank, who could not come because of a
dispute with the police over the ownership of a car he was driving
yesterday; John Smith, who could not come because this is the day he
reports to the parole board, and my good friend Bag Ears Mulligan."

"How did you happen to overlook Red Nose Tessie?" Joy asked.

"The poor woman is emotional. She does not enjoy wedding receptions. She
weeps."

"So does Aunt Gretchen," Joy observed.

Aunt Gretchen was indeed weeping--quietly, under the blanket of reserve
with which the Nicholases cover their emotions. I was about to comfort
her when she turned and fled. I started to run after her but decided
against it and returned to Joy.

"Perhaps," I said, "we had better investigate this strange turn of
events. Possibly our reception has been crashed by some undesirable
persons."

"Impossible," Joy replied. "But it might be fun to look them over. Shall
we have a quick one first--just to stiffen the old spine a bit?"

It sounded like a good suggestion so we stiffened our spines with what
was left in the bottle, and quitted the conservatory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back in the house, one thing became swiftly apparent. We had guests who
were utter strangers to me. But it was Bag Ears who summed up the
situation with the briefest possible statement. "Jees!" he ejaculated.
"It's a crooks' convention!"

"You can identify some of these intruders?"

"If you mean do I know 'em, the answer is without a doubt, pal. Somehow,
the whole Cement Mixer Zinsky mob has infiltered into the joint."

"Cement Mixer Zinsky," Joy murmured. "Another of those odd names."

"It's on account of he invented something. Zinsky was the first gee to
think up a very novel way of getting rid of people that crowd you. He
got the idea to mix up a tub of cement--place the unwanted character's
feet in same and then throw the whole thing into the lake. Result--no
more crowding by that guy."

"He was the first one who thought of it? A sort of trail blazer."

"Of course Cement Mixer is a big shot now and his boys take care of
things like that. But sometimes he goes along to mix the cement--just to
keep his hand in you might say."

"A sentimentalist no doubt."

"No doubt," Bag Ears agreed.

I patted Joy's hand and said, "Don't be alarmed, darling. I will take
care of everything."

The situation was definitely obnoxious to me. Tolerance of one's fellow
men is one thing, but this was something entirely different. These
people had come uninvited to our festive board and were of the criminal
element, pure and unadulterated by any instincts of honesty or decency.
And it made me angry to see them wading into Aunt Gretchen's liquor
supply as though the stuff came out of a pump.

They were easy to count, these hoodlums, segregated as they were. The
more respectable of the guests who had not already left, were clustered
together in one corner of the living room, possibly as a gesture toward
self-protection. None of these elite were making any effort to approach
the buffet or the portable bar at the other side of the room. And in
thus refraining, they showed a superior brand of intelligence. Under
present circumstances any attempt to reach the refreshments would have
been as dangerous as crossing the Hialeah race track on crutches.

In fact, as I surveyed the scene, one brave lady made a half-hearted
attempt to cross over and spear a sandwich off the corner of the buffet.
She was promptly shoved out of range by a lean, hungry-looking customer
in a pink shirt, who snarled, "Scram, Three Chins! You're overfed now."

Unhooking Joy's dear fingers from my arm, I said, "You will pardon me,
but it is time for action. Bag Ears will see that you are not harmed."

I started toward the buffet, or rather toward the crowd of male and
female hoodlums who completely blocked it from my sight. But Bag Ears
snatched me by the sleeve and whispered,

"For cri-yi, Homer! Don't be a fool! This mob is loaded wid hardware.
They don't horse around none. Start slugging and they'll dress you in
red polka dots. Better call in some law."

I shook my head firmly and pulled Bag Ears' hand from my sleeve. But,
his attention now turned in another direction, he held on even harder
and muttered,

"Jeeps! I'm seeing things!"

