tribesmen quite well."

"You mean you know what makes 'em tick?" Majesky asked.

"Yes, I think I can safely say I do," Bruckner said modestly. "Their
culture pattern is based on a long history of tribal conflict. And, for
a tribe to prosper, they must have a strong as well as resourceful
leader. Thus the splendid dress of their chieftain this morning, in
contrast to the drabness of the ordinary tribal dress. He must be, very
apparently, a man above the common tribesmen to hold their respect.

"And that," Bruckner added, "was the reason for our little act this
morning. The best way to impress them with our power is to display the
magnificence of our leader. The better we can keep them convinced of my
greatness, the less risk there will be of trouble."

       *       *       *       *       *

Big Stupe--someone gave their pet the name the first five minutes and it
stuck--had the run of the ship. Individually and in groups, the crew
took turns amusing themselves with him. And Big Stupe accepted
everything they did very seriously and loved the attention. He was
definitely a gregarious animal.

And his name fitted perfectly. His gullibility and invariable stupidity
seemed to have no limits. He fell for the same practical jokes over and
over again. He was clumsy and stumbled over furniture, loose objects and
even his own feet.

[Illustration]

He would eat anything. If what he swallowed proved indigestible, he
would stand for a minute with an astounded expression on his hairy face
and then whatever he had eaten would come rolling up. He eagerly gulped
down the same rubber ball a dozen times in the space of ten minutes.
Whenever spoken to, he replied promptly, in his incredible squawking
bray. A "hello," by one of the crew, with an answering bray from Big
Stupe, was always good for a laugh.

Big Stupe had a fear of loud noises and pulled a variation of the
ostrich-head-in-hole routine, at every unexpected loud sound, of turning
his back to whatever had frightened him and peering cautiously back
under a flipper. If a tail feather was pulled, he'd make a determined
and prolonged effort to run straight through the ship's wall, flapping
and treadmilling and skidding and pushing his beak against it.

Another of his tricks was the dispensing of pebbles--which he seemed to
consider very valuable gifts--from his marsupial pouch to the crew
members who took his fancy.

Sweets often wondered how an animal with so little common intelligence
had survived the evolutionary process. He could spot no counterbalancing
ability or survival characteristic. But somehow the species had escaped
extinction.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the second day, Bruckner sent Sweets and Teller, the head engineer,
to the chief with a present and samples of rare ores. Sweets' duties, on
the trip out, had included the learning of the native language.

The sun was hot and Sweets wore only his shoes, trousers and a T shirt.
It seemed absurd that a sun that appeared no larger than an egg should
be so hot. But he knew it generated all that heat because it was a blue
sun and not one of the ordinary yellow-white type, as it appeared. The
deceptive appearance was caused by the heavy atmosphere that held out
the ultraviolet and the heat and light came in on the yellow band. Last
night, the darkness had had a dim violet haze.

The interview with Chief Faffin went quite smoothly. He received the
Earthmen with great cordiality and Sweets was certain that he detected
in the chieftain's manner more than mere courtesy. He seemed to have a
genuine liking for them. He accepted gravely the gyroscope top which
Bruckner had sent and agreed, without argument or reservations, to send
his men in search of the ores that matched the samples Sweets showed
him.

He would be happy to assist his friends, the _Lacigule_, the chief said.
_Lacigule_ was the natives' name for the Earthmen, used in both the
singular and the plural.

The same afternoon, a dozen natives brought samples of ores to the ship.
At Bruckner's orders, Sweets gave each native a comb from the ship's
supply of trading goods.

During the evening, Teller and his men set up a portable mass
spectograph separator at the mine site and, three days later, they had
the hold of the ship two-thirds full.

