mechanism had caused it to rise again during the night, Elvin would have
found the gaping hole the point of the projectile had torn in the earth.
But there was nothing. Not a furrow in the ploughed field was disturbed.

Visibly amused, Matt Henderson departed, repeating his formula about
brands of liquor. This time, Elvin thought, the reporter actually
believed it. Elvin walked back to the ranch. He was very angry; but,
more than that, he was coldly afraid--and he had no idea what he was
afraid of.

The Schermerhorn twins stopped him as he crossed the driveway.

"You sure made us bite on that one, Mr. Elvin," Donald said good
naturedly.

"Yeah," David added. "All the kids came over early this morning to see
your rocket."

"I guest we deserve it, though," Donald went on philosophically, "for
pulling that deal on you in class last week."

       *       *       *       *       *

Gary Elvin went up to his room in a daze and sat staring at the bottle
of colored spheres. It seemed entirely clear what had happened last
night; yet, conceivably, the rocket could have been an hallucination. If
so, it was because of the grinding frustrations of his job. But Elvin
had a good mind; he did not have to let a bunch of discourteous
rattle-brained kids get him down. David and Donald had given him the
clue: the rocket was simply a practical joke he had played on his class
of tenth graders.

The second step in driving out the "dream" was an appeal to authority.
He must understand the limits of scientific possibility in the use of
rockets. That meant a trip to the library. Although it was four miles to
San Benedicto, Elvin decided to walk; the exercise would help clear his
head.

He entered the library at eleven-thirty, half an hour before the
building was closed for the weekend. It was a good library. The
assessment rate in prosperous San Benedicto was high, and books had been
purchased wisely. In the card catalogue Elvin found listed a number of
up-to-date references that he could use; but there was nothing on the
shelves. Five minutes before closing time, he asked the librarian for
help.

"I don't suppose there's anything in," she answered. "We've had a
perfect run on books all morning."

"You mean everything in the library is out?"

"Everything worthwhile." She beamed. "And most of the borrowers were
your tenth graders, too, Mr. Elvin. You've certainly done a wonderful
job of inspiring that class to do serious reading. Why, do you know
Mabel Travis has been in here three times today? She took out seven
books as soon as the library opened, and she had them back by
nine-thirty. Said she'd read them all, too."

"Seven books in less than two hours?" Elvin laughed.

"I suppose she thought she had. Poor little Mabel! She hasn't much to
work with, you know. But it was her new attitude I liked--so intense, so
serious. And she was doing such heavy reading, too."

Elvin walked back to the Schermerhorn ranch, enjoying the noon-day
warmth. San Benedicto was crowded with Saturday shoppers. He met his
students everywhere, and always they commented on the practical joke he
had played on them. By the time he was back in his room, the fiction of
the joke was thoroughly established in his own mind. He almost believed
it himself.

He glanced again at the transparent cylinder of spheres. A chemist might
be able to analyze the contents and say where the jar had originated.
Perhaps Miss Gerkin could do it. She had taught science for more than
twenty years at San Benedicto High. Yet Elvin knew he couldn't ask her
for help. If the colored balls turned out to be nothing more than hard
candy, then by inescapable logic he would have to accept the fact that
he was suffering from a major hallucination. It was more comfortable not
to know the truth.

The idea of candy, however, brought up another association. Mrs.
Schermerhorn had said that earlier in the evening Bill Blake had won a
jar of candy as a prize. Bill Blake was the prize joker of the tenth
grade. Elvin had what seemed to be an intuitive flash of understanding.
The rocket had been a joke, all right, but it had been aimed at Elvin.
The kids had rigged it up before he came home from the show. During the
night they had come back and taken the stage setting away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Elvin spent the rest of the weekend planning his revenge. He didn't
think of it as that, but rather disciplinary action. Yet he knew the
class would get the point and possibly even heed the implied warning. In
five years Elvin had reduced the complex process of teaching to one
workable rule: break the class, or the kids will break you.

Now he chose the classical cat-whip of a surprise test to crack them
back into line. He spent Sunday planning it and duplicating the pages.
He was scrupulously careful to be fair--at least as he defined the term.
The examination covered nothing that had not been discussed in class.
But Elvin taught grammar, and no field of the abstract allows such
devious application of the flimsy nonsense passing for rules.

On Monday morning, with a thin smile, Elvin was ready for them. He had
tenth grade English first period. As he passed out the mimeographed
pages, he waited for waves of groaning to sweep the room. Nothing
happened. He felt an annoying pang of anger. A hand shot up.

"Yes, Charles?" he snapped.

"If we finish before the end of the period, can we have free reading?"

"I doubt you'll finish, Charles. This test is ten pages long."

"But if we do--"

"By all means, yes."

Gary Elvin leaned back in his chair and surveyed, with satisfaction, the
thirty heads bent studiously over their desks. For perhaps five minutes
the idyll lasted, until Donald Schermerhorn brought his test up to the
desk and asked permission to go to the library. Elvin was both amazed
and disappointed; but at once he reassured himself. The test had been
simply too hard for Donald.

Nonetheless, as soon as Donald was out of the room, Elvin checked his
examination against the key. As he turned through the pages, his fingers
began to tremble. Donald had answered everything--and answered it
correctly. Before Elvin had finished checking Donald's test, ten more
students had left theirs on the desk and headed for the school library.

Within ten minutes Elvin was fighting a disorganizing bewilderment far
worse than the rocket-hallucination. Every examination was completed,
and none that he checked had as much as one mistake. Elvin wished he
could believe that whole-sale cheating had taken place, but he knew that
was impossible because of the precautions he always took.

       *       *       *       *       *

All of the tenth graders were back from the library by that time. They
had each brought two or more books. Elvin's body went rigid with anger
when he saw what was currently passing among them for the skill of
reading. They were methodically turning pages almost as quickly as they
could move their hands from one side of the books to the other, all with
the appearance of engrossed attention.

Elvin banged a ruler on his desk. One or two faces looked up. "This has
gone far enough!" he cried. "You asked for the privilege of free
reading, but I do not intend you to make a farce of it." A hand went up.
"Yes, Marilyn?"

"But we are reading, Mr. Elvin. Honestly."

"Oh, I see." His voice was thickly sarcastic. "And what's the title of
your book?"

"Toynbee's _Study of History_."

"You've given up Grace Livingston Hill? Could you summarize Toynbee for
us, Marilyn?"

"In another ten minutes, Mr. Elvin. I still have sixty pages to read."

Elvin turned savagely to another girl. "Mabel Travis! What are you
reading?"

The buxom girl looked up languidly. For a split second her big eyes
seemed focused on a distant prospective. "Why--why this, Mr. Elvin." She
