getting away. Circumstances were in his favor.

He could get so far away that they would never find him.

It was simple. Get off Triton on a spaceship. Go anyplace that had a big
spaceport, and manage to tranship out in secret. Then all the police
would have to search would be a few quadrillion square miles of space!

But first he had to leave Triton.

From the activity at the port, he could see that three ships were being
made ready for blastoff. Two of them were purely cargo-carriers, but the
third--Bartock could tell because he saw hand-luggage being
loaded--would carry passengers. His instinct for survival must have been
working overtime: he knew that the third ship would be his best bet, for
if he were discovered and pursued, hostages might make the difference
between recapture and freedom.

Bartock waited patiently in the darkness outside the pilot-barracks. The
only problem was, how to discover which pilot belonged to which ship?

The cordon of police from Interstelpen had set up several score
arc-lights on the perimeter of the field. The spaces between the lights
were patrolled by guards armed, as Bartock was, with blasters. Bartock
could never have made it through that cordon now. But it wasn't
necessary. He was already inside.

The barracks door opened, and a pilot came out. Tensing, ready, Bartock
watched him.

The three ships were scattered widely on the field, _Venus Bell_ to the
north, _Star of Hercules_ to the south, _Mozart's Lady_ to the east.
_Venus Bell_ and _Star of Hercules_ were straight cargo carriers.
_Mozart's Lady_--what a queer name for a spaceship, Bartock couldn't
help thinking--had taken in hand luggage. So if the pilot who had just
left the barracks headed east, Bartock would take him. The pilot paused
outside, lit a cigarette, hummed a tune. The scent of tobacco drifted
over to Bartock. He waited.

The pilot walked east toward _Mozart's Lady_.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Ready, girls?"

"Ready, Mrs. Moriarity. But couldn't we--well--sort of hang around until
we see what happens?"

"You mean the escaped convict?"

"Yes, ma'am." Hopefully.

"They'll catch him. They always catch them."

"But--"

"Come on."

"Aw, gosh, Mrs. Moriarity."

"I said, come on."

Reluctantly, the hundred girls trooped with their chaperone from the
hotel.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bartock struck swiftly and without mercy.

The blaster would make too much noise. He turned it around, held it by
the barrel, and broke the pilot's skull with it. In the darkness he
changed clothing for the second time that night, quickly, confidently,
his hands steady. In the darkness he could barely make out the pilot's
manifest. The man's ship was _Mozart's Lady_, all right. Outbound from
Triton City for Mars. Well, Bartock thought, he wouldn't go to Mars.
Assuming they learned what ship he had boarded, they would be guarding
the inner orbits too closely.

He would take _Mozart's Lady_ daringly outward, beyond Neptune's orbit.
Naturally, the ship wouldn't have interstellar drive, but as yet Bartock
wasn't going interstellar. You couldn't have everything. You couldn't
expect a starship on Triton, could you? So Bartock would take _Mozart's
Lady_ outward to Pluto's orbit--and wait. From the amount of hand
luggage taken aboard, _Mozart's Lady_ would be carrying quite a number
of passengers. If that number were reduced--drastically reduced--the
food, water and air aboard would last for many months. Until the fuss
died down. Until Bartock could bring _Mozart's Lady_, long since given
up for lost, in for a landing on one of the inner planets....

Now he dragged the dead pilot's body into the complete darkness on the
south side of the pilot-barracks, wishing he could hide it better but
knowing he didn't have the time or the means.

Then he walked boldly across the tarmac, wearing a pilot's uniform,
toward _Mozart's Lady_.

Fifteen minutes later, House Bartock watched with amazement while a
hundred pretty young women boarded the ship. Of all the things that had
happened since his escape, this came closest to unnerving him, for it
was the totally unexpected. Bartock shrugged, chain-smoked three
cigarettes while the women boarded slowly, taking last-minute looks at
dark Triton, the spaceport, the cordon of guards, the arc-lights.
Bartock cursed impotently. Seconds were precious now. The pilot's body
might be found. If it were....

At last the port clanged shut and the ground-crew tromped away. Since
even an over-age ship like _Mozart's Lady_ was close to ninety percent
automatic, there was no crew. Only the pilot--who was Bartock--and the
passengers.

Bartock was about to set the controls for blastoff when he heard
footsteps clomp-clomping down the companionway. He toyed with the idea
of locking the door, then realized that would arouse suspicion.

A square woman's face over a plump middle-aged figure.

"I'm Mrs. Moriarity, pilot. I have a hundred young girls aboard. We'll
have no nonsense."

"No, sir. I mean, no ma'am."

"Well, make sure."

"Yes, ma'am."

"And I want an easy trip, without fuss or incidents. For half of our
girls it's the second time in space--the first being when they came out
here. You understand?"

"Yes, ma'am."

"What happened to the pilot who took us out?"

"Uh, pressed into service last week on a Mercury run. I'm surprised the
control board didn't tell you."

"They didn't. It doesn't matter. You do your job, and that's all."

"Yes, ma'am," House Bartock said. "Just my job."

A few moments later, _Mozart's Lady_ blasted off.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Stop! Hey, wait!" Pitchblend Hardesty bawled at the top of his voice.
But it didn't do any good. The police rushed up behind Pitchblend, not
daring to fire.
