little from the floor on his elbows.

"Then you'll let her go if I pay you? I'll raise any amount, I'll do
anything you ask, if you'll set her free."

"No amount of money in the world could buy her from the Brotherhood of
the Door," answered Chandra Dass steadily. "For she belongs now, not to
us, but to They Beyond the Door. Within a few hours she and many others
shall stand before the Door, and They Beyond the Door shall take them."

"What are you going to do to her?" cried Ennis. "What is this damned
Door and who are They Beyond it?"

"I do not think that even if I told you, your little mind would be able
to accept the mighty truth," Chandra Dass said calmly. His coal-black
eyes suddenly flashed with fanatic, frenetic light. "How could your
poor, earth-bound little intelligences conceive the true nature of the
Door and of those who dwell beyond it? Your puny brains would be
stricken senseless by mere apprehension of them, They who are mighty and
crafty and dreadful beyond anything on earth."

A cold wind from the alien unknown seemed to sweep the lamplit room with
the Hindoo's passionate words. Then that rapt, fanatic exaltation
dropped from him as suddenly as it had come, and he spoke in his
ordinary vibrant tones.

"But enough of this parley with blind worms of the dust. Bring the
weights!"

The last words were addressed to the Malay servants, who sprang to a
closet in the corner of the room.

Inspector Campbell said steadily, "If my men find us dead when they come
in here, they'll leave none of you living."

       *       *       *       *       *

Chandra Dass did not even listen to him, but ordered the dark servants
sharply, "Attach the weights!"

The Malays had brought from the closet two fifty-pound lead balls, and
now they proceeded quickly to tie these to the feet of the two men. Then
one of them rolled back the brilliant red Indian rug from the rough pine
floor. A square trap-door was disclosed, and at Chandra Dass' order, it
was swung upward and open.

Up through the open square came the sound of waves slap-slapping against
the piles of the old pier, and the heavy odors of salt water and of
rotting wood invaded the room.

"The water under this pier is twenty feet deep," Chandra Dass told the
two prisoners. "I regret to give you so easy a death, but there is no
opportunity to take you to the fate you deserve."

Ennis, his skin crawling on his flesh, nevertheless spoke rapidly and as
steadily as possible to the Hindoo.

"Listen, I don't ask you to let me go, but I'll do anything you want,
let you kill me any way you want, if you'll let Ruth----"

Sheer horror cut short his words. The Malay servants had dragged
Campbell's bound body to the door in the floor. They shoved him over the
edge. Ennis had one glimpse of the inspector's taut, strange face
falling out of sight. Then a dull splash sounded instantly below, and
then silence.

He felt hands upon himself, dragging him across the floor. He fought,
crazily, hopelessly, twisting his body in its bonds, thrashing his bound
limbs wildly.

[Illustration: "A shove sent his body scraping over the edge, and he
plunged downward through dank darkness."]

He saw the dark, unmoved face of Chandra Dass, the brass lamp over his
head, the red hangings. Then his head dangled over the opening, a shove
sent his body scraping over the edge, and he plunged downward through
dank darkness. With a splash he hit the icy water and went under. The
heavy weight at his ankles dragged him irresistibly downward.
Instinctively he held his breath as the water rushed upward around him.

His feet struck oozy bottom. His body swayed there, chained by the lead
weight to the bottom. His lungs already were bursting to draw in air,
slow fires seeming to creep through his breast as he held his breath.

Ennis knew that in a moment or two more he would inhale the strangling
waters and die. The thought-picture of Ruth flashed across his
despairing mind, wild with hopeless regret. He could no longer hold his
breath, felt his muscles relaxing against his will, tasted the stinging
salt water at the back of his nose.

Then it was a bursting confusion of swift sensations, the choking water
in his nose and throat, the roaring in his ears. A scroll of flame
unrolled slowly in his brain and a voice shouted there, "You're dying!"
He felt dimly a plucking at his ankles.

Abruptly Ennis' dimming mind was aware that he now was shooting upward
through the water. His head burst into open air and he choked, strangled
and gasped, his tortured lungs gulping the damp, heavy air. He opened
his eyes, and shook the water from them.

He was floating in the darkness at the surface of the water. Someone was
floating beside him, supporting him. Ennis' chin bumped the other's
shoulder, and he heard a familiar voice.

"Easy, now," said Inspector Campbell. "Wait till I cut your hands
loose."

"Campbell!" Ennis choked. "How did you get loose?"

"Never mind that now," the inspector answered. "Don't make any noise, or
they may hear us up there."

Ennis felt a knife-blade slashing the bonds at his wrists. Then, the
inspector's arm helping him, he and his companion paddled weakly through
the darkness under the rotting pier. They bumped against the slimy,
moldering piles, threaded through them toward the side of the pier. The
waves of the flooding tide washed them up and down as Campbell led the
way.

They passed out from under the old pier into the comparative
illumination of the stars. Looking back up, Ennis saw the long, black
mass of the house of Chandra Dass, resting on the black pier, ruddy
light glowing from window-cracks. He collided with something and found
that Campbell had led toward a little floating dock where some skiffs
were moored. They scrambled up onto it from the water, and lay panting
for a few moments.

Campbell had something in his hand, a thin, razor-edged steel blade
several inches long. Its hilt was an ordinary leather shoe-heel.

The inspector turned up one of his feet and Ennis saw that the heel was
missing from that shoe. Carefully Campbell slid the steel blade beneath
the shoe-sole, the heel-hilt sliding into place and seeming merely the
innocent heel of the shoe.

"So that's how you got loose down in the water!" Ennis exclaimed, and
the inspector nodded briefly.

"That trick's done me good service before--even with your hands tied
behind your back you can get out that knife and use it. It was touch and
go, though, whether I could get it out and cut myself loose in the water
in time enough to free you."

Ennis gripped the inspector's shoulder. "Campbell, Ruth is in there! By
heaven, we've found her and now we can get her out!"

"Right!" said the officer grimly. "We'll go around to the front and in
two minutes we'll be in there with my men."

       *       *       *       *       *

They climbed dripping to their feet, and hastened from the little
floating dock up onto the shore, through the darkness to the cobbled
street.

The shabbily disguised men of Inspector Campbell were not now in front
of Chandra Dass' cafe, but lurking in the shadows across the street.
They came running toward Campbell and Ennis.

"All right, we're going in there," Campbell exclaimed in steely tones.
"Get Chandra Dass, whatever you do, but see that his prisoners are not
harmed."

He snapped a word and one of the men handed pistols to him and to Ennis.
Then they leaped toward the door of the Hindoo's cafe, from which still
streamed ruddy light and the babel of many voices.

A kick from Inspector Campbell sent the door flying inward, and they
burst in with guns gleaming wickedly in the ruddy light. Ennis' face was
a quivering mask of desperate resolve.

The motley patrons jumped up with yells of alarm at their entrance. The
hand of a Malay waiter jerked and a thrown knife thudded into the wall
beside them. Ennis yelled as he saw Chandra Dass, his dark face
startled, leaping back with his servants through the black curtains.

He and Campbell drove through the squealing patrons toward the back. The
Malay who had thrown the knife rushed to bar the way, another dagger
uplifted. Campbell's gun coughed and the Malay reeled and stumbled. The
inspector and Ennis threw themselves at the black curtains--and were
dashed back.

They tore aside the black folds. A dull steel door had been lowered
behind them, barring the way to the back rooms. Ennis beat crazily upon
it with his pistol-butt, but it remained immovable.

"No use--we can't break that down!" yelled Campbell, over the uproar.
"Outside, and around to the other end of the building!"

They burst back out through that mad-house, into the dark of the street.
They started along the side of the pier toward the river-end, edging
forward on a narrow ledge but inches wide. As they reached the back of
the building, Ennis shouted and pointed to dark figures at the end of
the pier. There were two of them, lowering shapeless, wrapped forms over
the end of the pier.

"There they are!" he cried. "They've got their prisoners out there with
them."

Campbell's pistol leveled, but Ennis swiftly struck it up. "No, you
might hit Ruth."

He and the inspector bounded forward along the pier. Fire streaked from
the dark ahead and bullets thumped the rotting boards around them.

Suddenly the loud roar of an accelerated motor drowned out all other
sounds. It came from the river at the pier's end.

Campbell and Ennis reached the end in time to see a long, powerful, gray
motor-boat dash out into the black obscurity of the river, and roar
eastward with gathering speed.
