eyes. She turned slowly, with her gold-link purse casually held in her
left hand; turned so that she made a complete, leisurely circle, as
though searching for someone. Then, with her red lips still shaped in a
smile, she faced the table again.

The croupier spun the wheel, snapped the ball into it. The eight players
leaned to watch it....

And in that position they remained. There was no movement of any sort
from any one of them. It was as though they had been frozen to blocks of
ice by a sudden blast of the cold of outer space; or as though a motion
picture had been stopped on its reel so that abruptly it became a
still-life, with all the actors in mid-move and with half-formed
expressions on their faces.

A tall blond girl was bent far over the table, with her left hand
hovering over her bet, on number twenty-nine. Beside her a man had a
cigarette in his lips and a lighter in his left hand which he had been
about to flick. Two other men were half facing each other with the lips
of one parted for a remark he had begun to make. The rest of the eight
were gazing at the wheel with arms hanging beside them.

And exactly in these positions they remained, for minute after minute.

During that time Madame Sin looked at them; and her smile now was a
thing to chill the blood. You couldn't have told why. Her face was as
serene-looking as ever, and there were no tangible lines of cruelty in
evidence in her face. Yet she looked like a she-fiend as she stared
around.

She walked to the croupier, who stood gazing at his wheel, with his
mouth open in the beginning of a yawn.

Down the hall came the clang of elevator doors, and the sound of
laughter and voices. Madame Sin glided toward the door. There she
paused, then went purposefully back to the table. She went swiftly from
one to another of the frozen, stark figures in their life-like but
utterly rigid positions, then back to the door.

Smiling, she left the room, passing five or six people who were about to
enter it for a little gambling. She was almost to the elevator shafts
when she heard a woman's scream knife the air, followed by a man's
hoarse shout that expressed almost as much horror as the scream had
done.

Still smiling, utterly composed, she stepped into an elevator--and the
elevator boy shivered a bit as he stared at her. He had not heard the
scream, did not know that anything was wrong. He only knew that
something in this lovely woman's smile sent cold fingers up and down his
spine.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a grim, white-faced trio that sat in the conference room of the
Blue Bay Hotel at eleven next morning.

Chichester nor Gest nor Kroner--none had had a moment's sleep all night.
They had been in Doctor Grays' suite with Weems when a shivering man--a
well-known young clubman, too, which was unfortunate--stumbled up to
tell of the dreadful thing to be seen in the roulette room.

With horror mounting in their breasts, half knowing already what they
would see, the three had gone there.

Nine more, counting the croupier, in a state like that which Weems was
in! Nine more people with all life, all movement, arrested in
mid-motion! Ten now with some kind of awful paralysis gripping them in
which they did not move nor seemingly breathe--ten who were dead by
every test known to science, but who, as even laymen could see at a
glance, were yet indubitably alive!

"Blue Bay Development is ruined," ground out Kroner. It had been said a
dozen times by every one of the three; but the words made the other two
look at him in frantic denial just the same.

"If we can keep it quiet--just for a little while--just until----"

"Until what?" snapped Kroner. "If we only had an idea when this
mysterious sickness would leave these people! We could stall the news
perhaps for a day, or even two days--_if_ we could have some assurance
that at the end of twenty-four or forty-eight hours they'd be all right
again. But we haven't. They may be like that for months before they
die--may even die in a few hours. Grays can't tell. This is all beyond
his medical experience. So it seems to me we might as well make public
announcements now, face ruin on the resort development, and get it over
with."

Chichester spoke, almost in a whisper.

"This Doctor Satan, whoever he is, gives us assurance in his note. He
says that if we pay what he demands, the ten will recover, and
everything will be all right."

"And if we pay what he demands, we'll be ruined just the same as though
we'd been killed by publicity," objected Gest.

Kroner glared at the wizened treasurer.

"I'm surprized you'd even suggest that, Chichester. But you've not only
suggested it--you've pled for it all night long! Do you get a cut from
Doctor Satan or something?"

"Gentlemen," soothed Gest, as Chichester half rose from his chair.
"We're in too serious a jam to indulge in petty quarrels. We've got to
decide what to do----"

"I move we call in the police," growled Kroner. "I still can't believe
that any human being could induce such a state of catalepsy, or living
death, or whatever you want to call it, in other human beings. Not
unless he's a wizard or something. Nevertheless, in view of this threat
note from Doctor Satan, there may be a definite criminal element here
that the cops should know about."

"Let's wait on the police," objected Gest. "We have already done better
than that in summoning this Ascott Keane to help us."

Chichester's dry skin flushed faintly.

"I still say that that was a stupid move!" he snapped. "Ascott Keane?
Who is he, anyhow? He has no reputation for detective work or any other
kind of work. A rich man's son--loafer--dilettante. What we should have
done was contact Doctor Satan after his first note, after Weems was
stricken. Then we would have saved the nine in the roulette room, and at
the same time saved our project here."

"You'd pay this crook our entire surplus?" snarled Kroner. "You'd give
him a million eight hundred thousand in cold cash, when you don't even
know that he has had a hand in what ails the ten?"

"It's worth a million eight hundred thousand to save our stake in Blue
Bay," said Chichester obstinately. "As for Doctor Satan's having a hand
in the horrible fate of Weems and the rest--he told you beforehand that
it would happen, didn't he?"

"Please," sighed Gest as for a second time the florid vice-president and
the wizened treasurer snarled at each other. "We----"

The door of the office suite banged open. The assistant manager of the
hotel staggered into the room. His blue eyes were blazing with
excitement. His youngish face was contorted with it.

"I've just found out something that I think is of vital importance!" he
gasped. "Something in the roulette room! I've been in there all night,
as you know, looking around to see if I could find poison needles
fastened to table or chairs, or anything like that, and quite by chance
I noticed something else. The maddest thing! The roulette wheel!
It's----"

He stopped.

"Go on, go on!" urged Kroner. "What about the roulette wheel? And what
possible connection could it have with what happened to the people in
that room?"

He stared at the young assistant manager, as did Gest and Chichester,
with his hands clenched with suspense.

And the assistant manager slowly, like a falling tree, pitched forward
on his face.

"My God----"

"What happened to him?"

The three got to him together. They rolled him over, lifted his head,
began chafing his hands. But it was useless. And in a moment that was
admitted in their faces as they looked at each other.

"Another victory for Doctor Satan," whispered Chichester, shuddering as
though with palsy. "He's--dead!"

Gest opened his mouth as though to deny it, but closed his lips again.
For palpably the assistant manager was dead, struck down an instant
before he could tell them some vital news he had uncovered. He had died
as though struck by lightning, at just the right time to save
disclosure. It was as though the being who called himself Doctor Satan
were there, in that office, and had acted to protect himself!

