place to go. Luckily, for you, madam, it was the man Smith who was
killed when the alloys failed me. It might have been Allen, for he was
the second pole of the connection."

"But," she began faintly, "how can this mad experiment have anything to
do with saving my boy?"

He waved impatiently at her evident denseness. "Do you not understand?
It is so I will save Allen, your son. I shall first switch our egos, or
souls, as you say. Then switch the bodies. It must always take this
sequence; why, I have not ascertained. But it always works thus."

Mrs. Baker was terrified. What she had just seen, smacked of the
blackest magic--yet a woman in her position must grasp at straws. The
world blamed her son for the murder of Smith, a man Professor Burr had
made use of as he might a guinea pig, and Allen must be snatched from
the death house.

"Do--do you mean you can bring Allen from the prison here--just by
throwing those switches?" she asked.

"That is it. But there is more to it than that, for it is not magic,
madam; it is science, you understand, and there must be some physical
connection. But with your help, that can easily be made."

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Ramsey Burr, she knew, was the greatest electrical engineer
the world had ever known. And he stood high as a physicist. Nothing
hindered him in the pursuit of knowledge, they said. He knew no fear,
and he lived on an intellectual promontory. He was so great that he
almost lost sight of himself. To such a man, nothing was impossible.
Hope, wild hope, sprang in Mary Baker's heart, and she grasped the bony
hand of the professor and kissed it.

"Oh, I believe, I believe," she cried. "You can do it. You can save
Allen. I will do anything, anything you tell me to."

"Very well. You visit your son daily at the death house, do you not?"

She nodded; a shiver of remembrance of that dread spot passed through
her.

"Then you will tell him the plan and let him agree to see me the night
preceding the electrocution. I will give him final instructions as to
the exchange of bodies. When my life spirit, or ego, is confined in your
son's body in the death house, Allen will be able to perform the feat of
changing the bodies, and your son's flesh will join his soul, which will
have been temporarily inhabiting my own shell. Do you see? When they
find me in the cell where they suppose your son to be, they will be
unable to explain the phenomenon; they can do nothing but release me.
Your son will go here, and can be whisked away to a safe place of
concealment."

"Yes, yes. What am I to do besides this?"

Professor Burr pulled out a drawer near at hand, and from it extracted a
folded garment of thin, shiny material.

"This is metal cloth coated with the new alloy," he said, in a matter of
fact tone. He rummaged further, saying as he did so, "I expected you
would be here to see me, and I have been getting ready for your visit.
All is prepared, save a few odds and ends which I can easily clean up in
the next two days. Here are four cups which Allen must place under each
leg of his bed, and this delicate little director coil you must take
especial pains with. It is to be slipped under your son's tongue at the
time appointed."

       *       *       *       *       *

She was staring at him still, half in fear, half in wonder, yet she
could not feel any doubt of the man's miraculous powers. Somehow, while
he talked to her and rested those cold eyes upon her, she was under the
spell of the great scientist. Her son, before the trouble into which he
had been dragged by the professor, had often hinted at the abilities of
Ramsey Burr, given her the idea that his employer was practically a
necromancer, yet a magician whose advanced scientific knowledge was
correct and explainable in the light of reason.

Yes, Allen had talked to her often when he was at home, resting from his
labors with Professor Burr. He had spoken of the new electricity
discovered by the famous man, and also told his mother that Burr had
found a method of separating atoms and then transforming them into a
form of radio-electricity so that they could be sent in radio waves, to
designated points. And she now remembered--the swift trial and
conviction of Allen on the charge of murder had occupied her so deeply
that she had forgotten all else for the time being--that her son had
informed her quite seriously that Professor Ramsey Burr would soon be
able to transport human beings by radio.

"Neither of us will be injured in any way by the change," said Burr
calmly. "It is possible for me now to break up human flesh, send the
atoms by radio-electricity, and reassemble them in their proper form by
these special transformers and atom filters."

Mrs. Baker took all the apparatus presented her by the professor. She
ventured the thought that it might be better to perform the experiment
at once, instead of waiting until the last minute, but this Professor
Burr waved aside as impossible. He needed the extra time, he said, and
there was no hurry.

She glanced about the room, and her eye took in the giant switches of
copper with their black handles; there were others of a gray-green metal
she did not recognize. Many dials and meters, strange to her, confronted
the little woman. These things, she felt with a rush of gratitude toward
the inanimate objects, would help to save her son, so they interested
her and she began to feel kindly toward the great machines.

       *       *       *       *       *

Would Professor Burr be able to save Allen as he claimed? Yes, she
thought, he could. She would make Allen consent to the trial of it, even
though her son had cursed the scientist and cried he would never speak
to Ramsey Burr again.

She was escorted from the home of the professor by Jared, and going out
into the bright, sunlit street, blinked as her eyes adjusted themselves
to the daylight after the queer light of the laboratory. In a bundle she
had a strange suit and the cups; her purse held the tiny coil, wrapped
in cotton.

How could she get the authorities to consent to her son having the suit?
The cups and the coil she might slip to him herself. She decided that a
mother would be allowed to give her son new underwear. Yes, she would
say it was that.

She started at once for the prison. Professor Burr's laboratory was but
twenty miles from the cell where her son was incarcerated.

As she rode on the train, seeing people in everyday attire, commonplace
occurrences going on about her, the spell of Professor Burr faded, and
cold reason stared her in the face. Was it nonsense, this idea of
transporting bodies through the air, in invisible waves? Yet, she was
old-fashioned; the age of miracles had not passed for her. Radio, in
which pictures and voices could be sent on wireless waves, was
unexplainable to her. Perhaps--

She sighed, and shook her head. It was hard to believe. It was also hard
to believe that her son was in deadly peril, condemned to death as a
"scientific fiend."

Here was her station. A taxi took her to the prison, and after a talk
with the warden, finally she stood there, before the screen through
which she could talk to Allen, her son.

"Mother!"

Her heart lifted, melted within her. It was always thus when he spoke.
"Allen," she whispered softly.

They were allowed to talk undisturbed.

"Professor Burr wishes to help you," she said, in a low voice.

       *       *       *       *       *

Her son, Allen Baker, M. D., turned eyes of misery upon her. His ruddy
hair was awry. This young man was imaginative and could therefore suffer
deeply. He had the gift of turning platitudes into puzzles, and his
hazel eyes were lit with an elfin quality, which, if possible, endeared
him the more to his mother. All his life he had been the greatest thing
in the world to this woman. To see him in such straits tore her very
heart. When he had been a little boy, she had been able to make joy
appear in those eyes by a word and a pat; now that he was a man, the
matter was more difficult, but she had always done her best.

"I cannot allow Professor Burr to do anything for me," he said dully.
"It is his fault that I am here."

"But Allen, you must listen, listen carefully. Professor Burr can save
you. He says it was all a mistake, the alloy was wrong. He has not come
forward before, because he knew he would be able to iron out the trouble
if he had time, and thus snatch you from this terrible place."

She put as much confidence into her voice as she could. She must, to
enhearten her son. Anything to replace that look of suffering with one
of hope. She would believe, she did believe. The bars, the great masses
of stone which enclosed her son would be as nothing. He would pass
through them, unseen, unheard.

For a time, Allen spoke bitterly of Ramsey Burr, but his mother pleaded
with him, telling him it was his only chance, and that the deviltry
Allen suspected was imaginary.

"He--he killed Smith in such an experiment," said Allen. "I took the
blame, as you know, though I only followed his instructions. But you say
he claims to have found the correct alloys?"

"Yes. And this suit, you must put it on. But Professor Burr himself will
be here to see you day after to-morrow, the day preceding the--the--"
She bit her lip, and got out the dreaded word, "the electrocution. But
there won't be any electrocution, Allen; no, there cannot be. You will
be safe, safe in my arms." She had to fight now to hold her belief in
the miracle which Burr had promised. The solid steel and stone dismayed
her brain.

       *       *       *       *       *

The new alloy seemed to interest Allen Baker. His mother told him of the
exchange of the monkey and the cat, and he nodded excitedly, growing
more and more restive, and his eyes began to shine with hope and
curiosity.

"I have told the warden about the suit, saying it was something I made
for you myself," she said, in a low voice. "You must pretend the coil
and the cups are things you desire for your own amusement. You know,
they have allowed you a great deal of latitude, since you are educated
and need diversion."

"Yes, yes. There may be some difficulty, but I will overcome that. Tell
Burr to come. I'll talk with him and he can instruct me in the final
details. It is better than waiting here like a rat in a trap. I have
been afraid of going mad, mother, but this buoys me up."

He smiled at her, and her heart sang in the joy of relief.

How did the intervening days pass? Mrs. Baker could not sleep, could
scarcely eat, she could do nothing but wait, wait, wait. She watched the
meeting of her son and Ramsey Burr, on the day preceding the date set
for the execution.

"Well, Baker," said Burr nonchalantly, nodding to his former assistant.
"How are you?"

"You see how I am," said Allen, coldly.

"Yes, yes. Well, listen to what I have to say and note it carefully.
There must be no slip. You have the suit, the cups and the director
coil? You must keep the suit on, the cups go under the legs of the cot
you lie on. The director under your tongue."

The professor spoke further with Allen, instructing him in scientific
terms which the woman scarcely comprehended.

"To-night, then at eleven-thirty," said Burr, finally. "Be ready."

       *       *       *       *       *

Allen nodded. Mrs. Baker accompanied Burr from the prison.

"You--you will let me be with you?" she begged.

"It is hardly necessary," said the professor.

"But I must. I must see Allen the moment he is free, to make sure he is
all right. Then, I want to be able to take him away. I have a place in
which we can hide, and as soon as he is rescued he must be taken out of
sight."

"Very well," said Burr, shrugging. "It is immaterial to me, so long as
you do not interfere with the course of the experiment. You must sit
perfectly still, you must not speak until Allen stands before you and
addresses you."

"Yes, I will obey you," she promised.

Mrs. Baker watched Professor Ramsey Burr eat his supper. Burr himself
was not in the least perturbed; it was wonderful, she thought, that he
could be so calm. To her, it was the great moment, the moment when her
son would be saved from the jaws of death.

Jared carried a comfortable chair into the laboratory and she sat in it,
quiet as a mouse, in one corner of the room.

It was nine o'clock, and Professor Burr was busy with his preparations.
She knew he had been working steadily for the past few days. She gripped
the arms of her chair, and her heart burned within her.

The professor was making sure of his apparatus. He tested this bulb and
that, and carefully inspected the curious oscillating platform, over
which was suspended a thickly bunched group of gray-green wire, which
was seemingly an antenna. The numerous indicators and implements seemed
to be satisfactory, for at quarter after eleven Burr gave an exclamation
of pleasure and nodded to himself.

Burr seemed to have forgotten the woman. He spoke aloud occasionally,
but not to her, as he drew forth a suit made of the same metal cloth as
Allen must have on at this moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

The tension was terrific, terrific for the mother, who was awaiting the
culmination of the experiment which would rescue her son from the
electric chair--or would it fail? She shuddered. What if Burr were mad?

But look at him, she was sure he was sane, as sane as she was.

"He will succeed," she murmured, digging her nails into the palms of her
hands. "I _know_ he will."

She pushed aside the picture of what would happen on the morrow, but a
few hours distant, when Allen, her son, was due to be led to a legal
death in the electric chair.

Professor Burr placed the shiny suit upon his lank form, and she saw him
put a duplicate coil, the same sort of small machine which Allen
possessed, under his tongue.

The Mephistophelian figure consulted a matter-of-fact watch; at that
moment, Mrs. Baker heard, above the hum of the myriad machines in the
laboratory, the slow chiming of a clock. It was the moment set for the
deed.

Then, she feared the professor was insane, for he suddenly leaped to the
high bench of the table on which stood one of the oscillating platforms.

Wires led out from this, and Burr sat gently upon it, a strange figure
in the subdued light.

Professor Burr, however, she soon saw, was not insane. No, this was part
of it. He was reaching for switches near at hand, and bulbs began to
glow with unpleasant light, needles on indicators swung madly, and at
last, Professor Burr kicked over a giant switch, which seemed to be the
final movement.

For several seconds the professor did not move. Then his body grew
rigid, and he twisted a few times. His face, though not drawn in pain,
yet twitched galvanically, as though actuated by slight jabs of
electricity.

       *       *       *       *       *

The many tubes fluoresced, flared up in pulsing waves of violet and
pink: there were gray bars of invisibility or areas of air in which
nothing visible showed. There came the faint, crackling hum of machinery
rather like a swarm of wasps in anger. Blue and gray thread of fire spat
across the antenna. The odor of ozone came to Mrs. Baker's nostrils,
and the acid odors burned her lungs.

She was staring at him, staring at the professor's face. She half rose
from her chair, and uttered a little cry.

The eyes had changed, no longer were they cold, impersonal, the eyes of
a man who prided himself on the fact that he kept his arteries soft and
his heart hard; they were loving, soft eyes.

"Allen," she cried.

