from the grotto-born river Narg. And the cities of Cathuria are
cinctured with golden walls, and their pavements are also of gold. In
the gardens of these cities are strange orchids, and perfumed lakes
whose beds are of coral and amber. At night the streets and the gardens
are lit with gay lanthorns fashioned from three-coloured shell of the
tortoise, and here resound the soft notes of the singer and the
lutanist. And the houses of the cities of Cathuria are all palaces, each
built over a fragrant canal bearing the waters of the sacred Narg. Of
marble and porphyry are the houses, and roofed with glittering gold
that reflects the rays of the sun and enhances the splendour of the
cities as blissful gods view them from the distant peaks. Fairest of all
is the palace of the great monarch Dorieb, whom some say to be a demigod
and others a god. High is the palace of Dorieb, and many are the turrets
of marble upon its walls. In its wide halls may multitudes assemble, and
here hang the trophies of the ages. And the roof is of pure gold, set
upon tall pillars of ruby and azure, and having such carven figures of
gods and heroes that he who looks up to those heights seem to gaze upon
the living Olympus. And the floor of the palace is of glass, under which
flow the cunningly lighted waters of the Narg, gay with gaudy fish not
known beyond the bounds of lovely Cathuria."

Thus would I speak to myself of Cathuria, but ever would the bearded man
warn me to turn back to the happy shores of Sona-Nyl; for Sona-Nyl is
known of men, while none hath ever beheld Cathuria.

And on the thirty-first day that we followed the bird, we beheld the
basalt pillars of the West. Shrouded in mist they were, so that no man
might peer beyond them or see their summits--which indeed some say reach
even to the heavens. And the bearded man again implored me to turn back,
but I heeded him not; for from the mists beyond the basalt pillars I
fancied there came the notes of singer and lutanist; sweeter than the
sweetest songs of Sona-Nyl, and sounding mine own praises; the praises
of me, who had voyaged far under the full moon and dwelt in the Land of
Fancy.

So to the sound of melody the White Ship sailed into the mist betwixt
the basalt pillars of the West. And when the music ceased and the mist
lifted, we beheld not the Land of Cathuria, but a swift-rushing
resistless sea, over which our helpless barque was borne toward some
unknown goal. Soon to our ears came the distant thunder of falling
waters, and to our eyes appeared on the far horizon ahead the titanic
spray of a monstrous cataract, wherein the oceans of the world drop down
to abysmal nothingness. Then did the bearded man say to me with tears on
his cheek, "We have rejected the beautiful Land of Sona-Nyl, which we
may never behold again. The gods are greater than men, and they have
conquered." And I closed my eyes before the crash that I knew would
come, shutting out the sight of the celestial bird which flapped its
mocking blue wings over the brink of the torrent.

Out of that crash came darkness, and I heard the shrieking of men and of
things which were not men. From the East tempestuous winds arose, and
chilled me as I crouched on the slab of damp stone which had risen
beneath my feet. Then as I heard another crash I opened my eyes and
beheld myself upon the platform of that lighthouse from whence I had
sailed so many aeons ago. In the darkness below there loomed the vast
blurred outlines of a vessel breaking up on the cruel rocks, and as I
glanced out over the waste I saw that the light had failed for the first
time since my grandfather had assumed its care.

And in the later watches of the night, when I went within the tower, I
saw on the wall a calendar which still remained as when I had left it at
the hour I sailed away. With the dawn I descended the tower and looked
for wreckage upon the rocks, but what I found was only this: a strange
dead bird whose hue was as of the azure sky, and a single shattered
spar, of a whiteness greater than that of the wave-tips or of the
mountain snow.

And thereafter the ocean told me its secrets no more; and though many
times since has the moon shone full and high in the heavens, the White
Ship from the South came never again.


TO MISTRESS SOPHIA SIMPLE, QUEEN OF THE CINEMA

(With humblest apologies to Randolph St. John, Gent.)

L. Theobald, Jun.

    Before our sight your mobile face
      Depicts your joys or woes distracting;
    We marvel at your winsome grace--
      And wish you'd learn the art of acting!

    Your eyes, we vow, surpass the stars;
      Your mouth is like the bow of Cupid;
    Your rose-ting'd cheeks no wrinkle mars--
      Yet why are you so sweetly stupid?

    The hero views you with delight,
      To win your hand forever working;
    We pity him--the witless wight--
      To fall a victim to your smirking!

    And yet, why should we wail in rhyme
      Because so crudely you dissemble?
    We can't expect for one small dime,
      To see a Woffington or Kemble!




 THE UNITED AMATEUR    JANUARY 1920


Literary Composition

H. P. Lovecraft

In a former article our readers have been shewn the fundamental sources
of literary inspiration, and the leading prerequisites to expression. It
remains to furnish hints concerning expression itself; its forms,
customs, and technicalities, in order that the young writer may lose
nothing of force or charm in presenting his ideas to the public.


Grammar

A review of the elements of English grammar would be foreign to the
purpose of this department. The subject is one taught in all common
schools, and may be presumed to be understood by every aspirant to
authorship. It is necessary, however, to caution the beginner to keep a
reliable grammar and dictionary always beside him, that he may avoid in
his compositions the frequent errors which imperceptibly corrupt even
the purest ordinary speech. As a general rule, it is well to give close
critical scrutiny to all colloquial phrases and expressions of doubtful
parsing, as well as to all words and usages which have a strained or
unfamiliar sound. The human memory is not to be trusted too far, and
most minds harbour a considerable number of slight linguistic faults and
inelegancies picked up from random discourse or from the pages of
newspapers, magazines, and popular modern books.


Types of Mistakes

Most of the mistakes of young authors, aside from those gross violations
of syntax which ordinary education corrects, may perhaps be enumerated
as follows.

    (1) Erroneous plurals of nouns, as =vallies= or =echos=.

    (2) Barbarous compound nouns, as =viewpoint= or =upkeep=.

    (3) Want of correspondence in number between noun and verb where the
    two are widely separated or the construction involved.

    (4) Ambiguous use of pronouns.

    (5) Erroneous case of pronouns, as =whom= for =who=, and vice versa,
    or phrases like "between you and =I=," or "Let =we= who are loyal,
    act promptly."

    (6) Erroneous use of =shall= and =will=, and of other auxiliary
    verbs.

    (7) Use of intransitive for transitive verbs, as "he =was graduated=
    from college," or vice versa, as "he =ingratiated= with the tyrant."

    (8) Use of nouns for verbs, as "he =motored= to Boston," or "he
    =voiced= a protest."

    (9) Errors in moods and tenses of verbs, as "If I =was= he, I should
    do otherwise," or "He said the earth =was= round."

    (10) The split infinitive, as "=to= calmly =glide=."

    (11) The erroneous perfect infinitive, as "Last week I expected =to
    have met= you."

    (12) False verb-forms, as "I =pled= with him."

    (13) Use of =like= for =as=, as "I strive to write =like= Pope
    wrote."

    (14) Misuse of prepositions, as "The gift was bestowed =to= an
    unworthy object," or "The gold was divided =between= the five men."

    (15) The superfluous conjunction, as "I wish =for= you to do this."

    (16) Use of words in wrong =senses=, as "The book greatly
    =intrigued= me," "=Leave= me take this," "He was =obsessed= with the
    idea," or "He is a =meticulous= writer."

    (17) Erroneous use of non-Anglicised foreign forms, as "a strange
    =phenomena=," or "two =stratas= of clouds."

    (18) Use of false or unauthorized words, as =burglarize= or
    =supremest=.

    (19) Errors of taste, including vulgarisms, pompousness, repetition,
    vagueness, ambiguousness, colloquialism, bathos, bombast, pleonasm,
    tautology, harshness, mixed metaphor, and every sort of rhetorical
    awkwardness.

    (20) Errors of spelling and punctuation, and confusion of forms such
    as that which leads many to place an apostrophe in the possessive
    pronoun =its=.

Of all blunders, there is hardly one which might not be avoided through
diligent study of simple textbooks on grammar and rhetoric, intelligent
perusal of the best authors, and care and forethought in composition.
Almost no excuse exists for their persistent occurrence, since the
sources of correction are so numerous and so available. Many of the
popular manuals of good English are extremely useful, especially to
persons whose reading is not as yet extensive; but such works sometimes
err in being too pedantically precise and formal. For correct writing,
the cultivation of patience and mental accuracy is essential. Throughout
the young author's period of apprenticeship, he must keep reliable
dictionaries and textbooks at his elbow; eschewing as far as possible
that hasty extemporaneous manner of writing which is the privilege of
more advanced students. He must take no popular usage for granted, nor
must he ever hesitate, in case of doubt, to fall back on the authority
of his books.


Reading

No aspiring author should content himself with a mere acquisition of
technical rules. As Mrs. Renshaw remarked in the preceding article,
"Impression should ever precede and be stronger than expression." All
attempts at gaining literary polish must begin with judicious =reading=,
and the learner must never cease to hold this phase uppermost. In many
cases, the usage of good authors will be found a more effective guide
than any amount of precept. A page of Addison or of Irving will teach
more of style than a whole manual of rules, whilst a story of Poe's will
impress upon the mind a more vivid notion of powerful and correct
description and narration than will ten dry chapters of a bulky
textbook. Let every student read unceasingly the best writers, guided by
the admirable Reading Table which has adorned the UNITED AMATEUR during
the past two years.

It is also important that cheaper types of reading, if hitherto
followed, be dropped. Popular magazines inculcate a careless and
deplorable style which is hard to unlearn, and which impedes the
acquisition of a purer style. If such things must be read, let them be
skimmed over as lightly as possible. An excellent habit to cultivate is
the analytical study of the King James Bible. For simple yet rich and
forceful English, this masterly production is hard to equal; and even
though its Saxon vocabulary and poetic rhythm be unsuited to general
composition, it is an invaluable model for writers on quaint or
imaginative themes. Lord Dunsany, perhaps the greatest living prose
artist, derived nearly all of his stylistic tendencies from the
Scriptures; and the contemporary critic Boyd points out very acutely the
loss sustained by most Catholic Irish writers through their
unfamiliarity with the historic volume and its traditions.


Vocabulary

One superlatively important effect of wide reading is the enlargement of
vocabulary which always accompanies it. The average student is gravely
impeded by the narrow range of words from which he must choose, and he
soon discovers that in long compositions he cannot avoid monotony. In
reading, the novice should note the varied mode of expression practiced
by good authors, and should keep in his mind for future use the many
appropriate synonymes he encounters. Never should an unfamiliar word be
passed over without elucidation; for with a little conscientious
research we may each day add to our conquests in the realm of philology,
and become more and more ready for graceful independent expression.

But in enlarging the vocabulary, we must beware lest we misuse our new
possessions. We must remember that there are fine distinctions betwixt
apparently similar words, and that language must ever be selected with
intelligent care. As the learned Dr. Blair points out in his Lectures,
"Hardly in any language are there two words that convey precisely the
same idea; a person thoroughly conversant in the propriety of language
will always be able to observe something that distinguishes them."


Elemental Phases

Before considering the various formal classes of composition, it is well
to note certain elements common to them all. Upon analysis, every piece
of writing will be found to contain one or more of the following basic
principles: =Description=, or an account of the appearance of things;
=Narration=, or an account of the actions of things; =Exposition=, which
defines and explains with precision and lucidity; =Argument=, which
discovers truth and rejects error; and =Persuasion=, which urges to
certain thoughts or acts. The first two are the bases of fiction; the
third didactic, scientific, historical and editorial writings. The
fourth and fifth are mostly employed in conjunction with the third, in
scientific, philosophical, and partisan literature. All these
principles, however, are usually mingled with one another. The work of
fiction may have its scientific, historical, or argumentative side;
whilst the textbook or treatise may be embellished with descriptions and
anecdotes.


Description

Description, in order to be effective, calls upon two mental qualities;
observation and discrimination. Many descriptions depend for their
vividness upon the accurate reproduction of details; others upon the
judicious selection of salient, typical, or significant points.

One cannot be too careful in the selection of adjectives for
descriptions. Words or compounds which describe precisely, and which
convey exactly the right suggestions to the mind of the reader, are
essential. As an example, let us consider the following list of epithets
applicable to a =fountain=, taken from Richard Green Parker's admirable
work on composition.

    Crystal, gushing, rustling, silver, gently-gliding, parting, pearly,
    weeping, bubbling, gurgling, chiding, clear, grass-fringed,
    moss-fringed, pebble-paved, verdant, sacred, grass-margined,
    moss-margined, trickling, soft, dew-sprinkled, fast-flowing,
    delicate, delicious, clean, straggling, dancing, vaulting,
    deep-embosomed, leaping, murmuring, muttering, whispering,
    prattling, twaddling, swelling, sweet-rolling, gently-flowing,
    rising, sparkling, flowing, frothy, dew-distilling, dew-born,
    exhaustless, inexhaustible, never-decreasing, never-failing,
    heaven-born, earth-born, deep-divulging, drought-dispelling,
    thirst-allaying, refreshing, soul-refreshing, earth-refreshing,
    laving, lavish, plant-nourishing.

For the purpose of securing epithets at once accurate and felicitous,
the young author should familiarize himself thoroughly with the general
aspect and phenomena of Nature, as well as with the ideas and
associations which these things produce in the human mind.

Descriptions may be of objects, of places, of animals, and of persons.
The complete description of an object may be said to consist of the
following elements:

    1. When, where, and how seen; when made or found; how affected by
    time.

    2. History and traditional associations.

    3. Substance and manner of origin.

    4. Size, shape, and appearance.

    5. Analogies with similar objects.

    6. Sensations produced by contemplating it.

    7. Its purpose or function.

    8. Its effects--the results of its existence.

Descriptions of places must of course vary with the type of the place.
Of natural scenery, the following elements are notable:

    1. How beheld--at dawn, noon, evening, or night; by starlight or
    moonlight.

    2. Natural features--flat or hilly; barren or thickly grown; kind of
    vegetation; trees, mountains, and rivers.

    3. Works of man--cultivation, edifices, bridges; modifications of
    scenery produced by man.

    4. Inhabitants and other forms of animal life.

    5. Local customs and traditions.

    6. Sounds--of water; forest; leaves; birds; barnyards; human beings;
    machinery.

    7. View--prospect on every side, and the place itself as seen from
    afar.

    8. Analogies to other scenes, especially famous scenes.

    9. History and associations.

    10. Sensations produced by contemplating it.

Descriptions of animals may be analyzed thus:

    1. Species and size.

    2. Covering.

    3. Parts.

    4. Abode.

    5. Characteristics and habits.

    6. Food.

    7. Utility or harmfulness.

    8. History and associations.

