
       *       *       *       *       *

His words were cut short by a very unusual incident.

A thin, high scream came suddenly from above our neat stuccoed hangars
at the edge of the white field. I looked up quickly, to catch a
glimpse of a bright object hurtling through the air above our heads.
The bellowing scream ended abruptly in a thunderous crash. I felt a
tremor of the ground underfoot.

"What--" I ejaculated.

"Look!" cried Charlie.

He pointed. I looked over the gleaming metal wing of the _Golden
Gull_, to see a huge cloud of white sand rising like a fountain at the
farther side of the level field. Deliberately the column of debris
rose, spread, rained down, leaving a gaping crater in the earth.

"Something fell?"

"It sounded like a shell from a big gun, except that it didn't
explode. Let's get over and see!"

We ran to where the thing had struck, three hundred yards across the
field. We found a great funnel-shaped pit torn in the naked earth. It
was a dozen yards across, fifteen feet deep, and surrounded with a
powdery ring of white sand and pulverized rock.

"Something like a shell-hole," I observed.

"I've got it!" Charlie cried. "It was a meteor!"

"A meteor? So big?"

"Yes. Lucky for us it was no bigger. If it had been like the one that
fell in Siberia a few years ago, or the one that made the Winslow
crater in Arizona--we wouldn't have been talking about it. Probably we
have a chunk of nickel-iron alloy here."

"I'll get some of the men out here with digging tools, and we'll see
what we can find."

Our mechanics were already hurrying across the field. I shouted at
them to bring picks and shovels. In a few minutes five of us were at
work throwing sand and shattered rock out of the pit.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly I noticed a curious thing. A pale bluish mist hung in the
bottom of the pit. It was easily transparent, no denser than tobacco
smoke. Passing my spade through it did not seem to disturb it in the
least.

I rubbed my eyes doubtfully, said to Charlie, "Do you see a sort of
blue haze in the pit?"

He peered. "No. No.... Yes. Yes, I do! Funny thing. Kind of a blue
fog. And the tools cut right through it without moving it! Queer! Must
have something to do with the meteor!" He was very excited.

We dug more eagerly. An hour later we had opened the hole to a depth
of twenty feet. Our shovels were clanging on the gray iron of the rock
from space. The mist had grown thicker as the excavation deepened; we
looked at the stone through a screen of motionless blue fog.

We had found the meteor. There were several queer things about it. The
first man who touched it--a big Swede mechanic named Olson--was
knocked cold as if by a nasty jolt of electricity. It took half an
hour to bring him to consciousness.

As fast as the rugged iron side of the meteorite was uncovered, a
white crust of frost formed over it.

"It was as cold as outer space, nearly at the absolute zero," Charlie
explained. "And it was heated only superficially during its quick
passage through the air. But how it comes to be charged with
electricity--I can't say."

He hurried up to his laboratory behind the hangars, where he had
equipment ranging from an astronomical telescope to a delicate
seismograph. He brought back as much electrical equipment as he could
carry. He had me touch an insulated wire to the frost-covered stone
from space, while he put the other end to one post of a galvanometer.

I think he got a current that wrecked the instrument. At any rate, he
grew very much excited.

"Something queer about that stone!" he cried. "This is the chance of a
lifetime! I don't know that a meteor has ever been scientifically
examined so soon after falling."

       *       *       *       *       *

He hurried us all across to the laboratory. We came back with a truck
load of coils and tubes and batteries and potentiometers and other
assorted equipment. He had men with heavy rubber gloves lift the
frost-covered stone to a packing box on a bench. The thing was
irregular in shape, about a foot long; it must have weighed two
hundred pounds. He sent a man racing on a motorcycle to the drug store
to get dry ice (solidified carbon dioxide) to keep the iron stone at
its low temperature.

In a few hours he had a complete laboratory set up around the
meteorite. He worked feverishly in the hot sunshine, reading the
various instruments he had set up, and arranging more. He contrived to
keep the stone cold by packing it in a box of dry ice.

The mechanics stopped for dinner, and I tried to get him to take time
to eat.

"No, Hammond," he said. "This is something big! We were talking about
Einstein. This rock seems energized with a new kind of force: all
meteors are probably the same way, when they first plunge out of
space. I think this will be to relativity what the falling apple is to
gravity. This is a big thing."

He looked up at me, brown eyes flashing.

"This is my chance to make a name, Hammond. If I do something big
enough--Virginia might reconsider her opinion."

Charlie worked steadily through the long hot afternoon. I spent most
of the time helping him, or gazing in fascination at the curious haze
of luminous blue mist that clung like a sphere of azure fog about the
meteoric stone. I did not completely understand what he did; the
reader who wants the details may consult the monograph he is preparing
for the scientific press.

He had the men string up a line from our direct current generator in
the shops, to supply power for his electrical instruments. He mounted
a powerful electromagnet just below the meteorite, and set up an X-ray
tube to bombard it with rays.

       *       *       *       *       *

Night came, and the fire of the white sun faded from the sky. In the
darkness, the curious haze about the stone became luminescent,
distinct, a dim, motionless sphere of blue light. I fancied that I saw
grotesque shapes flashing through it. A ball of blue fire, shimmering
and ghost-like, shrouded the instruments.

Charlie's induction coil buzzed wickedly, with purple fire playing
about the terminals. The X-ray tube flickered with a greenish glow. He
manipulated the rheostat that controlled the current through the
electromagnet, and continued to read his instruments.

"Look at that!" he cried.

The bluish haze about the stone grew brighter; it became a ball of
sapphire flame, five feet thick, bright and motionless. A great sphere
of shimmering azure fire! Wisps of pale, sparkling bluish mist ringed
it. The stone in its box, the X-ray bulb and other apparatus were
hidden. The end of the table stuck oddly from the ball of light.

I heard Charlie move a switch. The hum of the coils changed a note.

The ball of blue fire vanished abruptly. It became a hole, a window in
space!

Through it, we saw another world!

The darkness of the night hung about us. Where the ball had been was a
circle of misty blue flame, five feet across. Through that circle I
could see a vast expanse of blue ocean, running in high, white-capped
rollers, beneath a sky overcast with low gray clouds.

It was no flat picture like a movie screen. The scene had vast depth;
I knew that we were really looking over an infinite expanse of stormy
ocean. It was all perfectly clear, distinct, real!

       *       *       *       *       *

Astounded, I turned to find Charlie standing back and looking into the
ring of blue fire, with a curious mixture of surprise and delighted
satisfaction.

"What--what--" I gasped.

"It's amazing! Wonderful! More than I had dared hope for! The
complete vindication of my theory! If Virginia cares for scientific
reputation--"

"But what is it?"

"It's hard to explain without mathematical language. You might say
that we are looking through a hole in space. The new force in the
meteorite, amplified by the X-rays and the magnetic field, is causing
a distortion of space-time coordinates. You know that a gravitational
field bends light; the light of a star is deflected in passing the
sun. The field of this meteorite bends light through space-time,
through the four-dimensional continuum. That scrap of ocean we can see
may be on the other side of the earth."

I walked around the circle of luminous smoke with the marvelous
picture in the center. It seemed that the window swung with me. I
surveyed the whole angry surface of that slate-gray, storm-beaten sea,
to the misty horizon. Nowhere was it broken by land or ship.

Charlie fell to adjusting his rheostat and switches.

It seemed that the gray ocean moved swiftly beyond the window. Vast
stretches of it raced below our eyes. Faint black stains of steamer
smoke appeared against the blue-gray horizon and swept past. Then land
appeared--a long, green-gray line. We had a flash of a long coast that
unreeled in endless panorama before us. It was such a view as one
might get from a swift airplane--a plane flying thousands of miles per
hour.

The Golden Gate flashed before us, with the familiar skyline of San
Francisco rising on the hills behind it.

"San Francisco!" Charlie cried. "This is the Pacific we've been
seeing. Let's find the _Valhalla_. We might be able to see Virginia!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The coast-line vanished as he manipulated his instruments. Staring
into the circle of shining blue mist, I saw the endless ocean racing
below us again. We picked up a pleasure yacht, running under bare
poles.

"I didn't know there was such a storm on," Charlie murmured.

Other vessels swam past below us, laboring against heavy seas.

Then we looked upon an ocean whipped into mighty white-crowned waves.
Rain beat down in sheets from low dense clouds; vivid violet
lightnings flashed before us. It seemed very strange to see such
lightning and hear not the faintest whisper of thunder--but no sound
came from anything we saw through the blue-rimmed window in space.

"I hope the _Valhalla_ isn't in weather like this!" cried Charlie.

In a few minutes a dark form loomed through the wind-riven mist.
Swiftly it swam nearer; became a black ship.

"Only a tramp," Charlie said, breathing a sigh of relief.

It was a dingy tramp steamer, her superstructure wrecked. Her fires
seemed dead. She lay across the wind, rolling sluggishly, threatening
to sink with every monstrous wave. We saw no living person aboard her;
she seemed a sinking derelict. We made out the name _Roma_ on her
side.

Charlie moved his dials again.

In a few minutes the slender prow of another great steamer came
through the sheets of rain. It was evidently a passenger vessel. She
seemed limping along, half wrecked, with mighty waves breaking over
her rail.

Charlie grew white with alarm. "The _Valhalla_!" he gasped. "And she's
headed straight for that wreck!"

In a moment, as he brought the liner closer below our blue-rimmed
window, I, too, made out the name. The wet, glistening decks were
almost deserted. Here and there a man struggled futilely against the
force of the storm.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a few minutes the drifting wreck of the _Roma_ came into our view,
dead ahead of the limping liner. Through the mist and falling rain,
the derelict could not have been in sight of the lookout of the
passenger vessel until she was almost upon it.

We saw the white burst of steam as the siren was blown. We watched the
desperate effort of the liner to check her way, to come about. But it
was too much for the already crippled ship. Charlie cried out as a
mighty wave drove the _Valhalla_ down upon the sluggishly drifting
wreck.

All the mad scene that ensued was strangely silent. We heard no crash
when the collision occurred; heard no screams or shouts while the mob
of desperate, white-faced passengers were fighting their way to the
deck. The vain struggle to launch the boats was like a silent movie.

One boat was splintered while being lowered. Another, already filled
with passengers, was lifted by a great ware and crushed against the
side of the ship. Only shivered wood and red foam were left. The ship
listed so rapidly that the boats on the lee side were useless. It was
impossible to launch the others in that terrible, lashing sea.

"Virginia can swim." Charlie said hopefully. "You know she tried the
Channel last year, and nearly made it, too."

He stopped to watch that terrible scene in white-faced, anxious
silence.

The tramp went down before the steamer, drawing fragments of wrecked
boats after it. The liner was evidently sinking rapidly. We saw dozens
of hopeless, panic-stricken passengers diving off the lee side, trying
to swim off far enough to avoid the tremendous suction.

Then, with a curious deliberation, the bow of the _Valhalla_ dipped
under green water; her stern rose in the air until the ship stood
almost perpendicular. She slipped quickly down, out of sight.

Only a few swimming humans, and the wrecks of a few boats, were left
on the rough gray sea. Charlie fumbled nervously with his dials,
trying to get the scene near enough so that we could see the identity
of the struggling swimmers.

       *       *       *       *       *

A long boat, which must have been swept below by the suction of the
ship, came plunging above the surface, upside down. It drifted swiftly
among the swimmers, who struggled to reach it. I saw one person,
evidently a girl, grasp it and drag herself upon it. It swept on past
the few others still struggling.

The wrecked boat with the girl upon it seemed coming swiftly toward
our blue-rimmed window. In a few minutes I saw something familiar
about her.

"It's Virginia!" Charlie cried. "God! We've got to save her, somehow!"

The long rollers drove the over-turned boat swiftly along. Virginia
Randall clung desperately to it, deluged in foam, whipped with flying
spray, the wild wind tearing at her.

About us, the clear still night was deepening. The air was warm and
still; the hot stars shone steadily. Quiet lighted houses were in
sight above the beach. It was very strange to look through the
fire-rimmed circle, to see a girl struggling for life, clinging to a
wrecked boat in a stormy sea.

Charlie watched in an apathy of grief and horror, trembling and
speechless doing nothing except move the controls to keep the floating
girl in our sight.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hours went by as we watched. Then Charlie cried out in sudden hope.
"There's a chance! I might do it! I might be able to save her!"

"Might do what?"

"We are able to see what we do because the field of the meteor bends
light through the four-dimensional continuum. The world line of a ray
of light is a geodesic in the continuum. The field I have built
distorts the continuum, so we see rays that originated at a distant
point. Is that clear?"

"Clear as mud!"

"Well, anyhow, if the field were strong enough, we could bring
physical objects through space-time, instead of mere visual images. We
could pick Virginia up and bring her right here to the crater! I'm
sure of it!"

"You mean you could move a girl through some four or five thousand
miles of space!"

"You don't understand. She wouldn't come through space at all, but
through space-time, through the continuum, which is a very different
thing. She is four thousand miles away in our three-dimensional space,
but in space-time, as you see, she is only a few yards away. She is
only a few yards from us in the fourth dimension. If I can increase
the field a little, she will be drawn right through!"

