produced by the liquors contained in all the bottles, Pl. IV. Fig. 1.

Those who have not been accustomed to use the above described distilling
apparatus may perhaps be startled at the great number of openings which
require luting, and the time necessary for making all the previous
preparations in experiments of this kind. It is very true that, if we
take into account all the necessary weighings of materials and products,
both before and after the experiments, these preparatory and succeeding
steps require much more time and attention than the experiment itself.
But, when the experiment succeeds properly, we are well rewarded for all
the time and trouble bestowed, as by one process carried on in this
accurate manner much more just and extensive knowledge is acquired of
the nature of the vegetable or animal substance thus submitted to
investigation, than by many weeks assiduous labour in the ordinary
method of proceeding.

When in want of bottles with three orifices, those with two may be used;
it is even possible to introduce all the three tubes at one opening, so
as to employ ordinary wide-mouthed bottles, provided the opening be
sufficiently large. In this case we must carefully fit the bottles with
corks very accurately cut, and boiled in a mixture of oil, wax, and
turpentine. These corks are pierced with the necessary holes for
receiving the tubes by means of a round file, as in Pl. IV. Fig. 8.


SECT. II.

_Of Metallic Dissolutions._

I have already pointed out the difference between solution of salts in
water and metallic dissolutions. The former requires no particular
vessels, whereas the latter requires very complicated vessels of late
invention, that we may not lose any of the products of the experiment,
and may thereby procure truly conclusive results of the phenomena which
occur. The metals, in general, dissolve in acids with effervescence,
which is only a motion excited in the solvent by the disengagement of a
great number of bubbles of air or aeriform fluid, which proceed from the
surface of the metal, and break at the surface of the liquid.

Mr Cavendish and Dr Priestley were the first inventors of a proper
apparatus for collecting these elastic fluids. That of Dr Priestley is
extremely simple, and consists of a bottle A, Pl. VII. Fig. 2. with its
cork B, through which passes the bent glass tube BC, which is engaged
under a jar filled with water in the pneumato-chemical apparatus, or
simply in a bason full of water. The metal is first introduced into the
bottle, the acid is then poured over it, and the bottle is instantly
closed with its cork and tube, as represented in the plate. But this
apparatus has its inconveniencies. When the acid is much concentrated,
or the metal much divided, the effervescence begins before we have time
to cork the bottle properly, and some gas escapes, by which we are
prevented from ascertaining the quantity disengaged with rigorous
exactness. In the next place, when we are obliged to employ heat, or
when heat is produced by the process, a part of the acid distills, and
mixes with the water of the pneumato-chemical apparatus, by which means
we are deceived in our calculation of the quantity of acid decomposed.
Besides these, the water in the cistern of the apparatus absorbs all the
gas produced which is susceptible of absorption, and renders it
impossible to collect these without loss.

To remedy these inconveniencies, I at first used a bottle with two
necks, Pl. VII. Fig. 3. into one of which the glass funnel BC is luted
so as to prevent any air escaping; a glass rod DE is fitted with emery
to the funnel, so as to serve the purpose of a stopper. When it is used,
the matter to be dissolved is first introduced into the bottle, and the
acid is then permitted to pass in as slowly as we please, by raising the
glass rod gently as often as is necessary until saturation is produced.

Another method has been since employed, which serves the same purpose,
and is preferable to the last described in some instances. This consists
in adapting to one of the mouths of the bottle A, Pl. VII. Fig. 4. a
bent tube DEFG, having a capillary opening at D, and ending in a funnel
at G. This tube is securely luted to the mouth C of the bottle. When any
liquid is poured into the funnel, it falls down to F; and, if a
sufficient quantity be added, it passes by the curvature E, and falls
slowly into the bottle, so long as fresh liquor is supplied at the
funnel. The liquor can never be forced out of the tube, and no gas can
escape through it, because the weight of the liquid serves the purpose
of an accurate cork.

To prevent any distillation of acid, especially in dissolutions
accompanied with heat, this tube is adapted to the retort A, Pl. VII.
Fig. 1. and a small tubulated recipient, M, is applied, in which any
liquor which may distill is condensed. On purpose to separate any gas
that is absorbable by water, we add the double necked bottle L, half
filled with a solution of caustic potash; the alkali absorbs any
carbonic acid gas, and usually only one or two other gasses pass into
the jar of the connected pneumato-chemical apparatus through the tube
NO. In the first chapter of this third part we have directed how these
are to be separated and examined. If one bottle of alkaline solution be
not thought sufficient, two, three, or more, may be added.


SECT. III.

_Apparatus necessary in Experiments upon Vinous and Putrefactive
Fermentations._

For these operations a peculiar apparatus, especially intended for this
kind of experiment, is requisite. The one I am about to describe is
finally adopted, as the best calculated for the purpose, after numerous
corrections and improvements. It consists of a large matrass, A, Pl. X.
fig. 1. holding about twelve pints, with a cap of brass a b, strongly
cemented to its mouth, and into which is screwed a bent tube c d,
furnished with a stop-cock e. To this tube is joined the glass
recipient B, having three openings, one of which communicates with the
bottle C, placed below it. To the posterior opening of this recipient is
fitted a glass tube g h i, cemented at g and i to collets of
brass, and intended to contain a very deliquescent concrete neutral
salt, such as nitrat or muriat of lime, acetite of potash, &c. This tube
communicates with two bottles D and E, filled to x and y with a
solution of caustic potash.

All the parts of this machine are joined together by accurate screws,
and the touching parts have greased leather interposed, to prevent any
passage of air. Each piece is likewise furnished with two stop-cocks, by
which its two extremities may be closed, so that we can weigh each
separately at any period of the operation.

The fermentable matter, such as sugar, with a proper quantity of yeast,
and diluted with water, is put into the matrass. Sometimes, when the
fermentation is too rapid, a considerable quantity of froth is produced,
which not only fills the neck of the matrass, but passes into the
recipient, and from thence runs down into the bottle C. On purpose to
collect this scum and must, and to prevent it from reaching the tube
filled with deliquescent salts, the recipient and connected bottle are
made of considerable capacity.

In the vinous fermentation, only carbonic acid gas is disengaged,
carrying with it a small proportion of water in solution. A great part
of this water is deposited in passing through the tube g h i, which is
filled with a deliquescent salt in gross powder, and the quantity is
ascertained by the augmentation of the weight of the salt. The carbonic
acid gas bubbles up through the alkaline solution in the bottle D, to
which it is conveyed by the tube k l m. Any small portion which may
not be absorbed by this first bottle is secured by the solution in the
second bottle E, so that nothing, in general, passes into the jar F,
except the common air contained in the vessels at the commencement of
the experiment.

The same apparatus answers extremely well for experiments upon the
putrefactive fermentation; but, in this case, a considerable quantity of
hydrogen gas is disengaged through the tube q r s t u, by which it is
conveyed into the jar F; and, as this disengagement is very rapid,
especially in summer, the jar must be frequently changed. These
putrefactive fermentations require constant attendance from the above
circumstance, whereas the vinous fermentation hardly needs any. By means
of this apparatus we can ascertain, with great precision, the weights of
the substances submitted to fermentation, and of the liquid and aeriform
products which are disengaged. What has been already said in Part I.
Chap. XIII. upon the products of the vinous fermentation, may be
consulted.


SECT. IV.

_Apparatus for the Decomposition of Water._

Having already given an account, in the first part of this work, of the
experiments relative to the decomposition of water, I shall avoid any
unnecessary repetitions, and only give a few summary observations upon
the subject in this section. The principal substances which have the
power of decomposing water are iron and charcoal; for which purpose,
they require to be made red hot, otherwise the water is only reduced
into vapours, and condenses afterwards by refrigeration, without
sustaining the smallest alteration. In a red heat, on the contrary, iron
or charcoal carry off the oxygen from its union with hydrogen; in the
first case, black oxyd of iron is produced, and the hydrogen is
disengaged pure in form of gas; in the other case, carbonic acid gas is
formed, which disengages, mixed with the hydrogen gas; and this latter
is commonly carbonated, or holds charcoal in solution.

A musket barrel, without its breach pin, answers exceedingly well for
the decomposition of water, by means of iron, and one should be chosen
of considerable length, and pretty strong. When too short, so as to run
the risk of heating the lute too much, a tube of copper is to be
strongly soldered to one end. The barrel is placed in a long furnace,
CDEF, Pl. VII. Fig. 11. so as to have a few degrees of inclination from
E to F; a glass retort A, is luted to the upper extremity E, which
contains water, and is placed upon the furnace VVXX. The lower extremity
F is luted to a worm SS, which is connected with the tubulated bottle H,
in which any water distilled without decomposition, during the
operation, collects, and the disengaged gas is carried by the tube KK to
jars in a pneumato-chemical apparatus. Instead of the retort a funnel
may be employed, having its lower part shut by a stop-cock, through
which the water is allowed to drop gradually into the gun-barrel.
Immediately upon getting into contact with the heated part of the iron,
the water is converted into steam, and the experiment proceeds in the
same manner as if it were furnished in vapours from the retort.

In the experiment made by Mr Meusnier and me before a committee of the
Academy, we used every precaution to obtain the greatest possible
precision in the result of our experiment, having even exhausted all the
vessels employed before we began, so that the hydrogen gas obtained
might be free from any mixture of azotic gas. The results of that
experiment will hereafter be given at large in a particular memoir.

In numerous experiments, we are obliged to use tubes of glass,
porcelain, or copper, instead of gun-barrels; but glass has the
disadvantage of being easily melted and flattened, if the heat be in the
smallest degree raised too high; and porcelain is mostly full of small
minute pores, through which the gas escapes, especially when compressed
by a column of water. For these reasons I procured a tube of brass,
which Mr de la Briche got cast and bored out of the solid for me at
Strasburg, under his own inspection. This tube is extremely convenient
for decomposing alkohol, which resolves into charcoal, carbonic acid
gas, and hydrogen gas; it may likewise be used with the same advantage
for decomposing water by means of charcoal, and in a great number of
experiments of this nature.

FOOTNOTES:

[60] The representation of this apparatus, Pl. IV. Fig. 1. will convey a
much better idea of its disposition than can possibly be given by the
most laboured description.--E.




CHAP. VII.

_Of the Composition and Application of Lutes._


The necessity of properly securing the junctures of chemical vessels to
prevent the escape of any of the products of experiments, must be
sufficiently apparent; for this purpose lutes are employed, which ought
to be of such a nature as to be equally impenetrable to the most subtile
substances, as glass itself, through which only caloric can escape.

This first object of lutes is very well accomplished by bees wax, melted
with about an eighth part of turpentine. This lute is very easily
managed, sticks very closely to glass, and is very difficultly
penetrable; it may be rendered more consistent, and less or more hard or
pliable, by adding different kinds of resinous matters. Though this
species of lute answers extremely well for retaining gasses and vapours,
there are many chemical experiments which produce considerable heat, by
which this lute becomes liquified, and consequently the expansive
vapours must very readily force through and escape.

For such cases, the following fat lute is the best hitherto discovered,
though not without its disadvantages, which shall be pointed out. Take
very pure and dry unbaked clay, reduced to a very fine powder, put this
into a brass mortar, and beat it for several hours with a heavy iron
pestle, dropping in slowly some boiled lintseed oil; this is oil which
has been oxygenated, and has acquired a drying quality, by being boiled
with litharge. This lute is more tenacious, and applies better, if amber
varnish be used instead of the above oil. To make this varnish, melt
some yellow amber in an iron laddle, by which operation it loses a part
of its succinic acid, and essential oil, and mix it with lintseed oil.
Though the lute prepared with this varnish is better than that made with
boiled oil, yet, as its additional expence is hardly compensated by its
superior quality, it is seldom used.

The above fat lute is capable of sustaining a very violent degree of
heat, is impenetrable by acids and spiritous liquors, and adheres
exceedingly well to metals, stone ware, or glass, providing they have
been previously rendered perfectly dry. But if, unfortunately, any of
the liquor in the course of an experiment gets through, either between
the glass and the lute, or between the layers of the lute itself, so as
to moisten the part, it is extremely difficult to close the opening.
This is the chief inconvenience which attends the use of fat lute, and
perhaps the only one it is subject to. As it is apt to soften by heat,
we must surround all the junctures with slips of wet bladder applied
over the luting, and fixed on by pack-thread tied round both above and
below the joint; the bladder, and consequently the lute below, must be
farther secured by a number of turns of pack-thread all over it. By
these precautions, we are free from every danger of accident; and the
junctures secured in this manner may be considered, in experiments, as
hermetically sealed.

It frequently happens that the figure of the junctures prevents the
application of ligatures, which is the case with the three-necked
bottles formerly described; and it even requires great address to apply
the twine without shaking the apparatus; so that, where a number of
junctures require luting, we are apt to displace several while securing
one. In these cases, we may substitute slips of linen, spread with white
of egg and lime mixed together, instead of the wet bladder. These are
applied while still moist, and very speedily dry and acquire
considerable hardness. Strong glue dissolved in water may answer instead
of white of egg. These fillets are usefully applied likewise over
junctures luted together with wax and rosin.

Before applying a lute, all the junctures of the vessels must be
accurately and firmly fitted to each other, so as not to admit of being
moved. If the beak of a retort is to be luted to the neck of a
recipient, they ought to fit pretty accurately; otherwise we must fix
them, by introducing short pieces of soft wood or of cork. If the
disproportion between the two be very considerable, we must employ a
cork which fits the neck of the recipient, having a circular hole of
proper dimensions to admit the beak of the retort. The same precaution
is necessary in adapting bent tubes to the necks of bottles in the
apparatus represented Pl. IV. Fig. 1. and others of a similar nature.
Each mouth of each bottle must be fitted with a cork, having a hole made
with a round file of a proper size for containing the tube. And, when
one mouth is intended to admit two or more tubes, which frequently
happens when we have not a sufficient number of bottles with two or
three necks, we must use a cork with two or three holes, Pl. IV. Fig. 8.

When the whole apparatus is thus solidly joined, so that no part can
play upon another, we begin to lute. The lute is softened by kneading
and rolling it between the fingers, with the assistance of heat, if
necessary. It is rolled into little cylindrical pieces, and applied to
the junctures, taking great care to make it apply close, and adhere
firmly, in every part; a second roll is applied over the first, so as to
pass it on each side, and so on till each juncture be sufficiently
covered; after this, the slips of bladder, or of linen, as above
directed, must be carefully applied over all. Though this operation may
appear extremely simple, yet it requires peculiar delicacy and
management; great care must be taken not to disturb one juncture whilst
luting another, and more especially when applying the fillets and
ligatures.

Before beginning any experiment, the closeness of the luting ought
always to be previously tried, either by slightly heating the retort A,
Pl. IV. Fig. 1, or by blowing in a little air by some of the
perpendicular tubes S s s s; the alteration of pressure causes a
change in the level of the liquid in these tubes. If the apparatus be
accurately luted, this alteration of level will be permanent; whereas,
if there be the smallest, opening in any of the junctures, the liquid
will very soon recover its former level. It must always be remembered,
that the whole success of experiments in modern chemistry depends upon
the exactness of this operation, which therefore requires the utmost
patience, and most attentive accuracy.

It would be of infinite service to enable chemists, especially those who
are engaged in pneumatic processes, to dispense with the use of lutes,
or at least to diminish the number necessary in complicated instruments.
I once thought of having my apparatus constructed so as to unite in all
its parts by fitting with emery, in the way of bottles with cristal
stoppers; but the execution of this plan was extremely difficult. I have
since thought it preferable to substitute columns of a few lines of
mercury in place of lutes, and have got an apparatus constructed upon
this principle, which appears capable of very convenient application in
a great number of circumstances.

It consists of a double necked bottle A, Pl. XII. Fig. 12.; the interior
neck bc communicates with the inside of the bottle, and the exterior
neck or rim de leaves an interval between the two necks, forming a
deep gutter intended to contain the mercury. The cap or lid of glass B
enters this gutter, and is properly fitted to it, having notches in its
lower edge for the passage of the tubes which convey the gas. These
tubes, instead of entering directly into the bottles as in the ordinary
apparatus, have a double bend for making them enter the gutter, as
represented in Fig. 13. and for making them fit the notches of the cap
B; they rise again from the gutter to enter the inside of the bottle
over the border of the inner mouth. When the tubes are disposed in their
proper places, and the cap firmly fitted on, the gutter is filled with
mercury, by which means the bottle is completely excluded from any
communication, excepting through the tubes. This apparatus may be very
convenient in many operations in which the substances employed have no
action upon Mercury. Pl. XII. Fig. 14. represents an apparatus upon this
principle properly fitted together.

Mr Seguin, to whose active and intelligent assistance I have been very
frequently much indebted, has bespoken for me, at the glass-houses, some
retorts hermetically united to their recipients, by which luting will be
altogether unnecessary.




CHAP. VIII.

_Of Operations upon Combustion and Deflagration._


SECT. I.

_Of Combustion in general._

Combustion, according to what has been already said in the First Part of
this Work, is the decomposition of oxygen gas produced by a combustible
body. The oxygen which forms the base of this gas is absorbed by, and
enters into, combination with the burning body, while the caloric and
light are set free. Every combustion, therefore, necessarily supposes
oxygenation; whereas, on the contrary, every oxygenation does not
necessarily imply concomitant combustion; because combustion, properly
so called, cannot take place without disengagement of caloric and light.
Before combustion can take place, it is necessary that the base of
oxygen gas should have greater affinity to the combustible body than it
has to caloric; and this elective attraction, to use Bergman's
expression, can only take place at a certain degree of temperature,
which is different for each combustible substance; hence the necessity
of giving a first motion or beginning to every combustion by the
approach of a heated body. This necessity of heating any body we mean to
burn depends upon certain considerations, which have not hitherto been
attended to by any natural philosopher, for which reason I shall enlarge
a little upon the subject in this place.

Nature is at present in a state of equilibrium, which cannot have been
attained until all the spontaneous combustions or oxygenations possible
in the ordinary degrees of temperature had taken place. Hence, no new
combustions or oxygenations can happen without destroying this
equilibrium, and raising the combustible substances to a superior degree
of temperature. To illustrate this abstract view of the matter by
example: Let us suppose the usual temperature of the earth a little
changed, and that it is raised only to the degree of boiling water; it
is evident, that, in this case, phosphorus, which is combustible in a
considerably lower degree of temperature, would no longer exist in
nature in its pure and simple state, but would always be procured in its
acid or oxygenated state, and its radical would become one of the
substances unknown to chemistry. By gradually increasing the
temperature of the earth the same circumstance would successively happen
to all the bodies capable of combustion; and, at last, every possible
combustion having taken place, there would no longer exist any
combustible body whatever, as every substance susceptible of that
operation would be oxygenated, and consequently incombustible.

There cannot therefore exist, so far as relates to us, any combustible
body, except such as are incombustible in the ordinary temperatures of
the earth; or, what is the same thing, in other words, that it is
essential to the nature of every combustible body not to possess the
property of combustion, unless heated, or raised to the degree of
temperature at which its combustion naturally takes place. When this
degree is once produced, combustion commences, and the caloric which is
disengaged by the decomposition of the oxygen gas keeps up the
temperature necessary for continuing combustion. When this is not the
case, that is, when the disengaged caloric is insufficient for keeping
up the necessary temperature, the combustion ceases: This circumstance
is expressed in common language by saying, that a body burns ill, or
with difficulty.

Although combustion possesses some circumstances in common with
distillation, especially with the compound kind of that operation, they
differ in a very material point. In distillation there is a separation
of one part of the elements of the substance from each other, and a
combination of these, in a new order, occasioned by the affinities which
take place in the increased temperature produced during distillation:
This likewise happens in combustion, but with this farther circumstance,
that a new element, not originally in the body, is brought into action;
oxygen is added to the substance submitted to the operation, and caloric
is disengaged.

The necessity of employing oxygen in the state of gas in all experiments
with combustion, and the rigorous determination of the quantities
employed, render this kind of operations peculiarly troublesome. As
almost all the products of combustion are disengaged in the state of
gas, it is still more difficult to retain them than even those furnished
during compound distillation; hence this precaution was entirely
neglected by the ancient chemists; and this set of experiments
exclusively belong to modern chemistry.

Having thus pointed out, in a general way, the objects to be had in view
in experiments upon combustion, I proceed, in the following sections of
this chapter, to describe the different instruments I have used with
this view. The following arrangement is formed, not upon the nature of
the combustible bodies, but upon that of the instruments necessary for
combustion.


SECT. II.
