
Considerable time went by. Since the crabs had taken our watches, we
had no very accurate way of counting days; but I think we slept about
a dozen times. Ray and Mildred spent a good deal of time together, and
seemed not altogether to hate each other. By the end of the time my
feet were quite well; I did not even lose a toe.

We went over our plans for escape in great detail. The crabs had
confiscated our clothing. Mildred managed to secure the return of her
furs, and, incidentally, while she was about it, learned where the
rifle was.

Fortunately, perhaps realizing that it would be ruined by water, the
crabs had not taken it to their submerged city. Being amphibious, they
lived above water as easily as below, and much of their industrial
equipment was above the surface. The great pumps which lifted the
white phosphorescent liquid from the canals back to the cone above the
ground were located beyond the great lake. I did not see the place,
but Ray tells me that they had great engines and a wealth of strange
and complex machinery there. It was at these pumps that they had left
our rifle and instruments, as Mildred found when she was recovering
her furs.

They had taken our food, and we prepared as much more as we could
carry, arranged sacks for it, and made quilted garments for ourselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then the three brazen notes clanged out, and Mildred ran across the
beach and swam out to the blue cylinder to sing. Ray slipped hurriedly
away, while the green forest of antennae was still growing up from the
water about the girl.

I waited above the beach, enchanted by the haunting, wordless melody
of the gongs. It seemed that only a few minutes had passed, though it
may have been an hour or more, when Ray was by my side again. He
flourished the rifle.

"I've got it! In good shape, too. Hasn't even been fired, though it
looks like they have opened a box of cartridges, and cut open one or
two. Maybe they didn't understand the outfit--or it may be such a
primitive weapon that they aren't interested in it."

We hurried up to the building of blue cylinders and carefully hid the
gun and ammunition, as well as a sun compass, a pair of prism
binoculars, and a few other articles Ray had recovered.

In a few minutes Mildred, having seen Ray's return, finished her song
and ran up to join us. We arranged our packs, and waited the next call
of the throbbing brazen gong to make the attempt for freedom.

We slept twice again before the clang of the great gong. Ray and
Mildred were always together; I could not see that they were at all
impatient.

The bell note came, the awful brazen vibration of it ringing on the
black cavern roof. It came when we were eating, in the liquid
turquoise radiance of the lofty cylinder. We sprang out. Ray gave his
last directions to Mildred.

"Give us time to get to the top of the cliff by the shining fall. Then
swim ashore and run. They may not notice. And if they do, we give 'em
a taste of lead!"

I was not very much surprised when he took the girl in his arms and
put a burning kiss on her red lips. She gasped, but her struggles
subsided very quickly; she clung to him as he freed her.

She paused a moment in the door, before she ran down across the beach.
A radiant light of joy was burning in her great blue eyes, even though
tears were glistening there.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ray and I waited, to give time for the giant crabs that guarded the
ladder to get away. In about ten more minutes the second brazen gong
sounded, and presently the third. We gathered up the heavy packs of
food. Ray took the rifle and I the binoculars, and we slipped out into
the brilliant mushroom forest.

I stepped confidently out of the jungle into the clearing below the
splendid opalescent fall of fire--and threw myself backward in
trembling panic. A flaming crimson ray cut hissing into the towering
mushrooms above my head.

Mildred's confidence that the crabs would all gather at the ringing of
the gong had been mistaken. The two guards had been waiting at the
foot of the ladder, their flaming heat-rays ready for use.

As I dived back into the jungle, I heard two quick reports of the
rifle. I scrambled awkwardly to my feet, beneath the heavy pack. Ray
stood alert beside me, the smoking rifle in his hand. The giant crabs
had collapsed by the foot of the ladder, in grotesque and hideous
metal-bound heaps of red shell and twisted limb. Blood was oozing from
a ragged hole in the head of each.

"Glad they were here," Ray muttered. "I wanted to try the gun out on
'em. They're soft enough beneath the shell; the bullet tears 'em up
inside. Let's get a move on!"

He sprang past the revolting carcasses. I followed, holding my nose
against their nauseating, charnel-house odor. We scrambled up the
metal ladder.

As we climbed, I could hear the haunting melody of Mildred's wordless
song coming faint across the distance. Once I glanced back for a
moment, and glimpsed her tiny white figure above the black water, with
the thousands of green antennae rising in a luminous forest about her.

We reached the top of the cliff, where the opalescent river plunged
down in the flaming fall. Ray chose convenient boulders for shelter
and quickly we flung ourselves flat. Ray replaced the fired cartridges
in the rifle and leveled it across the rock before him. I unslung the
binoculars and focussed them.

"Watch 'em close," Ray muttered. "And tell me when to shoot."

       *       *       *       *       *

The black lake lay below us, with the weird city of sapphire cylinders
on its floor. I got the glasses upon Mildred's white form. Soon she
dived from the turquoise pedestal, swam swiftly ashore and vanished in
the vivid fungous jungle. The wavering green antennae vanished below
the water; I watched the crabs swimming away. Some of them climbed out
of the water and lumbered off in various directions.

In fifteen minutes the slender white form of Mildred appeared at the
foot of the ladder. She sprang over the dead crabs and scrambled
nimbly up. Soon she was halfway up the face of the cliff, and there
had been no sign of discovery. My hopes ran high.

I was sweeping the whole plain with the binoculars, while Ray peered
through the telescopic sights of the rifle. Suddenly I saw a giant
crab pause as he lumbered along the edge of the black lake. He rose
upright; his shining green antennae wavered. Then I saw him reaching
with a knobbed claw for a slender silver tube slung to his harness.

"Quick! The one by the lake! To the right of that canal!"

I pointed quickly. Ray swung his gun about, aimed. A broad red beam
flashed from the tube the thing carried, and fell upon the cliff. The
report of Ray's rifle rang thunderously in my ears. The red ray was
snapped off abruptly, and the giant crab rolled over into the black
water of the lake. Half a dozen of the huge crabs were in sight. They
all took alarm, probably having seen the flash of the red ray. They
raised grotesque heads, twisted stalked eyes and waved green antennae.
Some of them began to raise the metal tubes of the heat-ray.

"Let's get all there are in sight!" Ray muttered.

He began firing regularly, with deliberate precision. A few times he
had to take two shots, but ordinarily one was enough to bring down a
giant crab in a writhing red mass. Three times a red ray flashed out,
once at the girl clambering up the ladder, twice at our position above
the precipice. But the intense color of the ray announced its source,
and Ray stopped each before it could be focussed to do damage.

I looked over at Mildred and saw that she was still climbing bravely,
a little over a hundred feet below.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then the great red crabs began to climb out of the water, heat-ray
tubes grasped in their claws. Ray fired as fast as he could load and
aim. Still he shot with deliberate care, and almost every shot was
effective.

Intense, ruby-red rays flashed up from the lake shore. Twice, one of
them beat scorchingly upon us for a moment. Once a rock beside us was
fused and cracked with the heat. But Ray fired rapidly, and the rays
winked out as fast as they were born.

He was powder-stained, black and grimy. The heat-ray had singed his
clothing. He was dripping perspiration. The gun was so hot that he
could hardly handle it. But still the angry bark of the rifle rang
out, almost with a deliberate rhythm. Ray was a fine shot in his youth
on his father's Arizona ranch, but his best shooting, I think, was
done from above that cascade of liquid fire, at the hordes of monster
scarlet crabs.

Mildred scrambled over the edge, unharmed. Her breast was heaving, but
her face was bright with joy.

"You are wonderful!" she gasped to Ray.

We seized the packs and beat a hurried retreat. A crimson forest of
the heat-rays flashed up behind us, and flamed upon the black walls
and roof of the cavern until glistening lava became incandescent,
cracked and fused.

We were below the line of the rays. Quickly we made the bend in the
cavern and followed at a halting run up the path beside the shimmering
river of opalescent light. Before us the torrent of fire fell in a
magnificent flaming arc from the roof.

We rounded the pool of lambent milk of flame, passed the roaring
torrent of coruscating liquid radiance and reached the ladder in the
square, metal shaft. "If we can get to the top before they can get up
here, we're safe," Ray said. "If we don't, this shaft will be a
chimney of fire."

In the haste of desperation, we attacked the thousand-foot climb. I
went first, Mildred below me, and Ray, with the rifle, in the rear.
Our heavy packs were a terrible impediment, but we dared not attempt
to go on without them. The metal rungs were four feet apart; it was no
easy task to scramble from one to the next, again and again, for
hundreds of times.

       *       *       *       *       *

It must have taken us an hour to make it. We should have been caught
long before we reached the top, but the giant crabs were slow in their
lumbering movements. Despite their evident intelligence, they seemed
to lack anything like our railways and automobiles.

The cold gray light of the polar sky came about us; a dull,
purple-blue square grew larger above. I clambered over the last rung,
flung myself across the top of the metal shaft. Looking down at the
tiny fleck of white light so far below, I saw a bit of red move in it.

"A crab!" I shouted. "Hurry!"

Mildred was just below me. I took her pack and helped her over the
edge.

Red flame flared up the shaft.

We reached over, seized Ray's arms and fairly jerked him out of the
ruby ray.

The bitterly cold wind struck our hot, perspiring bodies as we
scrambled down the rungs outside the square metal shaft. Mildred
shivered in her thin attire.

"Out of the frying pan into the ice box!" Ray jested grimly as we
dropped, to the frozen plain.

Quickly we tore open our packs. Ray and I snatched out clothing and
wrapped up the trembling girl. In a few minutes we had her snugly
dressed in the fur garments that had been Major Meriden's. Then we got
into the quilted garments we had made for ourselves.

The intensely red heat-beam still flared up the shaft. Ray looked at
it in satisfaction.

"They'll have it so hot they can't get up it for some time yet," he
remarked hopefully.

We shouldered our packs and set out over the wilderness of snow,
turning our backs upon the metal-bound lake of fire, with the tall
cone of iridescent flame rising in its center.

The deep, purple-blue sky was clear, and, for a rarity, there was not
much wind. I doubt that the temperature was twenty below. But it was a
violent change from the warm cavern. Mildred was blue and shivering.

       *       *       *       *       *

In two hours the metal rim below the great white cone had vanished
behind the black ice-crags. We passed near the wreck of Major
Meriden's plane and reached our last camp, where we had left the tent
sledge, primus stove, and most of our instruments. The tent was still
stretched, though banked with snow. We got Mildred inside, chafed her
hands, and soon had her comfortable.

Then Ray went out and soon returned with a sealed tin of oil from the
wrecked plane, with which he lit the primus stove. Soon the tent was
warm. We melted snow and cooked thick red soup. After the girl had
made a meal of the scalding soup, with the little golden cakes, she
professed to be feeling as well as ever.

"We can fix our plane!" Ray said. "There's a perfectly good prop on
Meriden's plane!"

We went back to the wreck, found the tools, and removed an undamaged
propeller. This we packed on the sledge, with a good supply of fuel
for the stove.

"I'm sure we're safe now, so far as the crab-things go," he said. "I
don't fancy they'd get around very well in the snow."

In an hour we broke camp, and made ten miles of the distance back to
the plane before we stopped. We were anxious about Mildred, but she
seemed to stand the journey admirably; she is a marvelous physical
specimen. She seemed running over with gay vivacity of spirit; she
asked innumerable questions of the world which she had known only at
second-hand from her mother's words.

       *       *       *       *       *

The weather smiled on us during the march back to the plane as much as
it had frowned on the terrible journey to the cone. We had an
abundance of food and fuel, and we made it in eight easy stages. Once
there was a light fall of snow, but the air was unusually warm and
calm for the season.

We found the plane safe. It was the work of but a short time to remove
the broken propeller and replace it with the one we had brought from
the wrecked ship. We warmed and started the engine, broke the skids
loose from the ice, turned the plane around, and took off safely from
the tiny scrap of smooth ice.

Mildred seemed amazed and immensely delighted at the sensations of her
first trip aloft.

A few hours later we were landing beside the _Albatross_, in the
leaden blue sea beyond the ice barrier. Bluff Captain Harper greeted
us in amazed delight as we climbed to the deck.

"You're just in time!" he said. "The relief expedition we landed came
back a week ago. We had no idea you could still be alive, with only a
week's provisions. We were sailing to-morrow. But tell us! What
happened? Your passenger--"

"We just stopped to pick up my fiancee," Ray grinned. "Captain, may I
present Miss Mildred Meriden? We'll be wanting you to marry us right
away."


THE MENACE OF THE INSECT

It is possible that future study may tell man enough about insects to
enable him to eradicate them. This, however, is more than can be
reasonably expected, for the more we cultivate the earth the better we
make conditions for these enemies. The insect thrives on the work of
man. And having made conditions ideal for the insect, with great
expanses of cultivated food fitted to his needs, it is an optimist who
can believe that at the same time we can make other conditions which
will be so unfavorable as to cause him to disappear completely. The
two things do not go together.

The insect is much better fitted for life than is man. He can survive
long periods of famine, he can survive extremes of heat and cold. The
insect produces great numbers of young which have no long period of
infancy requiring the attention of the parents over a large part of
their life. Every function of the insect is directed toward the
propagation of the race and the use of minimum effort in every other
direction.

It is even possible in some cases, the water flea, for example, for
the female to produce young without the necessity of fertilization by
the male. In order to perform the necessary work to insure food
supplies for the winter other insects have developed highly
specialized workers, especially fitted to do particular kinds of
labor. Ants and termites are in this class.

If we examine the organization of insects closely we shall find but
one point at which they are vulnerable. This is in their lack of
ability to reason. True, there is considerable evidence to support the
belief that some insects are capable of simple reasoning, but the
development in this direction is only of the most elementary nature.
As compared to man it is safe to say that they do not reason. They are
guided by instinct.

This again is the most efficient way to organize their affairs. It
requires no long period of training. They can begin performing all
their useful functions as soon as their bodily development makes it
possible. No one need teach them how to catch their prey, how to build
their nests or shelters. Instinct takes care of this. But this,
obviously the best system in a world wholly governed by instinct, is
not so desirable when the instinctively actuated insect encounters
