
A glow of light illuminated me as I stood in the middle of the
passage; Migul was in a shadow behind me.

A man's voice answered, "You are a human? How come you there? Who are
you?"

"A stranger. A friend of the Princess Tina. I came in the
Time-traveling cage. I want to pass now into the palace."

       *       *       *       *       *

I could see the dark man's figure behind the grille. His voice called,
"Come slowly forward and stop at twenty feet. Walk only in the middle
of the passage: the sides are electrified, but I will admit you along
the middle."

I took a step, but no more. The figure of the guard stood now at the
grille doorway. I was conscious of Migul towering over me from behind.
Abruptly I felt a huge hand in my jacket pocket, and before I could
prevent it my cylinder came out, clutched by the Robot.

I think I half turned. There was a soundless flash beside me, a tiny
level beam leaped down the corridor--that horribly intense actinic
white beam. It struck the guard, and his figure fell forward in the
grille doorway. When we reached him, there was but a crumpled heap of
black and white garments enveloping a bleached white skeleton.

I turned shudderingly away. Migul said calmly, "Here is your weapon.
You should have used it more quickly. I give it back to you because
against Tugh I am not sure I would have the will to use it. Will you
be more quick with him?"

"Yes," I promised. And as we went through the gate, keeping cautiously
in the middle of the passage, the Robot added, "In dealing with Tugh
you cannot stop for talk. He will kill you when he sees you."

We were presently under the palace, in those lower corridors which I
have already described. Human voices were audible from upstairs, but
no one was down here. Migul was again prowling with his fingers along
the ground. We came to an unoccupied lighted room--Harl's room, though
I did not know it then. Once or twice Migul was at fault. We started
up a flight of stairs into the palace, then Migul came and turned
back.

"He went upstairs; but this, coming down, is more recent."[1]

[Footnote 1: It will be recalled that Tugh passed Alent's gate, and
with Tina and Larry went to the palace roof. Perhaps, while Larry was
with the Council during that time when the Robot revolt was first
sweeping over the city, Tugh may again have prowled down here in these
lower corridors. Then he went upstairs, brought Tina and Larry down
and they started for the Power House.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Migul had struck the main trail, now. We passed the lighted room
again, went on to a cave-like open space with a litter of abandoned
machinery and unswervingly to a blank space of the opposite wall.

Again Migul faltered.

"What's the matter, Migul?"

"His vibrations are faint. They are blurred with the Princess Tina's."

"Then she is with him?"

It was a tremendous relief. Larry doubtless was with them also.

"Is the man from 1935 with Tugh and the Princess?" I asked.

"I think so. There are unfamiliar vibrations--perhaps those of the man
from the past."

The Robot was running the filaments of its fingers lightly over the
wall.

"I have it. The Princess pressed this switch."

The door opened; the narrow descending tunnel was wholly black.

"Where does this go, Migul?"

"I do not know."

The Robot was stooping to the floor. "It is a plain trail," it said.
"Come."[2]

[Footnote 2: Had Migul at that juncture traced Tina's movements--her
hand where it went along the tunnel-wall--we would have found the
light switch. But it chanced that the Robot's fingers went at once to
the ground and caught the foot-trail of Tugh.]

The remainder of that journey through the labyrinth of passages was
made in blank darkness, with only the faint lurid red beams from
Migul's eye-sockets to light our way. But we went swiftly, and without
incident. At last we went under the dam, up the spiral stairs and upon
the catwalk above the abyss, where the great spillway of falling water
arched out over us.

"The Power House," said Migul, "is where they went."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Robot was obviously frightened, now. We were wet with spray. "I
should not be here," it said. "If the water gets into me--even though
I am well insulated--I will be destroyed!"

I recall as I write this how in Patton Place of 1935, one of the first
attacking Robots had exploded under a jet of water from the street
hydrant.

"I will stay behind you," Migul added. "They have a deranging ray in
the Power House, and they might use it on me. Will you protect me?"

"Yes, of course," I said.

I was ready to promise anything, if only I could get to Larry and
Tina, then back with them to Mary into the Time-cage; and if we were
safely out of this era, most assuredly I wanted none of it again.
Migul, as I advanced along the catwalk, followed behind me.

"You will kill Tugh?" it reiterated like an anxious child.

"Yes."

I saw that the catwalk terminated ahead under the Power House, where
steps led upward. Then I heard a cry:

"Help! Help! Here, inside the dam! Help!"

I stood transfixed, with horror tingling my flesh. The voice came
faintly from near at hand; it was muffled, and in the roar of the
falling water and lashing spray I barely heard it.

Then it came again. "Help us! Help us, quickly!"

It was an agonized, panting, human voice. And in a chance, partial
lull I heard it now plainly.

It was Larry's voice!


CHAPTER XXI

_The Fight in the Power House_

I found the narrow aperture and stood peering down into darkness.
Migul crowded behind me. The red beams of its eyes went down into the
pit, and by their faint illumination I saw the heads of Larry and a
girl, swimming twenty feet below. The girl's dark hair floated out
like black seaweed in the water.

"The Princess and the strange man!" exclaimed Migul.

I called, "Larry! Larry!"

His labored voice came up. "George? Thank God! Get us--out of here.
Almost--gone, George!"

I found my wits: "Then keep quiet! Don't talk. Save your strength.
I'll get you out!"

But how? I could see that they were almost spent, for they were
swimming with labored, inefficient strokes--Larry using most of his
strength to hold up the exhausted girl. We had not a moment to spare.
I wildly contemplated tearing my garments to make a rope.

But Migul pushed me away. "I will bring them. Stand back."

The Robot had opened its metal side and drawn forth a flexible wire
with a foot-long hook fastened to it. The wire came smoothly out as
though unrolling from a drum.

It leaned into the aperture and called down to Larry. "Fasten this
around the Princess. Be careful not to harm her. Put it under her
arms."

I saw that there was an eyelet on the wire into which the hook could
be inserted to make a loop.

"Under her arms," Migul called. "She will have to hold to the hook
with her hands or the wire will cut into her. Has she the strength?"

Larry floundered as he adjusted the wire. Tina gasped. "I--have the
strength."

The Robot braced itself, spreading its knees against the aperture with
its body leaning forward.

"Ready?" it called.

"Yes," came Larry's voice.

       *       *       *       *       *

Migul's finger pressed a button at the base of its neck, and with the
smooth power of machinery the wire cable rolled into its side. Tina
came up; Migul gripped her and pulled her through the aperture; laid
her gently on the catwalk. I unfastened the hook, and soon Migul had
Larry up with us.

The Robot stood aside, with its work done, silently regarding us. I
need not detail this reunion of Larry and me there on the spray-swept
catwalk, clinging to the side of the great dam with the foaming Hudson
beneath us. Larry and Tina were not injured, and presently their
strength partially returned. We hastily sketched what had happened to
each of us.

It was Tugh who was the guiding evil genius of all these disasters!
Tugh, the exile of Time, the ruthless murderer in many eras! He was
here, very probably, in the Power House, a few hundred feet away.

And Tina, regarding that Power House with her returning clarity of
senses saw that its sending signal lights were off, which meant that
the air-power of the New York District was not being supplied. Help
from other cities could not arrive.

Tina stood up waveringly. "We cannot stay here like this!" she said.
"Tugh has killed the guards, and is there in control. The electrical
defenses are shut off; they must be! The Robots will soon be coming
along the top of the dam, for their battery renewers are stored in the
Power House. If they get them, this massacre will go on for days!--and
spread all over! We've got to stop them! We must get in the Power
House and capture Tugh!"

"But we have no weapons!" Larry cried. "And he must have that
white-ray, if he has killed the guards!"

"I have a weapon!" I said. I had suddenly recalled the cylinder in my
pocket. "I have a white-ray!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A desperate madness was on us all. The lives of thousands of people
who might still be alive on Manhattan were at stake; and other
millions would be menaced if these Robots renewed their energy and
spread the revolt into other cities.

Over the roar, and the wind lashing us, I shouted:

"I promised Migul I would kill Tugh. I will!"

I turned toward Migul. But the Robot had vanished! Afraid, no doubt,
that we would want it to go with us after Tugh, the terrified
mechanism was hiding. We wasted no time searching for it.

We had all been half hysterical for these few moments, but we steadied
quickly enough as we approached the Power House's lower entrance. The
building was a rectangular structure some two hundred feet long. It
was fastened upon great brackets to the perpendicular side of the dam
and jutted out some fifty feet. It was two levels in height--a total
of about forty feet to its flat roof, in the center of which was set a
small oval tower. The whole structure was above us now; the catwalk
went close underneath it, passing through an arch of the huge
supporting brackets and terminating in a small lower platform, with an
open spiral staircase leading upward some ten feet into the lower
story.

The place seemed dark and deserted as we crept up to it. Gazing above
me, I could see the top of the dam, now looming above the Power House.
There was a break in the spillway at this point. The arching cascade
of water under which the catwalk hung ended here. We came out where
there was a vista of the lower Hudson beneath us, showing dimly down
past the docklights and skeleton landing stages to the bay.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sky was visible now and the open wind struck us full. It was a
crazy pendulum wind. A storm was breaking overhead. There were flares
of lightning and thunder cracks--from disturbed nature, outraged by
the temperature changes of the Robot's red and violet rays.

The Power House, so far as we could see, was dark and deserted. Its
normal lights were extinguished. Was Tugh in there? It was my weapon
against his. The white-ray was new to Tina; we had no way of
estimating this cylinder's effective range.[3]

[Footnote 3: The cylinder of the white-ray which I carried was not the
one with which Tugh murdered Harl. Mine was portable, and considerably
smaller.]

I kept Tina and Larry well behind me. It was a desperate approach, and
I was well aware of it. The catwalk now was illumined at intervals by
the lightning; Tugh from many points of vantage in the Power House
could have seen us and exterminated us with a soundless flash swift as
a lightning bolt itself. But we had to chance it.

We reached the small lower platform. The catwalk terminated. The Power
House was a roof over us. I stood at the foot of the spiral staircase,
which went up through a rectangular opening in the floor. There was a
vista of a dark room-segment.

"Keep behind me," I murmured, and I started up. Was Tugh lurking here,
waiting for me to raise myself above this opening? If he had been, he
could have held his position against a score of assailants.

But he was not. I soon stood breathlessly in a dark metal room. Tina
and Larry came up.

"He's not here," I whispered. It was more silent in here: the
cascading water was further away from us now. There came a flash of
lightning, followed in a few seconds by its accompanying thunder
crash.

I started. "What's that?"

       *       *       *       *       *

On the floor near us lay a gruesome, crumpled thing. I bent over it,
waiting for another flash. When one came I saw it was a heap of
clothes, covering a white skeleton. By the garments Tina knew it was
one of the guards.

We crept into a small interior corridor where a small light was
burning. The remains of two other guards lay here, close by the
doorway as though they had come running at Tugh's alarm, only to be
struck down.

It was horribly gruesome, here in the dimness with these bleached
bones which had been living men so recently. And it was nerve-breaking
to know that Tugh was doubtless here somewhere.

"Listen!" whispered Tina.

There was a crackling sound overhead, and then the blurred murmur of a
voice. An audible broadcasting transmitter was in operation.

"It's in the tower," said Tina swiftly. "Tugh must be there."

This was an infinite relief. We went to the top story, passing,
unheeding, another crumpled heap. Again we stood listening. The
transmitter was hissing and spluttering, and then shouting its
magnified human voice out into the night. It was Tugh up there. He was
calling audibly to his Robots, with words which would be relayed upon
all the local magnifiers in the city. Between the thunder cracks we
heard him plainly now.

"_This is your Master Tugh in the Power House. Robots, we are
triumphant! The city is isolated! No help can get in! Kill all humans!
Spare none! This night sees the end of human rule!_"

And again: "_When you want renewal, come along the top roadway of the
dam. The electric defenses are off. You can come, and I have your
renewers here. I have new batteries, new strength for you Robots!_"[4]

[Footnote 4: Tugh had been in the Power House before. He knew the
operations of its various controls. But he had come always by the
surface route; he had heard of the existence of the secret tunnel, but
