any of their talk?"

"Talk? I didn't hear any."

"Well, mental conversation then. They made no sound."

"No. All I understood was the orders I obeyed."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I got a great deal of it," the doctor said. "We are evidently in or
near a sort of central community of these fellows. They spoke;
thought is a better word; they thought of doing away with us but
decided to wait until they consulted someone with more authority. You
see, we are not airplane pilots. Captain Garland was taken at once to
the place where they have other aviators imprisoned."

"What do they want of pilots underground?"

"I couldn't quite get that. There was another thought that I am not
sure that I interpreted correctly. If I did, there is some man of the
upper world down here in a position of considerable authority among
them. He has some use for pilots, but what use, I don't know. We are
to be held until he is consulted."

"Who could it be?"

"I can only think of one man. Carnes, and I hope I'm wrong. I don't
have to name him."

"You mean--?"

"Ivan Saranoff. We haven't heard of him or had any activity from him
for the last eight months. We know that he had a subterranean borer
with which he has penetrated deep into the earth. Isn't it possible
that he has, at some time in his explorations, come into contact with
these fellows and made friends with them?"

"It's possible, Doctor, but I hoped we had killed him when we
destroyed his borer."

"So did I, but he seems to bear a charmed life. Several times we have
thought him dead, only to have him show up with some new form of
devil's work. It is too much to hope that we have succeeded in doing
away with him. Did you notice one thing? Those fellows were helpless
while I held the light on them. The one which was holding us captive
got so interested in the discussion about our fate that he momentarily
forgot us. That was when I got my light. Until I turned the light away
from them, we were free men."

       *       *       *       *       *

"That's right," answered the secret service man.

"Remember that. The next time we get a light on a bunch of them, hold
them in the beam until we can make terms."

"If we ever get hold of a light again."

"I have a light they didn't get, probably because I didn't think of it
while they were around. It is one of those fountain pen battery
affairs and they probably took it for a pen. I won't turn it on now,
partly to save it and partly not to let them know we have it. Let's
see what our prison is like."

They felt their way around the room. It proved to be eight paces by
ten in size. Like the tunnels it was floored with crepe rubber or some
similar substance which gave out no sound of footsteps, yet was firm
underfoot. The room was furnished with two beds, a table and two
chairs. There was no sign of a door.

"That's that," exclaimed the doctor when they had finished their
exploration. "I'm hungry. I wonder when we eat. Hello, here comes one
of the fellows now."

Carnes made no reply. As the doctor's speech ended, a wave of mental
power enveloped the room. One of the moles entered, moved over to the
table for an instant and then left the room. An earthly odor of
vegetables pervaded the room.

"My question is answered," said the doctor. "We eat now."

He moved to the table. On it had been placed dishes containing three
different types of roots. Two of them proved to be palatable, but the
third was woody and bitter. The prisoners made a hearty meal from the
two they relished. For an hour they sat waiting.

"Here they come again!" exclaimed the doctor. "We are going before the
person I spoke of. Can't you get their thoughts?"

"No, I can't, Doctor. I can understand when I get a command, but aside
from those times everything is a blank to me."

"My mental wave receiver, if that's what it is, must be attuned to a
different frequency than yours, for I can hear them talking to one
another. I guess I should say that I can feel them thinking to one
another. At any rate, they want us to follow. Come along, the road
will be open and level."

       *       *       *       *       *

The doctor stepped out confidently with Carnes at his heels. For half
a mile they went forward. Presently they halted.

"We are in a big chamber here, Carnes," whispered the doctor, "and
there is someone before us. We'll have some light in a minute."

His prophecy was soon fulfilled. A vague glimmer of light began to
fill the cavern in which they stood. As it grew stronger they could
see a raised dais before them on which were seated three figures. Two
of them were the giant moles. Each of the moles wore a helmet which
covered his head completely, with no sign of lenses or other means of
vision. It was the central figure, however, which held the attention
of the prisoners.

Seated on a chair and regarding, them with an expression of sardonic
amusement was a man. Above a high forehead rose a thin scrub of white
hair. Keen brown eyes peered at them from under almost hairless brows.
The nose was high bridged and aquiline and went well with his
prominent cheekbones. His mouth was a mere gash below his nose, framed
by thin bloodless lips. The lips were curled in a sneer, revealing
yellow teeth. The whole expression of the face was one of revolting
cruelty.

"So," said the figure slowly, "fate has been kind to me. My friends,
Dr. Bird and Operative Carnes have chosen to pay me a long visit. I
am greatly flattered."

The thin metallic voice with its noticeable accent struck a familiar
chord.

"Saranoff!" gasped Carnes.

"Yes, Mr. Carnes, Saranoff. Professor Ivan Saranoff, of the faculty of
St. Petersburg once. Now merely Saranoff, the scourge of the
bourgeois."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I hoped we had killed you," murmured Carnes.

"It was no fault of Dr. Bird's that he failed," replied the Russian
with an excess of malevolence in his voice. "His method was a correct
one. Merely the fortuitous fact that we had just pierced one of the
tunnels of the Selom, and I was away from my borer exploring it, saved
me. You did me a good turn, Doctor, without meaning to. You destroyed
an instrument on which I had relied. In doing so, you unwittingly
delivered into my hands a power greater than any I had dreamed of--the
Selom."

"What can a mental cripple like you do with blind allies like them?"
asked Dr. Bird with a contemptuous laugh. The Russian half rose from
his seat in rage. For a moment his hand toyed with a switch before
him. The sardonic sneer came back into his face and he dropped back
into his seat.

"You nearly provoked me to destroy you, Doctor," he said, "but cold
calculation saved you. Since you will never return to the upper world,
save when and as I decree, I have no objection to telling you. The
Selom are not blind. Their eyes are under the skin as is the case with
many of the talpidae, but for all that they can see very well. Their
eyes function on a shorter wave than ours, a wave so short that it
readily penetrates through miles of earth and rock. This cavern is now
flooded with it. Visible light, the light by which we see, is limited
to their eyes, hence the helmets which you see. They can see through
those helmets as well as you or I can see through air."

"What do you intend to do with us?"

"Ah, Doctor, there you hit me in a tender spot. I have a sore
temptation to close this switch on which my hand rests. Were I to do
so, both you and Mr. Carnes would vanish forevermore. I have, however,
conceived a very real affection for you two. Your brains, Doctor,
working in my behalf instead of against me would render me well-nigh
omnipotent. Mr. Carnes has a certain low cunning which I can also use
to advantage. Both of you will join me."

       *       *       *       *       *

"You might as well close your switch and save your breath, Saranoff,
for we will do nothing of the sort," replied the doctor sharply.

"Ah, but you will. So will Mr. Carnes. I had no hopes that you would
join me willingly. In fact, I am pleased that you do not. I could
never trust you. All the same, you will join my forces as have the
others whom I have brought into the hands of the Selom. I have ways of
accomplishing my desires. It pleases my fancy, Doctor, to use your
brains in aiding me in my scientific developments. You will enjoy
working with the scientists of the Selom. Among them you will find
brains which excel any to be found on the surface of the earth, since
we two are below. Already I have learned much from them. You, Mr.
Carnes shall be taught to pilot an airplane. When my cohorts go forth
from the realms of the Selom to establish the rule of Russia, you will
be piloting one of the planes. Your first task will be to learn to
fly."

"I refuse to do anything of the sort!" said Carnes.

"I will not be ready to have your flying lessons started until
to-morrow," replied the Russian, "and you will have until then to
reconsider your rash decision. It will be much easier for you if you
obey my orders. If you still refuse to-morrow, you will pay a visit to
the laboratory of the Selom. When you return your lessons will be
started. You will now be taken to your cell. I have use for Dr. Bird
this afternoon."

"I won't leave Dr. Bird and that's flat!" exclaimed Carnes. Dr. Bird
interrupted him.

"Go ahead, Carnesy, old dear," he said lightly. "You might just as
well toddle along under your own power as to be dragged along. You
have a day for reflection, in any event. I daresay I'll see you again
before they do anything to you."

Carnes glanced keenly at the doctor's face. What he saw evidently
reassured him for he turned without a word and walked away. The light
grew gradually dimmer until darkness again reigned in the cavern.

"Come, Doctor," said Saranoff's voice. "We have work to do."

       *       *       *       *       *

Carnes sat alone in his cell for hours. The darkness and loneliness
wore on him until he felt that his nerves would crack. Not a sound
came to him. He threw himself on one of the beds and plugged his ears
with his finger tips in an attempt to keep the silence out. Then a
cheerful voice sounded in the cell and a friendly hand fell on his
shoulder.

"Well, Carnesy, old dear," said Dr. Bird, "have you been lonesome?"

"Dr. Bird!" gasped Carnes in tones of relief. "Are you all right?"

"Right as can be. I learned a lot this afternoon. For one thing,
you're going to start flying lessons to-morrow and you're going to do
your best to become an expert pilot in a short time. It is the only
thing to do."

"And fly a plane for Saranoff?"

"I hope not. The only way to avoid that very thing is to keep your
mentality unimpaired so that I can call on you for help when I need
it. If the Selom operate on you, you will be useless to me."

"Operate? What do you mean?"

"I'll tell you. The Selom are a very old and highly civilized people.
For ages they have possessed scientific knowledge for which the
upper-world scientists are now blindly groping. Among other things,
they have a perfect knowledge of the workings of the brain. If they
operate they will remove from your brain every speck of memory you
have of past events, leaving only those things that will be useful to
Saranoff. You will be his complete slave. In that condition you will
be taught to fly a plane. When the time comes, you will fly one with
no remembrance of anything which happened prior to the operation and
with no will but his. It will be easier to teach you flying in your
natural state if you are willing. You will be willing."

"If you wish it, Doctor."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I do wish it, most decidedly," Dr. Bird went on. "Obey every order
they give you. You will find that the Selom are an enlightened and
civilized race. They are very kindly and would willingly harm no one."

"Then why have they taken up with Saranoff?"

"He is the first man with whom they have come into contact. He has
told them a horrible tale of conditions on the surface, and they have
swallowed it, hook, line and sinker. They believe that he is going to
establish a new order of happiness and plenty for all with the aid of
his gang of cutthroats from Russia. If they had the slightest inkling
of the true state of affairs, they would turn on him in an instant."

"Why don't you tell them?"

"Remember that I am a stranger here and he has poisoned their minds
against me. Although the mind of an ordinary men is an open book to
them, they cannot read Saranoff's secret thoughts against his will.
They can't read mine either, for that matter. I am working in the
laboratory and I will pick up a great deal. When the time comes, we
will strike for our liberty and for the safety of the world."

"Did you learn Saranoff's plans?"

"Yes. He is gathering planes and pilots in the underground caverns of
the Selom. When he gets enough, he will bring men from Russia to man
the planes. What could the United States, or the world for that
matter, do against a fleet of hundreds, possibly thousands, of the
best planes equipped with deadly weapons unknown to their science?
That menace confronts us and we must remove it. To give you some idea
of the power of the Selom, this afternoon Saranoff and I with one
assistant opened a cavern in the solid rock three miles long and a
mile wide and over six hundred feet in height."

"Three men! How on earth did you do it?"

"Two men and one mole. We did it with a ray, the secret of which only
the Selom and Saranoff know."

       *       *       *       *       *

"You have told me a disintegrating ray is an impossibility," objected
Carnes.

"It is. This was not a disintegrating ray. Carnes, either I am crazy
or the Selom have solved the secret of time, the fourth dimension. I
haven't been able to grasp the whole thing yet. What I think we did
was to remove that rock a distance, perhaps only a millionth of a
second, forward or back into time. At any rate it ceased to exist, yet
they can bring it back unchanged at will. That was the way they
captured our plane. They sent out a magnetic ray of such power that it
stopped our plane in midair and brought it to the ground. They
removed the rock from beneath us and lowered us into the hole. By
reversing the process they restored things to their original
condition. All of these tunnels and rooms were made in that way."

"I still don't understand how they did it."

"I don't either, but I hope to in time. Now let's go to bed. It's
late. To-morrow you will start your lessons with Captain Garland as an
instructor. He won't know you for he was operated on this afternoon.
Do your best to become a pilot. When I get ready, I want you with me
in full possession of all your faculties."

The next morning the two prisoners separated and went to their duties.
In the cavern which Dr. Bird had described, Captain Garland was
waiting beside the plane he had flown. He did not know Carnes, but he
still knew how to fly. Declining to enter into any conversation, he
started expounding the theory of flying to the detective. Carnes
remembered Dr. Bird's words and applied himself wholeheartedly. For
four hours they worked together. At the end of that time the light
faded in the cavern and Carnes was led by an unseen guide back to his
cell. He threw himself on a bed and awaited Dr. Bird's return.

"I have learned a few more things about the Selom," said the doctor
when he entered the cell several hours later. "We are in their largest
community. They have cities or warrens scattered all over the world.
Each city has its own ruler, but the whole race are ruled by an
overlord or king who habitually lives here. He is away visiting a
community under northern Africa just now, but he will be back in a few
days. The Selom are sincere in their desire to help the upper world.
They feel great pity for mankind in view of the conditions Saranoff
has described to them. When the king returns. I plan to make a direct
appeal to him. In the meantime, go on with your flying lessons. How
