including among them such stars as Polaris, Capella, Algol, Spica, [b]
Aurigæ, [z] Ursæ Majoris, etc., and their number is rapidly increasing,
about one star out of every seven whose motion in the line of sight is
determined proving to be a binary or, as in the case of Polaris,
possibly triple. On account of smaller distance apart their periodic
times are much shorter than those of the ordinary double stars, and
range from a few days up to several months--more than two years in the
case of [ê] Pegasi, which has the longest known period of any star of
this class.

Spectroscopic binaries agree with ordinary double stars in having masses
rather greater than that of the sun, but there is as yet no assured case
of a mass ten times as great as that of the sun.

204. VARIABLE STARS.--Attention has already been drawn (§ 23) to the
fact that some stars shine with a changing brightness--e. g., Algol, the
most famous of these _variable stars_, at its maximum of brightness
furnishes three times as much light as when at its minimum, and other
variable stars show an even greater range. The star [o] Ceti has
been named Mira (Latin, _the wonderful_), from its extraordinary range
of brightness, more than six-hundred-fold. For the greater part of the
time this star is invisible to the naked eye, but during some three
months in every year it brightens up sufficiently to be seen, rising
quite rapidly to its maximum brilliancy, which is sometimes that of a
second-magnitude star, but more frequently only third or even fourth
magnitude, and, after shining for a few weeks with nearly maximum
brilliancy, falling off to become invisible for a time and then return
to its maximum brightness after an interval of eleven months from the
preceding maximum. In 1901 it should reach its greatest brilliancy about
midsummer, and a month earlier than this for each succeeding year. Find
it by means of the star map, and by comparing its brightness from night
to night with neighboring stars of about the same magnitude see how it
changes with respect to them.

The interval of time from maximum to maximum of brightness--331.6 days
for Mira--is called the star's period, and within its period a star
regularly variable runs through all its changes of brilliancy, much as
the weather runs through its cycle of changes in the period of a year.
But, as there are wet years and dry ones, hot years and cold, so also
with variable stars, many of them show differences more or less
pronounced between different periods, and one such difference has
already been noted in the case of Mira; its maximum brilliancy is
different in different years. So, too, the length of the period
fluctuates in many cases, as does every other circumstance connected
with it, and predictions of what such a variable star will do are
notoriously unreliable.

205. THE ALGOL VARIABLES.--On the other hand, some variable stars
present an almost perfect regularity, repeating their changes time after
time with a precision like that of clockwork. Algol is one type of these
regular variables, having a period of 68.8154 hours, during six sevenths
of which time it shines with unchanging luster as a star of the 2.3
magnitude, but during the remaining 9 hours of each period it runs down
to the 3.5 magnitude, and comes back again, as is shown by a curve in
Fig. 130. The horizontal scale here represents hours, reckoned from the
time of the star's minimum brightness, and the vertical scale shows
stellar magnitudes. Such a diagram is called the star's light curve, and
we may read from it that at any time between 5h. and 32h. after the time
of minimum the star's magnitude is 2.32; at 2h. after a minimum the
magnitude is 2.88, etc. What is the magnitude an hour and a half before
the time of minimum? What is the magnitude 43 days after a minimum?

[Illustration: FIG. 130.--The light curve of Algol.]

The arrows shown in Fig. 130 are a feature not usually found with light
curves, but in this case each one represents a spectroscopic
determination of the motion of Algol in the line of sight. These
observations extended over a period of more than two years, but they are
plotted in the figure with reference to the number of hours each one
preceded or followed a minimum of the star's light, and each arrow shows
not only the direction of the star's motion along the line of sight, the
arrows pointing down denoting approach of the star toward the earth, but
also its velocity, each square of the ruling corresponding to 10
kilometers (6.2 miles per second). The differences of velocity shown by
adjacent arrows come mainly from errors of observation and furnish some
idea of how consistent among themselves such observations are, but there
can be no doubt that before minimum the star is moving away from the
earth, and after minimum is approaching it. It is evident from these
observations that in Algol we have to do with a spectroscopic binary,
one of whose components is a dark star which, once in each revolution,
partially eclipses the bright star and produces thus the variations in
its light. By combining the spectroscopic observations with the
variations in the star's light, Vogel finds that the bright star, Algol,
itself has a diameter somewhat greater than that of the sun, but is of
low density, so that its mass is less than half that of the sun, while
the dark star is a very little smaller than the sun and has about a
quarter of its mass. The distance between the two stars, dark and
bright, is 3,200,000 miles. Fig. 129, which is drawn to scale, shows the
relative positions and sizes of these stars as well as the orbits in
which they move.

The mere fact already noted that close binary systems exist in
considerable numbers is sufficient to make it probable that a certain
proportion of these stars would have their orbit planes turned so nearly
edgewise toward the earth as to produce eclipses, and corresponding to
this probability there are already known no less than 15 stars of the
Algol type of eclipse variables, and only a beginning has been made in
the search for them.

[Illustration: FIG. 131.--The light curve of [b] Lyræ.]

206. VARIABLES OF THE [b] LYRÆ TYPE.--In addition to these there is a
certain further number of binary variables in which both components are
bright and where the variation of brightness follows a very different
course. Capella would be such a variable if its orbit plane were
directed exactly toward the earth, and the fact that its light is not
variable shows conclusively that such is not the position of the orbit.
Fig. 131 represents the light curve of one of the best-known variable
systems of this second type, that of [b] Lyræ, whose period is 12 days
21.8 hours, and the student should read from the curve the magnitude of
the star for different times during this interval. According to Myers,
this light curve and the spectroscopic observations of the star point to
the existence of a binary star of very remarkable character, such as is
shown, together with its orbit and a scale of miles, in Fig. 132. Note
the tide which each of these stars raises in the other, thus changing
their shapes from spheres into ellipsoids. The astonishing dimensions of
these stars are in part compensated by their very low density, which is
less than that of air, so that their masses are respectively only 10
times and 21 times that of the sun! But these dimensions and masses
perhaps require confirmation, since they depend upon spectroscopic
observations of doubtful interpretation. In Fig. 132 what relative
positions must the stars occupy in their orbit in order that their
combined light should give [b] Lyræ its maximum brightness? What
position will furnish a minimum brightness?

[Illustration: FIG. 132.--The system of [b] Lyræ.--MYERS.]

207. VARIABLES OF LONG AND SHORT PERIODS.--It must not be supposed that
all variable stars are binaries which eclipse each other. By far the
larger part of them, like Mira, are not to be accounted for in this way,
and a distinction which is pretty well marked in the length of their
periods is significant in this connection. There is a considerable
number of variable stars with periods shorter than a month, and there
are many having periods longer than 6 months, but there are very few
having periods longer than 18 months, or intermediate between 1 month
and 6 months, so that it is quite customary to divide variable stars
into two classes--those of long period, 6 months or more, and those of
short period less than 6 months, and that this distinction corresponds
to some real difference in the stars themselves is further marked by the
fact that the long-period variables are prevailingly red in color, while
the short-period stars are almost without exception white or very pale
yellow. In fact, the longer the period the redder the star, although it
is not to be inferred that all red stars are variable; a considerable
percentage of them shine with constant light. The eclipse explanation of
variability holds good only for short-period variables, and possibly not
for all of them, while for the long-period variables there is no
explanation which commands the general assent of astronomers, although
unverified hypotheses are plenty.

The number of stars known to be variable is about 400, while a
considerable number of others are "suspected," and it would not be
surprising if a large fraction of all the stars should be found to
fluctuate a little in brightness. The sun's spots may suffice to make it
a variable star with a period of 11 years.

The discovery of new variables is of frequent occurrence, and may be
expected to become more frequent when the sky is systematically explored
for them by the ingenious device suggested by Pickering and illustrated
in Fig. 133. A given region of the sky--e. g., the Northern Crown--is
photographed repeatedly upon the same plate, which is shifted a little
at each new exposure, so that the stars shall fall at new places upon
it. The finally developed plate shows a row of images corresponding to
each star, and if the star's light is constant the images in any given
row will all be of the same size, as are most of those in Fig. 133; but
a variable star such as is shown by the arrowhead reveals its presence
by the broken aspect of its row of dots, a minimum brilliancy being
shown by smaller and a maximum by larger ones. In this particular case,
at two exposures the star was too faint to print its image upon the
plate.

[Illustration: FIG. 133.--Discovery of a variable star by means of
photography.--PICKERING.]

208. NEW STARS.--Next to the variable stars of very long or very
irregular period stand the so-called _new_ or _temporary stars_, which
appear for the most part suddenly, and after a brief time either vanish
altogether or sink to comparative insignificance. These were formerly
thought to be very remarkable and unusual occurrences--"the birth of a
new world"--and it is noteworthy that no new star is recorded to have
been seen from 1670 to 1848 A. D., for since that time there have been
no less than five of them visible to the naked eye and others
telescopic. In so far as these new stars are not ordinary variables
(Mira, first seen in 1596, was long counted as a new star), they are
commonly supposed due to chance encounters between stars or other cosmic
bodies moving with considerable velocities along orbits which approach
very close to each other. The actual collision of two dark bodies moving
with high velocities is clearly sufficient to produce a luminous
star--e. g., meteors--and even the close approach of two cooled-off
stars, might result in tidal actions which would rend open their crusts
and pour out the glowing matter from within so as to produce temporarily
a very great accession of brightness.

The most famous of all new stars is that which, according to Tycho
Brahe's report, appeared in the year 1572, and was so bright when at its
best as to be seen with the naked eye in broad daylight. It continued
visible, though with fading light, for about 16 months, and finally
disappeared to the naked eye, although there is some reason to suppose
that it can be identified with a ruddy star of the eleventh magnitude in
the constellation Cassiopeia, whose light still shows traces of
variability.

No modern temporary star approaches that of Tycho in splendor, but in
some respects the recent ones surpass it in interest, since it has been
possible to apply the spectroscope to the analysis of their light and to
find thereby a much more complex set of conditions in the star than
would have been suspected from its light changes alone.

One of the most extraordinary of new stars, and the most brilliant one
since that of Tycho, appeared suddenly in the constellation Perseus in
February, 1901, and for a short time equaled Capella in brightness. But
its light rapidly waned, with periodic fluctuations of brightness like
those of a variable star, and at the present time (September, 1902) it
is lost to the naked eye, although in the telescope it still shines like
a star of the ninth or tenth magnitude.

By the aid of powerful photographic apparatus, during the period of its
waning brilliancy a ring of faint nebulous matter was detected
surrounding the star and drifting around and away from it much as if a
series of nebulæ had been thrown off by the star at the time of its
sudden outburst of light. But the extraordinary velocity of this nebular
motion, nearly a billion miles per hour, makes such an explanation
almost incredible, and astronomers are more inclined to believe that the
ring was merely a reflection of the star's own light from a cloud of
meteoric matter, into which a rapidly moving dark star plunged and,
after the fashion of terrestrial meteors, was raised to brilliant
incandescence by the collision. If we assume this to be the true
explanation of these extraordinary phenomena, it is possible to show
from the known velocity with which light travels through space and from
the rate at which the nebula spread, that the distance of Nova Persei,
as the new star is called, corresponds to a parallax of about one
one-hundredth of a second, a result that is, in substance, confirmed by
direct telescopic measurements of its parallax.

Another modern temporary star is Nova Aurigæ, which appeared suddenly in
December, 1891, waned, and in the following April vanished, only to
reappear three months later for another season of renewed brightness.
The spectra of both these modern Novæ contain both dark and bright lines
displaced toward opposite ends of the spectrum, and suggesting the
Doppler effect that would be produced by two or more glowing bodies
having rapid and opposite motions in the line of sight. But the most
recent investigations cast discredit on this explanation and leave the
spectra of temporary stars still a subject of debate among astronomers,
with respect both to the motion they indicate and the intrinsic nature
of the stars themselves. The varying aspect of the spectra suggested at
one time the sun's chromosphere, at another time the conditions that are
present in nebulæ, etc.




CHAPTER XIV

STARS AND NEBULÆ


209. STELLAR COLORS.--We have already seen that one star differs from
another in respect of color as well as brightness, and the diligent
student of the sky will not fail to observe for himself how the luster
of Sirius and Rigel is more nearly a pure white than is that of any
other stars in the heavens, while at the other end of the scale
[a] Orionis and Aldebaran are strongly ruddy, and Antares presents an
even deeper tone of red. Between these extremes the light of every star
shows a mixture of the rainbow hues, in which a very pale yellow is the
predominant color, shading off, as we have seen, to white at one end of
the scale and red at the other. There are no green stars, or blue stars,
or violet stars, save in one exceptional class of cases--viz., where the
two components of a double star are of very different brightness, it is
quite the usual thing for them to have different colors, and then,
almost without exception, the color of the fainter star lies nearer to
the violet end of the spectrum than does the color of the bright one,
and sometimes shows a distinctly blue or green hue. A fine type of such
double star is [b] Cygni, in which the components are respectively
yellow and blue, and the yellow star furnishes eight times as much light
as the blue one.

The exception which double stars thus make to the general rule of
stellar colors, yellow and red, but no color of shorter wave length, has
never been satisfactorily explained, but the rule itself presents no
difficulties. Each star is an incandescent body, giving off radiant
energy of every wave length within the limits of the visible spectrum,
and, indeed, far beyond these limits. If this radiant energy could come
unhindered to our eyes every star would appear white, but they are all
surrounded by atmospheres--analogous to the chromosphere and reversing
layer of the sun--which absorb a portion of their radiant energy and,
like the earth's atmosphere, take a heavier toll from the violet than
from the red end of the spectrum. The greater the absorption in the
star's atmosphere, therefore, the feebler and the ruddier will be its
light, and corresponding to this the red stars are as a class fainter
than the white ones.

210. CHEMISTRY OF THE STARS.--The spectroscope is pre-eminently the
instrument to deal with this absorption of light in the stellar
atmospheres, just as it deals with that absorption in the sun's
atmosphere to which are due the dark lines of the solar spectrum,
although the faintness of starlight, compared with that of the sun,
presents a serious obstacle to its use. Despite this difficulty most of
the lucid stars and many of the telescopic ones have been studied with
the spectroscope and found to be similar to the sun and the earth as
respects the material of which they are made. Such familiar chemical
elements as hydrogen and iron, carbon, sodium, and calcium are scattered
broadcast throughout the visible universe, and while it would be
unwarranted by the present state of knowledge to say that the stars
contain nothing not found in the earth and the sun, it is evident that
in a broad way their substance is like rather than unlike that composing
the solar system, and is subject to the same physical and chemical laws
which obtain here. Galileo and Newton extended to the heavens the
terrestrial sciences of mathematics and mechanics, but it remained to
the nineteenth century to show that the physics and chemistry of the sky
are like the physics and chemistry of the earth.

211. STELLAR SPECTRA.--When the spectra of great numbers of stars are
compared one with another, it is found that they bear some relation to
the colors of the stars, as, indeed, we should expect, since spectrum
and color are both produced by the stellar atmospheres, and it is found
useful to classify these spectra into three types, as follows:

_Type I. Sirian stars._--Speaking generally, the stars which are white
or very faintly tinged with yellow, furnish spectra like that of Sirius,
from which they take their name, or that of [b] Aurigæ (Fig. 124), which
is a continuous spectrum, especially rich in energy of short wave
length--i. e., violet and ultraviolet light, and is crossed by a
relatively small number of heavy dark lines corresponding to the
spectrum of hydrogen. Sometimes, however, these lines are much fainter
than is here shown, and we find associated with them still other faint
ones pointing to the presence of other metallic substances in the star's
atmosphere. These metallic lines are not always present, and sometimes
even the hydrogen lines themselves are lacking, but the spectrum is
always rich in violet and ultraviolet light.

Since with increasing temperature a body emits a continually increasing
proportion of energy of short wave length (§ 118), the richness of these
spectra in such energy points to a very high temperature in these stars,
probably surpassing in some considerable measure that of the sun. Stars
with this type of spectrum are more numerous than all others combined,
but next to them in point of numbers stands--

_Type II. Solar stars._--To this type of spectrum belong the yellow
stars, which show spectra like that of the sun, or of Pollux (Fig. 125).
These are not so rich in violet light as are those of Type I, but in
complexity of spectrum and in the number of their absorption lines they
far surpass the Sirian stars. They are supposed to be at a lower
temperature than the Sirian stars, and a much larger number of chemical
elements seems present and active in the reversing layer of their
atmospheres. The strong resemblance which these spectra bear to that of
the sun, together with the fact that most of the sun's stellar neighbors
have spectra of this type, justify us in ranking both them and it as
members of one class, called _solar stars_.

_Type III. Red stars._--A small number of stars show spectra comparable
with that of [a] Herculis (Fig. 134), in which the blue and the violet
part of the spectrum is almost obliterated, and the remaining yellow and
red parts show not only dark lines, but also numerous broad dark bands,
sharp at one edge, and gradually fading out at the other. It is this
_selective absorption_, extinguishing the blue and leaving the red end
of the spectrum, which produces the ruddy color of these stars, while
the bands in their spectra "are characteristic of chemical combinations,
and their presence ... proves that at certain elevations in the
atmospheres of these stars the temperature has sunk so low that chemical
combinations can be formed and maintained" (Scheiner-Frost). One of the
chemical compounds here indicated is a hydrocarbon similar to that found
in comets. In the white and yellow stars the temperatures are so high
that the same chemical elements, although present, can not unite one
with another to form compound substances.

[Illustration: FIG. 134.--The spectrum of [a] Herculis.--ESPIN.]

Most of the variable stars are red and have spectra of the third type;
but this does not hold true for the eclipse variables like Algol, all of
which are white stars with spectra of the first type. The ordinary
variable star is therefore one with a dense atmosphere of relatively low
temperature and complex structure, which produces the prevailing red
color of these stars by absorbing the major part of their radiant
energy of short wave length while allowing the longer, red waves to
escape. Although their exact nature is not understood, there can be
little doubt that the fluctuation in the light of these stars is due to
processes taking place within the star itself, but whether above or
below its photosphere is still uncertain.

212. CLASSES OF STARS.--There is no hard-and-fast dividing line between
these types of stellar spectra, but the change from one to another is by
insensible gradations, like the transition from youth to manhood and
from manhood to old age, and along the line of transition are to be
found numberless peculiarities and varieties of spectra not enumerated
above--e. g., a few stars show not only dark absorption lines in their
spectra but bright lines as well, which, like those in Fig. 48, point to
the presence of incandescent vapors, even in the outer parts of their
atmospheres. Among the lucid stars about 75 per cent have spectra of the
first type, 23 per cent are of the second type, 1 per cent of the third
type, and the remaining 1 per cent are peculiar or of doubtful
classification. Among the telescopic stars it is probable that much the
same distribution holds, but in the present state of knowledge it is not
prudent to speak with entire confidence upon this point.

That the great number of stars whose spectra have been studied should
admit of a classification so simple as the above, is an impressive fact
which, when supplemented by the further fact of a gradual transition
from one type of spectrum to the next, leaves little room for doubt that
