A little stinging bug--another link in the cooperative Balakian
ecology--bit each of us on the back of the neck and we passed out cold.
When we woke up again, we were "guests" of Gaffa and his tribe in a sort
of settlement miles from the _S.E.2100_, and there wasn't so much as a
nail file among us in the way of weapons.

The natives hadn't bothered to shackle us or lock us up. We found
ourselves lying instead in the middle of a circular court surrounded by
mossy mounds that looked like flattened beehives, but which were
actually dwellings where the Balakians lived.

We learned later that the buildings were constructed by swarms of tiny
burrowing brutes like termites, who built them up grain by grain
according to specifications. I can't begin to explain the principle
behind the harmony existing between all living things on Balak; it just
was, and seemed to operate like a sort of hyper-sympathy or interlocking
telepathy between species. Every creature on the planet performed some
service for some other creature--even the plants, which grew edibles
without pain-nerves so it wouldn't hurt to be plucked, and which sent up
clouds of dust-dry spores once a week to make it rain.

And the three-legged, eight-armed natives were right at the top of this
screwy utopia, lords of it all.

Not that any of us were interested at first in it as an ecological
marvel, of course. From the moment we woke up we were too busy with
plans for escaping the trap we'd fallen into.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Quack is our only hope," Captain Corelli said, and groaned at the
thought. "If that hypochondriac idiot has brains enough to sit tight, we
may have a chance. If they get him, too, we're lost."

The Quack was a damned poor reed to lean on.

His name was Alvin Frick, but no one ever used it. He was twenty-nine,
and would never have rated a space berth as anything but a hydroponics
attendant, which is one step above manual labor. He was short, plump and
scrubbed to the pink, and he was the only hypochondriac I ever knew in
this modern age of almost no sickness. He groused about the germs
swarming in his reduction tanks, and he was scared green, in spite of
his permanent immunization shots, that he'd contract some nameless alien
disease at every planetfall. He dosed himself continuously with
concoctions whipped up from an old medical book he had found somewhere,
and he spent most of his off-duty time spraying himself and his quarters
with disinfectant. His mania had only one good facet--if he had been the
careless sort, hydroponics being what it is, he'd have smelled like a
barnyard instead of a dispensary.

We had never made any attempt to get rid of him, since we might have
drawn an even worse tank-farmer, but we began to wish now that we had.
We had hardly begun to figure ways and means of escaping when a bunch of
grinning natives swung into our court and deposited the Quack, sleeping
soundly, in our midst.

He came to just before sundown, and when we told him what had happened,
he promptly passed out again--this time from fright.

"A fine lot of help _you_ are, you super-sterile slob," I said when he
woke up for the second time. I'd probably have said worse, but it was
just then that the real squeeze began.

Gaffa came back with the two scowling Haslops in tow and handed us the
problem his tribe had spent twenty-two years in working up.

"We have learned enough already from Haslop," Gaffa said, "to know
something of the pressures and complexities that follow the expansion of
your Terran Realm through the galaxy, and to assure us that in time we
must either become a part of that Realm or isolate ourselves completely.

"We are a peaceful species and feel that we should probably benefit as
much from your physical sciences as your people would from our
biological skills, but there is a question of compatibility that must be
settled first, before we may risk making ourselves known to Terra. So we
have devised a test to determine what our course shall be."

       *       *       *       *       *

We raised our brows at one another over that, not guessing at the time
just what the Balakians really had on the ball.

"For thousands of generations, we have devoted our energies to knowing
ourselves and our environment," Gaffa said, "because we know that no
species can be truly balanced unless it understands itself. The
symbiosis between all life-forms on our planet is the result of that
knowledge. We should like to assure ourselves that you are capable of
understanding your own kind as well before we offer our services to your
Terran Realm--and therein lies the test we have arranged for you."

Captain Corelli drew himself up stiffly. "I think," he said, "that the
three of us should be able to unravel your little riddle, if you'll
condescend to tell us what it is."

Gaffa sent a puzzled look at the Quack, and I could see that he was
wondering why Corelli hadn't included him in the boast. But Gaffa
didn't know how simple the Quack could be, nor how preoccupied with his
own physiology he was.

"One of these two," said Gaffa, pointing to the two Haslops, "is the
