their equal state of abortion. If the hermaphrodites were supplanted by the
individuals having separated sexes, and if these latter were equalised in
number, a strictly dioecious species would be formed.

There is much difficulty in understanding why hermaphrodite plants should ever
have been rendered dioecious. There would be no such conversion, unless pollen
was already carried regularly by insects or by the wind from one individual to
the other; for otherwise every step towards dioeciousness would lead towards
sterility. As we must assume that cross-fertilisation was assured before an
hermaphrodite could be changed into a dioecious plant, we may conclude that the
conversion has not been effected for the sake of gaining the great benefits
which follow from cross-fertilisation. We can, however, see that if a species
were subjected to unfavourable conditions from severe competition with other
plants, or from any other cause, the production of the male and female elements
and the maturation of the ovules by the same individual, might prove too great a
strain on its powers, and the separation of the sexes would then be highly
beneficial. This, however, would be effected only under the contingency of a
reduced number of seeds, produced by the females alone, being sufficient to keep
up the stock.

There is another way of looking at the subject which partially removes a
difficulty that appears at first sight insuperable, namely, that during the
conversion of an hermaphrodite into a dioecious plant, the male organs must
abort in some individuals and the female organs in others. Yet as all are
exposed to the same conditions, it might have been expected that those which
varied would tend to vary in the same manner. As a general rule only a few
individuals of a species vary simultaneously in the same manner; and there is no
improbability in the assumption that some few individuals might produce larger
seeds than the average, better stocked with nourishment. If the production of
such seeds were highly beneficial to a species, and on this head there can be
little doubt, the variety with the large seeds would tend to increase. (7/1. See
the facts given in 'The Effects of Cross and Self-fertilisation' page 353.) But
in accordance with the law of compensation we might expect that the individuals
which produced such seeds would, if living under severe conditions, tend to
produce less and less pollen, so that their anthers would be reduced in size and
might ultimately become rudimentary. This view occurred to me owing to a
statement by Sir J.E. Smith that there are female and hermaphrodite plants of
Serratula tinctoria, and that the seeds of the former are larger than those of
the hermaphrodite form. (7/2. 'Transactions of the Linnean Society' volume 8
page 600.) It may also be worth while to recall the case of the mid-styled form
of Lythrum salicaria, which produces a larger number of seeds than the other
forms, and has somewhat smaller pollen-grains which have less fertilising power
than those of the corresponding stamens in the other two forms; but whether the
larger number of seeds is the indirect cause of the diminished power of the
pollen, or vice versa, I know not. As soon as the anthers in a certain number of
individuals became reduced in size in the manner just suggested or from any
other cause, the other individuals would have to produce a larger supply of
pollen; and such increased development would tend to reduce the female organs
through the law of compensation, so as ultimately to leave them in a rudimentary
condition; and the species would then become dioecious.

Instead of the first change occurring in the female organs we may suppose that
the male ones first varied, so that some individuals produced a larger supply of
pollen. This would be beneficial under certain circumstances, such as a change
in the nature of the insects which visited the flowers, or in their becoming
more anemophilous, for such plants require an enormous quantity of pollen. The
increased action of the male organs would tend to affect through compensation
the female organs of the same flower; and the final result would be that the
species would consist of males and hermaphrodites. But it is of no use
considering this case and other analogous ones, for, as stated in the
Introduction, the coexistence of male and hermaphrodite plants is excessively
rare.

It is no valid objection to the foregoing views that changes of such a nature
would be effected with extreme slowness, for we shall presently see good reason
to believe that various hermaphrodite plants have become or are becoming
dioecious by many and excessively small steps. In the case of polygamous
species, which exist as males, females and hermaphrodites, the latter would have
to be supplanted before the species could become strictly dioecious; but the
extinction of the hermaphrodite form would probably not be difficult, as a
complete separation of the sexes appears often to be in some way beneficial. The
males and females would also have to be equalised in number, or produced in some
fitting proportion for the effectual fertilisation of the females.

There are, no doubt, many unknown laws which govern the suppression of the male
or female organs in hermaphrodite plants, quite independently of any tendency in
them to become monoecious, dioecious, or polygamous. We see this in those
hermaphrodites which from the rudiments still present manifestly once possessed
more stamens or pistils than they now do,--even twice as many, as a whole
verticil has often been suppressed. Robert Brown remarks that "the order of
reduction or abortion of the stamina in any natural family may with some
confidence be predicted," by observing in other members of the family, in which
their number is complete, the order of the dehiscence of the anthers (7/3.
'Transactions of the Linnean Society' volume 12 page 98 or 'Miscellaneous Works'
volume 2 pages 278-81.); for the lesser permanence of an organ is generally
connected with its lesser perfection, and he judges of perfection by priority of
development. He also states that whenever there is a separation of the sexes in
an hermaphrodite plant, which bears flowers on a simple spike, it is the females
which expand first; and this he likewise attributes to the female sex being the
more perfect of the two, but why the female should be thus valued he does not
explain.

Plants under cultivation or changed conditions of life frequently become
sterile; and the male organs are much oftener affected than the female, though
the latter alone are sometimes affected. The sterility of the stamens is
generally accompanied by a reduction in their size; and we may feel sure, from a
wide-spread analogy, that both the male and female organs would become
rudimentary in the course of many generations if they failed altogether to
perform their proper functions. According to Gartner, if the anthers on a plant
are contabescent (and when this occurs it is always at a very early period of
growth) the female organs are sometimes precociously developed. (7/4. 'Beitrage
zur Kenntniss' etc. page 117 et seq. The whole subject of the sterility of
plants from various causes has been discussed in my 'Variation of Animals and
Plants under Domestication' chapter 18 2nd edition volume 2 pages 146-56.) I
mention this case as it appears to be one of compensation. So again is the well-
known fact, that plants which increase largely by stolons or other such means
are often utterly barren, with a large proportion of their pollen-grains in a
worthless condition.

Hildebrand has shown that with hermaphrodite plants which are strongly
proterandrous, the stamens in the flowers which open first sometimes abort; and
this seems to follow from their being useless, as no pistils are then ready to
be fertilised. Conversely the pistils in the flowers which open last sometimes
abort; as when they are ready for fertilisation all the pollen has been shed. He
further shows by means of a series of gradations amongst the Compositae, that a
tendency from the causes just specified to produce either male or female
florets, sometimes spreads to all the florets on the same head, and sometimes
even to the whole plant (7/5. 'Ueber die Geschlechtsverhaltnisse bei den
Compositen' 1869 page 89.); and in this latter case the species becomes
dioecious. In those rare instances mentioned in the Introduction, in which some
of the individuals of both monoecious and hermaphrodite plants are
proterandrous, others being proterogynous, their conversion into a dioecious
condition would probably be much facilitated, as they already consist of two
bodies of individuals, differing to a certain extent in their reproductive
functions.

Dimorphic heterostyled plants offer still more strongly marked facilities for
becoming dioecious; for they likewise consist of two bodies of individuals in
approximately equal numbers, and what probably is more important, both the male
and female organs differ in the two forms, not only in structure but in
function, in nearly the same manner as do the reproductive organs of two
distinct species belonging to the same genus. Now if two species are subjected
to changed conditions, though of the same nature, it is notorious that they are
often affected very differently; therefore the male organs, for instance, in one
form of a heterostyled plant might be affected by those unknown causes which
induce abortion, differently from the homologous but functionally different
organs in the other form; and so conversely with the female organs. Thus the
great difficulty before alluded to is much lessened in understanding how any
cause whatever could lead to the simultaneous reduction and ultimate suppression
of the male organs in half the individuals of a species, and of the female
organs in the other half, whilst all were subjected to exactly the same
conditions of life.

That such reduction or suppression has occurred in some heterostyled plants is
almost certain. The Rubiaceae contain more heterostyled genera than any other
family, and from their wide distribution we may infer that many of them became
heterostyled at a remote period, so that there will have been ample time for
some of the species to have been since rendered dioecious. Asa Gray informs me
that Coprosma is dioecious, and that it is closely allied through Nertera to
Mitchella, which as we know is a heterostyled dimorphic species. In the male
flowers of Coprosma the stamens are exserted, and in the female flowers the
stigmas; so that, judging from the affinities of the above three genera, it
seems probable that an ancient short-styled form bearing long stamens with large
anthers and large pollen-grains (as in the case of several Rubiaceous genera)
has been converted into the male Coprosma; and that an ancient long-styled form
with short stamens, small anthers and small pollen-grains has been converted
into the female form. But according to Mr. Meehan, Mitchella itself is dioecious
in some districts; for he says that one form has small sessile anthers without a
trace of pollen, the pistil being perfect; while in another form the stamens are
perfect and the pistil rudimentary. (7/6. 'Proceedings of the Academy of
Sciences of Philadelphia' July 28, 1868 page 183.) He adds that plants may be
observed in the autumn bearing an abundant crop of berries, and others without a
single one. Should these statements be confirmed, Mitchella will be proved to be
heterostyled in one district and dioecious in another.

Asperula is likewise a Rubiaceous genus, and from the published description of
the two forms of A. scoparia, an inhabitant of Tasmania, I did not doubt that it
was heterostyled; but on examining some flowers sent me by Dr. Hooker they
proved to be dioecious. The male flowers have large anthers and a very small
ovarium, surmounted by a mere vestige of a stigma without any style; whilst the
female flowers possess a large ovarium, the anthers being rudimentary and
apparently quite destitute of pollen. Considering how many Rubiaceous genera are
heterostyled, it is a reasonable suspicion that this Asperula is descended from
a heterostyled progenitor; but we should be cautious on this head, for there is
no improbability in a homostyled Rubiaceous plant becoming dioecious. Moreover,
in an allied plant, Galium cruciatum, the female organs have been suppressed in
most of the lower flowers, whilst the upper ones remain hermaphrodite; and here
we have a modification of the sexual organs without any connection with
heterostylism.

Mr. Thwaites informs me that in Ceylon various Rubiaceous plants are
heterostyled; but in the case of Discospermum one of the two forms is always
barren, the ovary containing about two aborted ovules in each loculus; whilst in
the other form each loculus contains several perfect ovules; so that the species
appears to be strictly dioecious.

Most of the species of the South American genus Aegiphila, a member of the
Verbenaceae, apparently are heterostyled; and both Fritz Muller and myself
thought that this was the case with Ae. obdurata, so closely did its flowers
resemble those of the heterostyled species. But on examining the flowers, the
anthers of the long-styled form were found to be entirely destitute of pollen
and less than half the size of those in the other form, the pistil being
perfectly developed. On the other hand, in the short-styled form the stigmas are
reduced to half their proper length, having also an abnormal appearance; whilst
the stamens are perfect. This plant therefore is dioecious; and we may, I think,
conclude that a short-styled progenitor, bearing long stamens exserted beyond
the corolla, has been converted into the male; and a long-styled progenitor with
fully developed stigmas into the female.

From the number of bad pollen-grains in the small anthers of the short stamens
of the long-styled form of Pulmonaria angustifolia, we may suspect that this
form is tending to become female; but it does not appear that the other or
short-styled form is becoming more masculine. Certain appearances countenance
the belief that the reproductive system of Phlox subulata is likewise undergoing
a change of some kind.

I have now given the few cases known to me in which heterostyled plants appear
with some considerable degree of probability to have been rendered dioecious.
Nor ought we to expect to find many such cases, for the number of heterostyled
species is by no means large, at least in Europe, where they could hardly have
escaped notice. Therefore the number of dioecious species which owe their origin
to the transformation of heterostyled plants is probably not so large as might
have been anticipated from the facilities which they offer for such conversion.

In searching for cases like the foregoing ones, I have been led to examine some
dioecious or sub-dioecious plants, which are worth describing, chiefly as they
show by what fine gradations hermaphrodites may pass into polygamous or
dioecious species.

POLYGAMOUS, DIOECIOUS, AND SUB-DIOECIOUS PLANTS.

Euonymus Europaeus (CELASTRINEAE).

(Figure 7.12. Euonymus Europaeus
Left: Hermaphrodite or male.
Right: Female.)

The spindle-tree is described in all the botanical works which I have consulted
as an hermaphrodite. Asa Gray speaks of the flowers of the American species as
perfect, whilst those in the allied genus Celastrus are said to be "polygamo-
dioecious." If a number of bushes of our spindle-tree be examined, about half
will be found to have stamens equal in length to the pistil, with well-developed
anthers; the pistil being likewise to all appearance well developed. The other
half have a perfect pistil, with the stamens short, bearing rudimentary anthers
destitute of pollen; so that these bushes are females. All the flowers on the
same plant present the same structure. The female corolla is smaller than that
on the polleniferous bushes. The two forms are shown in Figure 7.12.

I did not at first doubt that this species existed under an hermaphrodite and
female form; but we shall presently see that some of the bushes which appear to
be hermaphrodites never produce fruit, and these are in fact males. The species,
therefore, is polygamous in the sense in which I use the term, and trioecious.
The flowers are frequented by many Diptera and some small Hymenoptera for the
sake of the nectar secreted by the disc, but I did not see a single bee at work;
nevertheless the other insects sufficed to fertilise effectually female bushes
growing at a distance of even 30 yards from any polleniferous bush.

The small anthers borne by the short stamens of the female flowers are well
formed and dehisce properly, but I could never find in them a single grain of
pollen. It is somewhat difficult to compare the length of the pistils in the two
forms, as they vary somewhat in this respect and continue to grow after the
anthers are mature. The pistils, therefore, in old flowers on a polleniferous
plant are often of considerably greater length than in young flowers on a female
plant. On this account the pistils from five flowers from so many hermaphrodite
or male bushes were compared with those from five female bushes, before the
anthers had dehisced and whilst the rudimentary ones were of a pink colour and
not at all shrivelled. These two sets of pistils did not differ in length, or if
there was any difference those of the polleniferous flowers were rather the
longest. In one hermaphrodite plant, which produced during three years very few
and poor fruit, the pistil much exceeded in length the stamens bearing perfect
and as yet closed anthers; and I never saw such a case on any female plant. It
is a surprising fact that the pistil in the male and in the semi-sterile
hermaphrodite flowers has not been reduced in length, seeing that it performs
very poorly or not at all its proper function. The stigmas in the two forms are
exactly alike; and in some of the polleniferous plants which never produced any
fruit I found that the surface of the stigma was viscid, so that pollen-grains
adhered to it and had exserted their tubes. The ovules are of equal size in the
two forms. Therefore the most acute botanist, judging only by structure, would
never have suspected that some of the bushes were in function exclusively males.

Thirteen bushes growing near one another in a hedge consisted of eight females
quite destitute of pollen and of five hermaphrodites with well-developed
anthers. In the autumn the eight females were well covered with fruit, excepting
one, which bore only a moderate number. Of the five hermaphrodites, one bore a
dozen or two fruits, and the remaining four bushes several dozen; but their
number was as nothing compared with those on the female bushes, for a single
branch, between two and three feet in length, from one of the latter, yielded
more than any one of the hermaphrodite bushes. The difference in the amount of
fruit produced by the two sets of bushes is all the more striking, as from the
sketches above given it is obvious that the stigmas of the polleniferous flowers
can hardly fail to receive their own pollen; whilst the fertilisation of the
female flowers depends on pollen being brought to them by flies and the smaller
Hymenoptera, which are far from being such efficient carriers as bees.

I now determined to observe more carefully during successive seasons some bushes
growing in another place about a mile distant. As the female bushes were so
highly productive, I marked only two of them with the letters A and B, and five
polleniferous bushes with the letters C to G. I may premise that the year 1865
was highly favourable for the fruiting of all the bushes, especially for the
polleniferous ones, some of which were quite barren except under such favourable
conditions. The season of 1864 was unfavourable. In 1863 the female A produced
"some fruit;" in 1864 only 9; and in 1865, 97 fruit. The female B in 1863 was
"covered with fruit;" in 1864 it bore 28; and in 1865 "innumerable very fine
fruits." I may add, that three other female trees growing close by were
observed, but only during 1863, and they then bore abundantly. With respect to
the polleniferous bushes, the one marked C did not bear a single fruit during
the years 1863 and 1864, but during 1865 it produced no less than 92 fruit,
which, however, were very poor. I selected one of the finest branches with 15
fruit, and these contained 20 seeds, or on an average 1.33 per fruit. I then
took by hazard 15 fruit from an adjoining female bush, and these contained 43
seeds; that is, more than twice as many, or on an average 2.86 per fruit. Many
of the fruits from the female bushes included four seeds, and only one had a
single seed; whereas not one fruit from the polleniferous bushes contained four
seeds. Moreover when the two lots of seeds were compared, it was manifest that
those from the female bushes were the larger. The second polleniferous bush, D,
bore in 1863 about two dozen fruit,--in 1864 only 3 very poor fruit, each
containing a single seed,--and in 1865, 20 equally poor fruit. Lastly, the three
polleniferous bushes, E, F, and G, did not produce a single fruit during the
three years 1863, 1864, and 1865.

We thus see that the female bushes differ somewhat in their degree of fertility,
and the polleniferous ones in the most marked manner. We have a perfect
gradation from the female bush, B, which in 1865 was covered with "innumerable
fruits,"--through the female A, which produced during the same year 97,--through
the polleniferous bush C, which produced this year 92 fruits, these, however,
containing a very low average number of seeds of small size,--through the bush
D, which produced only 20 poor fruit,--to the three bushes, E, F, and G, which
did not this year, or during the two previous years, produce a single fruit. If
these latter bushes and the more fertile female ones were to supplant the
others, the spindle-tree would be as strictly dioecious in function as any plant
in the world. This case appears to me very interesting, as showing how gradually
an hermaphrodite plant may be converted into a dioecious one. (7/7. According to
Fritz Muller 'Botanische Zeitung' 1870 page 151, a Chamissoa (Amaranthaceae) in
Southern Brazil is in nearly the same state as our Euonymus. The ovules are
equally developed in the two forms. In the female the pistil is perfect, whilst
the anthers are entirely destitute of pollen. In the polleniferous form, the
pistil is short and the stigmas never separate from one another, so that,
although their surfaces are covered with fairly well-developed papillae, they
cannot be fertilised, these latter plants do not commonly yield any fruit, and
are therefore in function males. Nevertheless, on one occasion Fritz Muller
found flowers of this kind in which the stigmas had separated, and they produced
some fruit.)

Seeing how general it is for organs which are almost or quite functionless to be
reduced in size, it is remarkable that the pistils of the polleniferous plants
should equal or even exceed in length those of the highly fertile female plants.
This fact formerly led me to suppose that the spindle-tree had once been
heterostyled; the hermaphrodite and male plants having been originally long-
styled, with the pistils since reduced in length, but with the stamens retaining
their former dimensions; whilst the female plant had been originally short-
styled, with the pistil in its present state, but with the stamens since greatly
reduced and rendered rudimentary. A conversion of this kind is at least
possible, although it is the reverse of that which appears actually to have
occurred with some Rubiaceous genera and Aegiphila; for with these plants the
short-styled form has become the male, and the long-styled the female. It is,
however, a more simple view that sufficient time has not elapsed for the
reduction of the pistil in the male and hermaphrodite flowers of our Euonymus;
though this view does not account for the pistils in the polleniferous flowers
being sometimes longer than those in the female flowers.

Fragaria vesca, Virginiana, chiloensis, etc. (ROSACEAE).

A tendency to the separation of the sexes in the cultivated strawberry seems to
be much more strongly marked in the United States than in Europe; and this
appears to be the result of the direct action of climate on the reproductive
organs. In the best account which I have seen, it is stated that many of the
varieties in the United States consist of three forms, namely, females, which
produce a heavy crop of fruit,--of hermaphrodites, which "seldom produce other
than a very scanty crop of inferior and imperfect berries,"--and of males, which
produce none. (7/8. Mr. Leonard Wray 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1861 page 716.) The
most skilful cultivators plant "seven rows of female plants, then one row of
hermaphrodites, and so on throughout the field." The males bear large, the
hermaphrodites mid-sized, and the females small flowers. The latter plants
produce few runners, whilst the two other forms produce many; consequently, as
has been observed both in England and in the United States, the polleniferous
forms increase rapidly and tend to supplant the females. We may therefore infer
that much more vital force is expended in the production of ovules and fruit
than in the production of pollen. Another species, the Hautbois strawberry (F.
elatior), is more strictly dioecious; but Lindley made by selection an
hermaphrodite stock. (7/9. For references and further information on this
subject, see 'Variation under Domestication' chapter 10 2nd edition volume 1
page 375.)

Rhamnus catharticus (RHAMNEAE).

(FIGURE 7.13. Rhamnus catharticus (from Caspary.)
Left: Long-styled male.
Right: Short-styled male.)

(FIGURE 7.14. Rhamnus catharticus.
Left: Long-styled female.
Right: Short-styled female.)

