background of the sky exactly covering your celestial meridian and
passing from one pole through your zenith to the other pole. In Fig. 11
the inner circle represents the terrestrial meridian of a certain
place, _O_, as seen from the center of the earth, _C_, and the outer
circle represents the celestial meridian of _O_ as seen from _C_, only
we must imagine, what can not be shown on the figure, that the outer
circle is so large that the inner one shrinks to a mere point in
comparison with it. If _C P_ represents the direction in which the
earth's axis passes through the center, then _C E_ at right angles to it
must be the direction of the equator which we suppose to be turned
edgewise toward us; and if _C O_ is the direction of some particular
point on the earth's surface, then _Z_ directly overhead is called the
_zenith_ of that point, upon the celestial sphere. The line _C H_
represents a direction parallel to the horizon plane at _O_, and _H C P_
is the angle which the axis of the earth makes with this horizon plane.
The arc _O E_ measures the latitude of _O_, and the arc _Z E_ measures
the declination of _Z_, and since by elementary geometry each of these
arcs contains the same number of degrees as the angle _E C Z_, we have
the

_Theorem._--The latitude of any place is equal to the declination of its
zenith.

_Corollary._--Any star whose declination is equal to your latitude will
once in each day pass through your zenith.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.--Reference lines and circles.]

18. LATITUDE.--From the construction of the figure

    [angle] _E C Z_ + [angle] _Z C P_ = 90°
    [angle] _H C P_ + [angle] _Z C P_ = 90°

from which we find by subtraction and transposition

    [angle] _E C Z_ = [angle] _H C P_

and this gives the further

_Theorem._--The latitude of any place is equal to the elevation of the
pole above its horizon plane.

An observer who travels north or south over the earth changes his
latitude, and therefore changes the angle between his horizon plane and
the axis of the earth. What effect will this have upon the position of
stars in his sky? If you were to go to the earth's equator, in what part
of the sky would you look for Polaris? Can Polaris be seen from
Australia? From South America? If you were to go from Minnesota to
Texas, in what respect would the appearance of stars in the northern sky
be changed? How would the appearance of stars in the southern sky be
changed?

[Illustration: FIG. 12.--Diurnal path of Polaris.]

EXERCISE 8.--Determine your latitude by taking the altitude of Polaris
when it is at some one of the four points of its diurnal path, shown in
Fig. 12. When it is at _1_ it is said to be at upper culmination, and
the star [z] Ursæ Majoris in the handle of the Big Dipper will be
directly below it. When at _2_ it is at western elongation, and the
star Castor is near the meridian. When it is at _3_ it is at lower
culmination, and the star Spica is on the meridian. When it is at _4_ it
is at eastern elongation, and Altair is near the meridian. All of these
stars are conspicuous ones, which the student should find upon the map
and learn to recognize in the sky. The altitude observed at either _2_
or _4_ may be considered equal to the latitude of the place, but the
altitude observed when Polaris is at the positions marked _1_ and _3_
must be corrected for the star's distance from the pole, which may be
assumed equal to 1.3°.

The plumb-line apparatus described at page 12 is shown in Fig. 6
slightly modified, so as to adapt it to measuring the altitudes of
stars. Note that the board with the screw eye at one end has been
transferred from the box to the vertical standard, and has a screw eye
at each end. When the apparatus has been properly leveled, so that the
plumb line hangs at the middle of the hole in the box cover, the board
is to be pointed at the star by sighting through the centers of the two
screw eyes, and a pencil line is to be ruled along its edge upon the
face of the vertical standard. After this has been done turn the
apparatus halfway around so that what was the north side now points
south, level it again and revolve the board about the screw which holds
it to the vertical standard, until the screw eyes again point to the
star. Rule another line along the same edge of the board as before and
with a protractor measure the angle between these lines. Use a bicycle
lamp if you need artificial light for your work. The student who has
studied plane geometry should be able to prove that one half of the
angle between these lines is equal to the altitude of the star.

After you have determined your latitude from Polaris, compare the result
with your position as shown upon the best map available. With a little
practice and considerable care the latitude may be thus determined
within one tenth of a degree, which is equivalent to about 7 miles. If
you go 10 miles north or south from your first station you should find
the pole higher up or lower down in the sky by an amount which can be
measured with your apparatus.

19. THE MERIDIAN LINE.--To establish a true north and south line upon
the ground, use the apparatus as described at page 13, and when Polaris
is at upper or lower culmination drive into the ground two stakes in
line with the star and the plumb line. Such a meridian line is of great
convenience in observing the stars and should be laid out and
permanently marked in some convenient open space from which, if
possible, all parts of the sky are visible. June and November are
convenient months for this exercise, since Polaris then comes to
culmination early in the evening.

20. TIME.--What is _the time_ at which school begins in the morning?
What do you mean by "_the time_"?

The sidereal time at any moment is the right ascension of the hour
circle which at that moment coincides with the meridian. When the hour
circle passing through Sirius coincides with the meridian, the sidereal
time is 6h. 40m., since that is the right ascension of Sirius, and in
astronomical language Sirius is "_on the meridian_" at 6h. 40m. sidereal
time. As may be seen from the map, this 6h. 40m. is the right ascension
of Sirius, and if a clock be set to indicate 6h. 40m. when Sirius
crosses the meridian, it will show sidereal time. If the clock is
properly regulated, every other star in the heavens will come to the
meridian at the moment when the time shown by the clock is equal to the
right ascension of the star. A clock properly regulated for this purpose
will gain about four minutes per day in comparison with ordinary clocks,
and when so regulated it is called a sidereal clock. The student should
be provided with such a clock for his future work, but one such clock
will serve for several persons, and a nutmeg clock or a watch of the
cheapest kind is quite sufficient.

[Illustration: THE HARVARD COLLEGE OBSERVATORY, CAMBRIDGE, MASS.]

EXERCISE 9.--Set such a clock to sidereal time by means of the transit
of a star over your meridian. For this experiment it is presupposed that
a meridian line has been marked out on the ground as in § 19, and the
simplest mode of performing the experiment required is for the observer,
having chosen a suitable star in the southern part of the sky, to place
his eye accurately over the northern end of the meridian line and to
estimate as nearly as possible the beginning and end of the period
during which the star appears to stand exactly above the southern end of
the line. The middle of this period may be taken as the time at which
the star crossed the meridian and at this moment the sidereal time is
equal to the right ascension of the star. The difference between this
right ascension and the observed middle instant is the error of the
clock or the amount by which its hands must be set back or forward in
order to indicate true sidereal time.

A more accurate mode of performing the experiment consists in using the
plumb-line apparatus carefully adjusted, as in Fig. 7, so that the line
joining the wire to the center of the screw eye shall be parallel to the
meridian line. Observe the time by the clock at which the star
disappears behind the wire as seen through the center of the screw eye.
If the star is too high up in the sky for convenient observation, place
a mirror, face up, just north of the screw eye and observe star, wire
and screw eye by reflection in it.

The numerical right ascension of the observed star is needed for this
experiment, and it may be measured from the star map, but it will
usually be best to observe one of the stars of the table at the end of
the book, and to obtain its right ascension as follows: The table gives
the right ascension and declination of each star as they were at the
beginning of the year 1900, but on account of the precession (see
Chapter V), these numbers all change slowly with the lapse of time, and
on the average the right ascension of each star of the table must be
increased by one twentieth of a minute for each year after 1900--i. e.,
in 1910 the right ascension of the first star of the table will be
0h. 38.6m. + (10/20)m. = 0h. 39.1m. The declinations also change
slightly, but as they are only intended to help in finding the star on
the star maps, their change may be ignored.

Having set the clock approximately to sidereal time, observe one or two
more stars in the same way as above. The difference between the observed
time and the right ascension, if any is found, is the "correction" of
the clock. This correction ought not to exceed a minute if due care has
been taken in the several operations prescribed. The relation of the
clock to the right ascension of the stars is expressed in the following
equation, with which the student should become thoroughly familiar:

    A = T ± U

_T_ stands for the time by the clock at which the star crossed the
meridian. _A_ is the right ascension of the star, and _U_ is the
correction of the clock. Use the + sign in the equation whenever the
clock is too slow, and the - sign when it is too fast. _U_ may be found
from this equation when _A_ and _T_ are given, or _A_ may be found when
_T_ and _U_ are given. It is in this way that astronomers measure the
right ascensions of the stars and planets.

Determine _U_ from each star you have observed, and note how the several
results agree one with another.

21. DEFINITIONS.--To define a thing or an idea is to give a description
sufficient to identify it and distinguish it from every other possible
thing or idea. If a definition does not come up to this standard it is
insufficient. Anything beyond this requirement is certainly useless and
probably mischievous.

Let the student define the following geographical terms, and let him
also criticise the definitions offered by his fellow-students: Equator,
poles, meridian, latitude, longitude, north, south, east, west.

Compare the following astronomical definitions with your geographical
definitions, and criticise them in the same way. If you are not able to
improve upon them, commit them to memory:

_The Poles_ of the heavens are those points in the sky toward which the
earth's axis points. How many are there? The one near Polaris is called
the north pole.

_The Celestial Equator_ is a great circle of the sky distant 90° from
the poles.

_The Zenith_ is that point of the sky, overhead, toward which a plumb
line points. Why is the word overhead placed in the definition? Is there
more than one zenith?

_The Horizon_ is a great circle of the sky 90° distant from the zenith.

_An Hour Circle_ is any great circle of the sky which passes through the
poles. Every star has its own hour circle.

_The Meridian_ is that hour circle which passes through the zenith.

_A Vertical Circle_ is any great circle that passes through the zenith.
Is the meridian a vertical circle?

_The Declination_ of a star is its angular distance north or south of
the celestial equator.

_The Right Ascension_ of a star is the angle included between its hour
circle and the hour circle of a certain point on the equator which is
called the _Vernal Equinox_. From spherical geometry we learn that this
angle is to be measured either at the pole where the two hour circles
intersect, as is done in the star map opposite page 124, or along the
equator, as is done in the map opposite page 190. Right ascension is
always measured from the vernal equinox in the direction opposite to
that in which the stars appear to travel in their diurnal motion--i. e.,
from west toward east.

_The Altitude_ of a star is its angular distance above the horizon.

_The Azimuth_ of a star is the angle between the meridian and the
vertical circle passing through the star. A star due south has an
azimuth of 0°. Due west, 90°. Due north, 180°. Due east, 270°.

What is the azimuth of Polaris in degrees?

What is the azimuth of the sun at sunrise? At sunset? At noon? Are these
azimuths the same on different days?

_The Hour Angle_ of a star is the angle between its hour circle and the
meridian. It is measured from the meridian in the direction in which the
stars appear to travel in their diurnal motion--i. e., from east toward
west.

What is the hour angle of the sun at noon? What is the hour angle of
Polaris when it is at the lowest point in its daily motion?

22. EXERCISES.--The student must not be satisfied with merely learning
these definitions. He must learn to see these points and lines in his
mind as if they were visibly painted upon the sky. To this end it will
help him to note that the poles, the zenith, the meridian, the horizon,
and the equator seem to stand still in the sky, always in the same place
with respect to the observer, while the hour circles and the vernal
equinox move with the stars and keep the same place among them. Does the
apparent motion of a star change its declination or right ascension?
What is the hour angle of the sun when it has the greatest altitude?
Will your answer to the preceding question be true for a star? What is
the altitude of the sun after sunset? In what direction is the north
pole from the zenith? From the vernal equinox? Where are the points in
which the meridian and equator respectively intersect the horizon?




CHAPTER III

FIXED AND WANDERING STARS


23. STAR MAPS.--Select from the map some conspicuous constellation that
will be conveniently placed for observation in the evening, and make on
a large scale a copy of all the stars of the constellation that are
shown upon the map. At night compare this copy with the sky, and mark in
upon your paper all the stars of the constellation which are not already
there. Both the original drawing and the additions made to it by night
should be carefully done, and for the latter purpose what is called the
method of allineations may be used with advantage--i. e., the new star
is in line with two already on the drawing and is midway between them,
or it makes an equilateral triangle with two others, or a square with
three others, etc.

A series of maps of the more prominent constellations, such as Ursa
Major, Cassiopea, Pegasus, Taurus, Orion, Gemini, Canis Major, Leo,
Corvus, Bootes, Virgo, Hercules, Lyra, Aquila, Scorpius, should be
constructed in this manner upon a uniform scale and preserved as a part
of the student's work. Let the magnitude of the stars be represented on
the maps as accurately as may be, and note the peculiarity of color
which some stars present. For the most part their color is a very pale
yellow, but occasionally one may be found of a decidedly ruddy
hue--e. g., Aldebaran or Antares. Such a star map, not quite complete,
is shown in Fig. 13.

So, too, a sharp eye may detect that some stars do not remain always of
the same magnitude, but change their brightness from night to night,
and this not on account of cloud or mist in the atmosphere, but from
something in the star itself. Algol is one of the most conspicuous of
these _variable stars_, as they are called.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.--Star map of the region about Orion.]

24. THE MOON'S MOTION AMONG THE STARS.--Whenever the moon is visible
note its position among the stars by allineations, and plot it on the
key map opposite page 190. Keep a record of the day and hour
corresponding to each such observation. You will find, if the work is
correctly done, that the positions of the moon all fall near the curved
line shown on the map. This line is called the ecliptic.

After several such observations have been made and plotted, find by
measurement from the map how many degrees per day the moon moves. How
long would it require to make the circuit of the heavens and come back
to the starting point?

On each night when you observe the moon, make on a separate piece of
paper a drawing of it about 10 centimeters in diameter and show in the
drawing every feature of the moon's face which you can see--e. g., the
shape of the illuminated surface (phase); the direction among the stars
of the line joining the horns; any spots which you can see upon the
moon's face, etc. An opera glass will prove of great assistance in this
work.

Use your drawings and the positions of the moon plotted upon the map to
answer the following questions: Does the direction of the line joining
the horns have any special relation to the ecliptic? Does the amount of
illuminated surface of the moon have any relation to the moon's angular
distance from the sun? Does it have any relation to the time at which
the moon sets? Do the spots on the moon when visible remain always in
the same place? Do they come and go? Do they change their position with
relation to each other? Can you determine from these spots that the moon
rotates about an axis, as the earth does? In what direction does its
axis point? How long does it take to make one revolution about the axis?
Is there any day and night upon the moon?

Each of these questions can be correctly answered from the student's own
observations without recourse to any book.

25. THE SUN AND ITS MOTION.--Examine the face of the sun through a
smoked glass to see if there is anything there that you can sketch.

By day as well as by night the sky is studded with stars, only they can
not be seen by day on account of the overwhelming glare of sunlight, but
the position of the sun among the stars may be found quite as
accurately as was that of the moon, by observing from day to day its
right ascension and declination, and this should be practiced at noon on
clear days by different members of the class.

EXERCISE 10.--The right ascension of the sun may be found by observing
with the sidereal clock the time of its transit over the meridian. Use
the equation in § 20, and substitute in place of _U_ the value of the
clock correction found from observations of stars on a preceding or
following night. If the clock gains or loses _with respect to sidereal
time_, take this into account in the value of _U_.

EXERCISE 11.--To determine the sun's declination, measure its altitude
at the time it crosses the meridian. Use either the method of Exercise
4, or that used with Polaris in Exercise 8. The student should be able
to show from Fig. 11 that the declination is equal to the sum of the
altitude and the latitude of the place diminished by 90°, or in an
equation

    Declination = Altitude + Latitude - 90°.

If the declination as found from this equation is a negative number it
indicates that the sun is on the south side of the equator.

The right ascension and declination of the sun as observed on each day
should be plotted on the map and the date, written opposite it. If the
work has been correctly done, the plotted points should fall upon the
curved line (ecliptic) which runs lengthwise of the map. This line, in
fact, represents the sun's path among the stars.

Note that the hours of right ascension increase from 0 up to 24, while
the numbers on the clock dial go only from 0 to 12, and then repeat 0 to
12 again during the same day. When the sidereal time is 13 hours, 14
hours, etc., the clock will indicate 1 hour, 2 hours, etc., and 12 hours
must then be added to the time shown on the dial.

If observations of the sun's right ascension and declination are made
in the latter part of either March or September the student will find
that the sun crosses the equator at these times, and he should determine
from his observations, as accurately as possible, the date and hour of
this crossing and the point on the equator at which the sun crosses it.
These points are called the equinoxes, Vernal Equinox and Autumnal
Equinox for the spring and autumn crossings respectively, and the
student will recall that the vernal equinox is the point from which
right ascensions are measured. Its position among the stars is found by
astronomers from observations like those above described, only made with
much more elaborate apparatus.

Similar observations made in June and December show that the sun's
midday altitude is about 47° greater in summer than in winter. They show
also that the sun is as far north of the equator in June as he is south
