a neighbour of mine, though I did not know his name--and accosted.
But it was scarcely a time for articulate conversation.

"What ugly _brutes_!" he said.  "Good God!  What ugly brutes!"  He
repeated this over and over again.

"Did you see a man in the pit?" I said; but he made no answer to
that.  We became silent, and stood watching for a time side by side,
deriving, I fancy, a certain comfort in one another's company.  Then I
shifted my position to a little knoll that gave me the advantage of a
yard or more of elevation and when I looked for him presently he was
walking towards Woking.

The sunset faded to twilight before anything further happened.  The
crowd far away on the left, towards Woking, seemed to grow, and I
heard now a faint murmur from it.  The little knot of people towards
Chobham dispersed.  There was scarcely an intimation of movement from
the pit.

It was this, as much as anything, that gave people courage, and I
suppose the new arrivals from Woking also helped to restore
confidence.  At any rate, as the dusk came on a slow, intermittent
movement upon the sand pits began, a movement that seemed to gather
force as the stillness of the evening about the cylinder remained
unbroken.  Vertical black figures in twos and threes would advance,
stop, watch, and advance again, spreading out as they did so in a thin
irregular crescent that promised to enclose the pit in its attenuated
horns.  I, too, on my side began to move towards the pit.

Then I saw some cabmen and others had walked boldly into the sand
pits, and heard the clatter of hoofs and the gride of wheels.  I saw a
lad trundling off the barrow of apples.  And then, within thirty yards
of the pit, advancing from the direction of Horsell, I noted a little
black knot of men, the foremost of whom was waving a white flag.

This was the Deputation.  There had been a hasty consultation, and
since the Martians were evidently, in spite of their repulsive forms,
intelligent creatures, it had been resolved to show them, by
approaching them with signals, that we too were intelligent.

Flutter, flutter, went the flag, first to the right, then to the
left.  It was too far for me to recognise anyone there, but afterwards
I learned that Ogilvy, Stent, and Henderson were with others in this
attempt at communication.  This little group had in its advance
dragged inward, so to speak, the circumference of the now almost
complete circle of people, and a number of dim black figures followed
it at discreet distances.

Suddenly there was a flash of light, and a quantity of luminous
greenish smoke came out of the pit in three distinct puffs, which
drove up, one after the other, straight into the still air.

This smoke (or flame, perhaps, would be the better word for it) was
so bright that the deep blue sky overhead and the hazy stretches of
brown common towards Chertsey, set with black pine trees, seemed to
darken abruptly as these puffs arose, and to remain the darker after
their dispersal.  At the same time a faint hissing sound became
audible.

Beyond the pit stood the little wedge of people with the white flag
at its apex, arrested by these phenomena, a little knot of small
vertical black shapes upon the black ground.  As the green smoke arose,
their faces flashed out pallid green, and faded again as it vanished.
Then slowly the hissing passed into a humming, into a long, loud,
droning noise.  Slowly a humped shape rose out of the pit, and the
ghost of a beam of light seemed to flicker out from it.

Forthwith flashes of actual flame, a bright glare leaping from one
to another, sprang from the scattered group of men.  It was as if some
invisible jet impinged upon them and flashed into white flame.  It was
as if each man were suddenly and momentarily turned to fire.

Then, by the light of their own destruction, I saw them staggering
and falling, and their supporters turning to run.

I stood staring, not as yet realising that this was death leaping
from man to man in that little distant crowd.  All I felt was that it
was something very strange.  An almost noiseless and blinding flash of
light, and a man fell headlong and lay still; and as the unseen shaft
of heat passed over them, pine trees burst into fire, and every dry
furze bush became with one dull thud a mass of flames.  And far away
towards Knaphill I saw the flashes of trees and hedges and wooden
buildings suddenly set alight.

It was sweeping round swiftly and steadily, this flaming death,
this invisible, inevitable sword of heat.  I perceived it coming
towards me by the flashing bushes it touched, and was too astounded
and stupefied to stir.  I heard the crackle of fire in the sand pits
and the sudden squeal of a horse that was as suddenly stilled.  Then
it was as if an invisible yet intensely heated finger were drawn
through the heather between me and the Martians, and all along a
curving line beyond the sand pits the dark ground smoked and crackled.
Something fell with a crash far away to the left where the road from
Woking station opens out on the common.  Forth-with the hissing and
humming ceased, and the black, dome-like object sank slowly out of
sight into the pit.

All this had happened with such swiftness that I had stood
motionless, dumbfounded and dazzled by the flashes of light.  Had that
death swept through a full circle, it must inevitably have slain me in
my surprise.  But it passed and spared me, and left the night about me
suddenly dark and unfamiliar.

The undulating common seemed now dark almost to blackness, except
where its roadways lay grey and pale under the deep blue sky of the
early night.  It was dark, and suddenly void of men.  Overhead the
stars were mustering, and in the west the sky was still a pale,
bright, almost greenish blue.  The tops of the pine trees and the
roofs of Horsell came out sharp and black against the western
afterglow.  The Martians and their appliances were altogether
invisible, save for that thin mast upon which their restless mirror
wobbled.  Patches of bush and isolated trees here and there smoked and
glowed still, and the houses towards Woking station were sending up
spires of flame into the stillness of the evening air.

Nothing was changed save for that and a terrible astonishment.  The
little group of black specks with the flag of white had been swept out
of existence, and the stillness of the evening, so it seemed to me,
had scarcely been broken.

It came to me that I was upon this dark common, helpless,
unprotected, and alone.  Suddenly, like a thing falling upon me from
without, came--fear.

With an effort I turned and began a stumbling run through the
heather.

The fear I felt was no rational fear, but a panic terror not only
of the Martians, but of the dusk and stillness all about me.  Such an
extraordinary effect in unmanning me it had that I ran weeping
silently as a child might do.  Once I had turned, I did not dare to
look back.

I remember I felt an extraordinary persuasion that I was being
played with, that presently, when I was upon the very verge of safety,
this mysterious death--as swift as the passage of light--would leap
after me from the pit about the cylinder and strike me down.



CHAPTER SIX

THE HEAT-RAY IN THE CHOBHAM ROAD


It is still a matter of wonder how the Martians are able to slay
men so swiftly and so silently.  Many think that in some way they are
able to generate an intense heat in a chamber of practically absolute
non-conductivity.  This intense heat they project in a parallel beam
against any object they choose, by means of a polished parabolic
mirror of unknown composition, much as the parabolic mirror of a
lighthouse projects a beam of light.  But no one has absolutely proved
these details.  However it is done, it is certain that a beam of heat
is the essence of the matter.  Heat, and invisible, instead of
visible, light.  Whatever is combustible flashes into flame at its
touch, lead runs like water, it softens iron, cracks and melts glass,
and when it falls upon water, incontinently that explodes into steam.

That night nearly forty people lay under the starlight about the
pit, charred and distorted beyond recognition, and all night long the
common from Horsell to Maybury was deserted and brightly ablaze.

The news of the massacre probably reached Chobham, Woking, and
Ottershaw about the same time.  In Woking the shops had closed when
the tragedy happened, and a number of people, shop people and so
forth, attracted by the stories they had heard, were walking over the
Horsell Bridge and along the road between the hedges that runs out at
last upon the common.  You may imagine the young people brushed up
after the labours of the day, and making this novelty, as they would
make any novelty, the excuse for walking together and enjoying a
trivial flirtation.  You may figure to yourself the hum of voices
along the road in the gloaming. . . .

As yet, of course, few people in Woking even knew that the cylinder
had opened, though poor Henderson had sent a messenger on a bicycle to
the post office with a special wire to an evening paper.

As these folks came out by twos and threes upon the open, they
found little knots of people talking excitedly and peering at the
spinning mirror over the sand pits, and the newcomers were, no doubt,
soon infected by the excitement of the occasion.

By half past eight, when the Deputation was destroyed, there may
have been a crowd of three hundred people or more at this place,
besides those who had left the road to approach the Martians nearer.
There were three policemen too, one of whom was mounted, doing their
best, under instructions from Stent, to keep the people back and deter
them from approaching the cylinder.  There was some booing from those
more thoughtless and excitable souls to whom a crowd is always an
occasion for noise and horse-play.

Stent and Ogilvy, anticipating some possibilities of a collision,
had telegraphed from Horsell to the barracks as soon as the Martians
emerged, for the help of a company of soldiers to protect these
strange creatures from violence.  After that they returned to lead that
ill-fated advance.  The description of their death, as it was seen by
the crowd, tallies very closely with my own impressions: the three
puffs of green smoke, the deep humming note, and the flashes of flame.

But that crowd of people had a far narrower escape than mine.  Only
the fact that a hummock of heathery sand intercepted the lower part of
the Heat-Ray saved them.  Had the elevation of the parabolic mirror
been a few yards higher, none could have lived to tell the tale.  They
saw the flashes and the men falling and an invisible hand, as it were,
lit the bushes as it hurried towards them through the twilight.  Then,
with a whistling note that rose above the droning of the pit, the beam
swung close over their heads, lighting the tops of the beech trees
that line the road, and splitting the bricks, smashing the windows,
firing the window frames, and bringing down in crumbling ruin a
portion of the gable of the house nearest the corner.

In the sudden thud, hiss, and glare of the igniting trees, the
panic-stricken crowd seems to have swayed hesitatingly for some
moments.  Sparks and burning twigs began to fall into the road, and
single leaves like puffs of flame.  Hats and dresses caught fire.  Then
came a crying from the common.  There were shrieks and shouts, and
suddenly a mounted policeman came galloping through the confusion with
his hands clasped over his head, screaming.

"They're coming!" a woman shrieked, and incontinently everyone was
turning and pushing at those behind, in order to clear their way to
Woking again.  They must have bolted as blindly as a flock of sheep.
Where the road grows narrow and black between the high banks the crowd
jammed, and a desperate struggle occurred.  All that crowd did not
escape; three persons at least, two women and a little boy, were
crushed and trampled there, and left to die amid the terror and the
darkness.



CHAPTER SEVEN

HOW I REACHED HOME


For my own part, I remember nothing of my flight except the stress
of blundering against trees and stumbling through the heather.  All
about me gathered the invisible terrors of the Martians; that pitiless
sword of heat seemed whirling to and fro, flourishing overhead before
it descended and smote me out of life.  I came into the road between
the crossroads and Horsell, and ran along this to the crossroads.

At last I could go no further; I was exhausted with the violence of
my emotion and of my flight, and I staggered and fell by the wayside.
That was near the bridge that crosses the canal by the gasworks.  I
fell and lay still.

I must have remained there some time.

I sat up, strangely perplexed.  For a moment, perhaps, I could not
clearly understand how I came there.  My terror had fallen from me
like a garment.  My hat had gone, and my collar had burst away from
its fastener.  A few minutes before, there had only been three real
things before me--the immensity of the night and space and nature, my
own feebleness and anguish, and the near approach of death.  Now it
was as if something turned over, and the point of view altered
abruptly.  There was no sensible transition from one state of mind to
the other.  I was immediately the self of every day again--a decent,
ordinary citizen.  The silent common, the impulse of my flight, the
starting flames, were as if they had been in a dream.  I asked myself
had these latter things indeed happened?  I could not credit it.

I rose and walked unsteadily up the steep incline of the bridge.  My
mind was blank wonder.  My muscles and nerves seemed drained of their
strength.  I dare say I staggered drunkenly.  A head rose over the
arch, and the figure of a workman carrying a basket appeared.  Beside
him ran a little boy.  He passed me, wishing me good night.  I was
minded to speak to him, but did not.  I answered his greeting with a
meaningless mumble and went on over the bridge.

Over the Maybury arch a train, a billowing tumult of white, firelit
smoke, and a long caterpillar of lighted windows, went flying
south--clatter, clatter, clap, rap, and it had gone.  A dim group of
people talked in the gate of one of the houses in the pretty little
row of gables that was called Oriental Terrace.  It was all so real
and so familiar.  And that behind me!  It was frantic, fantastic!
Such things, I told myself, could not be.

Perhaps I am a man of exceptional moods.  I do not know how far my
experience is common.  At times I suffer from the strangest sense of
detachment from myself and the world about me; I seem to watch it all
from the outside, from somewhere inconceivably remote, out of time,
out of space, out of the stress and tragedy of it all.  This feeling
was very strong upon me that night.  Here was another side to my
dream.

But the trouble was the blank incongruity of this serenity and the
swift death flying yonder, not two miles away.  There was a noise of
business from the gasworks, and the electric lamps were all alight.  I
stopped at the group of people.

"What news from the common?" said I.

There were two men and a woman at the gate.

"Eh?" said one of the men, turning.

"What news from the common?" I said.

"'Ain't yer just _been_ there?" asked the men.

"People seem fair silly about the common," said the woman over the
gate.  "What's it all abart?"

"Haven't you heard of the men from Mars?" said I; "the creatures
from Mars?"

"Quite enough," said the woman over the gate.  "Thenks"; and all
three of them laughed.

I felt foolish and angry.  I tried and found I could not tell them
what I had seen.  They laughed again at my broken sentences.

"You'll hear more yet," I said, and went on to my home.

I startled my wife at the doorway, so haggard was I.  I went into
the dining room, sat down, drank some wine, and so soon as I could
collect myself sufficiently I told her the things I had seen.  The
dinner, which was a cold one, had already been served, and remained
neglected on the table while I told my story.

"There is one thing," I said, to allay the fears I had aroused;
"they are the most sluggish things I ever saw crawl.  They may keep
the pit and kill people who come near them, but they cannot get out
of it. . . .  But the horror of them!"

"Don't, dear!" said my wife, knitting her brows and putting her
hand on mine.

"Poor Ogilvy!" I said.  "To think he may be lying dead there!"

My wife at least did not find my experience incredible.  When I saw
how deadly white her face was, I ceased abruptly.

"They may come here," she said again and again.

I pressed her to take wine, and tried to reassure her.

"They can scarcely move," I said.

I began to comfort her and myself by repeating all that Ogilvy had
told me of the impossibility of the Martians establishing themselves
on the earth.  In particular I laid stress on the gravitational
