and they said they were all right, no worries. Nor do I think anything
in her own life would give a blackmailer or an extortionist anything to
go on. Still--I want to know."

Martinez drummed the desk-top with nervous fingers. "I'll look into it
if you insist," he said, "though it'll cost you a pretty penny. Rich
men's lives aren't easy to pry into if they've got something they want
to hide. But I don't think we'd find out much; your case seems to be
only one of a rash of similar ones in the past year."

"Huh?" Fraser looked sharply up.

"Yeah. I follow all the news; and remember the odd facts. There've been
a good dozen cases recently, where beautiful young women suddenly
married rich men or became their mistresses. It doesn't all get into the
papers, but I've got my contacts. I know. In every instance, there was
no obvious reason; in fact, the dames seemed very much in love with
daddy."

"And the era of the gold-digger is pretty well gone--" Fraser sat
staring out the window. It didn't seem right that the sky should be so
full of sunshine.

"Well," said Martinez, "you don't need me. You need a psychologist."

_Psychologist!_

"By God, Juan, I'm going to give you a job anyway!" Fraser leaped to his
feet. "You're going to check into an outfit called Sentiment, Inc."

       *       *       *       *       *

A week later, Martinez said, "Yeah, we found it easily enough. It's not
in the phone-book, but they've got a big suite right in the high-rent
district on Fifth. The address is here, in my written report. Nobody in
the building knows much about 'em, except that they're a quiet,
well-behaved bunch and call themselves research psychologists. They have
a staff of four: a secretary-receptionist; a full-time secretary; and a
couple of husky boys who may be bodyguards for the boss. That's this
Kennedy, Robert Kennedy. My man couldn't get into his office; the girl
said he was too busy and never saw anybody except some regular clients.
Nor could he date either of the girls, but he did investigate them.

"The receptionist is just a working girl for routine stuff, married,
hardly knows or cares what's going on. The steno is unmarried, has a
degree in psych, lives alone, and seems to have no friends except her
boss. Who's not her lover, by the way."

"Well, how about Kennedy himself?" asked Fraser.

"I've found out a good bit, but it's all legitimate," said Martinez.
"He's about fifty years old, a widower, very steady private life. He's a
licensed psychiatrist who used to practice in Chicago, where he also did
research in collaboration with a physicist named Gavotti, who's since
died. Shortly after that happened--

"No, there's no suspicion of foul play; the physicist was an old man and
died of a heart attack. Anyway, Kennedy moved to New York. He still
practices, officially, but he doesn't take just anybody; claims that his
research only leaves him time for a few." Martinez narrowed his eyes.
"The only thing you could hold against him is that he occasionally sees
a guy named Bryce, who's in a firm that has some dealings with Amtorg."

"The Russian trading corporation? Hm."

"Oh, that's pretty remote guilt by association, Colin. Amtorg does have
legitimate business, you know. We buy manganese from them, among other
things. And the rest of Kennedy's connections are all strictly blue
ribbon. _Creme de la creme_--business, finance, politics, and one big
union-leader who's known to be a conservative. In fact, Kennedy's
friends are so powerful you'd have real trouble doing anything against
him."

Fraser slumped in his chair. "I suppose my notion was pretty wild," he
admitted.

"Well, there is one queer angle. You know these rich guys who've
suddenly made out with such highly desirable dames? As far as I could
find out, every one of them is a client of Kennedy's."

"Eh?" Fraser jerked erect.

"'S a fact. Also, my man showed the building staff, elevator pilots and
so on, pictures of these women, and a couple of 'em were remembered as
having come to see Kennedy."

"Shortly before they--fell in love?"

"Well, that I can't be sure of. You know how people are about
remembering dates. But it's possible."

Fraser shook his dark head. "It's unbelievable," he said. "I thought
Svengali was outworn melodrama."

"I know something about hypnotism, Colin. It won't do anything like what
you think happened to those girls."

Fraser got out his pipe and fumbled tobacco into it. "I think," he said,
"I'm going to call on Dr. Robert Kennedy myself."

"Take it easy, boy," said Martinez. "You been reading too many weird
stories; you'll just get tossed out on your can."

Fraser tried to smile. It was hard--Judy wouldn't answer his calls and
letters any more. "Well," he said, "it'll be in a worthy cause."

       *       *       *       *       *

The elevator let him out on the nineteenth floor. It held four big
suites, with the corridor running between them. He studied the
frosted-glass doors. On one side was the Eagle Publishing Company and
Frank & Dayles, Brokers. On the other was the Messenger Advertising
Service, and Sentiment, Inc. He entered their door and stood in a quiet,
oak-paneled reception room. Behind the railing were a couple of desks, a
young woman working at each, and two burly men who sat boredly reading
magazines.

The pretty girl, obviously the receptionist, looked up as Fraser
approached and gave him a professional smile. "Yes, sir?" she asked.

"I'd like to see Dr. Kennedy, please," he said, trying hard to be
casual.

"Do you have an appointment, sir?"

"No, but it's urgent."

"I'm sorry, sir; Dr. Kennedy is very busy. He can't see anybody except
his regular patients and research subjects."

"Look, take him in this note, will you? Thanks."

Fraser sat uneasily for some minutes, wondering if he'd worded the note
correctly. _I must see you about Miss Judy Harkness._ _Important._ Well,
what the devil else could you say?

The receptionist came out again. "Dr. Kennedy can spare you a few
minutes, sir," she said. "Go right on in."

"Thanks." Fraser slouched toward the inner door. The two men lowered
their magazines to follow him with watchful eyes.

There was a big, handsomely-furnished office inside, with a door beyond
that must lead to the laboratory. Kennedy looked up from some papers and
rose, holding out his hand. He was a medium-sized man, rather plump,
graying hair brushed thickly back from a broad, heavy face behind
rimless glasses. "Yes?" His voice was low and pleasant. "What can I do
for you?"

"My name's Fraser." The visitor sat down and accepted a cigarette. Best
to act urbanely. "I know Miss Harkness well. I understand you made some
encephalographic studies of her."

"Indeed?" Kennedy looked annoyed, and Fraser recalled that Judy had been
asked not to tell anyone. "I'm not sure; I would have to consult my
records first." He wasn't admitting anything, thought Fraser.

"Look," said the engineer, "there's been a marked change in Miss
Harkness recently. I know enough psychology to be certain that such
changes don't happen overnight without cause. I wanted to consult you."

"I'm not her psychiatrist," said Kennedy coldly. "Now if you will excuse
me, I really have a lot to do--"

"All right," said Fraser. There was no menace in his tones, only a
weariness. "If you insist, I'll play it dirty. Such abrupt changes
indicate mental instability. But I know she was perfectly sane before.
It begins to look as if your experiments may have--injured her mind. If
so, I should have to report you for malpractice."

Kennedy flushed. "I am a licensed psychiatrist," he said, "and any other
doctor will confirm that Miss Harkness is still in mental health. If you
tried to get an investigation started, you would only be wasting your
own time and that of the authorities. She herself will testify that no
