belts.

There is a separate stairway inside of the tower for lubricating the
journals, etc., and the top of the tower is covered with skylights
protected underneath by a wire netting. In case of a fire in the belt
tower, the heat will readily break the glass at the top, and the fire will
tend to go up and out of the tower rather than through the mill.


                             MILL FLOORS.

The questions involved in designing the floors of a mill are of great
importance, contributing in no small measure to elements concerned in the
successful operation of the mill, and to a greater extent to its standing
as a fire risk, and therefore affecting the constant expense of insurance.

In the case of a building designed merely for sustaining of loads, as in a
storehouse, a floor would naturally be designed on the basis of
considering the breaking strength of the timber. But in the case of a
mill, the limitation is the amount of flexure allowable under the
circumstances; and therefore the floors of the building are made more
nearly rigid than would be required merely from the consideration of the
ultimate strength of the structure.

The books on the subject, repeating over a constant which was first, I
believe, given by Brunel in testimony before a parliamentary commission,
have held that one four-hundredth of a span is the proper ratio of
flexure. This may have been a very good rule to give to the parliamentary
commission, but it is hardly the practical method of limitation for a
matter of engineering construction, because the flexure of a loaded beam
is in the form of a curve, and therefore its law is that of a curvilinear
function, and not of a straight line. I have examined a great number of
precedents of good construction in this connection, and for mill use have
deduced the formula for deflection in inches, _d_ = 0.0012 L squared, in which L
is the length of span in feet. It will be readily recognized that the true
constant of deflection of span is measured by the radius of curvature
which will give a uniform and allowable distortion to the floor in either
direction to the limit of the radius upon which this formula is based,
which is 1,250 feet.

I do not propose to offer to you on this occasion any remarks in regard to
the treatment of the mathematics of the problem of applied mechanics
concerned in the questions of transverse stress, knowing that you have
certainly received instruction upon these subjects. But referring to the
questions of mill floors, I would state that Southern pine beams of solid
timber twelve by fourteen up to fourteen by sixteen inches are used; and
instead of attempting the use of one piece of timber, it is preferable to
use two pieces of the same depth and of half the breadth. These should be
bolted together, with a space of an inch or so between them left by
placing small vertical pieces of wood between the timbers when they are
bolted together. In this manner one is more sure of sound timber, and in
the process of seasoning there is less liability of dry rot in the
interior, or of injurious checking, warping, or twisting.

The end of the beams should rest upon iron plates in the masonry, and
should be secured by means of a tongue upon the plate entering a groove
across the lower side of the beam. It is not feasible to make this groove
to a close fit with the tongue; but it is cut a great deal larger, and the
whole brought to a firm bearing by means of pairs of wedges or quoins
driven into the groove each side of the iron tongue.

The outer end of the plate contains ribs or tongues reaching down into the
brickwork. In this manner the timber is securely fastened to the
brickwork; and yet in time of accident or of fire the falling of the beam
in the middle of the mill will raise it up sufficiently so that it will
clear the tongue and fall without tearing the wall down, which is the case
whenever the beams are secured by bolts entering the end of the beam from
the face of the wall.

At the points of support in a line of columns, the beams should be free
from all compressive stress, transmitted through the lines of columns from
floors above, by means of iron pintles between the cap of one column and
the floor of the next one carrying this load.

A faulty method of construction, quite frequently used, consists in
covering each column with a bolster of timber, four or five feet long,
reaching out under the floor beams.

The transverse contraction of wood in seasoning after it is in position in
the mill varies from three-eighths of an inch to double that quantity per
foot; and the aggregation of such shrinkage amounts to a very considerable
distortion or settling of the floor in a mill of several stories.
Moreover, the resistance of timber to transverse crushing has been shown
by experiments on the testing machine at the United States arsenal at
Watertown to be about three times the resistance to longitudinal crushing.

Iron columns for mills have been entirely displaced by those of timber, as
it was found that the latter were more reliable in resistance to fire,
were freer from defects in construction, and possessed less tendency to
vibration. A series of tests on full-sized mill columns of various forms
of construction and age, made in the experiments referred to, at the
Watertown arsenal, showed that resistance to crushing of Southern pine
columns was about 4,500 pounds to the square inch, and remarkably uniform
as to the different results. In white oak there was a wider range, owing
to the difference in the grain of the various samples, the generality of
the specimens being of somewhat less resistance than that of Southern
pine.

It was furthermore found by these experiments, on comparing the crushing
resistance of a full-sized column with that of a portion of the same,
perhaps two feet in length, that the results were practically identical,
likewise that within the limits of construction used for these columns the
question of flexure did not enter at all in the problem, but they gave way
by direct crushing, and that the resistance to crushing was proportional
to its load upon the minimum cross section.

The precedents of safe construction in this matter show that wood columns
in mills have successfully sustained for many years a load of six hundred
pounds to the square inch without deterioration. As the resistance of
such columns is proportional to the cross section, the results of these
experiments have changed the practice of mill engineers in the matter; and
square columns are of almost universal use, which interfere with no
greater area on the floor than the round column of the same diameter,
while they furnish an increased resistance of a little over twenty per
cent. in excess.

Along the axis of such columns a hole of about one and one-half inches in
diameter is bored, and near each end a couple of transverse holes,
generally half an inch in diameter, furnish means of ventilating the
inside of the column for the prevention of dry rot and also checking, due
to contraction and seasoning.

There are several methods of laying the floor plank upon these beams,
which are placed from eight to ten feet apart, according to the dimensions
of the machinery to be placed in the mill. The first floor of three-inch
plank, planed on one side and grooved on both edges, is laid planed side
down, and the hardwood splines are inserted into the grooves before the
planks are pressed up and spiked to the beams. An agreeable finish is
sometimes arranged underneath by plowing a rabbet in each of the corners,
and inserting a bead in the groove thus formed, which is secured by nails
driven diagonally into the plank on one side only, because if the nails
were driven into both sides, the bead would be split by the contraction of
the plank.

These planks should be cut to sufficient length to cover two bays of the
mill; and their transverse resistance is that of a beam fixed at one end
and supported at the other, or one and three-fifths as much as a plank of
the same size but half the length would support; but it should be
remembered in this connection that, if evenly distributed on the floor,
five-eighths of the load would be carried by every alternate beam unless
the planks are so laid to break joints at convenient intervals of about
three feet.

The top flooring is generally laid directly upon the floor plank, with one
or two thicknesses of roofing paper interposed; but the preferable method,
which deadens the sound and vibration, and also greatly increases the
fire-resisting qualities of the structure, is to lay a coat of mortar on
the floor plank, preserving the uniform thickness by means of furring
placed about sixteen inches apart, and then to lay the upper floor upon
this.

For these upper floors hardwood plank, one and one-fourth inches thick,
and not over four inches wide, is used. The black birch is considered by
many to possess the greater resistance to wear; and Southern pine is
ranked next, although the latter wood gives trouble by stringing,
especially when trucks are rolled over it. White maple forms an excellent
top floor, although not so hard as others, especially where the floor is
likely to be exposed to water, as in paper mills and bleacheries.


                                 ROOFS.

Benjamin Franklin once said that next to a good foundation a good roof was
the most important feature of a building. Although the constructive
features of mill roofs are well defined, yet with regard to roof covering
there is a wide diversity of experience and opinion.

The present form of factory roofing resembles a floor in its construction,
being made, in a similar manner, of plank laid upon beams which project
through the walls, where they act as a bracket to the cornice, the ends
being sawed after any suitable ornamentation. The inclination for such
roofs is about three-fourths of an inch to the foot. Where a mill is
narrow enough for a single beam to reach from the wall to the ridge, they
form cantilevers, the second point of support from the wall being by the
columns one-third of the distance across the mill, and the ends of the
beams are further secured together by means of iron dogs. For mills of
greater width, the beam would reach only to the row of columns, and over
the middle of the mill a beam is placed, usually horizontal on the under
side, and hewn down from the middle to each end, so as to preserve the
same slope on the upper side of the beam as for the roof.

In many instances mills are built with brick cornices, without any of the
wood projection from the side; and in other buildings the walls are
carried above the roof, which slopes toward the center, and all water
falling on it or melted from the snow is conducted from it by pipes
leading down through the middle of the mill.

It is not desirable to place gutters around the edge of the mill, as they
serve no useful purpose, and are in continual need of repairs. By leaving
the edge of the mill plank square and protecting it by sheet metal
flashing, the rain falling from the roof can be received by a concave walk
of coal tar concrete placed on the ground around the building. Suitable
porches over doors, or some guard on the roof at these points, will
prevent people who may be passing in at doors from being unduly wet by
water from the roof.

There are numerous forms of roof coverings, the use of the different
varieties being to a great extent local; that is, the sheet iron coverings
used in the Middle States are almost unknown in New England; and in the
latter place the ordinary tinned iron roofing is universally painted,
while in the Dominion of Canada it is laid obliquely and never painted.

It is conceded by all that sheet copper forms the most desirable method of
covering a roof; and, if one could be assured of the permanence of the
structure, irrespective of the necessity for making changes every half
year in order to keep pace with the march of invention, it would doubtless
be shown that under such conditions of permanency copper would form the
cheapest roof.

The most widely used roofing materials for this class of buildings are the
asphalt and the coal tar roof, the latter being the most widely used in
New England. There are numerous varieties of these composition coverings,
which are applied by various methods. Some of these are of the most
satisfactory character, while others are poorly designed and unskillfully
applied, and are a constant source of trouble and expense to the occupant
of the building.

One of the leading manufacturers, the efficiency of whose work for many
years over a large amount of mill property I can vouch for by personal
knowledge, uses the following method of applying the roofing. Three layers
of roofing felt are placed on the plank parallel to the eaves, and
continued by lapping each additional layer two thirds of its width upon
the preceding one, and in this manner covering the roof with three
thicknesses of the felt, breaking joints. This is secured to the roof by
nails through tin washers and coated with a melted composition, and then
two additional layers of felt are placed over the whole. Another coat of
composition is then applied and gravel is placed over the whole while
soft.

This maker does not approve of the practice of cementing each sheet of
felt when it is laid, because it does not allow the felt freedom to yield
from the expansion and contraction of the roof. When tin is applied to
roofs, resin-sized building paper should first be laid on the roof plank,
and the sheets of tin should be painted on the lower side before being
laid.

Of late years cotton duck has been applied as a roof covering, and has
been watched with a great deal of anticipation, although it has been used
for similar purposes in covering ships' decks for many years. But the two
uses are not strictly comparable, because the ship's deck is calked tight,
and therefore the covering is free from the application of moisture
underneath, while the roof is never tight, and the warm air underneath,
heavily charged with moisture, which permeates the cracks between the
planks, becomes chilled and condenses as it nears the top, carrying on a
process of distillation.

As an example of the extent to which this can be carried on, I have known
of instances where people presumed they were making a good roof by leaving
slight air spaces by means of the furring laid between the roof plank and
the top boarding. The circulation of air in these spaces deposited
sufficient moisture to rot the boards.

A mill manager, wishing to have a roof over a very warm room, which should
be both tight and a very perfect non-conductor, made a roof containing a
space of about sixteen inches, which was filled with sawdust, and the roof
boarding on top of this was covered with tar and gravel in the usual
manner. In a few weeks the water began to drip through the ceiling as if
the roof was leaking, although there was no snow on the top of the roof.
Investigation showed that within that short time a sufficient amount of
water had condensed with the sawdust to saturate the whole.

I would say in this connection that three inches of plank afford an ample
protection against condensation over any ordinary process of manufacture,
although four inches of plank have been used as a roof over paper machines
in order to be safe beyond peradventure; but it is necessary that nails
should not be driven into the bottom of this roof plank, because the point
of a nail will reach to a lower temperature near the outside of the roof
in the winter, and being a better conductor, it will cause moisture to
condense upon the head of the nail.

Tin roofing is so general in use as not to require any allusion to methods
of application, but the only course to reach economical and satisfactory
results for a term of years, especially for locations near to the sea
shore, is to use the best quality of dipped roofing plates of some brand
which can be relied on as conforming to the standard and free from
"wasters" or imperfect plates.

Duck roofing has been successfully applied by first laying and tacking
down a covering of two-ply asphalt paper, and upon this was spread a
covering of resin-sized sheathing paper, tacked in the usual manner. Upon
this was laid a covering consisting of cotton duck, forty-four inches wide
and weighing twenty-six ounces to the yard. Several methods of joining the
edges of the duck together have been tried, resulting in the abandonment
of the method of sewing used, for the preferable method of nailing the
duck down, laying one strip over the other, and then opening the duck, a
lock joint is formed without any jointure between the two sheets exposed
to the weather. After the duck is stretched on the roof, it is securely
fastened by means of round-headed woodscrews, one and one-fourth inches
long, through a concave tin washer three-fourths of an inch in diameter,
resting upon a seven-eighths of an inch washer made of roofing felt.

A coat of hot pine tar with a small quantity of linseed oil is laid upon
the whole of the duck roofing, after being laid, for the purpose of
filling the fiber and preserving the cotton fabric by means of the
antiseptic principles of the pine tar. The surface is then covered with
two coats of mineral paint.

Within a year, paper has been very successfully used as a roof covering.
Sheets of wood pulp board about one-sixteenth of an inch in thickness are
treated by a process which renders them hard and elastic, and secured upon
the roof by means of tacks through concave tin washers. The edge of each
sheet is grooved, in order to allow for the expansion and contraction of
the roof. The whole roof is then covered with a heavy mineral paint.
Experience with this during the past severe winter in Maine has been of
the most satisfactory nature.

Shingles furnish a much better roof covering than slate, both in the
matter of conduction of heat or cold in the extremes of summer and winter
and also in resistance to fire. The heat of a slight fire underneath the
roof will cause slates to crumble; and the same result will be obtained by
heavy sparks falling and burning upon the roof. Some people treat shingles
by boiling them under pressure in a solution of salt and chloride of lime,
for the purpose of antiseptic treatment and also to render them fireproof.


                              STOREHOUSES.

The latest form of storehouses tends to one of two extremes. Where land is
nearly level, and cheap, the greatest storage capacity can be obtained
with the greatest economy by means of a one or two story storehouse built
with a plank construction, with the beams secured to the posts by means of
knees. A traveling crane or railroad runs along the middle of the
storehouse, affording a ready means for rapid changes of the contents of
the storehouse.

Another form for storage is by means of very large brick buildings,
especially arranged as a protection against outside fire. In designing a
storehouse it is of especial importance that the stories should not be
made so high that it will be possible for a dangerous load to be piled
upon any one floor.

The wool storehouse of the Pacific Mills at Lawrence can be safely said to
be in its design and construction the finest example of mill engineering
in the country.

Another type of mill storehouse, designed for both raw material and
finished goods, is designed by Mr. John Kilburn, of Lowell, and consists
of two buildings placed at right angles to each other, and joining only
at one corner. These buildings do not contain openings through the floors
of any nature whatsoever, either for stairways, elevators, or any other
purpose; but all vertical communication is furnished by means of a masonry
tower at one corner of the buildings, which contains an elevator and
stairway. At the level of each floor, substantial balconies lead through a
doorway in the tower to one in the storehouse, and the storage is added to
or withdrawn from the storehouse in this manner.

I have not made any reference to the use of rolled iron for structural
purposes, because such material has not been used to any extent in mill
architecture. Irrespective of questions of space or of strength, wood
beams possess advantages in the reduction of vibration, facility of
securing the plank above and hangers below, and a great many other
purposes in the changing and alterations of a mill, which render them
peculiarly useful, and I believe that the results with Southern pine beams
in American mills are much superior to those of the iron beams in European
mills.

No small part of the success attending the use of rolled iron in the
structural purposes for which it is adapted, has been due to the excellent
and reliable engineering information contained in the manuals and
catalogues issued by the rolling mills. Such works are reliable and clear,
and, as far as I know, can without exception be safely followed.

The general tendency of American mill construction is toward as low
buildings as the price of land will admit. The American mills being
devoted to a large variety of operations, instead of being confined to a
single process after the manner of those of European type, require a great
deal more care in their organization, not merely in the original lay-out
for the purpose of arranging for the passage of the stock in processes
from the raw material to the finished product in as straight lines as
possible, but due consideration should also be given to providing
facilities for the enlargement of the mill.

As an illustration of the methods employed, in a paper mill plan of my own
design, [the view and plan being thrown on the screen], the various
operations containing processes of different hazard in regard to fire are
completely isolated from each other by means of fire walls, and the
storage of the mill is in turn isolated from the manufactory.

The storehouse consists of three sections, the largest section for paper
stock, which is sorted in the upper story, the second section, one story
in height, for other manufacturing supplies, and beyond the fire wall the
storehouse is arranged to contain the finished paper. Goods can be taken
away from or added to the storehouse at the single line of teams, or
railroad siding.

After the stock leaves the sorting room, it is carried to the dusting room
over a covered bridge, which is protected from the weather on one side,
yet does not form a flue for the spread of fire as does a closed bridge.

The first room in the main mill is used for a dusting room, and thence the
stock falls into the rotary bleach, whence it is carried through the fire
doors to the engine room. Here it meets the wood pulp and clay wheeled
from the middle section of the storehouse, which is on that same level.
After washing and beating, the stock is run into the drainers below,
whence it is raised again, and after suitable intermediate processes the
pulp is converted into paper on the paper machine in the connecting
building. This paper is then taken into the upper part of the main
building, and after being dried on the lofts is suitably calendered and
packed before being transferred into the extreme end of the storehouse to
await shipment.

At the present time it has been found that an inclined roof of the olden
type is not a necessity over a paper machine, as has been decreed by the
tradition passed down from old practices. Within the last year, a number
of flat roofs have been placed over paper machines, without any trouble
ensuing from condensed water forming on the ceiling and thence dropping
upon the stock. It is well known that the use of a flat roof in such
places is attended with a great many mechanical conveniences; and the
pitched roof hitherto used for these purposes has been submitted to, only
because it was presumed to be necessary. The whole tendency of mill design
is in the line of fitness of means to ends, in the simplest and most
direct manner.

When the mills in Lowell were first built, they consisted of isolated
buildings, which it was presumed would remain for all time; but when it
became necessary to increase the plant, it was found that the engineer had
wisely laid out the mills in the same yard in reference to a fixed grade,
so that corresponding floors would meet when the buildings were extended
so that they reached each other.

Wherever a strong and diffused light is necessary for any manufacturing
process, or the conditions are such as to require unusual stability of the
building, one-story mills lighted by monitors afford accommodations not
reached by any other form of construction.

In presenting before you some of the salient features of modern mill
construction, I have endeavored to show the various steps of progress
leading up to the development of the present types of design, as well as
some of the methods of construction in present use.

These various steps in advance, producing mills better suited for the
purposes for which a mill is built, are not generally due to elements
originating with the manufacturers, but with the Factory Mutual
Underwriters, who, finding it cheaper to prevent a fire than to settle a
loss, have in every manner encouraged improvements in construction,
equipment, and administration, with the result of diminishing the
insurance on textile manufacturing property during the last generation
from two and one-half down to one-fourth of one per cent., or reducing the
cost of insurance eighty per cent.

In designing any work, a careful regard should be given to precedents,
remembering that a good designer must also be a good copyist.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PASSIVE STATE OF IRON AND NICKEL.--E. Saint Edme.--The nickel of
commerce immediately becomes passive if immersed in ordinary nitric acid.
Iron, while being briskly attacked by common nitric acid, is rendered
passive by contact with nickel. If steel and nickel are plunged into the
acid together, the former metal is not even momentarily attacked. Nickel
retains energetically a proportion of combined nitrogen, to which its
passivity is due.




                        IMPROVED TORPEDO BOAT.


We give an illustration of the new type of second class torpedo boat which
Messrs. Yarrow & Co. have recently constructed to the order of the
Admiralty, and which was tried at the latter part of last year. The boat
is 60 ft. long over all and 8 ft. 6 in. wide, 3 ft. shorter and from a
foot to 15 in. wider than the old type of second class boats. She attained
a speed of rather more than 17 knots per hour on her official trial with 4
tons on board. The speed, when light, for six runs on the measured mile
was 18-1/2 knots. The latter seems a very high speed for so small a vessel,
and indeed it is a remarkable performance, but at the same time the speed
of 17.031 knots on a four hours' trial with 4 tons on board is more
remarkable still. It is well to note, says _Engineering_, in comparing
speeds of torpedo boats, under what conditions as to weight carried and
duration of running the trial is made. In our previous notice we referred
to the manner in which this boat differs from ordinary second class boats
in the manner of ejecting the torpedo; and the arrangement is well shown
in the engraving. The more ordinary method of firing the torpedo from a
tube or tubes, built into the hull and pointing forward through the bow,
will be familiar to the majority of our readers; but here it will be seen
the bow fire has been altogether abandoned, and a swiveling gun placed aft
is substituted. The gun, of course, is not new; indeed, one was placed on
the old Lightning, the first torpedo boat built for the English navy. That
vessel was, however, a first class boat, and although not so large as the
first class boats now built, was considerably bigger than No. 50, which is
the official designation of the craft under notice. In the Lightning, too,
the torpedo gun was placed forward, and was trained in quite a different
manner to that of this second class boat. We have already commented on the
offensive advantages of being able to eject the torpedo through a wide
angle of range, and when going at speed, rather than having to bring the
