At the elderly journalist's entrance, the skipper had shot a quick,
irritated glance over his shoulder and had begun to snap something; he
cut it off. Instead, he said, "When did you first sight the alien ship,
Mr. Gray?"

"_Alien?_"

"Yes, alien. When did you first sight it? It is obviously following us
in order to locate our home planet." There was extreme tension in the
captain's voice.

Markham Gray felt cold fingers trace their way up his back. "Why, why, I
must have noticed it several hours ago, Captain. But ... an _alien_!...
I...." He peered at the enlarged craft on the screen. "Are you sure,
Captain? It seems remarkably like our own. I would say--"

The captain had spun back around to stare at the screen again, as though
to reassure himself of what he had already seen.

"There are no other ships in the vicinity," he grated, almost as though
to himself. "Besides that, as far as I know, and I should know, there
are no Earth craft that look exactly like that. There are striking
similarities, I'll admit, to our St. Louis class scouts, but those jets
on the prow--there's nothing like them either in existence or
projected."

His voice rose in an attempt to achieve decisiveness, "Lieutenant
Bormann, prepare to attack."

Suddenly, the telviz blared.

_Calling the Neuve Los Angeles. Calling the Neuve Los Angeles. Be
unafraid. We are not hostile._

There was quiet on the bridge of the earth ship. Screaming quiet. It was
seemingly hours before they had recovered even to the point of staring
at one another.

Hans Bormann gasped finally, unbelievingly, "How could they possibly
know the name of our ship? How could they possibly know the Amer-English
language?"

The captain's face was white and frozen. He said, so quietly that they
could hardly make it out, "That's not all. Our alarms still haven't been
touched off, and our estimators aren't functioning; we don't know how
large they are nor how far away. It's unheard of--.Somehow they've
completely disrupted our instruments."

       *       *       *       *       *

Markham Gray followed the matter with more than average interest, after
their arrival at the New Albuquerque spaceport. Not that average
interest wasn't high.

Finally man had come in contact with another intelligence. He had been
dreading it, fearing it, for decades; now it was here. Another life form
had conquered space, and, seemingly, had equipment, in some respects at
least, superior to humanity's.

The court martial of Captain Roger Post had been short and merciless.
Free access to the trial had been given to the press and telviz systems,
and the newscasts had carried it in its entirety, partially to stress to
the public mind the importance of the situation, and partially as a
warning to other spacemen.

Post had stood before the raised dais upon which were seated SupSpaceCom
Michell and four other high-ranking officers and heard the charge
read--failure to attack the alien craft, destroy it, and thus prevent
the aliens--wherever they might be from--returning to their own world
and reporting the presence of man in the galaxy.

Markham Gray, like thousands of others, had sat on the edge of his chair
in the living room of his small suburban home, and followed the trial
closely on his telviz.

SupSpaceCom Michell had been blunt and ruthless. He had rapped out,
bitingly, "Roger Post, as captain of the _Neuve Los Angeles_, why did
you not either destroy the alien craft, or, if you felt it too strong
for your ship, why did you not blast off into space, luring it away from
your home planet?"

Post said hesitantly, "I didn't think it necessary, sir. His attitude
was--well, of peace. It was as if we were two ships that had met by
chance and dipped their flags in the old manner and passed on to their
different destinations. They even were able to telviz us a message."

The SupSpaceCom snapped, "That was undoubtedly a case of telepathy. The
alien is equipped in some manner to impose thoughts upon the human
brain. You _thought_ the telviz was used; actually the alien wasn't
speaking Amer-English, he was simply forcing thoughts into your minds."

