
"We cut our speed and come down on the tail as near to the domes of the
Ericsson settlement as possible without taking too much of a chance.
Then I secure everything for the towing."

"Towing? I'm sorry; I never read much about the moon rockets."

"Natural enough," Dudley retorted dryly. "Anyway, they send out big
cranes to lower the rocket to horizontal so they can tow it on wheels
under one of the loading domes. Handling cargo goes a lot faster and
safer that way. Most of the town itself is underground."

He began warming up his tele-screen prior to asking the spaceport for
observation of his approach. Kathi grabbed his elbow.

"Of course I'm going to talk with them," he answered her startled
question.

"Can they see me here behind you?"

"I guess so. Maybe not too clear, but they'll see somebody's with me.
What's the difference? It'll just save them a shock later."

"Why should they see me at all? I can hide till after you leave the
ship, and--."

"Fat chance!" grunted Dudley. "Forget it."

"Please, Dudley! I--I don't want to get you in any trouble, for one
thing. At least, let me get out of sight now. Maybe you'll change your
mind before we land."

He looked at her, and the anxiety seemed real enough. Knowing he was
only letting her postpone the unpleasantness but reluctant to make her
face it, he shrugged.

"All right, then! Go somewhere and wipe that stuff off your face. But
stop dreaming!"

He waited until she had disappeared into one or another of the tiny
compartments behind the control room, then sent out his call to the
Lunar settlement.

The problem did not affect his landing; in fact, he did better than
usual. His stubby but deft fingers lacked their ordinary tendency to
tighten up, now that part of his mind was rehearsing the best way to
explain the presence of an unauthorized passenger.

In the end, when he had the rocket parked neatly on the extremities of
its fins less than a quarter of a mile from one of the port domes, he
had not yet made up his mind.

"Nice landing, Pete," the ground observer told him. "Buy you a drink
later?"

"Uh ... yeah, sure!" Dudley answered. "Say, is Jack Fisher anywhere
around?"

"Jack? No, I guess he's gone bottom level. We're having 'night' just
now, you know. Why? What do you want a cop for?"

Suddenly, it was too difficult.

_If she could hide as long as she did, she could have done it all the
way_, he told himself.

"Oh, don't wake him up if he's asleep," he said hastily. "I just thought
I'd have dinner with him sometime before I leave."

He waited sullenly while the great self-propelled machines glided out
over the smooth floor of the crater toward the ship, despising himself
for giving in.

_Well, I just won't know anything about her_, he decided. _Let her have
her little fling on Luna! It won't last long._

He closed the key that would guard against accidental activation of the
controls and, enjoying the ability to walk even at one-sixth his normal
weight, went about securing loose objects. When the space-suited figures
outside signaled, he was ready for the tilt.

Once under the dome, he strode out through the airlock as if innocent of
any thought but getting breakfast. He exchanged greetings with some of
the tow crew, turned over his manifesto to the yawning checker who met
him, and headed for the entrance of the tunnel to the main part of the
settlement.

Only when he had chosen a monorail car and started off along the tunnel
toward the underground city a mile away did he let himself wonder about
Kathi Foster.

"Her problem now," he muttered, but he felt a little sorry for her
despite his view that she needed to grow up.

Later in the "day," he reported to transportation headquarters.

"Hiya, Pete!" grinned Les Snowdon, chief of the section. "All set for
the Ruby Planet?"

Dudley grimaced. "I suppose so," he said. "Left my locker mostly packed,
except for what I'll need for a couple of days. When do we go out and
who's the crew?"

"Jarkowski, Campiglia, and Wells. You have three days to make merry and
one to sober up."

"I sober fast," said Dudley.

Snowdon shook his head in mock admiration. "Nevertheless," he said, "the
physical will be on the fourth morning from now. Don't get in any fights
