"I'll go with you," the lad offered. "Most grownups have a hard time
talking to Uncle Angus. Even dad...." Whatever was his father's problem
with the prophetic model-maker remained unstated, as Toby managed to
wrap lips and teeth around a large final piece of pastry. He then went
to the bathroom to wash his hands before they went downstairs, to where
the General's car was waiting.


2

The sight of the huge olive-drab Cadillac limousine with its two-starred
flag and white trimmed and be-fourragered sergeant-chauffeur seemed to
awe Toby, who lapsed into mere occasional monosyllables during the drive
through the late afternoon to his Long Island home. It was as if, since
the General was in mufti, the lad had not quite been able to believe in
his reality--until official car and chauffeur offered proof.

This was quite all right with the General, who was desperately trying to
rearrange the chaos of his thoughts into some sort of order. He knew he
was being dangerously imaginative for a man in his position. But what if
this MacReedy actually could foresee the future, at least in its
military manifestations?

Granting this impossibility, how could the man be used? The General
shuddered at the thought of "selling" anyone with such a gift to the
Combined Chiefs of Staff--those quiet-eyed, low-voiced, strictly
pragmatic men on whom, perhaps, the future of country and world
depended. Even if they by some wild chance accepted the impossibility,
he knew full well what would be the tenor of their thoughts--and
therefore of their questions.

One of them would be sure to say, "Very well, General, but if we put our
planning in the hands of this man--seeking a short route to decisive
superiority of armament--how do we know he won't make a mistake, or lead
us up the garden path? How do we know he hasn't been planted for this
very purpose?"

How did he know? The General decided he didn't. Yet how could any man
with such a private power be permitted to exercise his rights of free
citizenship? He damned MacReedy, the enemy, the world and himself, and
got resettled in his corner of the soft rear seat.

They had left the sun behind them, setting in a dust-pink mist behind
the soft-edged towers of Manhattan. By the time they reached Flushing it
had begun to snow--big soft flakes whose crystalline dissimilarities
were almost visible to the naked eye as they settled against the car
windows into wet evanescence. Up ahead the twin windshield-wipers ground
them silently and methodically into wet-rimmed circle segments.

"I hope it lasts," said Toby from his window. "I got a sled for
Christmas. I haven't been able to use it."

"You'll get your chance," said the General. Damn it, he wondered, what
kind of man was Angus MacReedy--if he was a man. Somehow the silent
snow, the waning traffic, the oncoming twilight, combined into a sense
of ominous portent. It was as if the car were standing still, while a
perilous future rushed toward it.

"We turn left at the next traffic light, sir," said Toby.

They turned. They skirted a thinly-settled swampy area on a narrow road,
against a background of scrubby pines. The sprawling metropolis might
have been on some other continent, some other planet. They met only one
car--a long black sedan, that slithered past them on the skiddy
road-surface, missing them by inches.

The house where they pulled to a halt at Toby's direction was not large.
It had been put up early in the century, and its motif was that of the
high-gabled Swiss chalet. Mercifully the snow gave it a touch of
quaintness, almost of rightness, despite the absence of lowering alps.
Toby pointed to a similar structure about a hundred yards further down
the road. "That's where I live," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

MacReedy answered the door. He was a tall, angular man with a long,
angular face--from which small blue eyes peered alertly. He wore a grey
glen-plaid reefer that was buttoned wrong, a dark blue-flannel shirt and
covert slacks that needed a press. He said, "Hello, Toby--you've brought
company, I see."

"This is General Wales," said the lad very politely. "General--Uncle
Angus."

The General had a ridiculous fugitive memory--"Alice, mutton--mutton,
Alice." He shook hands with the model-maker.

"Honored, General," said MacReedy. He ushered them into a living room,
whose desk and tables and mantel were literally covered with miniature
American soldiery. He said, "Sorry the place is such a mess"--picking up
the morning paper from the carpet beside a worn but comfortable-looking
easy-chair--"but I wasn't expecting callers. I just had to boot out some
sort of a mad Russian."

"_What!_" The general didn't mean to bark but couldn't help it.

MacReedy grinned quietly and said, "This fellow said he was assistant
military attache, or something. Offered me all kinds of money to do some
work for him."

"What did he look like?" the General asked.

MacReedy, filling a corn-cob pipe that appeared to be near the close of
its short life, paused to say, "Like nothing special--not nearly as
distinguished as you, General. Blond, chunky fellow with a bit of
accent. Not a lot, but enough."

The General exchanged glances with Toby. He knew, without asking, that
the boy was thinking the same as himself; it was the man who had bought
the XT-101 model in the shop earlier that afternoon.

MacReedy got his pipe going and said through a small blue cloud of
smoke, "How does the exhibit look, Toby? Have they got it right?"

"Pretty good, Uncle Angus," said the lad seriously. "They got the
Mexican and Black Hawk War units mixed up, but I guess we can't blame
them for that."

"I guess we can't," said MacReedy. He turned to the General, added,
"Now, sir, what can I do for you? Or need I ask?"

"I have a hunch you know pretty well what I'm after," said the General.
"My predecessor must have given you some idea."

"I've been afraid of this," said MacReedy with a sigh. "It's what I
deserve for trying to show off to Toby."

"I don't understand," said the General.

"I was trying to show Toby how good I was," he said, ruffling the boy's
curly hair. "Then, when I got that seventy-five AA-gun doped out ahead
of time--and it proved correct--I had to go one step further. I should
never have let the model out of the house."

"I'd like to see your workshop," said the General.

Angus MacReedy removed his pipe and said, "Come along."
