had attacked him, and, flinging its coils about his body, was slowly
squeezing out his life. Suddenly, he was wide awake. Strong hands were
on his throat, the thumbs were pressed tight against his larynx.

He struggled to gain his breath, to shout for help, but the pressure
closed his throat. In another moment it would be too late. Then his mind
cleared; raising both hands to the back of his neck, he grasped the
little fingers of his assailant, and pulled with all his strength. The
man gave a cry of pain and anger and relaxed his grip. Holden gulped in
a breath of air, and flung himself from his berth, endeavoring to catch
and hold the coward who had attacked in the dark. The man, however, was
wiry and quick. With a sudden jerk he wriggled loose, gained the door
and was gone. When Holden reached the corridor, no one was in sight.
Quickly he walked to Professor Erickson's room, awakened him, and told
him what had happened.

Erickson rang up a steward, who promised to do everything in his power
to apprehend the culprit.

"Who could it have been?" asked Erickson.

"I haven't the slightest idea. I have no enemies that I know of. I'm not
carrying any valuables. It was probably a case of mistaken identity."

The incident was dismissed with that interpretation, and it was several
weeks before Holden thought of it again, but then he wished fervently
that he had investigated more thoroughly.




CHAPTER II

A Midnight Attack


It was midnight when the liner reached San Francisco, but Holden
insisted on going at once to the offices of the Interplanetary
Transportation Company, where work was carried on day and night.
Fortunately they found an official of the company who had sufficient
power to carry out their instructions.

It is unnecessary to go into the details of the meeting, or of the
ensuing days. The unlimited power given Holden, together with the vital
importance of his mission, brought everyone into instant cooperation.

Three mammoth space ships were turned over to the gang of mechanics he
had hired, to be fitted with projectors for the anti-gravitational
screens. Thousands of chemists all over the world dropped their work to
prepare the precious _hexoxen_ while others extracted Europium from the
rare minerals in which it was found. Special freight ships were sent out
to gather together the supply of these materials upon which the fate of
the earth depended, and rapidly the great quantities of the chemical
necessary were stored in the ships.

Captain Linet had proven true to his word, and, with his great executive
ability, had made himself invaluable.

It was a pleasant sight to see the huge old Captain, veteran of many a
storm in the air, conferring with the slim young Holden, whose pleasant
features and soft voice gave no real notion of the immense energy, fiery
courage and scientific knowledge which he possessed.

Crews for the three ships had to be assembled. Holden and Erickson
picked many from among the scientific men of their acquaintance, all
experts in their lines. The Interplanetary Transportation Company
recommended several of their best men for the positions on board
requiring technical knowledge of the handling of space ships, and
Captain Linet also picked up a few of his friends--brave, strong men.
There were to be fifty on each ship.

The start had been scheduled for the fifteenth of the month, but on the
tenth Professor Erickson received a radiogram from the Seismographical
Institute which read as follows: "Observations indicate a series of
stresses approaching Pacific fault, probably aggravated by unusual tidal
action of moon in that area tenth of next month."

"Gentlemen," the old professor addressed the little group gathered in
the office allotted them in the I. T. C. building, "as you know, this is
the tenth. Without allowing for possible delays, we would just have
time, starting tomorrow, to reach the moon, distribute the _hexoxen_ and
Europium and get out of range by the first. That would leave us only ten
days for cutting the gaseous mass into small pieces which will drift
harmlessly into space. If we do not have that task accomplished by the
time indicated in this message, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Portland and
Seattle will suffer the fate which overtook New York such a short time
ago."

Holden's face was pale as he rose and nodded to the professor. "If
Captain Linet will take the responsibility of getting the crews on
board, I will see that we are ready to leave at high noon tomorrow."

The meeting adjourned in a flurry of papers, a ringing of bells, and
brisk words spoken into television transmitters.

All that night and all the next morning work went on. At eleven A. M.
the last five hundred tons of _hexoxen_ was loaded on the _San
Francisco_, which was to be the flagship; at noon exactly the huge doors
swung shut, the repulsion tubes at the stern began to glow, and the
beautiful cigar-shaped ship rose from the earth, followed immediately by
the _Los Angeles_ and the _Ganymede_. They cruised slowly, at about six
hundred miles per hour, until they were well out of the earth's
atmosphere, when full power was slowly turned on, and the trip to the
moon was actually begun.

Holden and Erickson stood in the bow of the _San Francisco_, watching
the skilful hands of the pilot, Edwards, as he spun the dials
controlling the steering discharges, keeping the delicate needle in the
direction indicator exactly in line with the path indicated on the chart
before him.

"How are things going, Edwards?" Holden asked.

"Fine so far. We have developed our necessary velocity in very good
time. If you would allow me a word of advice, I would suggest that you
turn in now, as the tremendous acceleration of the last few minutes, and
the speed with which we are now traveling, are liable to affect you
disagreeably, since this is your first trip. Our course has been plotted
by the experts of the I. T. C., and there is nothing to do now but to
stay on it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Holden decided that the suggestion was a good one, as he was beginning
to feel light-headed and slightly bewildered. Erickson, however, chose
to go down to the observation room, for a glance at the earth, and the
two parted company in the hall which led through the storage
compartments, located amidships.

As Holden continued on down the hall toward his cabin, a sudden feeling
of danger came over him. Memories of the clutching hands that had
endeavored to throttle the life out of him shot into his mind. He
laughed to himself, attributing the fear to the mental disorganization
suffered by travelers on their first trip into space. He opened the door
of his cabin, and stepped inside, instinctively reaching for the
light-switch.

His hand encountered warm flesh! Swiftly he went into action, diving for
the stranger's throat, but his unknown antagonist had the advantage of
being prepared. Holden heard a soft swish, a tremendous weight seemed to
descend on him, crushing his entire body. Buzzing lights flashed before
his eyes. Then came darkness, and he sank, unconscious, to the floor.

"Jack, Jack, my boy." The voice came from a great distance, slowly
penetrating the great cloud which hung over him. "Jack, what's the
matter with you?" He realized that someone was talking to him. With a
mighty effort, he opened his eyes and endeavored to distinguish the
speaker among the thousands of objects which whirled before his eyes. At
last things settled down, and he saw the anxious faces of Erickson and
Captain Linet bending above him.

"Somebody was in my cabin, and slugged me over the head with a
black-jack when I came in. Look at the wall-cabinet, will you,
professor, and see if any of the papers are missing?"

The professor stepped over to one side of the room, and bent to examine
the compartment set in the solid metal of the wall.

"Holden," he cried, "the intruder tried to open the cabinet, but was
