Without color in the flower what would the bees and painters do? If all
the grass and trees were white, it would be like winter all the year
round. If we had white blood in our veins like some of the insects it
would be hard lines for our poets. And what would become of our morality
if we could not blush?

  "As for me, I thrill to see
    The bloom a velvet cheek discloses!
  Made of dust! I well believe it,
    So are lilies, so are roses."

An etiolated earth would be hardly worth living in.

The chlorophyll of the leaves and the hemoglobin of the blood are
similar in constitution. Chlorophyll contains magnesium in place of iron
but iron is necessary to its formation. We all know how pale a plant
gets if its soil is short of iron. It is the iron in the leaves that
enables the plants to store up the energy of the sunshine for their own
use and ours. It is the iron in our blood that enables us to get the
iron out of iron rust and make it into machines to supplement our feeble
hands. Iron is for us internally the carrier of energy, just as in the
form of a trolley wire or of a third rail it conveys power to the
electric car. Withdraw the iron from the blood as indicated by the
pallor of the cheeks, and we become weak, faint and finally die. If the
amount of iron in the blood gets too small the disease germs that are
always attacking us are no longer destroyed, but multiply without check
and conquer us. When the iron ceases to work efficiently we are killed
by the poison we ourselves generate.

Counting the number of iron-bearing corpuscles in the blood is now a
common method of determining disease. It might also be useful in moral
diagnosis. A microscopical and chemical laboratory attached to the
courtroom would give information of more value than some of the evidence
now obtained. For the anemic and the florid vices need very different
treatment. An excess or a deficiency of iron in the body is liable to
result in criminality. A chemical system of morals might be developed on
this basis. Among the ferruginous sins would be placed murder, violence
and licentiousness. Among the non-ferruginous, cowardice, sloth and
lying. The former would be mostly sins of commission, the latter, sins
of omission. The virtues could, of course, be similarly classified; the
ferruginous virtues would include courage, self-reliance and
hopefulness; the non-ferruginous, peaceableness, meekness and chastity.
According to this ethical criterion the moral man would be defined as
one whose conduct is better than we should expect from the per cent. of
iron in his blood.

The reason why iron is able to serve this unique purpose of conveying
life-giving air to all parts of the body is because it rusts so readily.
Oxidation and de-oxidation proceed so quietly that the tenderest cells
are fed without injury. The blood changes from red to blue and _vice
versa_ with greater ease and rapidity than in the corresponding
alternations of social status in a democracy. It is because iron is so
rustable that it is so useful. The factories with big scrap-heaps of
rusting machinery are making the most money. The pyramids are the most
enduring structures raised by the hand of man, but they have not
sheltered so many people in their forty centuries as our skyscrapers
that are already rusting.

We have to carry on this eternal conflict against rust because oxygen is
the most ubiquitous of the elements and iron can only escape its ardent
embraces by hiding away in the center of the earth. The united elements,
known to the chemist as iron oxide and to the outside world as rust, are
among the commonest of compounds and their colors, yellow and red like
the Spanish flag, are displayed on every mountainside. From the time of
Tubal Cain man has ceaselessly labored to divorce these elements and,
having once separated them, to keep them apart so that the iron may be
retained in his service. But here, as usual, man is fighting against
nature and his gains, as always, are only temporary. Sooner or later his
vigilance is circumvented and the metal that he has extricated by the
fiery furnace returns to its natural affinity. The flint arrowheads, the
bronze spearpoints, the gold ornaments, the wooden idols of prehistoric
man are still to be seen in our museums, but his earliest steel swords
have long since crumbled into dust.

Every year the blast furnaces of the world release 72,000,000 tons of
iron from its oxides and every year a large part, said to be a quarter
of that amount, reverts to its primeval forms. If so, then man after
five thousand years of metallurgical industry has barely got three years
ahead of nature, and should he cease his efforts for a generation there
would be little left to show that man had ever learned to extract iron
from its ores. The old question, "What becomes of all the pins?" may be
as well asked of rails, pipes and threshing machines. The end of all
iron is the same. However many may be its metamorphoses while in the
service of man it relapses at last into its original state of oxidation.
To save a pound of iron from corrosion is then as much a benefit to the
world as to produce another pound from the ore. In fact it is of much
greater benefit, for it takes four pounds of coal to produce one pound
of steel, so whenever a piece of iron is allowed to oxidize it means
that four times as much coal must be oxidized in order to replace it.
And the beds of coal will be exhausted before the beds of iron ore.

If we are ever to get ahead, if we are to gain any respite from this
enormous waste of labor and natural resources, we must find ways of
preventing the iron which we have obtained and fashioned into useful
tools from being lost through oxidation. Now there is only one way of
keeping iron and oxygen from uniting and that is to keep them apart. A
very thin dividing wall will serve for the purpose, for instance, a film
of oil. But ordinary oil will rub off, so it is better to cover the
surface with an oil-like linseed which oxidizes to a hard elastic and
adhesive coating. If with linseed oil we mix iron oxide or some other
pigment we have a paint that will protect iron perfectly so long as it
is unbroken. But let the paint wear off or crack so that air can get at
the iron, then rust will form and spread underneath the paint on all
sides. The same is true of the porcelain-like enamel with which our
kitchen iron ware is nowadays coated. So long as the enamel holds it is
all right but once it is broken through at any point it begins to scale
off and gets into our food.

Obviously it would be better for some purposes if we could coat our
iron with another and less easily oxidized metal than with such
dissimilar substances as paint or porcelain. Now the nearest relative to
iron is nickel, and a layer of this of any desired thickness may be
easily deposited by electricity upon any surface however irregular.
Nickel takes a bright polish and keeps it well, so nickel plating has
become the favorite method of protection for small objects where the
expense is not prohibitive. Copper plating is used for fine wires. A
sheet of iron dipped in melted tin comes out coated with a thin adhesive
layer of the latter metal. Such tinned plate commonly known as "tin" has
become the favorite material for pans and cans. But if the tin is
scratched the iron beneath rusts more rapidly than if the tin were not
there, for an electrolytic action is set up and the iron, being the
negative element of the couple, suffers at the expense of the tin.

With zinc it is quite the opposite. Zinc is negative toward iron, so
when the two are in contact and exposed to the weather the zinc is
oxidized first. A zinc plating affords the protection of a Swiss Guard,
it holds out as long as possible and when broken it perishes to the last
atom before it lets the oxygen get at the iron. The zinc may be applied
in four different ways. (1) It may be deposited by electrolysis as in
nickel plating, but the zinc coating is more apt to be porous. (2) The
sheets or articles may be dipped in a bath of melted zinc. This gives us
the familiar "galvanized iron," the most useful and when well done the
most effective of rust preventives. Besides these older methods of
applying zinc there are now two new ones. (3) One is the Schoop process
by which a wire of zinc or other metal is fed into an oxy-hydrogen air
blast of such heat and power that it is projected as a spray of minute
drops with the speed of bullets and any object subjected to the
bombardment of this metallic mist receives a coating as thick as
desired. The zinc spray is so fine and cool that it may be received on
cloth, lace, or the bare hand. The Schoop metallizing process has
recently been improved by the use of the electric current instead of the
blowpipe for melting the metal. Two zinc wires connected with any
electric system, preferably the direct, are fed into the "pistol." Where
the wires meet an electric arc is set up and the melted zinc is sprayed
out by a jet of compressed air. (4) In the Sherardizing process the
articles are put into a tight drum with zinc dust and heated to 800 deg. F.
The zinc at this temperature attacks the iron and forms a series of
alloys ranging from pure zinc on the top to pure iron at the bottom of
the coating. Even if this cracks in part the iron is more or less
protected from corrosion so long as any zinc remains. Aluminum is used
similarly in the calorizing process for coating iron, copper or brass.
First a surface alloy is formed by heating the metal with aluminum
powder. Then the temperature is raised to a high degree so as to cause
the aluminum on the surface to diffuse into the metal and afterwards it
is again baked in contact with aluminum dust which puts upon it a
protective plating of the pure aluminum which does not oxidize.

[Illustration: PHOTOMICROGRAPHS SHOWING THE STRUCTURE OF STEEL MADE BY
PROFESSOR E.G. MARTIN OF PURDUE UNIVERSITY

1. Cold-worked steel showing ferrite and sorbite (enlarged 500 times)

2. Steel showing pearlite crystals (enlarged 500 times)

3. Structure characteristic of air-cooled steel (enlarged 50 times)

4. The triangular structure characteristic of cast steel showing ferrite
and pearlite (enlarged 50 times)]

[Illustration: Courtesy of E.G. Mahin

THE MICROSCOPIC STRUCTURE OF METALS

1. Malleabilized casting; temper carbon in ferrite (enlarged 50 times)

2. Type metal; lead-antimony alloy in matrix of lead (enlarged 100
times)

3. Gray cast iron; carbon as graphite (enlarged 500 times)

4. Steel composed of cementite (white) and pearlite (black) (enlarged 50
times)]

Another way of protecting iron ware from rusting is to rust it. This is
a sort of prophylactic method like that adopted by modern medicine where
inoculation with a mild culture prevents a serious attack of the
disease. The action of air and water on iron forms a series of compounds
and mixtures of them. Those that contain least oxygen are hard, black
and magnetic like iron itself. Those that have most oxygen are red and
yellow powders. By putting on a tight coating of the black oxide we can
prevent or hinder the oxidation from going on into the pulverulent
stage. This is done in several ways. In the Bower-Barff process the
articles to be treated are put into a closed retort and a current of
superheated steam passed through for twenty minutes followed by a
current of producer gas (carbon monoxide), to reduce any higher oxides
that may have been formed. In the Gesner process a current of gasoline
vapor is used as the reducing agent. The blueing of watch hands, buckles
and the like may be done by dipping them into an oxidizing bath such as
melted saltpeter. But in order to afford complete protection the layer
of black oxide must be thickened by repeating the process which adds to
the time and expense. This causes a slight enlargement and the high
temperature often warps the ware so it is not suitable for nicely
adjusted parts of machinery and of course tools would lose their temper
by the heat.

A new method of rust proofing which is free from these disadvantages is
the phosphate process invented by Thomas Watts Coslett, an English
chemist, in 1907, and developed in America by the Parker Company of
Detroit. This consists simply in dipping the sheet iron or articles into
a tank filled with a dilute solution of iron phosphate heated nearly to
the boiling point by steam pipes. Bubbles of hydrogen stream off rapidly
at first, then slower, and at the end of half an hour or longer the
action ceases, and the process is complete. What has happened is that
the iron has been converted into a basic iron phosphate to a depth
depending upon the density of articles processed. Any one who has
studied elementary qualitative analysis will remember that when he added
ammonia to his "unknown" solution, iron and phosphoric acid, if present,
were precipitated together, or in other words, iron phosphate is
insoluble except in acids. Therefore a superficial film of such
phosphate will protect the iron underneath except from acids. This film
is not a coating added on the outside like paint and enamel or tin and
nickel plate. It is therefore not apt to scale off and it does not
increase the size of the article. No high heat is required as in the
Sherardizing and Bower-Barff processes, so steel tools can be treated
without losing their temper or edge.

The deposit consisting of ferrous and ferric phosphates mixed with black
iron oxide may be varied in composition, texture and color. It is
ordinarily a dull gray and oiling gives a soft mat black more in
accordance with modern taste than the shiny nickel plating that
delighted our fathers. Even the military nowadays show more quiet taste
than formerly and have abandoned their glittering accoutrements.

The phosphate bath is not expensive and can be used continuously for
months by adding more of the concentrated solution to keep up the
strength and removing the sludge that is precipitated. Besides the iron
the solution contains the phosphates of other metals such as calcium or
strontium, manganese, molybdenum, or tungsten, according to the
particular purpose. Since the phosphating solution does not act on
nickel it may be used on articles that have been partly nickel-plated so
there may be produced, for instance, a bright raised design against a
dull black background. Then, too, the surface left by the Parker process
is finely etched so it affords a good attachment for paint or enamel if
further protection is needed. Even if the enamel does crack, the iron
beneath is not so apt to rust and scale off the coating.

These, then, are some of the methods which are now being used to combat
our eternal enemy, the rust that doth corrupt. All of them are useful in
their several ways. No one of them is best for all purposes. The claim
of "rust-proof" is no more to be taken seriously than "fire-proof." We
should rather, if we were finical, have to speak of "rust-resisting"
coatings as we do of "slow-burning" buildings. Nature is insidious and
unceasing in her efforts to bring to ruin the achievements of mankind
and we need all the weapons we can find to frustrate her destructive
determination.

But it is not enough for us to make iron superficially resistant to rust
from the atmosphere. We should like also to make it so that it would
withstand corrosion by acids, then it could be used in place of the
large and expensive platinum or porcelain evaporating pans and similar
utensils employed in chemical works. This requirement also has been met
in the non-corrosive forms of iron, which have come into use within the
last five years. One of these, "tantiron," invented by a British
metallurgist, Robert N. Lennox, in 1912, contains 15 per cent. of
silicon. Similar products are known as "duriron" and "Buflokast" in
America, "metilure" in France, "ileanite" in Italy and "neutraleisen" in
Germany. It is a silvery-white close-grained iron, very hard and rather
brittle, somewhat like cast iron but with silicon as the main additional
ingredient in place of carbon. It is difficult to cut or drill but may
be ground into shape by the new abrasives. It is rustproof and is not
attacked by sulfuric, nitric or acetic acid, hot or cold, diluted or
concentrated. It does not resist so well hydrochloric acid or sulfur
dioxide or alkalies.

The value of iron lies in its versatility. It is a dozen metals in one.
It can be made hard or soft, brittle or malleable, tough or weak,
resistant or flexible, elastic or pliant, magnetic or non-magnetic, more
or less conductive to electricity, by slight changes of composition or
mere differences of treatment. No wonder that the medieval mind ascribed
these mysterious transformations to witchcraft. But the modern
micrometallurgist, by etching the surface of steel and photographing it,
shows it up as composite as a block of granite. He is then able to pick
out its component minerals, ferrite, austenite, martensite, pearlite,
graphite, cementite, and to show how their abundance, shape and
arrangement contribute to the strength or weakness of the specimen. The
last of these constituents, cementite, is a definite chemical compound,
an iron carbide, Fe_{3}C, containing 6.6 per cent. of carbon, so hard as
to scratch glass, very brittle, and imparting these properties to
hardened steel and cast iron.

With this knowledge at his disposal the iron-maker can work with his
eyes open and so regulate his melt as to cause these various
constituents to crystallize out as he wants them to. Besides, he is no
longer confined to the alloys of iron and carbon. He has ransacked the
chemical dictionary to find new elements to add to his alloys, and some
of these rarities have proved to possess great practical value.
Vanadium, for instance, used to be put into a fine print paragraph in
the back of the chemistry book, where the class did not get to it until
the term closed. Yet if it had not been for vanadium steel we should
have no Ford cars. Tungsten, too, was relegated to the rear, and if the
student remembered it at all it was because it bothered him to
understand why its symbol should be W instead of T. But the student of
today studies his lesson in the light of a tungsten wire and relieves
his mind by listening to a phonograph record played with a "tungs-tone"
stylus. When I was assistant in chemistry an "analysis" of steel
consisted merely in the determination of its percentage of carbon, and I
used to take Saturday for it so I could have time enough to complete the
combustion. Now the chemists of a steel works' laboratory may have to
determine also the tungsten, chromium, vanadium, titanium, nickel,
cobalt, phosphorus, molybdenum, manganese, silicon and sulfur, any or
all of them, and be spry about it, because if they do not get the report
out within fifteen minutes while the steel is melting in the electrical
