paused they both fell upon their knees before her. She put her hands
upon their heads and smiling wistfully, said in English:

"So it shall be; with me you shall go, because that is what you wish."

The Very Young Man looked around at them all with satisfaction. "Then
it's all settled," he said, and again his glance fell on Aura. He
wondered why his heart was pounding so, and why he was so thrilled with
happiness; and he was glad he was able to speak in so matter-of-fact a
tone.

"I don't know how about you," he added, "but, Great Scott, I'm hungry."

"Since we have decided to go," the Chemist said, "we had better start as
soon as possible. Are there things in the house, Lylda, that you care to
take?"

Lylda shook her head. "Nothing can I take but memories of this world,
and those would I rather leave." She smiled sadly. "There are some
things I would wish to do--my father----"

"It might be dangerous to wait," the Big Business Man put in hurriedly.
"The sooner we start, the better. Another encounter would only mean more
death." He looked significantly at the beach.

"We've got to eat," said the Very Young Man.

"If we handle the drugs right," the Chemist said, "we can make the trip
out in a very short time. When we get above the forest and well on our
way we can rest safely. Let us start at once."

"We've got to eat," the Very Young Man insisted. "And we've got to have
food with us."

The Chemist smiled. "What you say is quite true, Jack, we have got to
have food and water; those are the only things necessary to our trip."

"We can make ourselves small now and have supper," suggested the Very
Young Man. "Then we can fill up the bottles for our belts and take
enough food for the trip."

"No, we won't," interposed the Big Business Man positively. "We won't
get small again. Something might happen. Once we get through the
tunnels----" He stopped abruptly.

"Great Scott! We never thought of that," ejaculated the Very Young Man,
as the same thought occurred to him. "We'll have to get small to get
through the tunnels. Suppose there's a mob there that won't let us in?"

"Is there any other way up to the forest?" the Doctor asked.

The Chemist shook his head. "There are a dozen different tunnels, all
near here, and several at Orlog, that all lead to the upper surface. But
I think that is the only way."

"They might try to stop us," the Big Business Man suggested. "We
certainly had better get through them as quickly as we possibly can."

It was Aura who diffidently suggested the plan they finally adopted.
They all reduced their size first to about the height of the Chemist's
house. Then the Very Young Man prepared to make himself sufficiently
small to get the food and water-bottles, and bring them up to the larger
size.

"Keep your eye on me," he warned. "Somebody might jump on me."

They stood around the house, while the Very Young Man, in the garden,
took the drug and dwindled in stature to Oroid size. There were none of
the Oroids in sight, except some on the beach and others up the street
silently watching. As he grew smaller the Very Young Man sat down
wearily in the wreck of what once had been Lylda's beautiful garden. He
felt very tired and hungry, and his head was ringing.

When he was no longer changing size he stood up in the garden path. The
house, nearly its proper dimensions once more, was close at hand, silent
and deserted. Aura stood in the garden beside it, her shoulders pushing
aside the great branches of an overhanging tree, her arm resting upon
the roof-top. The Very Young Man waved up at her and shouted: "Be out in
a minute," and then plunged into the house.




CHAPTER XXXV

GOOD-BY TO ARITE


Once inside he went swiftly to the room where they had left their
water-bottles and other paraphernalia. He found them without difficulty,
and retraced his steps to the door he had entered. Depositing his load
near it, he went back towards the room which Lylda had described to him,
and in which the food was stored.

Walking along this silent hallway, listening to the echoes of his own
footsteps on its stone floor, the Very Young Man found himself oppressed
by a feeling of impending danger. He looked back over his shoulder--once
he stood quite still and listened. But he heard nothing; the house was
quite silent, and smiling at his own fear he went on again.

Selecting the food they needed for the trip took him but a moment. He
left the storeroom, his arms loaded, and started back toward the garden
door. Several doorways opened into the hall below, and all at once the
Very Young Man found himself afraid as he passed them. He was within
sight of the garden door, not more than twenty feet away, when he
hesitated. Just ahead, at his right, an archway opened into a room
beside the hall. The Very Young Man paused only an instant; then,
ashamed of his fear, started slowly forward. He felt an impulse to run,
but he did not. And then, from out of the silence, there came a low,
growling cry that made his heart stand still, and the huge gray figure
of a man leaped upon him and bore him to the ground.

As he went down, with the packages of food flying in all directions, the
Very Young Man gripped the naked body of his antagonist tightly. He
twisted round as he fell and lay with his foe partly on top of him. He
knew instinctively that his situation was desperate. The man's huge
torso, with its powerful muscles that his arms encircled, told him that
in a contest of strength such as this, inevitably he would find himself
overcome.

The man raised his fist to strike, and the Very Young Man caught him by
the wrist. Over his foe's shoulder now he could see the open doorway
leading into the garden, not more than six or eight feet away. Beyond it
lay safety; that he knew. He gave a mighty lunge and succeeded in
rolling over toward the doorway. But he could not stay above his
opponent, for the man's greater strength lifted him up and over, and
again pinned him to the floor.

He was nearer the door now, and just beyond it he caught a glimpse of
the white flesh of Aura's ankle as she stood beside the house. The man
put a hand on the Very Young Man's throat. The Very Young Man caught it
by the wrist, but he could feel the growing pressure of its fingers
cutting off his breath. He tried to pull the hand back, but could not;
he tried to twist his body free, but the weight of his foe held him
tightly against the floor. A great roaring filled his ears; the hallway
began fading from his sight. With a last despairing breath, he gave a
choking cry: "Aura! Aura!"

The man's fingers at his throat loosened a little; he drew another
breath, and his head cleared. His eyes were fixed on the strip of garden
he could see beyond the doorway. Suddenly Aura's enormous body came into
view, as she stooped and then lay prone upon the ground. Her face was
close to the door; she was looking in. The Very Young Man gave another
cry, half stifled. And then into the hallway he saw come swiftly a huge
hand, whose fingers gripped him and his antagonist and jerked them
hurriedly down the hall and out into the garden.

As they lay struggling on the ground outside, the Very Young Man felt
himself held less closely. He wrenched himself free and sprang to his
feet, standing close beside Aura's face. The man was up almost as
quickly, preparing again to spring upon his victim. Something moved
behind the Very Young Man, and he looked up into the air hurriedly. The
Big Business Man stood behind him; the Very Young Man met his anxious
glance.

"I'm all right," he shouted. His antagonist leaped forward and at the
same instant a huge, flat object, that was the Big Business Man's foot,
swept through the air and mashed the man down into the dirt of the
garden. The Very Young Man turned suddenly sick as he heard the agonized
shriek and the crunching of the breaking bones. The Big Business Man
lifted his foot, and the mangled figure lay still. The Very Young Man
sat down suddenly in the garden path and covered his face with his
hands.

When he raised his head his friends were all standing round him,
crowding the garden. The body of the man who had attacked him had
disappeared. The Very Young Man looked up into Aura's face--she was on
her feet now with the others and tried to smile.

"I'm all right," he repeated. "I'll go get the food and things."

In a few minutes more he had made himself as large as his companions,
and had brought with him most of the food. There still remained in the
smaller size the water-bottles, some of the food, the belts with which
to carry it, and a few other articles they needed for the trip.

"I'll get them," said the Big Business Man; "you sit down and rest."

The Very Young Man was glad to do as he was told, and sat beside Aura in
the garden, while the Big Business Man brought up to their size the
remainder of the supplies.

When they had divided the food, and all were equipped for the journey,
they started at once for the tunnels. Lylda's eyes again filled with
tears as she left so summarily, and probably for the last time, this
home in which she had been so happy.

As they passed the last houses of the city, heading towards the tunnel
entrances that the Chemist had selected, the Big Business Man and the
Chemist walked in front, the others following close behind them. A crowd
of Oroids watched them leave, and many others were to be seen ahead; but
these scattered as the giants approached. Occasionally a few stood their
ground, and these the Big Business Man mercilessly trampled under foot.

"It's the only way; I'm sorry," he said, half apologetically. "We cannot
take any chances now; we must get out."

"It's shorter through these tunnels I'm taking," the Chemist said after
a moment.

"My idea," said the Big Business man, "is that we should go through the
tunnels that are the largest. They're not all the same size, are they?"

"No," the Chemist answered; "some are a little larger."

"You see," the Big Business Man continued, "I figure we are going to
have a fight. They're following us. Look at that crowd over there.
They'll never let us out if they can help it. When we get into the
tunnels, naturally we'll have to be small enough to walk through them.
The larger we are the better; so let's take the very biggest."

"These are," the Chemist answered. "We can make it at about so high." He
held his hand about the level of his waist.

"That won't be so bad," the Big Business Man commented.

Meanwhile the Very Young Man, walking with Aura behind the leaders, was
talking to her earnestly. He was conscious of a curious sense of
companionship with this quiet girl--a companionship unlike anything he
had ever felt for a girl before. And now that he was taking her with
him, back to his own world----

"Climb out on to the surface of the ring," he was saying, "and then, in
a few minutes more, we'll be there. Aura, you cannot realize how
wonderful it will be."

The girl smiled her quiet smile; her face was sad with the memory of
what she was leaving, but full of youthful, eager anticipation of that
which lay ahead.

"So much has happened, and so quickly, I cannot realize it yet, I know,"
she answered. "But that it will be very wonderful, up there above, I do
believe. And I am glad that we are going, only----"

The Very Young Man took her hand, holding it a moment. "Don't, Aura. You
mustn't think of that." He spoke gently, with a tender note in his
voice.

"Don't think of the past, Aura," he went on earnestly. "Think only of
the future--the great cities, the opera, the poetry I am going to teach
you."

The girl laid her hand on his arm. "You are so kind, my friend Jack. You
will have much to teach me, will you not? Is it sure you will want to? I
shall be like a little child up there in your great world."

An answer sprang to the Very Young Man's lips--words the thinking of
which made his heart leap into his throat. But before he could voice
them Loto ran up to him from behind, crying. "I want to walk by you,
Jack; _mamita_ talks of things I know not."

The Very Young Man put his arm across the child's shoulders. "Well,
little boy," he said laughing, "how do you like this adventure?"

"Never have I been in the Great Forests," Loto answered, turning his
big, serious eyes up to his friend's face. "I shall not be afraid--with
my father, and _mamita_, and with you."

"The Great Forests won't seem very big, Loto, after a little while," the
Very Young Man said. "And of course you won't be afraid of anything.
You're going to see many things, Loto--very many strange and wonderful
things for such a little boy."

They reached the entrance to the tunnel in a few moments more, and
stopped before it. As they approached, a number of little figures darted
into its luminous blackness and disappeared. There were none others in
sight now, except far away towards Arite, where perhaps a thousand stood
watching intently.

The tunnel entrance, against the side of a hill, stood nearly breast
high.

"I'm wrong," said the Chemist, as the others came up. "It's not so high
all the way through. We shall have to make ourselves much smaller than
this."

"This is a good time to eat," suggested the Very Young Man. The others
agreed, and without making themselves any smaller--the Big Business Man
objected to that procedure--they sat down before the mouth of the tunnel
and ate a somewhat frugal meal.

"Have you any plans for the trip up?" asked the Doctor of the Chemist
while they were eating.

"I have," interjected the Big Business Man, and the Chemist answered:

"Yes, I am sure I can make it far easier than it was for me before. I'll
tell you as we go up; the first thing is to get through the tunnels."

"I don't anticipate much difficulty in that," the Doctor said. "Do you?"

The Chemist shook his head. "No, I don't."

"But we mustn't take any chances," put in the Big Business Man quickly.
"How small do you suppose we should make ourselves?"

The Chemist looked at the tunnel opening. "About half that," he replied.

"Not at the start," said the Big Business Man. "Let's go in as large as
possible; we can get smaller when we have to."

It took them but a few minutes to finish the meal. They were all tired
from the exciting events of the day, but the Big Business Man would not
hear of their resting a moment more than was absolutely necessary.

"It won't be much of a trip up to the forests," he argued. "Once we get
well on our way and into one of the larger sizes, we can sleep safely.
But not now; it's too dangerous."

They were soon ready to start, and in a moment more all had made
themselves small enough to walk into the tunnel opening. They were, at
this time, perhaps six times the normal height of an adult Oroid. The
city of Arite, apparently much farther away now, was still visible up
against the distant horizon. As they were about to start, Lylda, with
Aura close behind her, turned to face it.

"Good-by to our own world now we must say, my sister," she said sadly.
"The land that bore us--so beautiful a world, and once so kindly. We
have been very happy here. And I cannot think it is right for me to
leave."

"Your way lies with your husband," Aura said gently. "You yourself have
said it, and it is true."

Lylda raised her arms up towards the far-away city with a gesture almost
of benediction.

"Good future to you, land that I love." Her voice trembled. "Good future
to you, for ever and ever."

The Very Young Man, standing behind them with Loto, was calling:
"They're started; come on."

With one last sorrowful glance Lylda turned slowly, and, walking with
her arm about her sister, followed the others into the depths of the
tunnel.




CHAPTER XXXVI

THE FIGHT IN THE TUNNELS


For some time this strange party of refugees from an outraged world
walked in silence. Because of their size, the tunnel appeared to them
now not more than eight or nine feet in height, and in most places of
nearly similar width. For perhaps ten minutes no one spoke except an
occasional monosyllable. The Chemist and Big Business Man, walking
abreast, were leading; Aura and Lylda with the Very Young man, and Loto
close in front of them, brought up the rear.

The tunnel they were traversing appeared quite deserted; only once, at
the intersection of another smaller passageway, a few little
figures--not more than a foot high--scurried past and hastily
disappeared. Once the party stopped for half an hour to rest.

"I don't think we'll have any trouble getting through," said the
Chemist. "The tunnels are usually deserted at the time of sleep."

The Big Business Man appeared not so sanguine, but said nothing. Finally
they came to one of the large amphitheaters into which several of the
tunnels opened. In size, it appeared to them now a hundred feet in
length and with a roof some twelve feet high. The Chemist stopped to let
the others come up.

"I think our best route is there," he pointed.

"It is not so high a tunnel; we shall have to get smaller. Beyond it
they are larger again. It is not far--half an hour, perhaps, walking as
we----"

A cry from Aura interrupted him.

"My brother, see, they come," she exclaimed.

Before them, out of several of the smaller passageways, a crowd of
little figures was pouring. There were no shouts; there was seemingly no
confusion; just a steady, flowing stream of human forms, emptying from
the tunnels into the amphitheater and spreading out over its open
surface.

The fugitives stared a moment in horror. "Good God! they've got us," the
Doctor muttered, breaking the tenseness of the silence.

The little people kept their distance at first, and then as the open
space filled up, slowly they began coming closer, in little waves of
movement, irresistible as an incoming tide.

Aura turned towards the passageway through which they had entered. "We
can go back," she said. And then. "No--see, they come there, too." A
crowd of the little gray figures blocked that entrance also--a crowd
that hesitated an instant and then came forward, spreading out fan-shape
as it came.

The Big Business Man doubled up his fists.

"It's fight," he said grimly. "By God! we'll----" but Lylda, with a low
cry, flung herself before him.

