their horse-hide tents for stone houses, crudely but mightily built, and
thus protected, they grew strong. There are few more dramatic events in
history than the rise of the rude, fierce kingdom of Hyperborea, whose
people turned abruptly from their nomadic life to rear dwellings of
naked stone, surrounded by cyclopean walls--a race scarcely emerged from
the polished stone age, who had by a freak of chance, learned the first
rude principles of architecture.

The rise of this kingdom drove forth many other tribes, for, defeated in
the war, or refusing to become tributary to their castle-dwelling
kinsmen, many clans set forth on long treks that took them halfway
around the world. And already the more northern tribes are beginning to
be harried by gigantic blond savages, not much more advanced than
ape-men.

The tale of the next thousand years is the tale of the rise of the
Hyborians, whose warlike tribes dominate the western world. Rude
kingdoms are taking shape. The tawny-haired invaders have encountered
the Picts, driving them into the barren lands of the west. To the
northwest, the descendants of the Atlanteans, climbing unaided from
apedom into primitive savagery, have not yet met the conquerors. Far to
the east the Lemurians are evolving a strange semi-civilization of their
own. To the south the Hyborians have founded the kingdom of Koth, on the
borders of those pastoral countries known as the Lands of Shem, and the
savages of those lands, partly through contact with the Hyborians,
partly through contact with the Stygians who have ravaged them for
centuries, are emerging from barbarism. The blond savages of the far
north have grown in power and numbers so that the northern Hyborian
tribes move southward, driving their kindred clans before them. The
ancient kingdom of Hyperborea is overthrown by one of these northern
tribes, which, however, retains the old name. Southeast of Hyperborea a
kingdom of the Zhemri has come into being, under the name of Zamora. To
the southwest, a tribe of Picts have invaded the fertile valley of
Zingg, conquered the agricultural people there, and settled among them.
This mixed race was in turn conquered later by a roving tribe of Hybori,
and from these mingled elements came the kingdom of Zingara.

Five hundred years later the kingdoms of the world are clearly defined.
The kingdoms of the Hyborians--Aquilonia, Nemedia, Brythunia,
Hyperborea, Koth, Ophir, Argos, Corinthia, and one known as the Border
Kingdom--dominate the western world. Zamora lies to the east, and
Zingara to the southwest of these kingdoms--people alike in darkness of
complexion and exotic habits, but otherwise unrelated. Far to the south
sleeps Stygia, untouched by foreign invasion, but the peoples of Shem
have exchanged the Stygian yoke for the less galling one of Koth. The
dusky masters have been driven south of the great river Styx, Nilus, or
Nile, which, flowing north from the shadowy hinterlands, turns almost at
right angles and flows almost due west through the pastoral meadowlands
of Shem, to empty into the great sea. North of Aquilonia, the
western-most Hyborian kingdom, are the Cimmerians, ferocious savages,
untamed by the invaders, but advancing rapidly because of contact with
them; they are the descendants of the Atlanteans, now progressing more
steadily than their old enemies the Picts, who dwell in the wilderness
west of Aquilonia.

Another five centuries and the Hybori peoples are the possessors of a
civilization so virile that contact with it virtually snatched out of
the wallow of savagery such tribes as it touched. The most powerful
kingdom is Aquilonia, but others vie with it in strength and mixed race;
the nearest to the ancient root-stock are the Gundermen of Gunderland, a
northern province of Aquilonia. But this mixing has not weakened the
race. They are supreme in the western world, though the barbarians of
the wastelands are growing in strength.

In the north, golden-haired, blue-eyed barbarians, descendants of the
blond arctic savages, have driven the remaining Hyborian tribes out of
the snow countries, except the ancient kingdom of Hyperborea, which
resists their onslaught. Their country is called Nordheim, and they are
divided into the red-haired Vanir of Vanaheim, and the yellow-haired
AEsir of Asgard.

Now the Lemurians enter history again as Hyrkanians. Through the
centuries they have pushed steadily westward, and now a tribe skirts the
southern end of the great inland sea--Vilayet--and establishes the
kingdom of Turan on the southwestern shore. Between the inland sea and
the eastern borders of the native kingdoms lie vast expanses of steppes
and in the extreme north and extreme south, deserts. The non-Hyrkanian
dwellers of these territories are scattered and pastoral, unclassified
in the north, Shemitish in the south, aboriginal, with a thin strain of
Hyborian blood from wandering conquerors. Toward the latter part of the
period other Hyrkanian clans push westward, around the northern
extremity of the inland sea, and clash with the eastern outposts of the
Hyperboreans.

Glance briefly at the peoples of that age. The dominant of Hyborians are
no longer uniformly tawny-haired and grey-eyed. They have mixed with
other races. There is a strong Shemitish, even a Stygian strain among
the peoples of Koth, and to a lesser extent, of Argos, while in the case
of the latter, admixture with the Zingarans has been more extensive than
with the Shemites. The eastern Brythunians have intermarried with the
dark-skinned Zamorians, and the people of southern Aquilonia have mixed
with the brown Zingarans until black hair and brown eyes are the
dominant type in Poitain, the southern-most province. The ancient
kingdom of Hyperborea is more aloof than the others, yet there is alien
blood in plenty in its veins, from the capture of foreign
women--Hyrkanians, AEsir and Zamorians. Only in the province of
Gunderland, where the people keep no slaves, is the pure Hyborian stock
found unblemished. But the barbarians have kept their bloodstream pure;
the Cimmerians are tall and powerful, with dark hair and blue or grey
eyes. The people of Nordheim are of similar build, but with white skins,
blue eyes and golden or red hair. The Picts are of the same type as
they always were--short, very dark, with black eyes and hair. The
Hyrkanians are dark and generally tall and slender, though a squat
slant-eyed type is more and more common among them, resulting from
mixture with a curious race of intelligent, though stunted, aborigines,
conquered by them among the mountains east of Vilayet, on their westward
drift. The Shemites are generally of medium height, though sometimes
when mixed with Stygian blood, gigantic, broadly and strongly built,
with hook noses, dark eyes and blue-black hair. The Stygians are tall
and well made, dusky, straight-featured--at least the ruling classes are
of that type. The lower classes are a down-trodden, mongrel horde, a
mixture of negroid, Stygian, Shemitish, even Hyborian bloods. South of
Stygia are the vast black kingdoms of the Amazons, the Kushites, the
Atlaians and the hybrid empire of Zembabwe.

Between Aquilonia and the Pictish wilderness lie the Bossonian marches,
peopled by descendants of an aboriginal race, conquered by a tribe of
Hyborians, early in the first ages of the Hyborian drift. This mixed
people never attained the civilization of the purer Hyborians, and was
pushed by them to the very fringe of the civilized world. The Bossonians
are of medium height and complexion, their eyes brown or grey, and they
are mesocephalic. They live mainly by agriculture, in large walled
villages, and are part of the Aquilonian kingdom. Their marches extend
from the Border Kingdom in the north to Zingara in the southwest,
forming a bulwark for Aquilonia against both the Cimmerians and the
Picts. They are stubborn defensive fighters, and centuries of warfare
against northern and western barbarians have caused them to evolve a
