Benzene at

60 deg. C.

Specific inductive capacity

2.715

2.314

2.21

2.22

Specific resistance in ohms per cubic centimetre

1.5 x 1013,

1.75 x 1012

1.56 x 1011

7.9 x 1011

[Footnote: Professor J.  J.  Thomson, and Newall (Phil.  Proc.  1886)
consider that carbon bisulphide showed traces of a "residual charge"
effect;  hence, until this point is cleared up, we must regard Bouty's
value as corresponding only to a very short, but not indefinitely
short, period of charge.  On this point the paper must be consulted.

March 1897--The writer has investigated this point by an independent
method, but found no traces of "residual charge."]

Information as to the specific inductive capacity of a large number of
oils may be found in a paper by Hopkinson, Phil. Proc. 1887, and in a
paper by Quincke in Wiedemann's Annalen, 1883.

Sec. 114.  Imperfect Conductors.

Under this heading may be grouped such things as wood, slate, marble,
etc--in fact, materials generally used for switchboard insulation.
An examination of the insulating power of these substances has
recently been made by B.  O.  Peirce (Electrical Review, 11th January
1895) with quite sufficient accuracy, having in view the impossibility
of being certain beforehand as to the character of any particular
sample.  The tests were made by means of holes drilled in slabs of the
material to be examined.  These holes were three-eighths of an inch in
diameter, and from five-eighths to three-quarters of an inch deep, and
one inch apart, centre to centre.  A voltage of about 15 volts was
employed.  The following general results were arrived at:-

(1) Heating in a paraffin bath always increases the resistance of
wood, though only slightly if the wood be hard and dense.

(2) Frequent exhaustion and readmission of air above the surface of
the paraffin always has a good effect in increasing the resistance of
wood.

(3) When wood is once dry, impregnating it with paraffin tends to keep
it dry.

(4) Red vulcanised fibre, like wood, absorbs paraffin, but it cannot
be entirely waterproofed in this way.

(5) The resistance of wood with stream lines along the grain is twenty
to fifty per cent lower than when the stream lines cross the grain.

(6) The "contact" resistance between slabs of wood pressed together is
always very high.

The following table will sufficiently illustrate the results obtained.
The stone was dried in the sun for three weeks in the summer (United
States), and the wood is described as having been well seasoned:-

CURRENT WITH THE GRAIN

Lowest Resistance  Highest Resistance Lowest Specific Highest Specific
between two Cups   between two Cups   Resistance in   Resistance in
in Megohms.        in Megohms.        Megohms.        Megohms.




Ash.

    550               920                 380             700

Cherry

   1100              4000                2800            6000

Mahogany

    430               730                 310             610

Oak

    220               420                1050            2200

Pine.

    330               630                  360            1470

Hard pine.

     10                48                   17            1050

Black walnut

   1100              3000                  320            2100

Red fibre

      2                 4                    3              60

Slate

                                           184             280

Soapstone.

                                           330             500

White marble

                                          2000            8800


Sec. 115.  As to working the materials very little need be said.

Fibre is worked like wood, but has the disadvantage of rapidly taking
the edge off the tools.  In turning it, therefore, brass-turning
tools, though leaving not quite such a perfect finish as wood-turning
tools, last much longer, and really do well enough.  Fibre will not
bear heating much above 100 deg.C--at all events in paraffin.  At 140 deg.
C.  it becomes perfectly brittle.  Its chief merit lies in its great
strength.  So far as insulation is concerned, Mr. Peirce's experiments
show that it is far below most kinds of wood.

Slate. This is a vastly more useful substance than it is generally
credited with being.  It is very easily worked at a slow speed, either
on the shaping machine or on the lathe, with tools adjusted for
cutting brass, and it keeps its figure, which is more than can be said
for most materials.  It forms a splendid base for instruments,
especially when ground with a little emery by iron or glass grinders,
fined with its own dust, and French polished in the ordinary way.
Spools for coils of considerable radial dimension may be most
conveniently made of slate instead of wood or brass, both because it
keeps its shape, and because it insulates sufficiently well to stop
eddy currents--at all events, sufficiently for ordinary practice.  An
appreciable advantage is that slate may be purchased at a reasonable
rate in large slabs of any desired thickness.  It is generally cut in
the laboratory by means of an old cross-cut saw, but it does not do
much damage to a hard hack saw such as is used for iron or brass.

Marble. According to Holtzapffell, marble may be easily turned by
means of simple pointed tools of good steel tempered to a straw
colour.  The cutting point is ground on both edges like a wood-turning
tool, and held up to the work "at an angle of twenty or thirty
degrees" (?with the horizontal).  The marble is cut wet to save the
tool.  As soon as the point gets, by grinding, to be about one-eighth
of an inch broad it must either be drawn down or reground;  a flat
tool will not turn marble at all.

A convenient saw for marble is easily made on the principle of the
frame saw.  A bit of hoop iron forms a convenient blade, and is
sharpened by being hammered into notches along one edge, using the
sharp end of a hammer head.  The saw is liberally supplied with sand
and water--or emery and water, where economy of time is an object.
The sawing of marble is thus really a grinding process, but it goes on
rapidly.  Marble is ground very easily with sand and water;  it is
fined with emery and polished with putty powder, which, I understand,
is best used with water on cloth or felt.  As grinding processes have
already been fully described, there is no need to go into them here.
I have no personal knowledge of polishing marble.

Sec. 116.  Conductors.

The properties of conductors, more particularly of metals, have been
so frequently examined, that the literature of the subject is
appallingly heavy.  In what follows I have endeavoured to keep clear
of what might properly appear in a treatise on electricity on the one
hand, and in a wiring table on the other.  The most important work on
the subject of the experimental resistance properties of metals has
been done by Matthieson, Phil. Trans. 1860 and 1862, and British
Association Reports (1864); Callender, Phil. Trans. vol. clxxiii;
Callender and Griffiths, Phil. Trans. vol.  clxxxii;   The Committee
of the British Association on Electrical Standards from 1862 to
Present Time; Dewar and Fleming, Phil. Mag. vol. xxxvi.  (1893);

Klemencic, Wiener Sitzungsberichte (Denkschrift), 1888, vol. xcvii. p.
838;  Feussner and St. Lindeck, Zeitsch. fuer Inst. 'Kunde, ix. 1889,
p. 233, and B. A. Reports, 1892, p.  139.  Of these, Matthieson, and
Dewar and Fleming treat of resistance generally, the latter
particularly at low temperatures.

[Footnote: The following is a list of Dr. Matthieson's chief papers on
the subject of the electrical resistance of metals and alloys:  Phil.
Mag. xvi. 1858, pp. 219-223;  Phil. Trans. 1858, pp. 383-388 Phil.
Trans. 1860, pp. 161-176;  Phil. Trans. 1862, pp. 1-27 Phil. Mag. xxi.
(1861), pp. 107-115;  Phil. Mag. xxiii. (1862), pp. 171-179;
Electrician, iv. 1863, pp. 285-296;  British Association Reports,
1863, p. 351.]

Matthieson, and Matthieson and Hockin, Klemencic, Feussner, and St.
Lindeck deal with the choice of metals for resistance standards.
Callender's, and Callender and Griffiths' work is devoted to the study
of platinum for thermometric purposes.

The bibliography referring to special points will be given later.  The
simplest way of exhibiting the relative resistances of metals is by
means of a diagram published by Dewar and Fleming (loc. cit.), which
is reproduced on a suitable scale on the opposite page.  For very
accurate work, in which corrections for the volumes occupied by the
metals at different temperatures are of importance, the reader is
referred to the discussion in the original paper, which will be found
most pleasant reading.  From this diagram both the specific resistance
and the temperature coefficient may be deduced with sufficient
accuracy for workshop purposes.  In interpreting the diagram the
following notes will be of assistance.  The diagram is drawn to a
scale of so-called "platinum temperatures"--that is to say, let R0,
R100, Rt be the resistances of pure platinum at 0 deg., 100 deg., and t deg. C.
respectively, then the platinum temperature pt is defined as

pt = 100 X (Rt-R0)/(R100-R0)

This amounts to making the temperature scale such that the temperature
at any point is proportional to the resistance of platinum at that
point.  Consequently on a resistance temperature diagram the straight
line showing the relation between platinum resistance and platinum
temperature will "run out" at the platinum absolute zero, which
coincides more or less with the thermodynamic absolute zero, and also
with the "perfect gas" absolute zero.  Platinum temperatures may be
taken for workshop purposes over ordinary ranges as almost coinciding
with air thermometer temperatures.  The metals used by Professors
Dewar and Fleming were, with some exceptions, not absolutely pure, but
in general represent the best that can be got by the most refined
process of practical metallurgy.  We may note further that the
specific resistance is only correct for a temperature of about 15 deg. C,
since no correction for the expansion or contraction of material has
been applied.

The following notes on alloys suitable for resistance coils will
probably be found sufficient.

Sec. 117.  Platinoid.

This substance, discovered by Martino and described by Bottomley
(Phil. Proc. Roy. Soc. 1885), is an alloy of nickel, zinc, copper, and
1 per cent to 2 per cent of tungsten, but I have not been able to
obtain an analysis of its exact composition.  It appears to be
difficult to get the tungsten to alloy, and it has to be added to part
of the copper as phosphide of tungsten, in considerably greater
quantity than is finally required.  The nickel is added to part of the
copper and the phosphide of tungsten, then the zinc, and then the rest
of the copper.  The alloy requires to be remelted several times, and a
good deal of tungsten is lost by oxidation.

The alloy is of a fine white colour, and is very little affected by
air--in fact, it is to some extent untarnishable.  The specific
resistance will be seen to be about one and a half times greater than
that of German silver, and the temperature coefficient is about 0.021
per cent per degree C.  (i.e.  about nineteen times less than copper,
and half that of German silver).  To all intents and purposes it may
be regarded as German silver with 1 per cent to 2 per cent of
tungsten.  It does not appear to have been particularly examined for
secular changes of resistance.

118.  German Silver.  This material has been exhaustively examined of
late years by Klemencic and by Feussner and St. Lindeck.  Everybody
agrees that German silver, as ordinarily used for resistances, and
composed of copper four parts, zinc two parts, nickel one part, is
very ill-fitted for the purpose of making resistance standards.  This
is due
(1) to its experiencing a considerable increase in resistance on
winding.  Feussner and St.  Lindeck found an increase of 1 per cent
when German silver was wound on a core of ten wire diameters.

(2) To the fact that the change goes on, though with gradually
decreasing rate, for months or years;

(3) to the fact that the resistance is permanently changed (increased)
by heating to 40 deg. C.  or over.  By  "artificially ageing" coils of
German silver by heating to 150 deg. C, say for five or six hours, its
permanency is greatly improved, and it becomes fit for ordinary
resistance coils where changes of, say, 1/5000 do not matter.

It is a remarkable property of all nickel alloys containing zinc that
their specific resistance is permanently increased by heating, whereas
alloys which do not contain zinc suffer a change in the opposite
direction.  The manufacturers of German silver appear to take very
little care as to the uniformity of the product put on the market;
some so-called German silver is distinctly yellow, while other samples
are bright and white.

It is noted by Price (Measurements of Electrical Resistance, p. 24)
that German silver wire is apt to exhibit great differences of
resistance within quite short lengths.  This has been my own
experience as well, and is a great drawback to the use of German
silver in the laboratory, for it makes it useless to measure off
definite lengths of wire with a view to obtaining an approximate
resistance.  In England German silver coils are generally soaked in
melted hard paraffin.  In Germany, at all events at the Charlottenburg
Institute, according to St.  Lindeck--coils are shellac-varnished and
baked.  In any case it appears to be essential to thoroughly protect
the metal against atmospheric influence.

Sec. 119.  Platinum Silver.

In the opinion of Matthieson and of Klemencic the 10 per cent silver,
90 per cent platinum alloy is the one most suitable for resistance
standards.  At all events, it has stood the test of time, for, with
the following exceptions, all the British Association coils
constructed of it from 1867 to the present day have continued to agree
well together.  The exceptions were three one-ohm coils, which
permanently increased between 1888 and 1890, probably through some
straining when immersed in ice.  One coil changed by 0.0006 in 1
between the years 1867 and 1891.  According to Klemencic, absolute
permanency is not to be expected even from this alloy.

Its recommendation as a standard depends on its chemical inertness,
its small temperature coefficient (0.00027 per degree), and its small
thermo-voltage against copper, as the following table (taken from
Klemencic) will show:-

Thermo-voltages in Micro-volts per degree against Copper
          over the Range 0 deg. to 17 deg. C.

Platinum iridium           7.14 micro-volts per degree C.

Platinum silver            6.62 micro-volts per degree C.

Nickelin                  28.5  micro-volts per degree C.

German silver             10.43 micro-volts per degree C.

Manganin (St.  Lindeck)    1.5  micro-volts per degree C.

Mechanically, the platinum silver is weak, and is greatly affected as
to its resistance by mechanical strains--in fact, Klemencic considers
it the worst substance he examined from this point of view--a
conclusion rather borne out by Mr. Glazebrook's experience with the
British Association standards already referred to (B. A. Reports, 1891
and 1892).

Taking everything into account, it will probably be well to construct
standards either with oil insulation only, or to bake the coils in
shellac before testing, instead of soaking in paraffin.  Fig. 89
illustrates a form of an oil immersed standard which is in use in my
laboratory, and through which a considerable current may be passed.
The oil is stirred by means of a screw propeller.
