score warriors fall, and I alone survive the field where Mulfhere's
reavers met the men of Bragi. Tell me, woman, have you caught the flash
of mail across the snow-plains, or seen armed men moving upon the ice?"

"I have seen the hoar-frost glittering in the sun," she answered. "I
have heard the wind whispering across the everlasting snows."

He shook his head.

"Niord should have come up with us before the battle joined. I fear he
and his warriors have been ambushed. Wulfhere lies dead with all his
weapon-men.

"I had thought there was no village within many leagues of this spot,
for the war carried us far, but you can have come no great distance over
these snows, naked as you are. Lead me to your tribe, if you are of
Asgard, for I am faint with the weariness of strife."

"My dwelling place is further than you can walk, Amra of Akbitana!" she
laughed. Spreading wide her arms she swayed before him, her golden head
lolling wantonly, her scintillant eyes shadowed beneath long silken
lashes. "Am I not beautiful, man?"

"Like Dawn running naked on the snows," he muttered, his eyes burning
like those of a wolf.

"Then why do you not rise and follow me? Who is the strong warrior who
falls down before me?" she chanted in maddening mockery. "Lie down and
die in the snow with the other fools, Amra of the black hair. You can
not follow where I would lead."

With an oath the man heaved himself upon his feet, his blue eyes blazing
his dark scarred face convulsed. Rage shook his soul, but desire for the
taunting figure before him hammered at his temples and drove his wild
blood riotously through his veins. Passion fierce as physical agony
flooded his whole being so that earth and sky swam red to his dizzy
gaze, and weariness and faintness were swept from him in madness.

He spoke no word as he drove at her fingers hooked like talons. With a
shriek of laughter she leaped back and ran, laughing at him over her
white shoulder. With a low growl Amra followed. He had forgotten the
fight, forgotten the mailed warriors who lay in their blood, forgotten
Niord's belated reavers. He had thought only for the slender white shape
which seemed to float rather than run before him.

Out across the white blinding plain she led him. The trampled red field
fell out of sight behind him, but still Amra kept on with the silent
tenacity of his race. His mailed feet broke through the frozen crust; he
sank deep in the drifts and forged through them by sheer strength. But
the girl danced across the snow as light as a feather floating across a
pool; her naked feet scarcely left their imprint on the hoar-frost. In
spite of the fire in his veins, the cold bit through the warrior's mail
and furs; but the girl in her gossamer veil ran as lightly and as gaily
as if she danced through the palms and rose gardens of Poitain.

Black curses drooled through the warrior's parched lips. The great veins
swelled and throbbed in his temples, and his teeth gnashed
spasmodically.

"You can not escape me!" he roared. "Lead me into a trap and I'll pile
the heads of your kinsmen at your feet. Hide from me and I'll tear apart
the mountains to find you! I'll follow you to hell and beyond hell!"

Her maddening laughter floated back to him, and foam flew from the
warrior's lips. Further and further into the wastes she led him, till he
saw the wide plains give way to low hills, marching upward in broken
ranges. Far to the north he caught a glimpse of towering mountains, blue
with the distance, or white with the eternal snows. Above these
mountains shone the flaring rays of the borealis. They spread fan-wise
into the sky, frosty blades of cold flaming light, changing in color,
growing and brightening.

Above him the skies glowed and crackled with strange lights and gleams.
The snow shone weirdly, now frosty blue, now icy crimson, now cold
silver. Through a shimmering icy realm of enchantment Amra plunged
doggedly onward, in a crystaline maze where the only reality was the
