dotards who could barely walk; and of men not past their prime I could
barely command a score.

Still, seeing the narrowness of the passages which led to each of the
gates, up which in no place could more than two men advance together, we
were by no means in desperate straits for the defence as yet; and if my
new-given kingdom was so far small, consisting as it did in effect of
the Sacred Mountain and no other part of Atlantis, at any rate there
seemed little danger of its being further contracted.

Another of the wise precautions of the men of old stood us in good stead
then. In the ancient times, when grain first was grown as food, it came
to be looked upon as the acme of wealth. Tribute was always paid from
the people to their Priests, and presently, so the old histories say,
it was appointed that this should take the form of grain, as this was
a medium both dignified and fitting. And those of the people who had
it not, were forced to barter their other produce for grain before they
could pay this tribute.

On the Sacred Mountain itself vast storehouses were dug in the rock, and
here the grain was teemed in great yellow heaps, and each generation of
those that were set over it, took a pride in adding to the accumulation.

In more modern days it had been a custom amongst the younger and more
forward of the Priests to scoff at this ancient provision, and to hold
that a treasure of gold, or weapons, or jewels would have more value and
no less of dignity; and more than once it has been a close thing
lest these innovators should not be out-voted. But as it was, the old
constitution had happily been preserved, and now in these years of trial
the Clan reaped the benefit. And so with these granaries, and a series
of great tanks and cisterns which held the rainfall, there was no chance
of Phorenice reducing our stronghold by mere close investment, even
though she sat down stubbornly before it for a score of years.

But it was the paucity of men for the defence which oppressed me most.
As I took my way about the head of the Mountain, inspecting all points,
the emptiness of the place smote me like a succession of blows. The
groves, once so trim, were now shaggy and unpruned. Wind had whirled
the leaves in upon the temple floors, and they lay there unswept. The
college of youths held no more now than a musty smell to bear witness
that men had once been grown there. The homely palaces of the higher
Priests, at one time so ardently sought after, lay many of them empty,
because not even one candidate came forward now to canvass for election.

Evil thoughts surged up within me as I saw these things, that were
direct promptings from the nether Gods. "There must be something
wanting," these tempters whispered, "in a religion from which so many of
its Priests fled at the first pinch of persecution."

I did what I could to thrust these waverings resolutely behind me; but
they refused to be altogether ousted from my brain; and so I made a
compromise with myself: First, I would with the help that might be given
me, destroy this wanton Phorenice, and regain the kingdom which had been
given me to my own proper rule; and afterwards I would call a council
of the Seven and council of the Three, and consider without prejudice
if there was any matter in which our ancient ritual could be amended
to suit the more modern requirements. But this should not be done till
Phorenice was dead and I was firmly planted in her room. I would not be
a party, even to myself, to any plan which smacked at all of surrender.

And there as I walked through the desolate groves and beside the cold
altars, the High Gods were pleased to show their approval of my scheme,
and to give me opportunity to bind myself to it with a solemn oath and
vow. At that moment from His distant resting-place in the East, our Lord
the Sun leaped up to begin another day. For long enough from where I
stood below the crest of the Mountain, He Himself would be invisible.
But the great light of His glory spread far into the sky, and against it
the Ark of the Mysteries loomed in black outline from the highest crag
where it rested, lonely and terrible.

For anyone unauthorised to go nearer than a thousand paces to this
storehouse of the Highest Mysteries meant instant death. On that day
when I was initiated as one of the Seven, I had been permitted to go
near and once press my lips against its ample curves; and the rank of
my degree gave me the privilege to repeat that salute again once on each
day when a new year was born. But what lay inside its great interior,
and how it was entered, that was hidden from the Seven, even as it was
from the other Priests and the common people in the city below. Only
those who had been raised to the sublime elevation of the Three had a
knowledge of the dreadful powers which were stored within it.

I went down on my knees where I was, and Zaemon knelt beside me, and
together we recited the prayers which had been said by the Priests from
the beginning of time, giving thanks to our great Lord that He has
come to brighten another day. And then, with my eyes fixed on the black
outline of the Ark of Mysteries I vowed that, come what might, I at
least would be true servant of the High Gods to my life's end, and that
my whole strength should be spent in restoring Their worship and glory.




17. NAIS THE REGAINED


Now, from where we stood together just below the crest of the Sacred
Mountain, we could see down into the city, which lay spread out below
us like a map. The harbour and the great estuary gleamed at its
farther side; and the fringe of hills beyond smoked and fumed in their
accustomed fashion; the great stone circle of our Lord the Sun stood
up grim and bare in the middle of the city; and nearer in reared up the
great mass of the royal pyramid, the gold on its sides catching new gold
from the Sun. There, too, in the square before the pyramid stood the
throne of granite, dwarfed by the distance to the size of a mole's hill,
in which these nine years my love had lain sleeping.

Old Zaemon followed my gaze. "Ay," he said with a sigh, "I know where
your chief interest is. Deucalion when he landed here new from Yucatan
was a strong man. The King whom we have chosen--and who is the best we
have to choose--has his weakness."

"It can be turned into additional strength. Give me Nais here, living
and warm to fight for, and I am a stronger man by far than the cold
viceroy and soldier that you speak about."

"I have passed my word to that already, and you shall have her, but at
the cost of damaging somewhat this new kingdom of yours. Maybe too at
the same time we may rid you of this Phorenice and her brood. But I do
not think it likely. She is too wily, and once we begin our play, she is
likely to guess whence it comes, and how it will end, and so will make
an escape before harm can reach her. The High Gods, who have sent
all these trials for our refinement, have seen fit to give her some
knowledge of how these earth tremors may be set a-moving."

"I have seen her juggle with them. But may I hear your scheme?"

"It will be shown you in good time enough. But for the present I would
bid you sleep. It will be your part to go into the city to-night, and
take your woman (that is my daughter) when she is set free, and bring
her here as best you can. And for that you will need all a strong man's
strength."--He stepped back, and looked me up and down.--"There are not
many folk that would take you for the tidy clean-chinned Deucalion now,
my brother. Your appearance will be a fine armour for you down yonder in
the city to-night when we wake it with our earth-shaking and terror.
As you stand now, you are hairy enough, and shaggy enough, and naked
enough, and dirty enough for some wild savage new landed out of Europe.
Have a care that no fine citizen down yonder takes a fancy to your
thews, and seizes upon you as his servant."

"I somewhat pity him in his household if he does."

Old Zaemon laughed. "Why, come to think of it, so do I."

But quickly he got grave again. Laughter and Zaemon were very rare
playmates. "Well, get you to bed, my King, and leave me to go into the
Ark of Mysteries and prepare there with another of the Three the things
that must be done. It is no light business to handle the tremendous
powers which we must put into movement this night. And there is danger
for us as there is for you. So if by chance we do not meet again till we
stand up yonder behind the stars, giving account to the Gods, fare you
well, Deucalion."

I slept that day as a soldier sleeps, taking full rest out of the hours,
and letting no harassing thought disturb me. It is only the weak who
permit their sleep to be broken on these occasions. And when the dark
was well set, I roused and fetched those who should attend to the rope.
Our Lady the Moon did not shine at that turn of the month: and the air
was full of a great blackness. So I was out of sight all the while they
lowered me.

I reached the tumbled rocks that lay at the deep foot of the cliff,
and then commenced to use a nice caution, because Phorenice's soldiers
squatted uneasily round their camp-fires, as though they had forebodings
of the coming evil. I had no mind to further stir their wakefulness. So
I crept swiftly along in the darkest of the shadows, and at last came to
the spot where that passage ends which before I had used to get beneath
the walls of the city.

The lamp was in place, and I made my way along the windings swiftly. The
air, so it seemed to me, was even more noxious with vapours than it had
been when I was down there before, and I judged that Zaemon had already
begun to stir those internal activities which were shortly to convulse
the city. But again I had difficulty in finding an exit, and this, not
because there were people moving about at the places where I had to come
out, but because the set of the masonry was entirely changed. In olden
times the Priests' Clan oversaw all the architects' plans, and ruled out
anything likely to clash with their secret passages and chambers. But
in this modern day the Priests were of small account, and had no say in
this matter, and the architects often through sheer blundering sealed up
and made useless many of these outlets and hiding-places.

As it was then, I had to get out of the network of tunnels and galleries
where I could, and not where I would, and in the event found myself at
the farther side of the city, almost up to where the outer wall joins
down to the harbour. I came out without being seen, careful even in this
moment of extremity to preserve the ordinances, and closed all traces of
exit behind me. The earth seemed to spring beneath my feet like the deck
of a ship in smooth water; and though there was no actual movement as
yet to disturb the people, and indeed these slept on in their houses and
shelters without alarm, I could feel myself that the solid deadness
of the ground was gone, and that any moment it might break out into
devastating waves of movement.

Gods! Should I be too late to see the untombing of my love? Would she be
laid there bare to the public gaze when presently the people swarmed out
into the open spaces through fear at what the great earth tremor might
cause to fall? I could see, in fancy, their rude, cruel hands thrust
upon her as she lay there helpless, and my inwards dried up at the
thought.

I ran madly down and down the narrow winding streets with the one
thought of coming to the square which lay in front of the royal pyramid
before these things came to pass. With exquisite cruelty I had been
forced with my own hands to place her alive in her burying-place beneath
the granite throne, and if thews and speed could do it, I would not miss
my reward of taking her forth again with the same strong hands.

Few disturbed that furious hurry. At first here and there some wretch
who harboured in the gutter cried: "A thief! Throw a share or I pursue."
But if any of these followed, I do not know. At any rate, my speed then
must have out-distanced anyone. Presently, too, as the swing of the
earth underfoot became more keen, and the stonework of the buildings by
the street side began to grate and groan and grit, and sent forth little
showers of dust, people began to run with scared cries from out of their
doors. But none of these had a mind to stop the ragged, shaggy, savage
man who ran so swiftly past, and flung the mud from his naked feet.

And so in time I came to the great square, and was there none too soon.
The place was filling with people who flocked away from the narrow
streets, and it was full of darkness, and noise, and dust, and sickness.
Beneath us the ground rippled in undulations like a sea, which with
terrifying slowness grew more and more intense.

Ever and again a house crashed down unseen in the gloom, and added to
the tumult. But the great pyramid had been planned by its old builders
to stand rude shocks. Its stones were dovetailed into one another with a
marvellous cleverness, and were further clamped and joined by ponderous
tongues of metal. It was a boast that one-half the foundations could be
dug from beneath it, and still the pyramid would stand four-square under
heaven, more enduring than the hills.

Flickering torches showed that its great stone doors lay open, and ever
and again I saw some frightened inmate scurry out and then be lost to
sight in the gloom. But with the royal pyramid and its ultimate fate
I had little concern; I did not even care then whether Phorenice was
trapped, or whether she came out sound and fit for further mischief.
I crouched by the granite throne which stood in the middle of that
splendid square, and heard its stones grate together like the ends of a
broken bone as it rocked to the earth-waves.

In that night of dust and darkness it was hard to see the outline of
one's own hand, but I think that the Gods in some requital for the love
which had ached so long within me, gave me special power of sight. As
I watched, I saw the great carved rock which formed the capstone of the
throne move slightly and then move again, and then again; a tiny jerk
for each earth-pulse, but still there was an appreciable shifting; and,
moreover, the stone moved always to one side.

There was method in Zaemon's desperate work, and this in my blind panic
of love and haste, I had overlooked. So I went up the steps of the
throne on the side from which the great capstone was moving, and clung
there afire with expectation.

More and more violent did the earth-swing grow, though the graduations
of its increase could not be perceived, and the din of falling houses
and the shrieks and cries of hurt and frightened people went louder
up into the night. Thicker grew the dust that filled the air, till one
coughed and strangled in the breathing, and more black did the night
become as the dust rose and blotted the rare stars from sight. I clung
to an angle of the granite throne, crouching on the uppermost step but
one below the capstone, and could scarcely keep my place against the
violence of the earth tremors.

But still the huge capstone that was carved with the snake and the
outstretched hand held my love fast locked in her living tomb, and I
could have bit the cold granite at the impotence which barred me from
her. The people who kept thronging into the square were mad with
terror, but their very numbers made my case more desperate every moment.
"Phorenice, Goddess, aid us now!" some cried, and when the prayer
did not bring them instant relief, they fell to yammering out the old
confessions of the faith which they had learned in childhood, turning
in this hour of their dreadful need to those old Gods, which, through
so many dishonourable years, they had spurned and deserted. It was a
curious criticism on the balance of their real religion, if one had
cared to make it.

Louder grew the crash of falling masonry; and from the royal pyramid
itself, though indeed I could not even see its outline through the
darkness, there came sounds of grinding stones and cracking bars of
metal which told that even its superb majestic strength had a breaking
strain. There came to my mind the threat that old Zaemon had thundered
forth in that painted, perfumed banqueting-hall: "You shall see," he had
cried to the Empress, "this royal pyramid which you have polluted
with your debaucheries torn tier from tier, and stone from stone, and
scattered as feathers spread before a wind!"

Still heavier grew the surging of the earth, and the pavement of the
great square gaped and upheaved, and the people who thronged it screamed
still more shrilly as their feet were crushed by the grinding blocks.
And now too the great pyramid itself was commencing to split, and
gape, and topple. The roofs of its splendid chambers gave way, and the
ponderous masonry above shuttered down and filled them. In part, too,
one could see the destruction now, and not guess at it merely from the
fearful hearings of the darkness. Thunders had begun to roar through
the black night above, and add their bellowings to this devil's
orchestration of uproar, and vivid lightning splashes lit the flying
dust-clouds.

It was perhaps natural that she should be there, but it came as a
shock when a flare of the lightning showed me Phorenice safe out in the
square, and indeed standing not far from myself.

She had taken her place in the middle of a great flagstone, and stood
there swaying her supple body to the shocks. Her face was calm, and its
loveliness was untouched by the years. From time to time she brushed
away the dust as it settled on the short red hair which curled about her
neck. There was no trace of fear written upon her face. There was some
weariness, some contempt, and I think a tinge of amusement. Yes, it took
more than the crumbling of her royal pyramid to impress Phorenice with
the infinite powers of those she warred against.

Gods! How the sight of her cool indifference maddened me then. I had
it in me to have strangled her with my hands if she had come within
my reach. But as it was, she stood in her place, swaying easily to the
earth-waves as a sailor sways on a ship's deck, and beside her, crouched
on the same great flagstone, and overcome with nausea was Ylga, who
again was raised to be her fan-girl. It came to my mind that Ylga was
twin sister to Nais, and that I owed her for an ancient kindness, but I
had leisure to do nothing for her then, and indeed it was little enough
I could have done. With each shock the great capstone of the throne to
which I clung jarred farther and farther from its bed place, and my love
was coming nearer to me. It was she who claimed all my service then.

Once in their blind panic a knot of the people in the square thought
that the granite stone was too solid to be overturned, and saw in it
an oasis of safety. They flocked towards it, many of them dragging
themselves up the steep deep high steps on hands and knees because their
feet had been injured by the billowing flagstones of the square.

But I was in no mood to have the place profaned by their silly
tremblings and stares: I beat at them with my hands, tearing them away,
and hurling them back down the steepness of the steps. They asked me
