"Certainly, Your Honor. I have no more questions for this infanticide."

As Ford turned away to sit down, Auguste saw a quick little smile crease
Judge Cooper's face, then disappear. He began to feel hope stirring in a
heart that had been heavy ever since he came to Victor. This trial would
not be conducted according to Lynch's law.

But he still burned with hatred for Armand Perrault. He turned to watch
Perrault go back to his seat.

And his skin tingled. Just past the gaunt-faced Lieutenant Davis, Nancy
was sitting, only two rows of chairs away. Her deep blue eyes widened as
she looked at him. Her smile was, as Cooper's had been, just a brief
shadow, but her face flushed, and she shook her head almost
imperceptibly.

Auguste understood. As Ford had said, if Nancy were to testify in his
behalf, people must never know what they had been to each other. All
their hatred for red men would come boiling up, and they would hang him
for having intercourse with a white woman, if for nothing else. He
nodded ever so slightly, tore his eyes away from hers.

Woodrow was sitting beside Nancy, holding her hand. He had no need to
hide his feelings, and gave Auguste a big grin. Auguste smiled back at
him, but at the sight of Woodrow, longing for Eagle Feather was a knife
in his heart.

_I don't even know whether Eagle Feather is alive._

And grief for poor little Floating Lily crushed him.

There were Frank and Nicole sitting together, with one of their smaller
children--Patrick, Auguste thought--squirming on Nicole's lap. The sight
of the baby made him want to weep.

There were Elysee and Guichard, two old men sitting side by side.
Grandpapa had a home of his own now, he'd told Auguste while visiting
him, a small frame house on a hillside north of town, also built by
Frank. And a young doctor named Surrey who had just moved into the
county looked in on Elysee regularly.

_Good that they have a new doctor here._

Too bad, though, Gram Medill had died. Of an infection, Auguste had
heard, that she'd refused to let Dr. Surrey treat.

Auguste saw many more spectators whom he did not recognize, people who
stared back at him with hostility or--at best--curiosity.

A handsome young woman wearing a black bonnet and a black dress caught
his eye. There was a strange intensity in her look, but her mouth was
drawn tight, and he could not tell whether she felt hatred or sympathy
for him. Then he remembered who she was--Pamela Russell, widow of the
town clerk whose brains had been dashed out by a Sauk war club during
the attack on Victor. Nicole, on one of her visits to the village hall,
had described Russell's death to him and told him how Pamela had
insisted on touching off the cannon that broke the war party's attack.

_She will probably want to be the one to put the rope around my neck._

The prosecutor called Levi Pope to the stand. The shambling backwoodsman
held his coonskin cap in his hand as he approached the witness chair.
This was the first time Auguste could remember seeing him without a
rifle. Its absence made him look strange.

Bennett led Levi Pope through an account of Old Man's Creek. Then Thomas
Ford rose to question him.

"All right, Levi. When the three Indians, including Auguste, came into
your camp with the peace flag, how'd you know it was treachery?"

Levi frowned and shook his head. "Well, when we seen that the woods was
full of Injuns."

"Now, we've heard many times during this trial that 'the woods was full
of Injuns.' How many Indians did you see?"

"'Twasn't me that saw them. It was the scouts Colonel Raoul sent out."

"So you didn't see any sign yourself that the Indians were trying to
lead you into some kind of trap?"

"Well--no, sir."

"And when you rode into the forest on the north side of Old Man's Creek,
did you see any Indians?"

"No, sir. They must of all run off by that time."

"When did you first meet up with Indians?"

"Oh, we rode maybe an hour up along the river. It was full dark then,
and they come down off a hill in front of us, a-yelling and screaming."

"A frontal attack, then. If the Indians were planning to ambush you,
what did they gain by sending three men into your camp claiming they
wanted to talk surrender?"

Levi Pope's face seemed to elongate as he contemplated Ford's question.
"I don't rightly know."

"Do you think the Indians are stupid, Mr. Pope?"

"Well, they was stupid to start this war." Levi grinned at Ford, looking
pleased with himself. Auguste heard some appreciative chuckles from the
spectators. He turned and saw Levi Pope's wife, a skinny, pale woman,
frowning at her husband as if his testimony made her angry.

Ford nodded and held off on making his reply while he paced the open
space before the judge's table and let his calm gaze travel over all the
spectators and jurymen. He waited until the hall was quiet.

"Maybe the Indians thought it was a stupid war, too, Mr. Pope. Maybe
that is the real reason Black Hawk sent those three braves to your
camp."

"Objection," called Bennett. "Mr. Ford is just speculating."

Ford said, "Your Honor, the claim by Colonel de Marion and others that
the Indian attempt to make peace, in which Auguste de Marion
participated, was some kind of dastardly trick is, itself, merely
speculation."

Judge Cooper grunted. "Well, let's stick to what people know, not what
they think they know."

"Fine with me, Your Honor," said Ford, "as long as the prosecution is
held to the same standard."

Auguste's belly tightened as he heard Ford speak sharply to the judge.
He'd seen some hope in Cooper. He didn't want him antagonized. Then he
slumped, letting his manacled hands dangle. What difference? He didn't
have a chance anyway.

Ford went back to his seat, smiling grimly at Auguste, and Levi Pope,
looking somewhat puzzled, slouched back to his place among the
spectators. Judge Cooper declared that proceedings were over for the day
and that the defense would call its witnesses tomorrow.

Hopelessly, Auguste stood up and bent over to pick up the iron ball
chained to his leg. Perhaps, he thought, Lynch's law would be better. At
least it would not prolong his suffering, make him relive moment by
moment everything he and those he loved had suffered over the past year.
And sooner or later he was bound to end up in the same place--a grave.

The following day Nicole was sitting in the witness chair, answering
Ford's questions in a soft, melodious voice.

Ford asked, "Do you agree, Mrs. Hopkins, with your brother's charge that
Auguste is a renegade and murderer?"

Nicole's full face reddened with anger. "My God, no! Auguste never
turned against us. He left Smith County because Raoul would have had him
murdered if he'd stayed. Auguste has never harmed anyone."

Ford's next witness was Mrs. Pamela Russell. Hearing the spectators
murmuring questions to one another after Ford called her name, Auguste
wondered anxiously what a woman whose husband had been killed by Wolf
Paw's raid on Victor could possibly say that would help him. Her black
dress and bonnet made her face look even paler. She clutched a black
leather bag in her lap.

Ford said, "Mrs. Russell, did your late husband entrust any papers to
you concerning Auguste de Marion?"

"Not exactly, but he kept such papers in our house and told me about
them. I kept them safe after he died."

"What were they?"

"A certificate of adoption and a will."

"Why did he keep them in your home instead of in the village hall?"

Pamela Russell's dark eyes flashed as she searched the courtroom,
looking, Auguste suspected, for Raoul.

"Raoul de Marion, who never let my husband forget that he owed his job
to him, ordered Burke to destroy both papers."

"That's a lie!" came Raoul's shout from the back of the hall.

Justus Bennett looked toward Raoul and said, "Colonel de Marion, please.
What this woman is saying might even help our case."

"All right," Raoul called. "But you watch what you're doing."

"Now, Mrs. Russell--" Ford began again.

"Burke knew that what he told him to do was wrong. So, instead of
destroying the adoption certificate and the will, he brought them home
and kept them in his strongbox in our cellar. When the Indians burned
our house, the papers survived." She paused, gazing over Ford's head.
"The papers survived."

"Do you have them now, Mrs. Russell?"

She unbuckled the strap that closed the leather bag in her lap and drew
out two folded pieces of paper. She handed them to Ford, who unfolded
them with a flourish and turned to the judge.

Ford asked, "Your Honor, may I read these documents to the court?"

"Go right ahead," said Judge Cooper.

"First, the certificate of adoption," said Ford.

Auguste felt a hard lump rise to block his throat as Ford read the
statement that Pierre de Marion, on the sixteenth day of August, 1825,
did declare his natural son, hereafter to be known as Auguste de Marion,
to be his lawful son, granting him all rights and privileges to which
that status might entitle him.

Auguste covered his burning eyes with his hand.

_I meant so much to him._

"Now," said Ford, "the will: 'I, Pierre de Marion, residing on the
estate called Victoire, in the County of Smith and State of Illinois,
make this my will and revoke all prior wills and codicils.'"

It was the will Auguste had fought against until Pierre had finally
persuaded him to smoke the calumet; the will giving the chateau and the
land to Auguste. There were also monetary gifts to a number of servants,
including one of two hundred dollars to Armand and Marchette Perrault.
Auguste heard an angry-bee buzzing among the spectators. By seizing the
estate, and concealing the will, Raoul had wiped out these gifts. He'd
have to face some angry servants today, Auguste thought with
satisfaction. Including that swine Perrault.

"The prosecution will want to see those papers," said Bennett when Ford
had finished reading.

"Of course," said Cooper. "You may have a look any time. In my
presence."

After Ford had given the jurors the two papers to look at and had
returned them to Cooper's table, he turned to Bennett.

"Your witness."

Bennett slouched into the open area before the judge's table. "No
questions. Mrs. Russell, widowed by those savages, has surely suffered
enough."

Pamela Russell stayed sitting in the chair beside the judge's table,
clutching her leather bag. Her bosom, Auguste saw, was rising and
falling with some powerful emotion.

"That's all, Pamela," David Cooper said softly. "You can go now."

She stood up, looking like a woman in a trance, and moved slowly toward
the door in the rear of the courtroom. Auguste turned in his seat to
watch her. She stopped before Raoul, who was sitting near the back. He
stared up at her as she pointed at him.

"How dare you call me a liar, Raoul de Marion! When it's you that lied
about what you told my husband. My husband never fired a gun before in
his life, and he had to stand up and be killed, because you took all the
men who could shoot away with you. I hope those papers ruin you."

Spots of red stood out on her cheeks. She covered her face with her hand
and rushed out of the courtroom.

"How come you didn't shut her up, Judge?" Raoul shouted after she was
gone.

"I figured she deserved to have her say," said Cooper calmly.

Ford said, "The defense calls Miss Nancy Hale."

Auguste's heart started to beat harder as he watched Nancy, tall and
straight in a pale violet dress, walk to the witness's chair. Just what
he had feared a year ago, when Nancy first asked him to make love to
her, had happened. He felt a love for her--an impossible love, now--that
was as strong in its way as the love he felt for Redbird.

In answer to Ford's soft-spoken questions, Nancy told how she had been
captured and how Auguste had intervened to protect her, and later to
protect Woodrow. She told how he had risked his life to escort her and
Woodrow to safety, and had ended up being captured.

Bennett got up to cross-question.

"Miss Hale, this may be a hard question for you to answer in open court.
But it is important to this trial. It's well-known that Indians are no
respecters of the virtue of white women. So, what I'm asking you is ..."
He paused and leaned over her. "Were you subjected to anything of a
shameful nature while you were a prisoner of the Sauk?"

"Objection," called Ford. "The question itself is shameful. It has no
possible bearing on this case."

Judge Cooper glared at Bennett. "What call do you have to ask her that?"

"Defense counsel has taken us down a lot of winding roads, Your Honor.
I'm attempting to determine facts about the defendant's character."

"I'll allow it," said Cooper, his voice low and reluctant, and Bennett
turned with a look of satisfaction to Nancy and repeated his question.

Nancy looked him coldly in the eye. "I've already said. Auguste de
Marion protected me. I was never harmed."

Bennett narrowed his eyes. Raoul had chosen the man well for his
purposes, Auguste thought, hating Bennett for tormenting Nancy.

"Well, but what about Auguste de Marion himself? Didn't you live in one
of their huts with him? Did he ever approach you with lewd intent?"

"Certainly not!" said Nancy. "Yes, I did live in his--the word is
wickiup, Mr. Bennett. But the situation was perfectly proper. His wife
and child were with us all the time."

From the back of the hall Raoul brayed, "She probably enjoyed it. She
always had an eye for the mongrel."

Auguste felt his neck grow hot. He wanted to kill. But someone would
stop him before he reached Raoul; and even to try to attack him would
only confirm the picture Bennett was trying to paint, of a murderous
savage. He forced himself to sit still.

And yet, he thought, as he breathed deeply to calm himself, it was Nancy
who was concealing the truth and Bennett and Raoul who sensed what had
really happened. But their very words for it--"shameful," "lewd
intent"--turned the truth into a lie.

He and Nancy had proclaimed their love in honor before the British Band.
Now he felt as if he were tied down on a forest floor and weasels and
crows were biting and pecking at him. Why must he and Nancy hide their
love from these hate-filled people?

He heard indignant murmurs provoked by Raoul's outburst.

"Shocking!" someone said.

"No gentleman would talk that way."

Auguste heard Lieutenant Davis sitting behind him, say to one of his
men, "If I weren't on duty, I'd teach that scoundrel a lesson."

Someone with the accent of Victoire called out, "Raoul, your father is
right! Tu es un sauvage!"

Cooper pounded on his table with his wooden mallet until there was
silence.

Thomas Ford called, "Master Woodrow Prewitt, will you take the stand,
please?"

Woodrow walked past Auguste, who felt a warmth for him and, again, a
pang of longing for Eagle Feather.

Under Ford's questions, Woodrow told how White Bear and Redbird had
treated him like a foster son, and how White Bear had helped them
escape.

When it was Bennett's turn, he stood threateningly over Woodrow. "Have
you forgotten, young man, that you had a real, white, Christian father
and mother? Have you forgotten what the Indians did to them?"

"No, sir," said Woodrow in a small voice.

"Well, then, how can you make it out that this half-Indian and his squaw
were such fine people? They held you prisoner!"

"Sir, my pa used to whip me before breakfast and after supper. My ma
laid in bed most days, drunk. White Bear--Mr. Auguste--he was kind to
me. So was his missus. Living with them was shinin'."

"Shining!" Bennett looked disgusted.

Woodrow shrugged. "Well, would'a been, if the soldiers hadn't always
been chasing us."

Auguste heard the thump of boots. He turned to see Raoul storming up
from the back of the room.

"That boy's lying!" Raoul roared. "Indians took me prisoner when I was
his age--I know firsthand how kind they are, I got the scars to prove
it. The half-breed's white squaw has made it worthwhile for the kid to
lie. If I get my hands on him, I'll beat the truth out of him."

"Sit down, sir!" Lieutenant Davis jumped up from his seat behind Auguste
and blocked Raoul's way. Auguste turned to see Raoul's big frame just a
few feet from him, close enough for him to smell whiskey fumes.

"This is none of your business, Davis," Raoul growled.

"General Winfield Scott and Colonel Zachary Taylor commanded me to see
that this man receives a proper trial," said Davis in a calm, steady
voice.

Judge Cooper rapped his mallet. "De Marion, I won't allow you to disrupt
this court."

Raoul shouted at Cooper over Davis's shoulder. "Don't you forget,
Cooper, that when you're not wearing that black robe you're just a small
farmer who bought his land from me and sells his crop to me."

Cooper was standing now, his jaw clenched. "That's enough, de Marion.
Sit down."

Raoul's head turned slowly from side to side. For a moment he stared at
Auguste, his eyes full of hate. Auguste felt an answering hatred boiling
up in his chest.

Raoul and the lieutenant stood facing each other for a long, silent
moment. Then Raoul turned abruptly and strode back to his seat. Auguste,
whose attention had been fixed on Raoul and Davis, became aware of men
sitting down all over the courtroom. He wondered whether they were
Raoul's men.

Auguste felt his guts squirm as he realized what a thin barrier
protected this trial from being abruptly ended. Raoul could call on his
crew of rogues to drag him out and hang him at once. The judge and the
three Federal soldiers might not be able to stop him.

Ford called Auguste to the witness chair. Auguste had sat rigid for so
long that standing up made him stumble, and Ford put a steadying hand on
his arm.

As he sat down he felt himself trembling at the sight of dozens of pale
eyes faces, hard, solemn and expressionless, looking at him. Bearded men
squirting tobacco juice into brass spittoons. Women eyeing him from
under bonnets. He looked for the friendly faces in the room--Nancy,
Woodrow, Elysee, Guichard, Nicole, Frank.

Ford said, "We've heard bits and pieces of your story from many
different people, Auguste. If you were just another Sauk Indian you
wouldn't be on trial here today. You'd be with your people, what's left
of them. But because you've lived with whites and your father was white
and you have a claim to a white man's property, you're accused of being
a traitor and a murderer. I want you to tell us about your life. How
come you're both Indian and white man?"

As Auguste talked he forgot the watching faces and saw again Sun Woman
and Star Arrow, Black Hawk and Owl Carver, Redbird and Nancy, Saukenuk
and Victoire, Old Man's Creek and the Bad Axe.

When he was done, Ford thanked him quietly and sat down. It was
Bennett's turn.

He shuffled toward Auguste, fixing him with small eyes that glinted with
malice.

"We have to take your word for it that you spoke for peace in the
councils of the Sauk and Fox Indians, don't we? And we have to take your
word that you went to the camp of Colonel de Marion's spy battalion on
an errand of peace, don't we?"

"That's right," Auguste said bitterly. "Because all my witnesses are
dead."

"Don't try to get us to feel sorry for you," Bennett rasped. "This
courtroom is full of people who've seen loved ones stabbed, shot,
scalped, cut to pieces, burnt to ashes. At the hands of your Indians."
He raised his voice to a shout. "And while that was happening, you were
behind the red fiends! Urging them on to kill and kill some more!" He
turned away, face twisted in disgust. "I have no more questions for
you."

Cooper said, "Does the defense have any more witnesses?"

"No, Your Honor," said Ford, and Auguste's heart sank as he walked back
to his seat. Bennett, he felt, had finished him with those few sentences
reminding people what the Sauk had done to them.

Auguste turned to Ford, whose round face was blank, unreadable. No hope
there. Ford had done his best, Auguste was sure. But he had no more
chance against the hatred here in Victor than Black Hawk's band had
against the armies of the United States.

_I am going to be hanged._

"Hold it there!" called a voice from the doorway of the courtroom. "He
_has_ got two more witnesses."

Auguste saw a tall, mustached man thumping up from the back of the court
with the aid of a crutch and a peg leg. Beside him a skinny man with a
small head and a gap-toothed grin shuffled over the plank floor. A rifle
hung from one long arm.

It took him a moment to recognize Otto Wegner and Eli Greenglove.

Alert, wary, he watched them come up the aisle between the spectators'
chairs.

Cooper raised a hand in warning, said, "Mr. Greenglove, you'll have to
put that rifle down before you come any farther."

"So be it," said Greenglove, handing the rifle to one of Jefferson
Davis's corporals who had risen to bar his way. "I just needed it to
make sure I got this far alive."

Ford came over to Auguste and said in a low voice, "I take it these men
are offering to testify in your defense. Do you want them?"

"I think Wegner must be here to help me," said Auguste. "But I don't
know why Greenglove is here." He remembered his conviction that
Greenglove had missed him on purpose, and shrugged. "I haven't got much
to lose."

Ford began with Wegner, asking him how he came to be in Victor when word
was he had emigrated to Texas.

"My family and I only got as far as New Orleans, where we are buying
provisions to join the colony at San Felipe de Austin. Then this
gentleman comes to me." Wegner pointed to Greenglove, now sitting in the
front row of spectators. "He tells me Herr Auguste is to be tried at
Victor. At once we take the steamboat. I pay for both his passage and
mine, using money my family needs. I tell you this not to praise myself
but to show how much that man means to me." Now Wegner pointed to
Auguste, who looked down at the floor, his face hot and his throat
choked.

Ford nodded gravely. "I understand you were at Old Man's Creek, Mr.
Wegner. What happened to you?"

Wegner told the story just as Auguste remembered it, ending, "I lost my
leg, but I still have my life, thanks to Auguste de Marion, for whom I
never did a single thing good."

_If I could have taken him back to the Sauk camp, I might even have
saved his leg._

Ford said, "Mr. Wegner, we've heard that Auguste de Marion is a murderer
and a traitor to his country."

"Lies!" said Otto Wegner firmly. "By the rules of war he had every right
to kill me and he did not. He is the most Christian man I have ever
known."

_I wonder if Wegner knows I have never believed in any spirits but
Earthmaker and the Turtle and the Bear._

Returning from the witness chair, Wegner stopped to take Auguste's hand
in both of his. "I am so glad I could come and speak for you. You are a
_great_ man, Herr Auguste."

Auguste, struggling to hold back tears, murmured his thanks. Perhaps
Elysee could replace the money Wegner had spent getting here, if the
Prussian was not too proud to take it.

Ford began questioning Eli Greenglove about Old Man's Creek.

"Hell, there weren't no Injuns in ambush in the woods," Greenglove
drawled. "'Twas plain as day what was going on. They was a few scouts
that come to watch what happened to the peace party. Most of our men
were carrying a right powerful load of whiskey. Some of the men saw the
scouts hiding in the woods and got excited. Colonel Raoul, he used that
as an excuse to order us to finish off the Injuns with the white flag."

"And you shot Auguste?" Ford asked.

"I give him that ear." Greenglove pointed in the general direction of
Auguste's right ear. "Hoped he'd be smart enough to play possum after he
was hit."

"Why did you choose not to kill Auguste? Did you think it would be
murder?"

Greenglove cackled scornfully. "Hell, that never stopped me before. No,
it was real simple." He paused, and the courtroom was still. "I saved
that boy's life because I wanted Colonel Raoul to marry my daughter,
Clarissa."

And suddenly Eli Greenglove started to cry. Tears ran down his bony
cheeks and sobs shook his lean frame.

Ford stood looking wide-eyed, turned to stare at Auguste, who himself
was dumbfounded, having never seen a man like Eli Greenglove cry.

Bennett broke the embarrassed silence. "Your Honor, I don't see what
this man's daughter has to do with the case."

Greenglove's moist eyes narrowed to angry slits. "Just shut up a minute,
lawyer, and I'll tell you. My daughter lived with Raoul de Marion for
seven years and bore him two kids, but he wouldn't marry her because she
weren't good enough for him. No, he had to have the preacher's daughter.
That lady, Miss Hale." He pointed toward the spectators. "But she was
sweet on Mr. Pierre's boy, Auguste, and I could see he had an eye for
her too. As long as Auguste was alive, I figured there'd be a chance
that Miss Hale would run off with him. So I made sure to keep him
alive."

Auguste's heart sank. If the jury believed what Greenglove was saying
now, wouldn't that make them think that there must have been something
between him and Nancy when she was kidnapped by the Sauk?

Greenglove's lips drew back from his stained teeth. "But then that
sonofabitch Raoul had to go and kill Black Hawk's men that brought the
white flag. There weren't no real war before that happened. If he'd sent
them messengers on to General Atkinson, the whole thing would've been
over in May. Every one of them white people, soldiers and farmers, men,
women and children, was killed by that man there." He pointed a skinny
finger in Raoul's direction. "Meanin' my daughter Clarissa and my two
grandkids."

"Your daughter was a slut, Greenglove," Raoul shouted. "I'd've never
married her if she lived to be a hundred." Auguste turned and saw him
standing in the back of the courtroom, Perrault and a few more of his
bully boys flanking him.

"Oh?" said Greenglove in a whisper that somehow was loud enough for the
whole court to hear. "You are very lucky they took my rifle away from
me, Colonel Raoul."

Ford said, "I think that's all. Mr. Bennett, do you wish to
cross-examine?"

Raoul, from the back, cut in, "Judge, this man is a deserter from my
militia battalion. He's been on the run for the past three months. What
he's said here is worth nothing."

Cooper frowned at Greenglove, then at Raoul. "I don't see what
difference that makes. They bring convicted criminals out of prison
cells to testify."

Ford said, "In fact, if this man risked arrest to come here, that makes
his testimony all the more believable. To say nothing of going all the
way to New Orleans to bring Mr. Wegner back."

"No, it doesn't show him any more honest," Bennett spoke up. "It just
means he wants revenge against Raoul de Marion."

Cooper rapped with his mallet. "The testimony can stand. The jury'll
decide what it's worth. Lieutenant Davis, have your corporals see that
Mr. Wegner and Mr. Greenglove reach the town limits safely. And then,
Lieutenant, I'd like a word with you. Meanwhile, the lawyers for each
side can sum up."

Flanked by the two blue-coated corporals, Greenglove and Otto Wegner
started side by side toward the courtroom door, Wegner's peg leg
thumping on the plank floor.

"You go to Hell, Eli!" Raoul snarled as Greenglove passed him.

Greenglove laughed. "I got a better idea from ol' Otto here. I'm a-going
to Texas!"

The two men walked out the door as a silence fell over the courtroom.

Auguste wondered, had their testimony saved him? They had told the truth
about what happened at Old Man's Creek, but since when had truth meant
anything to the pale eyes? If those twelve men sitting in church pews on
the right side of the courtroom decided they wanted to hang him, they
would hang him even if their Jesus spirit himself came into the
courtroom and told the truth about him.

And after seeing the slaughter at the Bad Axe, could Auguste doubt that
killing all red people was what all pale eyes most wanted to do?

Cooper and the lieutenant talked quietly at the judge's table. When
Cooper called on Bennett to sum up, the prosecutor rose and sidled over
to the jury.

"About the supposed adoption papers and Pierre de Marion's alleged will,
Mrs. Russell's claim that Mr. Raoul de Marion ordered these papers
destroyed is hearsay. She has no direct knowledge that Mr. de Marion
gave any such instructions to her husband. More important--if Pierre de
Marion adopted Auguste, that makes Auguste a U.S. citizen, and his
participating in acts of war by the Sauk nation against the United
States is treason. Auguste made war on his own flag.

"Whether Raoul de Marion did right or wrong in running his nephew off
Victoire, gentlemen, one thing is sure. Auguste went back to the British
Band carrying a powerful grudge against this place and these people.
So, I put it to you, he decided that if he could not be a white
landowner, he would destroy the white landowners.

"And he had the power to do it, because the Indians would listen to him.
They knew him as a witch doctor, and they also knew that he had been
educated among whites. And so he used his power to push Black Hawk
toward war. He is an accomplice to the murder of every white man, woman
and child killed by his fellow tribesmen.

"Auguste de Marion or White Bear or whatever he chooses to call
himself"--Bennett pointed an accusing finger at Auguste--"should be
hanged as a traitor and a butcher of his own people."

Auguste heard mutterings of approval from around the courtroom and a
loud "Damned right!" from Raoul. His feeling that this trial was
hopeless grew deeper. Bennett had told the jury what they wanted to
hear--the version of the truth that would let them do what they wanted
to him.

Ford stood up, wiping his brow. The room was hot for late September. He
crossed the front of the courtroom to stand before the two rows of
jurymen in their borrowed church pews.

"Gentlemen of the jury, I took up arms against the Sauk and Fox Indians
under General Edmund Gaines in 1831. I am not prejudiced in favor of
Indians. I only ask that you try to understand _this_ man whose life is
in your hands.

"You have to decide two questions: One, by traveling and living with the
British Band of the Sauk and Fox from September 1831 to August 1832, did
Auguste de Marion commit treason against the United States? Two, is
Auguste de Marion guilty of the murder of any citizens of the United
States or the state of Illinois?

"Is Auguste a traitor to his country? Well, it seems to me that if
anything, Auguste holds dual citizenship in the United States and in the
Sauk and Fox nation. And, far from being a traitor to either, he tried
to make peace between them. The only thing he ever carried against the
United States was a white flag.

"Has Auguste committed murder? All we know for a fact is that no one has
seen him raise a violent hand against another human being. Otto Wegner
told you how Auguste had a chance to kill him, and instead helped him
escape. At great peril to himself.

"You've heard Pierre de Marion's will, which explains why Raoul de
Marion, who illegally seized the great house known as Victoire, has been
so eager to hound this young man to his death.

"This man has lost everything a man holds dear. His father and mother.
His home here in Victor. His home among the Sauk.

"Almost all of his people, his loved ones and the friends of his youth,
have been killed. Everyone who lives in Victor knows to their sorrow
what happened to his infant daughter. His wife and son are captives,
too, and he cannot be with them or provide for them. Which of you,
having had so much taken from him so cruelly, would not go mad with
grief?

"He has lost so much. All he has left is his life. Let us not, I beg of
you, take that from him as well."

Ford sat down in the midst of a heavy silence. Auguste tried to send his
shaman's sense forward into the future to tell him how the jury would
decide, but his spirit met a blank wall.

He glanced out a nearby unshuttered window and saw a blue afternoon sky
with a few white clouds. Within the wooden walls of this courtroom, sky
and sun, prairie and river, seemed very far away.

Judge Cooper said, "Gentlemen of the jury, we have prepared a room
upstairs for you. We'll send food and drink to you as you require. There
are cots in case you can't make up your minds today."

As he watched the twelve men file up the stairs behind the judge's
table, Auguste could not stop his mind from wandering to the worst. He
thought about what it would be like to be hanged, the rough grip of the
rope on his neck, the blood bursting in his head, the world going black,
his body jerking in hopeless struggle, breath cut off, lungs aching, the
final silencing of his heart.

He heard a harsh laugh in the back of the room. He turned and saw Raoul
in the midst of a group of men standing near the doorway of the
courtroom. Beside Raoul was Armand Perrault. Raoul looked at Auguste and
smiled. Auguste knew what that smile meant.

Whatever the jury decided, for him there would be no escape from death.




23

Sharp Knife


Late that afternoon, Lieutenant Davis called Auguste from his cell and
took him down to the courtroom.

"Judge said send for you. I think maybe the jury's reached a verdict."

Entering through the rear door of the courtroom, Auguste met Raoul's
eyes and his longing for vengeance made his blood feel like molten metal
in his veins.

The jurymen came in through a side door. Robert McAllister, foreman of
the jury, glanced at Auguste, then handed David Cooper a folded piece of
paper.

"He looked at you," Ford whispered. "It's an old tale among lawyers that
if members of the jury have found the defendant guilty, they don't look
at him."

Cooper read the note and sighed loudly, as if he found the message
burdensome. Then he took goose quill and ink and wrote a note of his
own. McAllister watched him write, looking over his shoulder, sighed as
heavily as Cooper had, looked at Auguste again. After a moment he nodded
and took the judge's note back upstairs.

"Well," said Judge Cooper to the courtroom at large, "it seems the
jury's a pretty fair distance from a verdict. They can't agree on a lot
of things. So, I've given orders that they stay upstairs and keep at it.
It looks like we won't have a guilty or not guilty until tomorrow. The
prisoner will go back upstairs to his cell. Court will open at nine
o'clock in the morning."

Auguste heard the rear door of the courtroom slam and knew without
looking around that Raoul had left.

That night Auguste lay on his corn-husk mattress wondering whether he
should try to run away when they took him out. To be shot while trying
to escape might be more honorable than hanging. He wished he could see
Redbird and Eagle Feather one last time. He wished Nancy would come to
visit him. Or at least Nicole, Grandpapa or Frank. But Lieutenant Davis
said that for the prisoner's safety no one would be allowed into the
village hall tonight.

He heard a key turning in his door lock. He climbed to his feet.

"Come on," said Davis quickly. "We're taking you out of here."

_They've come to kill me_, Auguste thought. It would not be the first
time an inconvenient Indian was "shot while trying to escape." But his
shaman's insight told him Davis was as trustworthy as any Sauk.

"Why? Before the verdict?"

"They did reach a verdict today. You are found not guilty."

Not guilty! Joy flooded through him as he stood, so amazed that he could
not move, staring at the open cell door.

When he had recovered enough to move, Auguste followed Davis out of the
village hall, to where the two corporals waited with horses in the
silent street. The river rippled black and silver in the light of a
three-quarter moon. The Ioway bluffs opposite were black bison shapes
under a sky spangled with stars.

The moonlight helped Auguste guide his horse up the steep road out of
the village. Davis led, followed by Auguste, the two corporals bringing
up the rear. After weeks of imprisonment, Auguste reveled in the cool
night air blowing in his face.

They passed the trading post. The road was wider here, and the three
soldiers bunched around him. Raoul was surely in there getting drunk,
laughing as he looked forward to seeing Auguste swinging at a rope's
end.

They trotted along the ridge leading to Victoire. Auguste's heart
started to beat harder as he approached the place that had been his
home.

