similar instrument had already for some years been in its place at
Pulkowa. It was long before the possibility of surpassing these
masterpieces of German skill presented itself to any optician. For
fifteen years it seemed as if a line had been drawn just there. It was
first transgressed in America. A portrait-painter of Cambridgeport,
Massachusetts, named Alvan Clark, had for some time amused his leisure
with grinding lenses, the singular excellence of which was discovered in
England by Mr. Dawes in 1853.[1632] Seven years passed, and then an
order came from the University of Mississippi for an object-glass of the
unexampled size of eighteen inches. An experimental glance through it to
test its definition resulted, as we have seen, in the detection of the
companion of Sirius, January 31, 1862. It never reached its destination
in the South. War troubles supervened, and it was eventually sent to
Chicago, where it served Professor Hough in his investigations of
Jupiter, and Mr. Burnham in his scrutiny of double stars.

The next step was an even longer one, and it was again taken by a
self-taught optician, Thomas Cooke, the son of a shoemaker at
Allerthorpe, in the East Riding of Yorkshire. Mr. Newall of Gateshead
ordered from him in 1863 a 25-inch object-glass. It was finished early
in 1868, but at the cost of shortening the life of its maker, who died
October 19, 1868, before the giant refractor he had toiled at for five
years was completely mounted. This instrument, the fine qualities of
which had long been neutralized by an unfavourable situation, was
presented by Mr. Newall to the University of Cambridge, a few weeks
before his death, April 21, 1889. Under the care of his son, Mr. Frank
Newall, it has proved highly efficient in the delicate work of measuring
stellar radial motions.

Close upon its construction followed that of the Washington 26-inch, for
which twenty thousand dollars were paid to Alvan Clark. The most
illustrious point in its career, entered upon in 1873, has been the
discovery of the satellites of Mars. Once known to be there, these were,
indeed, found to be perceptible with very moderate optical means (Mr.
Wentworth Erck saw Deimos with a 7-inch Clark); but the first detection
of such minute objects is a feat of a very different order from their
subsequent observation. Dr. See's perception with this instrument, in
1899, of Neptune's cloud-belts, and his refined series of micrometrical
measures of the various planets, attest the unimpaired excellence of its
optical qualities.

It held the primacy for more than eight years. Then, in December, 1880,
the place of honour had to be yielded to a 27-inch achromatic, built by
Howard Grubb (son and successor of Thomas Grubb) for the Vienna
Observatory. This, in its turn, was surpassed by two of respectively
29-1/2 and 30 inches, sent by Gautier of Paris to Nice, and by Alvan
Clark to Pulkowa; and an object-glass, three feet in diameter, was in
1886 successfully turned out by the latter firm for the Lick Observatory
in California. The difficulties, however, encountered in procuring discs
of glass of the size and purity required for this last venture seemed to
indicate that a term to progress in this direction was not far off. The
flint was, indeed, cast with comparative ease in the workshops of M.
Feil at Paris. The flawless mass weighed 170 kilogrammes, was over 38
inches across, and cost 10,000 dollars. But with the crown part of the
designed achromatic combination things went less smoothly. The
production of a perfect disc was only achieved after _nineteen_
failures, involving a delay of more than two years; and the glass for a
third lens, designed to render the telescope available at pleasure for
photographic purposes, proved to be strained, and consequently went to
pieces in the process of grinding. It has been replaced by one of 33
inches, with which a series of admirable lunar and other photographs
have been taken.

Nor is the difficulty in obtaining suitable material the only obstacle
to increasing the size of refractors. The "secondary spectrum," as it is
called, also interposes a barrier troublesome to surmount. True
achromatism cannot be obtained with ordinary flint and crown-glass; and
although in lenses of "Jena glass," outstanding colour is reduced to
about one-sixth its usual amount, their term of service is fatally
abridged by rapid deterioration. Nevertheless, a 13-inch objective of
the new variety was mounted at Koenigsberg in 1898; and discs of Jena
crown and flint, 23 inches across, were purchased by Brashear at the
Chicago Exhibition of 1893. An achromatic combination of three kinds of
glass, devised by Mr. A. Taylor[1633] for Messrs. Cooke of York, has
less serious drawbacks, but has not yet come into extensive use.
Meanwhile, in giant telescopes affected to the full extent by chromatic
aberration, such as the Lick and Yerkes refractors, the differences of
focal length for the various colours are counted by inches,[1634] and
this not through any lack of skill in the makers, but by the necessity
of the case. Embarrassing consequences follow. Only a small part of the
spectrum of a heavenly body, for instance, can be distinctly seen at one
time; and a focal adjustment of half an inch is required in passing from
the observation of a planetary nebula to that of its stellar nucleus. A
refracting telescope loses, besides, one of its chief advantages over a
reflector when its size is increased beyond a certain limit. That
advantage is the greater luminosity of the images given by it.
Considerably more light is transmitted through a glass lens than is
reflected from an equal metallic surface. But only so long as both are
of moderate dimensions. For the glass necessarily grows in thickness as
its area augments, and consequently stops a larger percentage of the
rays it refracts. So that a point at length arrives--fixed by the late
Dr. Robinson at a diameter a little short of 3 feet[1635]--where the
glass and the metal are, in this respect, on an equality; while above it
the metal has the advantage. And since silvered glass gives back
considerably more light than speculum metal, the stage of equalisation
with lenses is reached proportionately sooner where this material is
employed.[1636]

The most distinctive faculty of reflectors, however, is that of bringing
rays of all refrangibilities to a focus together. They are naturally
achromatic. None of the beams they collect are thrown away in
colour-fringes, obnoxious both in themselves and as a waste of the chief
object of astrophysicists' greed--light. Reflectors, then, are in this
respect specially adapted to photographic and spectrographic use. But
they have a countervailing drawback. The penalties imposed by bigness
are for them peculiarly heavy. Perfect definition becomes with
increasing size, more and more difficult to attain; once attained, it
becomes more and more difficult to keep. For the huge masses of material
employed to form great object-glasses or mirrors tend with every
movement to become deformed by their own weight. Now, the slightest
bending of a mirror is fatal to its performance, the effect being
doubled by reflection; while in a lens alteration of figure is
compensated by the equal and contrary flexures of the opposing surfaces,
so that the emergent beams pursue much the same paths as if the curves
of the refracting medium had remained theoretically perfect. For this
reason work of precision must remain the province of refracting
telescopes, although great reflectors retain the primacy in the
portraiture of the heavenly bodies, as well as in certain branches of
spectroscopy. Professor Hale, accordingly, summarised a valuable
discussion on the subject by asserting[1637] "that the astrophysicist
may properly consider the reflector to be an even more important part of
his instrumental equipment than the refractor." A new era in its
employment west of the Atlantic opened with the transfer from Halifax to
Mount Hamilton of the Crossley reflector. Its prerogatives in nebular
photography were splendidly indicated in 1899 by Professor Keeler's
exquisite and searching portrayals of the cloud-worlds of space, and
those obtained two years later, with a similar, though smaller,
instrument, by Professor Ritchey of the Yerkes Observatory, were fully
comparable with them. The performances of the Yerkes 5-foot reflector
still belong to the future.

Ambition as regards telescopic power is by no means yet satisfied. Nor
ought it to be. The advance of astrophysical researches of all kinds
depends largely upon light-grasp. For the spectroscopic examination of
stars, for the measurement of their motions in the line of sight, for
the discovery and study of nebulae, for stellar and nebular photography,
the cry continually is "more light." There is no enterprising head of an
observatory but must feel cramped in his designs if he can command no
more than 14 or 15 inches of aperture, and he aspires to greater
instrumental capacity, not merely with a view to the chances of
discovery, but for the steady prosecution of some legitimate line of
inquiry. Thus projects of telescope-building on a large scale are rife,
and some obtain realisation year by year. Sir Howard Grubb finished in
1893 a 28-inch achromatic for the Royal Observatory, Greenwich; the
Thompson equatoreal, mounted at the same establishment in 1897, carries
on a single axis a 26-inch photographic refractor and a 30-inch
silvered-glass reflector; the Victoria telescope, inaugurated at the
Cape in 1901, comprises a powerful spectrographic apparatus, together
with a chemically corrected 24-inch refractor, the whole being the
munificent gift of Mr. Frank McClean; at Potsdam, at Meudon, at Paris,
at Alleghany, engines for light-concentration have been, or shortly will
be, erected of dimensions which, two generations back, would have seemed
extravagant and impossible.

Perhaps the finest, though not absolutely the greatest, among them,
marked the summit and end of the performances of Alvan G. Clark, the
last survivor of the Cambridgeport firm.

In October, 1892, Mr. Yerkes of Chicago offered an unlimited sum for the
provision of the University of that city with a "superlative" telescope.
And it happened, fortunately, that a pair of glass discs, nearly 42
inches in diameter, and of perfect quality, were ready at hand. They had
been cast by Mantois for the University of Southern California, when the
erection of a great observatory on Wilson's Peak was under
consideration. In the Clark workshop they were combined into a superb
objective, brought to perfection by trials and delicate touches
extending over nearly five years. Then the maker accompanied it to its
destination, by the shore of a far Western Lake Geneva, and died
immediately after his return, June 9, 1897. Nor has the implement of
celestial research he just lived to complete been allowed to "rust
unburnished." Manipulated by Hale, Burnham, and Barnard, it has done
work that would have been impracticable with less efficient optical aid.
Its construction thus marks a noticeable enlargement of astronomical
possibilities, exemplified--to cite one among many performances--by
Barnard's success in keeping track of cluster-variables when below the
common limit of visual perception.

With the Lick telescope results have also been achieved testifying to
its unsurpassed excellence. Holden's and Schaeberle's views of planetary
nebulae, Burnham's and Hussey's hair's-breadth star-splitting operations,
Keeler's measurements of nebular radial motion, Barnard's detections and
prolonged pursuit of faint comets, his discovery of Jupiter's tiny moon,
Campbell's spectroscopic determinations--all this could only have been
accomplished, even by an exceptionally able and energetic staff, with
the aid of an instrument of high power and quality. But there was
another condition which should not be overlooked.

The best telescope may be crippled by a bad situation. The larger it is,
indeed, the more helpless is it to cope with atmospheric troubles. These
are the worst plagues of all those that afflict the astronomer. No
mechanical skill avails to neutralise or alleviate them. They augment
with each increase of aperture; they grow with the magnifying powers
applied. The rays from the heavenly bodies, when they can penetrate the
cloud-veils that too often bar their path, reach us in an enfeebled,
scattered, and disturbed condition. Hence the twinkling of stars, the
"boiling" effects at the edges of sun, moon, and planets; hence
distortions of bright, effacements of feeble telescopic images; hence,
too, the paucity of the results obtained with many powerful
light-gathering machines.

No sooner had the Parsonstown telescope been built than it became
obvious that the limit of profitable augmentation of size had, under
climatic conditions at all nearly resembling those prevailing there,
been reached, if not overpassed; and Lord Rosse himself was foremost to
discern the need of pausing to look round the world for a clearer and
stiller air than was to be found within the bounds of the United
Kingdom. With this express object Mr. Lassell transported his 2-foot
Newtonian to Malta in 1852, and mounted there, in 1860, a similar
instrument of fourfold capacity, with which, in the course of about two
years, 600 new nebulae were discovered. Professor Piazzi Smyth's
experiences during a trip to the Peak of Teneriffe in 1856 in search of
astronomical opportunities[1638] gave countenance to the most sanguine
hopes of deliverance, at suitable elevated stations, from some of the
oppressive conditions of low-level star-gazing; yet for a number of
years nothing effectual was done for their realisation. Now, at last,
however, mountain observatories are not only an admitted necessity but
an accomplished fact; and Newton's long forecast of a time when
astronomers would be compelled, by the developed powers of their
telescopes, to mount high above the "grosser clouds" in order to use
them,[1639] had been justified by the event.

James Lick, the millionaire of San Francisco, had already chosen, when
he died, October 1, 1876, a site for the new observatory, to the
building and endowment of which he had devoted a part of his large
fortune. The situation of the establishment is exceptional and splendid.
Planted on one of the three peaks of Mount Hamilton, a crowning summit
of the Californian Coast Range, at an elevation of 4,200 feet above the
sea, in a climate scarce rivalled throughout the world, it commands
views both celestial and terrestrial which the lover of nature and
astronomy may alike rejoice in. Impediments to observation are there
found to be most materially reduced. Professor Holden, who was
appointed, in 1885, president of the University of California and
director of the new observatory affiliated to it, stated that during six
or seven months of the year an unbroken serenity prevails, and that half
the remaining nights are clear.[1640] The power of continuous work thus
afforded is of itself an inestimable advantage; and the high visual
excellences testified to by Mr. Burnham's discovery, during a two
months' trip to Mount Hamilton in the autumn of 1879, of forty-two new
double stars with a 6-inch achromatic, gave hopes since fully realised
of a brilliant future for the Lick establishment. Its advantages are
shared, as Professor Holden desired them to be, by the whole
astronomical world.[1641] A sort of appellate jurisdiction was at once
accorded to the great equatoreal, and more than one disputed point has
been satisfactorily settled by recourse to it.

Its performances, considered both as to quality and kind, are unlikely
to be improved upon by merely outbidding it in size, unless the care
expended upon the selection of its site be imitated. Professor Pickering
thus showed his customary prudence in reserving his efforts to procure a
great telescope until Harvard College owned a dependent observatory
where it could be employed to advantage. This was found by Mr. W. H.
Pickering, after many experiments in Colorado, California, and Peru, at
Arequipa, on a slope of the Andes, 8,000 feet above the sea-level. Here
the post provided for by the "Boyden Fund" was established in 1891,
under ideal meteorological conditions. Temperature preserves a "golden
mean"; the barometer is almost absolutely steady; the yearly rainfall
amounts to no more than three or four inches. No wonder, then, that the
"seeing" there is of the extraordinary excellence attested by Mr.
Pickering's observations. In the absence of bright moonlight, he tells
us,[1642] eleven Pleiades can always be counted; the Andromeda nebula
appears to the naked eye conspicuously bright, and larger than the full
moon; third magnitude stars have been followed to their disappearance at
the true horizon; the zodiacal light spans the heavens as a complete
arch, the "Gegenschein" forming a regular part of the scenery of the
heavens. Corresponding telescopic facilities are enjoyed. The chief
instrument at the station, a 13-inch equatoreal by Clark, shows the
fainter parts of the Orion nebula, photographed at Harvard College in
1887, by which the dimensions given to it in Bond's drawing are doubled;
stars are at times seen encircled by half a dozen immovable diffraction
rings, up to twelve of which have been counted round Alpha Centauri;
while on many occasions no available increase of magnifying power
availed to bring out any wavering in the limbs of the planets. Moreover,
the series of fine nights is nearly unbroken from March to November.

The facilities thus offered for continuous photographic research
rendered feasible Professor Bailey's amazing discovery of variable
star-clusters. They belong exclusively to the "globular" class, and the
peculiarity is most strikingly apparent in the groups known as
Omega Centauri, and Messier 3, 5, and 15. A large number of their minute
components run through perfectly definite cycles of change in periods
usually of a few hours.[1643] Altogether, about 500 "cluster-variables"
have been recorded since 1895. It should be mentioned that Mr. David
Packer and Dr. Common discerned, about 1890, some premonitory symptoms
of light-fluctuation among the crowded stars of Messier 5.[1644] With
the Bruce telescope, a photographic doublet 24 inches in diameter, a
store of 5,686 negatives was collected at Arequipa between 1896 and
1901. Some were exposed directly, others with the intervention of a
prism; and all are available for important purposes of detection or
investigation.

Vapours and air-currents do not alone embarrass the use of giant
telescopes. Mechanical difficulties also oppose a formidable barrier to
much further growth in size. But what seems a barrier often proves to be
only a fresh starting-point; and signs are not wanting that it may be
found so in this case. It is possible that the monumental domes and huge
movable tubes of our present observatories will, in a few decades, be as
much things of the past as Huygens's "aerial" telescopes. It is certain
that the thin edge of the wedge of innovation has been driven into the
old plan of equatoreal mounting.

M. Loewy, the present director of the Paris Observatory, proposed to
Delaunay in 1871 the direction of a telescope on a novel system. The
design seemed feasible, and was adopted; but the death of Delaunay and
the other untoward circumstances of the time interrupted its execution.
Its resumption, after some years, was rendered possible by M.
Bischoffsheim's gift of 25,000 francs for expenses, and the _coude_ or
"bent" equatoreal has been, since 1882, one of the leading instruments
at the Paris establishment.

Its principle is briefly this: The telescope is, as it were, its own
polar axis. The anterior part of the tube is supported at both ends, and
is thus fixed in a direction pointing towards the pole, with only the
power of twisting axially. The posterior section is joined on to it at
right angles, and presents the object-glass, accordingly, to the
celestial equator, in the plane of which it revolves. Stars in any other
part of the heavens have their beams reflected upon the object-glass by
means of a plane rotating mirror placed in front of it. The observer,
meanwhile, is looking steadfastly down the bent tube towards the
invisible _southern_ pole. He would naturally see nothing whatever were
it not that a second plane mirror is fixed at the "elbow" of the
instrument, so as to send the rays which have traversed the object-glass
to his eye. He never needs to move from his place. He watches the stars,
seated in an arm-chair in a warm room, with as perfect convenience as if
he were examining the seeds of a fungus with a microscope. Nor is this a
mere gain of personal ease. The abolition of hardship includes a vast
accession of power.[1645]

Among other advantages of this method of construction are, first, that
of added stability, the motion given to the ordinary equatoreal being
transferred, in part, to an auxiliary mirror. Next, that of increased
focal length. The fixed part of the tube can be made almost indefinitely
long without inconvenience, and with enormous advantage to the optical
qualities of a large instrument. Finally, the costly and unmanageable
cupola is got rid of, a mere shed serving all purposes of protection
required for the "coude."

The desirability of some such change as that which M. Loewy has realised
has been felt by others. Professor Pickering sketched, in 1881, a plan
for fixing large refractors in a permanently horizontal position, and
reflecting into them, by means of a shifting mirror, the objects desired
to be observed.[1646] The observations for his photometric catalogues
are, in fact, made with a "broken transit," in which the line of sight
remains permanently horizontal, whatever the altitude of the star
examined. Sir Howard Grubb, moreover, set up, in 1882, a kind of
siderostat at the Crawford Observatory, Cork. In a paper read before the
Royal Society, January 21, 1884, he proposed to carry out the principle
on a more extended scale;[1647] and shortly afterwards undertook its
application to a telescope 18 inches in aperture for the Armagh
Observatory.[1648] The chief honours, however, remain to the Paris
inventor. None of the prognosticated causes of failure have proved
effective. The loss of light from the double reflection is
insignificant. The menaced deformation of images is, through the
exquisite skill of the MM. Henry in producing plane mirrors of all but
absolute perfection, quite imperceptible. The definition was admitted to
be singularly good. Sir David Gill stated in 1884 that he had never
measured a double star so easily as he did Gamma Leonis by its
means.[1649] Sir Norman Lockyer pronounced it to be "one of the
instruments of the future"; and the principle of its construction was
immediately adopted by the directors of the Besancon and Algiers
Observatories, as well as for a 17-inch telescope destined for a new
observatory at Buenos Ayres. At Paris, it has since been carried out on
a larger scale. A "coude," of 23-1/2 inches aperture and 62 feet focal
length was in 1890 installed at the National Observatory, and has served
M. Loewy for his ingenious studies on refraction and aberration--above
all, for taking the magnificent plates of his lunar atlas. The "bent"
form is capable of being, but has not yet been, adapted to
reflectors.[1650]

The "coelostat," in the form given to it by Professor Turner, has
proved an invaluable adjunct to eclipse-equipments. It consists
essentially of a mirror rotating in forty-eight hours on an axis in its
own plane, and parallel to the earth's axis. In the field of a telescope
kept rigidly pointed towards such a mirror, stars appear immovably
fixed. The employment of long-focus lenses for coronal photography is
thus facilitated, and the size of the image is proportional to the
length of the focus. Professor Barnard, accordingly, depicted the
totality of 1900 with a horizontal telescope 61-1/2 feet long, fed by a
mirror 18 inches across, the diameter of the moon on his plates being 7
inches. The largest siderostat in the world is the Paris 50-inch
refractor, which formed the chief attraction of the Palais d'Optique at
the Exhibition of 1900. It has a focal length of nearly 200 feet, and
can be used either for photographic or for visual purposes.

Celestial photography has not reached its grand climacteric; yet its
earliest beginnings already seem centuries behind its present
performances. The details of its gradual yet rapid improvement are of
too technical a nature to find a place in these pages. Suffice it to say
that the "dry-plate" process, with which such wonderful results have
been obtained, appears to have been first made available by Sir William
Huggins in photographing the spectrum of Vega in 1876, and was then
successively adopted by Common, Draper, and Janssen. Nor should Captain
Abney's remarkable extension of the powers of the camera be left
unnoticed. He began his experiments on the chemical action of red and
infra-red rays in 1874, and at length succeeded in obtaining a
substance--the "blue" bromide of silver--highly sensitive to these
slower vibrations of light. With its aid he explored a vast, unknown,
and for ever invisible region of the solar spectrum, presenting to the
Royal Society, December 5, 1879,[1651] a detailed map of its infra-red
portion (wave-lengths 7,600 to 10,750), from which valuable inferences
may yet be derived as to the condition of the various kinds of matter
ignited in the solar atmosphere. Upon plates rendered "orthochromatic"
by staining with alizarine, or other dye-stuffs, the whole visible
spectrum can now be photographed; but those with their maximum of
sensitiveness near G are found preferable, except where the results of
light-analysis are sought to be completely recorded. And since
photographic refractors are corrected for the blue rays, exposures with
them of orthochromatic surfaces would be entirely futile.

The chemical plate has two advantages over the human retina:[1652]
First, it is sensitive to rays which are utterly powerless to produce
any visual effect; next, it can accumulate impression almost
indefinitely, while from the retina they fade after one-tenth part of a
second, leaving it a continually renewed _tabula rasa_.

It is, accordingly, quite possible to photograph objects so faint as to
be altogether beyond the power of any telescope to reveal--witness the
chemical disclosure of the invisible nebula encircling Nova Persei--and
we may thus eventually learn whether a blank space in the sky truly
represents the end of the stellar universe in that direction, or whether
farther and farther worlds roll and shine beyond, veiled in the
obscurity of immeasurable distance.

Of many ingenious improvements in spectroscopic appliances the most
fundamentally important relate to what are known as "gratings." These
are very finely striated surfaces, by which light-waves are brought to
interfere, and are thus sifted out, strictly according to their
different lengths, into "normal" spectra. Since no universally valid
measures can be made in any others, their production is quite
indispensable to spectroscopic science. Fraunhofer, who initiated the
study of the diffraction spectrum, used a real grating of very fine
wires: but rulings on glass were adopted by his successors, and were by
Nobert executed with such consummate skill that a single square inch of
surface was made to contain 100,000 hand-drawn lines. Such rare and
costly triumphs of art, however, found their way into very few hands,
and practical availability was first given to this kind of instrument by
the inventiveness and mechanical dexterity of two American
investigators. Both Rutherfurd's and Rowland's gratings are
machine-ruled, and reflect instead of transmitting the rays they
analyse; but Rowland's present to them a very much larger diffractive
surface, and consequently possess a higher resolving power. The first
preliminary to his improvements was the production, in 1882, of a
faultless screw, those previously in use having been the inevitable
source of periodical errors in striation, giving, in their turn,
ghost-lines as subjects of spectroscopic study.[1653] Their abolition
was not one of Rowland's least achievements. With his perfected machine
a metallic area of 6-1/4 by 4-1/4 inches can be ruled with exquisite
accuracy to almost any degree of fineness; he considered, however,
43,000 lines to the inch to be the limit of usefulness.[1654] The ruled
surface is, moreover, concave, and hence brings the spectrum to a focus
without a telescope. A slit and an eye-piece are alone needed to view
it, and absorption of light by glass lenses is obviated--an advantage
especially sensible in dealing with the ultra- or infra-visible rays.

The high qualities of Rowland's great photographic map of the solar
spectrum were thus based upon his previous improvement of the
instrumental means used in its execution. The amount of detail shown in
it is illustrated by the appearance on the negatives of 150 lines
between H and K; and many lines depict themselves as double which, until
examined with a concave grating, had passed for one and indivisible. A
corresponding hand-drawing, for which M. Thollon received in 1886 the
Lalande Prize, exhibits, not the diffractive, but the prismatic spectrum
as obtained with bisulphide of carbon prisms of large dispersive power.
About one-third of the visible gamut of the solar radiations (A to _b_)
is covered by it; it includes 3,200 lines, and is over ten metres
long.[1655] The grating is an expensive tool in the way of light. Where
there is none to spare, its advantages must be foregone. They could not,
accordingly, be turned to account in stellar spectroscopy until the Lick
telescope was at hand to supply more abundant material for research. By
the use thus made possible of Rowland's gratings, Professor Keeler was
able to apply enormous dispersion to the rays of stars and nebulae, and
so to attain a previously unheard-of degree of accuracy in their
measurement. His memorable detection of nebular movement in line of
sight ensued as a consequence. Professor Campbell, his successor, has
since obtained, by the same means, the first satisfactory photographs of
stellar diffraction-spectra.

The means at the disposal of astronomers have not multiplied faster than
the tasks imposed upon them. Looking back to the year 1800, we cannot
fail to be astonished at the change. The comparatively simple and serene
science of the heavenly bodies known to our predecessors, almost perfect
so far as it went, incurious of what lay beyond its grasp, has developed
into a body of manifold powers and parts, each with its separate mode
and means of growth, full of strong vitality, but animated by a restless
and unsatisfied spirit, haunted by the sense of problems unsolved, and
tormented by conscious impotence to sound the immensities it perpetually
confronts.

Knowledge might be said, when the _Mecanique Celeste_ issued from the
press, to be bounded by the solar system; but even the solar system
presented itself under an aspect strangely different from what it now
wears. It consisted of the sun, seven planets, and twice as many
satellites, all circling harmoniously in obedience to a universal law,
by the compensating action of which the indefinite stability of their
mutual relations was secured. The occasional incursion of a comet, or
the periodical presence of a single such wanderer chained down from
escape to outer space by planetary attraction, availed nothing to impair
the symmetry of the majestic spectacle.

Now, not alone the ascertained limits of the system have been widened by
a thousand millions of miles, with the addition of one more giant planet
and seven satellites to the ancient classes of its members, but a
complexity has been given to its constitution baffling description or
thought. Five hundred circulating planetary bodies bridge the gap
between Jupiter and Mars, the complete investigation of the movements of
any one of which would overtask the energies of a lifetime. Meteorites,
strangers, apparently, to the fundamental ordering of the solar
household, swarm, nevertheless, by millions in every cranny of its
space, returning at regular intervals like the comets so singularly
associated with them, or sweeping across it with hyperbolic velocities,
brought, perhaps, from some distant star. And each of these cosmical
grains of dust has a theory far more complex than that of Jupiter; it
bears within it the secret of its origin, and fulfils a function in the
universe. The sun itself is no longer a semi-fabulous, fire-girt globe,
but the vast scene of the play of forces as yet imperfectly known to us,
offering a boundless field for the most arduous and inspiring
researches. Among the planets the widest variety in physical habitudes
is seen to prevail, and each is recognised as a world apart, inviting
inquiries which, to be effective, must necessarily be special and
detailed. Even our own moon threatens to break loose from the trammels
of calculation, and commits "errors" which sap the very foundations of
the lunar theory, and suggest the formidable necessity for its complete
revision. Nay, the steadfast earth has forfeited the implicit confidence
placed in it as a time-keeper, and questions relating to the stability
of the earth's axis and the constancy of the earth's rate of rotation
are among those which it behoves the future to answer. Everywhere there
is multiformity and change, stimulating a curiosity which the rapid
development of methods of research offers the possibility of at least
partially gratifying.

Outside the solar system, the problems which demand a practical solution
are virtually infinite in number and extent. And these have all arisen
and crowded upon our thoughts within less than a hundred years. For
sidereal science became a recognised branch of astronomy only through
Herschel's discovery of the revolutions of double stars in 1802. Yet
already it may be, and has been called, "the astronomy of the future,"
so rapidly has the development of a keen and universal interest attended
and stimulated the growth of power to investigate this sublime subject.
What has been done is little--is scarcely a beginning; yet it is much in
comparison with the total blank of a century past. And our knowledge
will, we are easily persuaded, appear in turn the merest ignorance to
those who come after us. Yet it is not to be despised, since by it we
reach up groping fingers to touch the hem of the garment of the Most
High.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1630: _Comptes Rendus_, t. xliv., p. 339.]

[Footnote 1631: A. A. Common, _Memoirs R. Astr. Soc._, vol. i., p. 118.]

[Footnote 1632: Newcomb, _Pop. Astr._, p. 137.]

[Footnote 1633: _Month. Not._, vol. liv., p. 67.]

[Footnote 1634: Keeler, _Publ. Astr. Pac. Soc._, vol. ii., p. 160.]

[Footnote 1635: H. Grubb, _Trans. Roy. Dub. Soc._, vol. i. (new ser.),
p. 2.]

[Footnote 1636: Hale, nevertheless (_Astroph. Jour._, vol. v., p. 128),
considers that refractors preserve their superiority of visual
light-grasp over Newtonian reflectors up to an aperture of 52-1/2, while
equalisation is reached for the photographic rays at 34 inches.]

[Footnote 1637: _Astroph. Jour._, vol. v., p. 130.]

[Footnote 1638: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cxlviii., p. 465.]

[Footnote 1639: _Optics_, p. 107 (2nd ed., 1719).]

[Footnote 1640: _Observatory_, vol. viii., p. 85.]

[Footnote 1641: Holden on Celestial Photography, _Overland Monthly_,
Nov., 1886.]

[Footnote 1642: _Observatory_, vol. xv., p. 283.]

[Footnote 1643: Bailey, _Astroph. Jour._, vol. x., p. 255.]

[Footnote 1644: _Harvard Circulars_, Nos. 2, 18, 24, 33;]

[Footnote 1645: Loewy, _Bull. Astr._, t. i., p. 286; _Nature_, vol.
xxix., p. 36.]

[Footnote 1646: _Nature_, vol. xxiv., p. 389.]

[Footnote 1647: _Ibid._, vol. xxix., p. 470.]

[Footnote 1648: _Trans. R. Dublin Soc._, vol. iii., p. 61.]

[Footnote 1649: _Observatory_, vol. vii., p. 167.]

[Footnote 1650: Loewy, _Bull. Astr._, t. i., p. 265.]

[Footnote 1651: _Phil. Trans._, vol. clxxi., p. 653.]

[Footnote 1652: Janssen, _L'Astronomie_, t. ii., p. 121.]

[Footnote 1653: Rev. A. L. Cortie, _Astr. and Astrophysics_, vol. xi.,
p. 400.]

[Footnote 1654: _Phil. Mag._, vol. xiii., 1882, p. 469.]

[Footnote 1655: _Bull. Astr._, t. iii., p. 331.]





                               APPENDIX


                                TABLE I

                          CHRONOLOGY, 1774-1893

  1774, March 4    Herschel's first observation. Subject, the Orion Nebula.
  1774             Sun-spots geometrically proved to be depressions by
                     Wilson.
  1774             First experimental determination of the earth's mean
                     density by Maskelyne.
  1781, March 13   Discovery of Uranus.
  1782             Herschel's first Catalogue of Double Stars.
  1783             Herschel's first investigation of the sun's movement
                     in space.
  1783             Goodricke's discovery of Algol's law of variation.
  1784             Analogy between Mars and the Earth pointed out by
                     Herschel.
  1784             Construction of the Heavens investigated by Herschel's
                     method of star-gauging. "Cloven-disc" plan of the
                     Milky Way.
  1784             Discovery of binary stars anticipated by Michell.
  1786             Herschel's first Catalogue of Nebulae.
  1787, Jan. 11    Discovery by Herschel of two Uranian moons
                  (Oberon and Titania).
  1787, Nov. 19    Acceleration of the moon explained by Laplace.
  1789             Herschel's second Catalogue of Nebulae, and
                     classification by age of these objects.
  1789             Completion of Herschel's forty-foot reflector.
  1789, Aug. 28    His discovery with it of the two inner Saturnian
   and Sept. 17      satellites.
  1789             Repeating-circle invented by Borda.
  1789             Five-foot circle constructed by Ramsden for Piazzi.
  1790             Maskelyne's Catalogue of thirty-six fundamental stars.
  1791             Herschel propounds the hypothesis of a fluid
                     constitution for nebulae.
  1792             Atmospheric refraction in Venus announced by Schroeter.
  1794             Rotation-period of Saturn fixed by Herschel at 10h. 16m.
  1795             Herschel's theory of the solar constitution.
  1796             Herschel's first measures of comparative stellar
                     brightness.
  1796             Laplace's Nebular Hypothesis published in _Exposition
                     du Systeme du Monde_.
  1797             Publication of Olbers's method of computing
                     cometary orbits.
  1798             Retrograde motions of Uranian satellites detected
                     by Herschel.
  1799             Publication of first two volumes of _Mecanique Celeste_.
  1799, May 7      Transit of Mercury observed by Schroeter.
  1799, Nov. 12    Star-shower observed by Humboldt at Cumana.
  1800             _Monatliche Correspondenz_ started by Von Zach.
  1800             Invisible heat-rays detected in the solar spectrum
                     by Herschel.
  1801, Jan. 1     Discovery of Ceres by Piazzi.
  1801             Publication of Lalande's _Histoire Celeste_.
  1801             Investigation by Herschel of solar emissive variability
                     in connection with spot-development.
  1802, March 28   Discovery of Pallas by Olbers.
  1802             Herschel's third Catalogue of Nebulae.
  1802             Herschel's discovery of binary stars.
  1802             Marks of clustering in the Milky Way noted by Herschel.
  1802             Wollaston records seven dark lines in the solar
                     spectrum.
  1802, Nov. 9     Transit of Mercury observed by Herschel.
  1804, Sept. 2    Discovery of Juno by Harding.
  1804             Foundation of Optical Institute at Munich.
  1805             Herschel's second determination of the solar apex.
  1807, March 29   Discovery of Vesta by Olbers.
  1811             Herschel's theory of the development of stars from
                     nebulae.
  1811, Feb. 9     Death of Maskelyne. Pond appointed to succeed him
                     as Astronomer-Royal.
  1811, Sept. 12   Perihelion passage of great comet.
  1812             Theory of electrical repulsion in comets originated
                     by Olbers.
  1812, Sept. 15   Perihelion passage of Pons's comet.
  1814             Herschel demonstrates the irregular distribution of
                     stars in space.
  1815             Fraunhofer maps 324 dark lines in the solar spectrum.
  1818             Publication of Bessel's _Fundamenta Astronomiae_.
  1819             Recognition by Encke of the first short-period comet.
  1819, June 26    Passage of the earth through the tail of a comet.
  1820             Foundation of the Royal Astronomical Society.
  1821             Foundation of Paramatta Observatory.
  1821, September  First number of _Astronomische Nachrichten_.
  1822, May 24     First calculated return of Encke's comet.
  1822, August 25  Death of Herschel.
  1823             Bessel introduces the correction of observations for
                     personal equation.
  1823             Fraunhofer examines the spectra of fixed stars.
  1824             Distance of the sun concluded by Encke to be
                     95-1/4 million miles.
  1824             Publication of Lohrmann's Lunar Chart.
  1824             Dorpat refractor mounted equatoreally.
  1826             Commencement of Schwabe's observations of sun-spots.
  1826, Feb. 27    Biela's discovery of a comet.
  1827             Orbit of a binary star calculated by Savary.
  1829             Completion of the Royal Observatory at the Cape of
                     Good Hope.
  1829             The Koenigsberg heliometer mounted.
  1830             Publication of Bessel's _Tabulae Regiomontanae_.
  1832             Discovery by Brewster of "atmospheric lines" in the
                     solar spectrum.
  1833             Magnetic observatory established at Gottingen.
  1833, Nov. 12,13 Star-shower visible in North America.
  1833             Completion of Sir J. Herschel's survey of the northern
                     heavens.
  1834, Jan. 16    Sir J. Herschel's landing at the Cape.
  1835, September  Airy appointed Astronomer-Royal in succession to Pond.
  1835, Nov. 16    Perihelion passage of Halley's comet.
  1837             Solar movement determined by Argelander.
  1837             Bessel's application of the heliometer to measurements
                    of stellar parallax.
  1837             Publication of Beer and Maedler's _Der Mond_.
  1837             Publication of Struve's _Mensurae Micrometricae_.
  1837, Dec. 16    Outburst of Eta Carinae observed by Sir J. Herschel.
  1837             Thermal power of the sun measured by Herschel and
                     Pouillet.
  1838             Parallax of 61 Cygni determined by Bessel.
  1839, Jan. 9     Parallax of Alpha Centauri announced by Henderson.
  1839             Completion of Pulkowa Observatory.
  1839             Solidity of the earth concluded by Hopkins.
  1840, March 2    Death of Olbers.
  1840             First attempt to photograph the moon by J. W. Draper.
  1842             Doppler enounces principle of colour-change by motion.
  1842             Conclusion of Baily's experiments in weighing the Earth.
  1842, July 8     Total solar eclipse. Corona and prominences observed
                     by Airy, Baily, Arago, and Struve.
  1843, Feb. 27    Perihelion-passage of great comet.
  1845, February   Completion of Parsonstown reflector.
  1845, April      Discovery with it of spiral nebulae.
  1845, April 2    Daguerreotype of the sun taken by Foucault and Fizeau.
  1845, Oct. 21    Place of Neptune assigned by Adams.
  1845, Dec. 8     Discovery of Astraea by Hencke.
  1845, Dec. 29    Duplication of Biela's comet observed at Yale College.
  1846             Melloni's detection of heating effects from moonlight.
  1846, March 17   Death of Bessel.
  1846, Sept. 23   Discovery of Neptune by Galle.
  1846, Oct. 10    Neptune's satellite discovered by Lassell.
  1847             Publication of Sir J. Herschel's _Results of
                     Observations at the Cape of Good Hope_.
  1847             Cyclonic theory of sun-spots stated by him.
  1848             J. R. Mayer's meteoric hypothesis of solar conservation.
  1848             Motion-displacements of Fraunhofer lines adverted to
                     by Fizeau.
  1848, April 27   New Star in Ophiuchus observed by Hind.
  1848, Sept. 19   Simultaneous discovery of Hyperion by Bond and Lassell.
  1849             First experimental determination of the velocity of
                     light (Fizeau).
  1850, July 17    Vega photographed at Harvard College.
  1850, Nov. 15    Discovery by Bond of Saturn's dusky ring.
  1851             O. Struve's first measurements of Saturn's ring-system
  1851, July 28    Total solar eclipse observed in Sweden.
  1851, Oct. 24    Discovery by Lassell of two inner Uranian satellites.
  1851             Schwabe's discovery of sun-spot periodicity published by
                     Humboldt.
  1852, May 6      Coincidence of magnetic and sun-spot periods announced
                     by Sabine.
  1852, Oct. 11    Variable nebula in Taurus discovered by Hind.
  1852             Lassell's two-foot reflector transported to Malta.
  1853             Adams shows Laplace's explanation of the moon's
                     acceleration to be incomplete.
  1854             Hansen infers from lunar theory a reduced value for
                     the distance of the sun.
  1854             Helmholtz's "gravitation theory" of solar energy.
  1856             Piazzi Smyth's observations on the Peak of Teneriffe.
  1857             Saturn's rings shown by Clerk Maxwell to be of meteoric
                     formation.
  1857, April 27   Double-star photography initiated at Harvard College.
  1858             Solar photography begun at Kew.
  1858, Sept. 30   Perihelion of Donati's comet.
  1859             Spectrum analysis established by Kirchhoff and Bunsen.
  1859             Carrington's discovery of the compound nature of the
                     sun's rotation.
  1859, Sept. 1    Luminous solar outburst and magnetic storm.
  1859, Oct. 19    Merope nebula discovered by Tempel.
  1859, Dec. 15    Chemical constitution of the sun described by Kirchhoff.
  1860, Feb. 27    Discovery by Liais of a "double comet."
  1860, May 21     New star in Scorpio detected by Auwers.
  1860, July 18    Total solar eclipse observed in Spain. Prominences
                     shown by photography to be solar appendages.
  1861, June 30    The earth involved in the tail of a great comet.
  1861-1862        Kirchhoff's map of the solar spectrum.
  1862             Solar hydrogen-absorption recognised by Angstrom.
  1862, Jan. 31    Discovery by Alvan G. Clark of the companion of Sirius.
  1862             Foucault determines the sun's distance by the velocity
                     of light.
  1862             Opposition of Mars. Determination of solar parallax.
  1862             Completion of _Bonner Durchmusterung_.
  1863             Secchi's classification of stellar spectra.
  1863             Foundation of the German Astronomical Society.
  1864, March 5    Rotation period of Mars determined by Kaiser.
  1864             Huggins's first results in stellar spectrum analysis.
  1864, Aug. 5     Spectroscopic examination of Tempel's comet by
                     Donati shows it to be composed of glowing gas.
  1864, Aug. 29    Discovery by Huggins of gaseous nebulae.
  1864             Value of 91,000,000 miles adopted for the sun's
                     distance.
  1864             Croll's explanation of glacial epochs.
  1864, Nov. 23    Death of Struve.
  1865, Jan. 4     Spectroscopic observation by Huggins of the occultation
                     of Eta Piscium.
  1865, Jan. 16    Faye's theory of the solar constitution.
  1865             Kew results published.
  1865             Zoellner argues for a high temperature in the great
                     planets.
  1866             Identity of the orbits of the August meteors and
                     of comet 1862 iii. demonstrated by Schiaparelli.
  1866             Delaunay explains lunar acceleration by a lengthening
                     of the day through tidal friction.
  1866, March 4    Spectroscopic study of the sun's surface by Lockyer.
  1866, March 12   New star in Corona Borealis detected by Birmingham.
  1866, October    Schmidt announces the disappearance of the lunar crater
                     Linne.
  1866, Nov. 13    Meteoric shower visible in Europe.
  1867             Period of November meteors determined by Adams.
  1867, Aug. 29    Total solar eclipse. Minimum sun-spot type of corona
                     observed by Grosch at Santiago.
  1867             Discovery of gaseous stars in Cygnus by Wolf and Rayet.
  1868, February   Principle of daylight spectroscopic visibility of
                     prominences started by Huggins.
  1868, Aug. 18    Great Indian eclipse. Spectrum of prominences observed.
  1868, Aug. 19    Janssen's first daylight view of a prominence.
  1868, Oct. 26    Lockyer and Janssen independently announce their
                     discovery of the spectroscopic method.
  1868             Doppler's principle applied by Huggins to measure
                     stellar radial movements.
  1868             Publication of Angstrom's map of the normal solar
                     spectrum.
  1868             Spectrum of Winnecke's comet found by Huggins to agree
                     with that of olefiant gas.
  1869, Feb. 11    Tenuity of chromospheric gases inferred by Lockyer and
                     Frankland.
  1869, Feb. 13    Huggins observes a prominence with an "open slit."
  1869, Aug. 7     American eclipse. Detection of bright-line coronal
                     spectrum.
  1870             Mounting of Newall's 25-inch achromatic at Gateshead.
  1870             Proctor indicates the prevalence of drifting movements
                     among the stars.
  1870             A solar prominence photographed by Young.
  1870, Dec. 22    Sicilian eclipse. Young discovers reversing layer.
  1871, May 11     Death of Sir J. Herschel.
  1871, June 9     Line-displacements due to solar rotation detected by
                      Vogel.
  1871, Dec. 12    Total eclipse visible in India. Janssen observes
                     reflected Fraunhofer lines in spectrum of corona.
  1872             Conclusion of a three years' series of observations on
                     lunar heat by Lord Rosse.
  1872             Spectrum of Vega photographed by H. Draper.
  1872             Faye's cyclonic hypothesis of sun-spots.
  1872             Young's solar-spectroscopic observations at Mount
                     Sherman.
  1872             Cornu's experiments on the velocity of light.
  1872, Nov. 27    Meteoric shower connected with Biela's comet.
  1873             Determination of mean density of the earth by
                     Cornu and Baille.
  1873             Solar photographic work begun at Greenwich.
  1873             Erection of 26-inch Washington refractor.
  1874             Light-equation redetermined by Glasenapp.
  1874             Vogel's classification of stellar spectra.
  1874, Dec. 8     Transit of Venus.
  1876             Publication of Neison's _The Moon_.
  1876, Nov. 24    New star in Cygnus discovered by Schmidt.
  1876             Spectrum of Vega photographed by Huggins. First
                     use of dry gelatine plates in celestial photography.
  1877, May 19     Klein observes a supposed new lunar crater (Hyginus N.).
  1877             Measurement by Vogel of selective absorption in solar
                     atmosphere.
  1877, Aug. 16-17 Discovery of two satellites of Mars by Hall at
                     Washington.
  1877, Sept. 23   Death of Leverrier.
  1877             Canals of Mars discovered by Schiaparelli.
  1877             Opposition of Mars observed by Gill at Ascension.
                     Solar parallax deduced = 8.78".
  1878, January    Stationary meteor-radiants described by Denning.
  1878             Publication of Schmidt's
                     _Charte der Gebirge des Mondes_.
  1878             First observations of Great Red Spot on Jupiter.
  1878             Conclusion of Newcomb's researches on the lunar theory.
  1878, May 6      Transit of Mercury.
  1878             Foundation of Selenographical Society.
  1878, July 29    Total eclipse visible in America. Vast equatoreal
                     extension of the corona.
