Yes, without doubt, the eyes of her son were looking at her out of the
body of Professor Ramsey Burr.

"Mother," he said gently. "Don't be alarmed. It is successful. I am
here, in Professor Burr's body."

"Yes," she cried, hysterically. It was too weird to believe. It seemed
dim to her, unearthly.

"Are you all right, darling?" she asked timidly.

"Yes. I felt nothing beyond a momentary giddy spell, a bit of nausea and
mental stiffness. It was strange, and I have a slight headache. However,
all is well."

He grinned at her, laughed with the voice which was not his, yet which
she recognized as directed by her son's spirit. The laugh was cracked
and unlike Allen's whole-hearted mirth, yet she smiled in sympathy.

"Yes, the first part is a success," said the man. "Our egos have
interchanged. Soon, our bodies will undergo the transformation, and then
I must keep under cover. I dislike Burr--yet he is a great man. He has
saved me. I suppose the slight headache which I feel is one bequeathed
me by Burr. I hope he inherits my shivers and terrors and the neuralgia
for the time being, so he will get some idea of what I have undergone."

He had got down from the oscillating platform, the spirit of her son in
Ramsey's body.

"What--what are you doing now?" she asked.

"I must carry out the rest of it myself," he said. "Burr directed me
when we talked yesterday. It is more difficult when one subject is out
of the laboratory, and the tubes must be checked."

       *       *       *       *       *

He went carefully about his work, and she saw him replacing four of the
tubes with others, new ones, which were ready at hand. Though it was the
body of Ramsey Burr, the movements were different from the slow, precise
work of the professor, and more and more, she realized that her son
inhabited the shell before her.

For a moment, the mother thought of attempting to dissuade her son from
making the final change; was it not better thus, than to chance the
disintegration of the bodies? Suppose something went wrong, and the
exchange did not take place, and her son, that is, his spirit, went back
to the death house?

Midnight struck as he worked feverishly at the apparatus, the long face
corrugated as he checked the dials and tubes. He worked swiftly, but
evidently was following a procedure which he had committed to memory,
for he was forced to pause often to make sure of himself.

"Everything is O. K.," said the strange voice at last. He consulted his
watch. "Twelve-thirty," he said.

She bit her lip in terror, as he cried, "Now!" and sprang to the table
to take his place on the metallic platform, which oscillated to and fro
under his weight. The delicate grayish metal antenna, which, she knew,
would form a glittering halo of blue and gray threads of fire, rested
quiescent above his head.

"This is the last thing," he said calmly, as he reached for the big
ebony handled switch. "I'll be myself in a few minutes, mother."

"Yes, son, yes."

The switch connected, and Allen Baker, in the form of Ramsey Burr,
suddenly cried out in pain. His mother leaped up to run to his side, but
he waved her away. She stood, wringing her hands, as he began to twist
and turn, as though torn by some invisible force. Eery screams came
from the throat of the man on the platform, and Mrs. Baker's cries of
sympathy mingled with them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The mighty motors hummed in a high-pitched, unnatural whine, and
suddenly Mrs. Baker saw the tortured face before her grow dim. The
countenance of the professor seemed to melt, and then there came a dull,
muffled thud, a burst of white-blue flame, the odor of burning rubber
and the tinkle of broken glass.

Back to the face came the clarity of outline, and still it was Professor
Ramsey Burr's body she stared at.

Her son, in the professor's shape, climbed from the platform, and looked
about him as though dazed. An acrid smoke filled the room, and burning
insulation assailed the nostrils.

Desperately, without looking at her, his lips set in a determined line,
the man went hurriedly over the apparatus again.

"Have I forgotten, did I do anything wrong?" she heard his anguished
cry.

Two tubes were burned out, and these he replaced as swiftly as possible.
But he was forced to go all over the wiring, and cut out whatever had
been short-circuited so that it could be hooked up anew with uninjured
wire.

Before he was ready to resume his seat on the platform, after half an
hour of feverish haste, a knock came on the door.

The person outside was imperative, and Mrs. Baker ran over and opened
the portal. Jared, the whites of his eyes shining in the dim light,
stood there. "De professah--tell him dat de wahden wishes to talk with
him. It is very important, ma'am."

The body of Burr, inhabited by Allen's soul, pushed by her, and she
followed falteringly, wringing her hands. She saw the tall figure snatch
at the receiver and listen.

"Oh, God," he cried.

At last, he put the receiver back on the hook, automatically, and sank
down in a chair, his face in his hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Baker went to him quickly. "What is it, Allen?" she cried.

"Mother," he said hoarsely, "it was the warden of the prison. He told me
that Allen Baker had gone temporarily insane, and claimed to be
Professor Ramsey Burr in my body."

"But--but what is the matter?" she asked. "Cannot you finish the
experiment, Allen? Can't you change the two bodies now?"

He shook his head. "Mother--they electrocuted Ramsey Burr in my body at
twelve forty-five to-night!"

She screamed. She was faint, but she controlled herself with a great
effort.

"But the electrocution was not to be until morning," she said.

Allen shook his head. "They are allowed a certain latitude, about twelve
hours," he said. "Burr protested up to the last moment, and begged for
time."

"Then--then they must have come for him and dragged him forth to die in
the electric chair while you were attempting the second part of the
change," she said.

"Yes. That was why it failed. That's why the tubes and wires burned out
and why we couldn't exchange bodies. It began to succeed, then I could
feel something terrible had happened. It was impossible to complete the
Beta circuit, which short-circuited. They took him from the cell, do you
see, while I was starting the exchange of the atoms."

       *       *       *       *       *

For a time, the mother and her boy sat staring at one another. She saw
the tall, eccentric figure of Ramsey Burr before her, yet she saw also
the soul of her son within that form. The eyes were Allen's, the voice
was soft and loving, and his spirit was with her.

"Come, Allen, my son," she said softly.

"Burr paid the price," said Allen, shaking his head. "He became a martyr
to science."

The world has wondered why Professor Ramsey Burr, so much in the
headlines as a great scientist, suddenly gave up all his experiments and
took up the practice of medicine.

Now that the public furor and indignation over the death of the man
Smith has died down, sentimentalists believe that Ramsey Burr has
reformed and changed his icy nature, for he manifests great affection
and care for Mrs. Mary Baker, the mother of the electrocuted man who had
been his assistant.


                +--------------------------------------+
                |             BY NO MEANS              |
                |   _Miss the Opening Installment of   |
                |  the Extraordinary Four-Part Novel_  |
                |            MURDER MADNESS            |
                |         _By Murray Leinster_         |
                |                                      |
                |     _Starting In Our Next Issue_     |
                +--------------------------------------+




The Ray of Madness

_By Captain S. P. Meek_

[Illustration: "_That's the one," he exclaimed. "Hold the glass there
for a moment._"]

  Dr. Bird discovers a dastardly plot, amazing in its mechanical
  ingenuity, behind the apparently trivial eye trouble of the
  President.


A knock sounded at the door of Dr. Bird's private laboratory in the
Bureau of Standards. The famous scientist paid no attention to the
interruption but bent his head lower over the spectroscope with which he
was working. The knock was repeated with a quality of quiet insistence
upon recognition. The Doctor smothered an exclamation of impatience and
strode over to the door and threw it open to the knocker.

"Oh, hello, Carnes," he exclaimed as he recognized his visitor. "Come in
and sit down and keep your mouth shut for a few minutes. I am busy just
now but I'll be at liberty in a little while."

[Illustration]

"There's no hurry, Doctor," replied Operative Carnes of the United
States Secret Service as he entered the room and sat on the edge of the
Doctor's desk. "I haven't got a case up my sleeve this time; I just came
in for a little chat."

"All right, glad to see you. Read that latest volume of the
_Zeitschrift_ for a while. That article of Von Beyer's has got me
guessing, all right."

Carnes picked up the indicated volume and settled himself to read. The
Doctor bent over his apparatus. Time and again he made minute
adjustments and gave vent to muttered exclamations of annoyance at the
results he obtained. Half an hour later he rose from his chair with a
sigh and turned to his visitor.

"What do you think of Von Beyer's alleged discovery?" he asked the
operative.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's too deep for me, Doctor," replied the operative. "All that I can
make out of it is that he claims to have discovered a new element named
'lunium,' but hasn't been able to isolate it yet. Is there anything
remarkable about that? It seems to me that I have read of other new
elements being discovered from time to time."

"There is nothing remarkable about the discovery of a new element by the
spectroscopic method," replied Dr. Bird. "We know from Mendeleff's
table that there are a number of elements which we have not discovered
as yet, and several of the ones we know were first detected by the
spectroscope. The thing which puzzles me is that so brilliant a man as
Von Beyer claims to have discovered it in the spectra of the moon. His
name, lunium, is taken from Luna, the moon."

"Why not the moon? Haven't several elements been first discovered in the
spectra of stars?"

"Certainly. The classic example is Lockyer's discovery of an orange line
in the spectra of the sun in 1868. No known terrestrial element gave
such a line and he named the new element which he deduced helium, from
Helos, the sun. The element helium was first isolated by Ramsey some
twenty-seven years later. Other elements have been found in the spectra
of stars, but the point I am making is that the sun and the stars are
incandescent bodies and could be logically expected to show the
characteristic lines of their constituent elements in their spectra. But
the moon is a cold body without an atmosphere and is visible only by
reflected light. The element, lunium, may exist in the moon, but the
manifestations which Von Beyer has observed must be, not from the moon,
but from the source of the reflected light which he spectro-analyzed."

       *       *       *       *       *

"You are over my depth, Doctor."

"I'm over my own. I have tried to follow Von Beyer's reasoning and I
have tried to check his findings. Twice this evening I thought that I
caught a momentary glimpse on the screen of my fluoroscope of the
ultra-violet line which he reports as characteristic of lunium, but I am
not certain. I haven't been able to photograph it yet. He notes in his
article that the line seems to be quite impermanent and fades so rapidly
that an accurate measurement of its wave-length is almost impossible.
However, let's drop the subject. How do you like your new assignment?"

"Oh, it's all right. I would rather be back on my old work."

"I haven't seen you since you were assigned to the Presidential detail.
I suppose that you fellows are pretty busy getting ready for Premier
McDougal's visit?"

"I doubt if he will come," replied Carnes soberly. "Things are not
exactly propitious for a visit of that sort just now."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Bird sat back in his chair in surprise.

"I thought that the whole thing is arranged. The press seems to think
so, at any rate."

"Everything is arranged, but arrangements may be cancelled. I wouldn't
be surprised to hear that they were."

"Carnes," replied Dr. Bird gravely, "you have either said too much or
too little. There is something more to this than appears on the surface.
If it is none of my business, don't hesitate to tell me so and I'll
forget what you have said, but if I can help you any, speak up."

Carnes puffed meditatively at his pipe for a few minutes before
replying.

"It's really none of your business. Doctor," he said at length, "and yet
I know that a corpse is a chatterbox compared to you when you are told
anything in confidence, and I really need to unload my mind. It has been
kept from the press so far; but I don't know how long it can be kept
muzzled. In strict confidence, the President of the United State acts
as though he were crazy."

"Quite a section of the press has claimed that for a long time," replied
Dr. Bird, with a twinkle in his eye.

"I don't mean crazy in that way, Doctor, I mean _really_ crazy. Bugs!
Nuts! Bats in his belfry!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Bird whistled softly.

"Are you sure, Carnes?" he asked.

"As sure as may be. Both of his physicians think so. They were
non-committal for a while, especially as the first attack waned and he
seemed to recover, but when his second attack came on more violently
than the first and the President began to act queerly, they had to take
the Presidential detail into their confidence. He has been quietly
examined by some of the greatest psychiatrists in the country, but none
of them have ventured on a positive verdict as to the nature of the
malady. They admit, of course, that it exists, but they won't classify
it. The fact that it is intermittent seems to have them stopped. He was
bad a month ago but he recovered and became, to all appearances, normal
for a time. About a week ago he began to show queer symptoms again and
now he is getting worse daily. If he goes on getting worse for another
week, it will have to be announced so that the Vice-President can take
over the duties of the head of the government."

       *       *       *       *       *

