
_Of the Combustion of Phosphorus._

In these combustions we begin by filling a jar, capable at least of
holding six pints, with oxygen gas in the water apparatus, Pl. V. Fig.
1.; when it is perfectly full, so that the gas begins to flow out below,
the jar, A, is carried to the mercury apparatus, Pl. IV. Fig. 3. We then
dry the surface of the mercury, both within and without the jar, by
means of blotting-paper, taking care to keep the paper for some time
entirely immersed in the mercury before it is introduced under the jar,
lest we let in any common air, which sticks very obstinately to the
surface of the paper. The body to be submitted to combustion, being
first very accurately weighed in nice scales, is placed in a small flat
shallow dish, D, of iron or porcelain; this is covered by the larger cup
P, which serves the office of a diving bell, and the whole is passed
through the mercury into the jar, after which the larger cup is retired.
The difficulty of passing the materials of combustion in this manner
through the mercury may be avoided by raising one of the sides of the
jar, A, for a moment, and slipping in the little cup, D, with the
combustible body as quickly as possible. In this manner of operating, a
small quantity of common air gets into the jar, but it is so very
inconsiderable as not to injure either the progress or accuracy of the
experiment in any sensible degree.

When the cup, D, is introduced under the jar, we suck out a part of the
oxygen gas, so as to raise the mercury to EF, as formerly directed, Part
I. Chap. V. otherwise, when the combustible body is set on fire, the gas
becoming dilated would be in part forced out, and we should no longer be
able to make any accurate calculation of the quantities before and after
the experiment. A very convenient mode of drawing out the air is by
means of an air-pump syringe adapted to the syphon, GHI, by which the
mercury may be raised to any degree under twenty-eight inches. Very
inflammable bodies, as phosphorus, are set on fire by means of the
crooked iron wire, MN, Pl. IV. Fig. 16. made red hot, and passed quickly
through the mercury. Such as are less easily set on fire have a small
portion of tinder, upon which a minute particle of phosphorus is fixed,
laid upon them before using the red hot iron.

In the first moment of combustion the air, being heated, rarifies, and
the mercury descends; but when, as in combustions of phosphorus and
iron, no elastic fluid is formed, absorption becomes presently very
sensible, and the mercury rises high into the jar. Great attention must
be used not to burn too large a quantity of any substance in a given
quantity of gas, otherwise, towards the end of the experiment, the cup
would approach so near the top of the jar as to endanger breaking it by
the great heat produced, and the sudden refrigeration from the cold
mercury. For the methods of measuring the volume of the gasses, and for
correcting the measures according to the heighth of the barometer and
thermometer, &c. see Chap. II. Sect. V. and VI. of this part.

The above process answers very well for burning all the concrete
substances, and even for the fixed oils: These last are burnt in lamps
under the jar, and are readily set on fire by means of tinder,
phosphorus, and hot iron. But it is dangerous for substances susceptible
of evaporating in a moderate heat, such as ether, alkohol, and the
essential oils; these substances dissolve in considerable quantity in
oxygen gas; and, when set on fire, a dangerous and sudden explosion
takes place, which carries up the jar to a great height, and dashes it
in a thousand pieces. From two such explosions some of the members of
the Academy and myself escaped very narrowly. Besides, though this
manner of operating is sufficient for determining pretty accurately the
quantity of oxygen gas absorbed, and of carbonic acid produced, as water
is likewise formed in all experiments upon vegetable and animal matters
which contain an excess of hydrogen, this apparatus can neither collect
it nor determine its quantity. The experiment with phosphorus is even
incomplete in this way, as it is impossible to demonstrate that the
weight of the phosphoric acid produced is equal to the sum of the
weights of the phosphorus burnt and oxygen gas absorbed during the
process. I have been therefore obliged to vary the instruments according
to circumstances, and to employ several of different kinds, which I
shall describe in their order, beginning with that used for burning
phosphorus.

Take a large balloon, A, Pl. IV. Fig. 4. of cristal or white glass, with
an opening, EF, about two inches and a half, or three inches, diameter,
to which a cap of brass is accurately fitted with emery, and which has
two holes for the passage of the tubes xxx, yyy. Before shutting the
balloon with its cover, place within it the stand, BC, supporting the
cup of porcelain, D, which contains the phosphorus. Then lute on the cap
with fat lute, and allow it to dry for some days, and weigh the whole
accurately; after this exhaust the balloon by means of an air-pump
connected with the tube xxx, and fill it with oxygen gas by the tube
yyy, from the gazometer, Pl. VIII. Fig. 1. described Chap. II. Sect
II. of this part. The phosphorus is then set on fire by means of a
burning-glass, and is allowed to burn till the cloud of concrete
phosphoric acid stops the combustion, oxygen gas being continually
supplied from the gazometer. When the apparatus has cooled, it is
weighed and unluted; the tare of the instrument being allowed, the
weight is that of the phosphoric acid contained. It is proper, for
greater accuracy, to examine the air or gas contained in the balloon
after combustion, as it may happen to be somewhat heavier or lighter
than common air; and this difference of weight must be taken into
account in the calculations upon the results of the experiment.


SECT. III.

_Of the Combustion of Charcoal._

The apparatus I have employed for this process consists of a small
conical furnace of hammered copper, represented in perspective, Pl. XII.
Fig. 9. and internally displayed Fig. 11. It is divided into the
furnace, ABC, where the charcoal is burnt, the grate, d e, and the
ash-hole, F; the tube, GH, in the middle of the dome of the furnace
serves to introduce the charcoal, and as a chimney for carrying off the
air which has served for combustion. Through the tube, l m n, which
communicates with the gazometer, the hydrogen gas, or air, intended for
supporting the combustion, is conveyed into the ash-hole, F, whence it
is forced, by the application of pressure to the gazometer, to pass
through the grate, d e, and to blow upon the burning charcoal placed
immediately above.

Oxygen gas, which forms 28/100 of atmospheric air, is changed into
carbonic acid gas during combustion with charcoal, whilst the azotic gas
of the air is not altered at all. Hence, after the combustion of
charcoal in atmospheric air, a mixture of carbonic acid gas and azotic
gas must remain; to allow this mixture to pass off, the tube, o p, is
adapted to the chimney, GH, by means of a screw at G, and conveys the
gas into bottles half filled with solution of caustic potash. The
carbonic acid gas is absorbed by the alkali, and the azotic gas is
conveyed into a second gazometer, where its quantity is ascertained.

The weight of the furnace, ABC, is first accurately determined, then
introduce the tube RS, of known weight, by the chimney, GH, till its
lower end S, rests upon the grate, d e, which it occupies entirely; in
the next place, fill the furnace with charcoal, and weigh the whole
again, to know the exact quantity of charcoal submitted to experiment.
The furnace is now put in its place, the tube, l m n, is screwed to
that which communicates with the gazometer, and the tube, o p, to that
which communicates with the bottles of alkaline solution. Every thing
being in readiness, the stop-cock of the gazometer is opened, a small
piece of burning charcoal is thrown into the tube, RS, which is
instantly withdrawn, and the tube, o p, is screwed to the chimney, GH.
The little piece of charcoal falls upon the grate, and in this manner
gets below the whole charcoal, and is kept on fire by the stream of air
from the gazometer. To be certain that the combustion is begun, and goes
on properly, the tube, q r s, is fixed to the furnace, having a piece
of glass cemented to its upper extremity, s, through which we can see
if the charcoal be on fire.

I neglected to observe above, that the furnace, and its appendages, are
plunged in water in the cistern, TVXY, Fig. 11. Pl. XII. to which ice
may be added to moderate the heat, if necessary; though the heat is by
no means very considerable, as there is no air but what comes from the
gazometer, and no more of the charcoal burns at one time than what is
immediately over the grate.

As one piece of charcoal is consumed another falls down into its place,
in consequence of the declivity of the sides of the furnace; this gets
into the stream of air from the grate, d e, and is burnt; and so on,
successively, till the whole charcoal is consumed. The air which has
served the purpose of the combustion passes through the mass of
charcoal, and is forced by the pressure of the gazometer to escape
through the tube, o p, and to pass through the bottles of alkaline
solution.

This experiment furnishes all the necessary data for a complete analysis
of atmospheric air and of charcoal. We know the weight of charcoal
consumed; the gazometer gives us the measure of the air employed; the
quantity and quality of gas remaining after combustion may be
determined, as it is received, either in another gazometer, or in jars,
in a pneumato-chemical apparatus; the weight of ashes remaining in the
ash-hole is readily ascertained; and, finally, the additional weight
acquired by the bottles of alkaline solution gives the exact quantity of
carbonic acid formed during the process. By this experiment we may
likewise determine, with sufficient accuracy, the proportions in which
charcoal and oxygen enter into the composition of carbonic acid.

In a future memoir I shall give an account to the Academy of a series of
experiments I have undertaken, with this instrument, upon all the
vegetable and animal charcoals. By some very slight alterations, this
machine may be made to answer for observing the principal phenomena of
respiration.


SECT. IV.

_Of the Combustion of Oils._

Oils are more compound in their nature than charcoal, being formed by
the combination of at least two elements, charcoal and hydrogen; of
course, after their combustion in common air, water, carbonic acid gas,
and azotic gas, remain. Hence the apparatus employed for their
combustion requires to be adapted for collecting these three products,
and is consequently more complicated than the charcoal furnace.

The apparatus I employ for this purpose is composed of a large jar or
pitcher A, Pl. XII. Fig. 4. surrounded at its upper edge by a rim of
iron properly cemented at DE, and receding from the jar at BC, so as to
leave a furrow or gutter xx, between it and the outside of the jar,
somewhat more than two inches deep. The cover or lid of the jar, Fig. 5.
is likewise surrounded by an iron rim f g, which adjusts into the
gutter xx, Fig. 4. which being filled with mercury, has the effect of
closing the jar hermetically in an instant, without using any lute; and,
as the gutter will hold about two inches of mercury, the air in the jar
may be made to sustain the pressure of more than two feet of water,
without danger of its escaping.

The lid has four holes, T h i k, for the passage of an equal
number of tubes. The opening T is furnished with a leather box, through
which passes the rod, Fig. 3. intended for raising and lowering the wick
of the lamp, as will be afterwards directed. The three other holes are
intended for the passage of three several tubes, one of which conveys
the oil to the lamp, a second conveys air for keeping up the combustion,
and the third carries off the air, after it has served for combustion.
The lamp in which the oil is burnt is represented Fig. 2; a is the
reservoir of oil, having a funnel by which it is filled; b c d e f g h
is a syphon which conveys the oil to the lamp 11; 7, 8, 9, 10, is the
tube which conveys the air for combustion from the gazometer to the same
lamp. The tube b c is formed externally, at its lower end b, into a
male screw, which turns in a female screw in the lid of the reservoir of
oil a; so that, by turning the reservoir one way or the other, it is
made to rise or fall, by which the oil is kept at the necessary level.

When the syphon is to be filled, and the communication formed between
the reservoir of oil and the lamp, the stop-cock c is shut, and that
at e opened, oil is poured in by the opening f at the top of the
syphon, till it rises within three or four lines of the upper edge of
the lamp, the stop-cock k is then shut, and that at c opened; the
oil is then poured in at f, till the branch b c d of the syphon is
filled, and then the stop-cock e is closed. The two branches of the
syphon being now completely filled, a communication is fully established
between the reservoir and the lamp.

In Pl. XII. Fig. 1. all the parts of the lamp 11, Fig. 2. are
represented magnified, to show them distinctly. The tube i k carries
the oil from the reservoir to the cavity a a a a, which contains the
wick; the tube 9, 10, brings the air from the gazometer for keeping up
the combustion; this air spreads through the cavity d d d d, and, by
means of the passages c c c c and b b b b, is distributed on each
side of the wick, after the principles of the lamps constructed by
Argand, Quinquet, and Lange.

To render the whole of this complicated apparatus more easily
understood, and that its description may make all others of the same
kind more readily followed, it is represented, completely connected
together for use, in Pl. XI. The gazometer P furnishes air for the
combustion by the tube and stop-cock 1, 2; the tube 2, 3, communicates
with a second gazometer, which is filled whilst the first one is
emptying during the process, that there may be no interruption to the
combustion; 4, 5, is a tube of glass filled with deliquescent salts, for
drying the air as much as possible in its passage; and the weight of
this tube and its contained salts, at the beginning of the experiment,
being known, it is easy to determine the quantity of water absorbed by
them from the air. From this deliquescent tube the air is conducted
through the pipe 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, to the lamp 11, where it spreads on
both sides of the wick, as before described, and feeds the flame. One
part of this air, which serves to keep up the combustion of the oil,
forms carbonic acid gas and water, by oxygenating its elements. Part of
this water condenses upon the sides of the pitcher A, and another part
is held in solution in the air by means of caloric furnished by the
combustion. This air is forced by the compression of the gazometer to
pass through the tube 12, 13, 14, 15, into the bottle 16, and the worm
17, 18, where the water is fully condensed from the refrigeration of the
air; and, if any water still remains in solution, it is absorbed by
deliquescent salts contained in the tube 19, 20.

All these precautions are solely intended for collecting and determining
the quantity of water formed during the experiment; the carbonic acid
and azotic gas remains to be ascertained. The former is absorbed by
caustic alkaline solution in the bottles 22 and 25. I have only
represented two of these in the figure, but nine at least are requisite;
and the last of the series may be half filled with lime-water, which is
the most certain reagent for indicating the presence of carbonic acid;
if the lime-water is not rendered turbid, we may be certain that no
sensible quantity of that acid remains in the air.

The rest of the air which has served for combustion, and which chiefly
consists of azotic gas, though still mixed with a considerable portion
of oxygen gas, which has escaped unchanged from the combustion, is
carried through a third tube 28, 29, of deliquescent salts, to deprive
it of any moisture it may have acquired in the bottles of alkaline
solution and lime-water, and from thence by the tube 29, 30, into a
gazometer, where its quantity is ascertained. Small essays are then
taken from it, which are exposed to a solution of sulphuret of potash,
to ascertain the proportions of oxygen and azotic gas it contains.

In the combustion of oils the wick becomes charred at last, and
obstructs the rise of the oil; besides, if we raise the wick above a
certain height, more oil rises through its capillary tubes than the
stream of air is capable of consuming, and smoke is produced. Hence it
is necessary to be able to lengthen or shorten the wick without opening
the apparatus; this is accomplished by means of the rod 31, 32, 33, 34,
which passes through a leather-box, and is connected with the support of
the wick; and that the motion of this rod, and consequently of the wick,
may be regulated with the utmost smoothness and facility; it is moved at
pleasure by a pinnion which plays in a toothed rack. The rod, with its
appendages, are represented Pl. XII. Fig. 3. It appeared to me, that the
combustion would be assisted by surrounding the flame of the lamp with a
small glass jar open at both ends, as represented in its place in Pl.
XI.

I shall not enter into a more detailed description of the construction
of this apparatus, which is still capable of being altered and modified
in many respects, but shall only add, that when it is to be used in
experiment, the lamp and reservoir with the contained oil must be
accurately weighed, after which it is placed as before directed, and
lighted; having then formed the connection between the air in the
gazometer and the lamp, the external jar A, Pl. XI. is fixed over all,
and secured by means of the board BC and two rods of iron which connect
this board with the lid, and are screwed to it. A small quantity of oil
is burnt while the jar is adjusting to the lid, and the product of that
combustion is lost; there is likewise a small portion of air from the
gazometer lost at the same time. Both of these are of very
inconsiderable consequence in extensive experiments, and they are even
capable of being valued in our calculation of the results.

In a particular memoir, I shall give an account to the Academy of the
difficulties inseparable from this kind of experiments: These are so
insurmountable and troublesome, that I have not hitherto been able to
obtain any rigorous determination of the quantities of the products. I
have sufficient proof, however, that the fixed oils are entirely
resolved during combustion into water and carbonic acid gas, and
consequently that they are composed of hydrogen and charcoal; but I have
no certain knowledge respecting the proportions of these ingredients.


SECT. V.

_Of the Combustion of Alkohol._

The combustion of alkohol may be very readily performed in the apparatus
already described for the combustion of charcoal and phosphorus. A lamp
filled with alkohol is placed under the jar A, Pl. IV. Fig. 3. a small
morsel of phosphorus is placed upon the wick of the lamp, which is set
on fire by means of the hot iron, as before directed. This process is,
however, liable to considerable inconveniency; it is dangerous to make
use of oxygen gas at the beginning of the experiment for fear of
deflagration, which is even liable to happen when common air is
employed. An instance of this had very near proved fatal to myself, in
presence of some members of the Academy. Instead of preparing the
experiment, as usual, at the time it was to be performed, I had disposed
every thing in order the evening before; the atmospheric air of the jar
had thereby sufficient time to dissolve a good deal of the alkohol; and
this evaporation had even been considerably promoted by the height of
the column of mercury, which I had raised to EF, Pl. IV. Fig. 3. The
moment I attempted to set the little morsel of phosphorus on fire by
means of the red hot iron, a violent explosion took place, which threw
the jar with great violence against the floor of the laboratory, and
dashed it in a thousand pieces.

Hence we can only operate upon very small quantities, such as ten or
twelve grains of alkohol, in this manner; and the errors which may be
committed in experiments upon such small quantities prevents our placing
any confidence in their results. I endeavoured to prolong the
combustion, in the experiments contained in the Memoirs of the Academy
for 1784, p. 593. by lighting the alkohol first in common air, and
furnishing oxygen gas afterwards to the jar, in proportion as it
consumed; but the carbonic acid gas produced by the process became a
great hinderance to the combustion, the more so that alkohol is but
difficultly combustible, especially in worse than common air; so that
even in this way very small quantities only could be burnt.

Perhaps this combustion might succeed better in the oil apparatus, Pl.
XI.; but I have not hitherto ventured to try it. The jar A in which the
combustion is performed is near 1400 cubical inches in dimension; and,
were an explosion to take place in such a vessel, its consequences would
be very terrible, and very difficult to guard against. I have not,
however, despaired of making the attempt.

From all these difficulties, I have been hitherto obliged to confine
myself to experiments upon very small quantities of alkohol, or at least
to combustions made in open vessels, such as that represented in Pl. IX.
Fig. 5. which will be described in Section VII. of this chapter. If I am
ever able to remove these difficulties, I shall resume this
investigation.


SECT. VI.

_Of the Combustion of Ether._

Tho' the combustion of ether in close vessels does not present the same
difficulties as that of alkohol, yet it involves some of a different
kind, not more easily overcome, and which still prevent the progress of
my experiments. I endeavoured to profit by the property which ether
possesses of dissolving in atmospheric air, and rendering it inflammable
without explosion. For this purpose, I constructed the reservoir of
ether a b c d, Plate XII. Fig. 8. to which air is brought from the
gazometer by the tube 1, 2, 3, 4. This air spreads, in the first place,
in the double lid ac of the reservoir, from which it passes through
seven tubes ef, gh, ik, &c. which descend to the bottom of the
ether, and it is forced by the pressure of the gazometer to boil up
through the ether in the reservoir. We may replace the ether in this
first reservoir, in proportion as it is dissolved and carried off by the
air, by means of the supplementary reservoir E, connected by a brass
tube fifteen or eighteen inches long, and shut by a stop-cock. This
length of the connecting tube is to enable the descending ether to
overcome the resistance occasioned by the pressure of the air from the
gazometer.

The air, thus loaded with vapours of ether, is conducted by the tube 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, to the jar A, into which it is allowed to escape through a
capillary opening, at the extremity of which it is set on fire. The air,
when it has served the purpose of combustion, passes through the bottle
16, Pl. XI. the worm 17, 18, and the deliquescent tube 19, 20, after
which it passes through the alkaline bottles; in these its carbonic acid
gas is absorbed, the water formed during the experiment having been
previously deposited in the former parts of the apparatus.

When I caused construct this apparatus, I supposed that the combination
of atmospheric air and ether formed in the reservoir a b c d, Pl. XII.
Fig. 8. was in proper proportion for supporting combustion; but in this
I was mistaken; for there is a very considerable quantity of excess of
ether; so that an additional quantity of atmospheric air is necessary
to enable it to burn fully. Hence a lamp constructed upon these
principles will burn in common air, which furnishes the quantity of
oxygen necessary for combustion, but will not burn in close vessels in
which the air is not renewed. From this circumstance, my ether lamp went
out soon after being lighted and shut up in the jar A, Pl. XII. Fig. 8.
To remedy this defect, I endeavoured to bring atmospheric air to the
lamp by the lateral tube 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, which I distributed
circularly round the flame; but the flame is so exceedingly rare, that
it is blown out by the gentlest possible stream of air, so that I have
not hitherto succeeded in burning ether. I do not, however, despair of
being able to accomplish it by means of some changes I am about to have
made upon this apparatus.


SECT. VII.

_Of the Combustion of Hydrogen Gas, and the Formation of Water._

In the formation of water, two substances, hydrogen and oxygen, which
are both in the aeriform state before combustion, are transformed into
liquid or water by the operation. This experiment would be very easy,
and would require very simple instruments, if it were possible to
procure the two gasses perfectly pure, so that they might burn without
any residuum. We might, in that case, operate in very small vessels,
and, by continually furnishing the two gasses in proper proportions,
might continue the combustion indefinitely. But, hitherto, chemists have
only employed oxygen gas, mixed with azotic gas; from which
circumstance, they have only been able to keep up the combustion of
hydrogen gas for a very limited time in close vessels, because, as the
residuum of azotic gas is continually increasing, the air becomes at
last so much contaminated, that the flame weakens and goes out. This
inconvenience is so much the greater in proportion as the oxygen gas
employed is less pure. From this circumstance, we must either be
satisfied with operating upon small quantities, or must exhaust the
vessels at intervals, to get rid of the residuum of azotic gas; but, in
this case, a portion of the water formed during the experiment is
evaporated by the exhaustion; and the resulting error is the more
dangerous to the accuracy of the process, that we have no certain means
of valuing it.

These considerations make me desirous to repeat the principal
experiments of pneumatic chemistry with oxygen gas entirely free from
any admixture of azotic gas; and this may be procured from oxygenated
muriat of potash. The oxygen gas extracted from this salt does not
appear to contain azote, unless accidentally, so that, by proper
precautions, it may be obtained perfectly pure. In the mean time, the
