decide to generate a force above and beyond its own gravitic drag?"

"That's it," he said happily. "And even if it only manages to negate
its own weight, we'll have an easier time ironing the bugs out of a
model than we would out of a diagram. After all, who'd have figured that
beyond _Mach I_, all the lift-surfaces on a plane work in _reverse_?"

It wasn't, I had to admit, anything that an inventor could have
reasonably theorized at the outset.... So I locked myself in the lab for
a week, and built his gadget, while he spent his time pacing through his
fourteen-room mansion across the way from the lab building (the "way"
being the flat grassy region on Artie's estate that housed his swimming
pool, private heliport, and movie theatre), trying to coin a nifty name
for the thing. We both finished in a dead heat.

       *       *       *       *       *

I unlocked the door of the lab, blinked hard against the sting of warm
yellow sunlight after a week of cool blue fluorescents, and just as I
wheezed, "Got it," Artie was counterpointing with, "We'll call it The
_Uuaa_!" (He made four syllables out of it.)

"The Oo-oo-_ah_-ah?" I glottaled. "In honor of the fiftieth state, or
what? I know 'aa' is a type of lava, but what the hell's 'uu', besides
the noise a man makes getting into an overheated bath?"

Artie pouted. "'Uuaa' is initials. For 'Up, up, and away!' I thought it
was pretty good."

I shook my head. "Why feed free fodder to the telecomics? I can hear
them now, doing monologues about people getting beri-beri flying from
Walla Walla to Pago Pago on their Uuaas...."

"So what would _you_ call it!" he grunted.

"A bust," I sighed, left-thumbing over my shoulder at the lab. "It sits
and twirls and whistles a little, but that's about the size of it,
Artie."

He spanieled with his eyes, basset-hounded with his mouth, and
orangutaned with his cheeks, then said, with dim hope, "Did you weigh
it? Maybe if you weighed it--"

"Oh, it lost, all right," I admitted. "When I connected the batteries,
the needle on the scale dropped down to zero, and stopped there. And I
found that I could lift the machine into the air, and it'd stay where it
was put, just whistling and whirling its cones. But then it started to
settle." I beckoned him back inside.

"Settle? Why?" Artie asked.

"Dust," I said. "There's always a little dust settling out of the air.
It doesn't weigh _much_, but it made the machine weigh at least what the
dust-weight equalled, and down it went. Slow and easy, but down."

Artie looked at the gadget, sitting and whistling on the floor of the
lab, then turned a bleak-but-still-hopeful glance my way. "Maybe--If we
could make a _guy_ take on a cone-shape, and whirled him--"

"Sure," I muttered. "Bend over, grab his ankles, and fly anywhere in
the world, with his torso and legs pivoting wildly around his peaked
behind." I shook my head. "Besides the manifestly undignified posturing
involved, we have to consider the other effects; like having his
eyeballs fly out."

"If--If we had a bunch of men lie in a circle around a kind of
Maypole-thing, each guy clutching the ankles of the next one...."

"Maybe they'd be weightless, but they _still_ wouldn't go _up_," I
said. "Unless they could be towed, somehow. And by the time they
landed, they'd be too nauseous to be of any use for at least three
days. Always assuming, of course, that the weak-wristed member of the
sick circlet didn't lose his grip, and have them end up playing mid-air
crack-the-whip before they fell."

"So all right, it's got a couple of bugs!" said Artie. "But the
principle's sound, right?"

"Well--Yeah, there you got me, Artie. The thing _cancels_ weight,
anyhow...."

"Swell. So we work from there," He rubbed his hands together joyously.
"And who knows what we'll come up with."

"_We_ never do, that's for sure," I mumbled.

But Artie just shrugged. "I like surprises," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The end of the day--me working, Artie inventing--found us with some
new embellishments for the machine. Where it was originally a sort
of humped metal box (the engine went inside the hump) studded with
toothbrush-bristle rows of counter-revolving cones (lest elementary
torque send the machine swinging the other way, and thus destroy the
thrust-effect of the cones), it now had an additional feature: A helical
flange around each cone.

"You see," Artie explained, while I was torching them to order from
plate metal, "the helices will provide _lift_ as the cones revolve."

"Only in the atmosphere of the planet," I said.

"Sure, I know. But by the time the outer limits of the air are reached,
the machine, with the same mass-thrust, will have less gravity-drag
to fight, being that much farther from the Earth. The effect will be
cumulative. The higher it gets, the more outward thrust it'll generate.
Then nothing'll stop it!"

"You could be right," I admitted, hammering out helix after helix on an
electric anvil (another gadget of Artie's; the self-heating anvil--The
Thermovil--had begun life as a small inspiration in Artie's mind for a
portable toaster).

It was just after sunset when we figured the welds were cool enough so
we could test it. Onto the scale it went again, I flicked the toggle,
and we stood back to watch the needle as the cones picked up speed.
Along with the original whistling sound made by the cones we began to
detect a shriller noise, one which abruptly became a genuine pain in the
ear. As Artie and I became somewhat busy with screaming (the only thing
we could think of on the spur of the moment to counteract the terrible
waves of noise assaulting our tympana), it was all at once much easier
to see the needle of the scale dropping toward zero, as the glass disc
facing the dial dissolved into gritty powder, along with the glass panes
in every window in the lab, the house, the heliport, and the movie
theatre. (Not to mention those of a few farmhouses a couple of miles
down the highway, but we didn't find that out till their lawyers showed
up with bills for damages.)

Sure enough, though, the thing lifted. Up it bobbed, like a metal
dirigible with agonizing gas pains, shrieking louder by the second.
When the plaster started to trickle and flake from the walls, and the
fillings in my teeth rose to a temperature just short of incandescence,
I decided it was time to cancel this phase of the experiment, and, with
