
1024. Light-colored clothing should be worn by those who have care of
the sick, in preference to dark-colored apparel; particularly if the
disease is of a contagious character. Experiments have shown, that
black and other dark colors will absorb more readily the subtile
effluvia that emanate from sick persons, than white or light colors.

1025. Whatever may be wanted during the night, should be brought into
the sick-chamber, or the adjoining room, before the family retires for
sleep, in order that the slumbers of the patient be not disturbed by
haste, or searching for needed articles.

1026. The same general directions should be observed by watchers, as
are given to the nurse; nor should the watcher deem it necessary to
make herself acceptable to the patient by exhausting conversation.

1027. It can hardly be expected that the farmer, who has been laboring
hard in the field, or the mechanic, who has toiled during the day, is
qualified to render all those little attentions that a sick person
requires. Hence, would it not be more benevolent and economical to
employ and _pay_ watchers, who are qualified by knowledge and
_training_, to perform this duty in a faithful manner, while the
kindness and sympathy of friends may be _practically_ manifested by
assisting to defray the expenses of these qualified and useful
assistants?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

1023. When watching in cold weather, what precaution is necessary?
1024. What is said relative to the color of the clothing worn in the
sick-room? 1025. What suggestions to watchers relative to the
arrangement of the sick-chamber? 1026. What should watchers observe?
1027. What is said of employing those persons to watch who labor hard
during the day?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=




APPENDIX.


POISONS AND THEIR ANTIDOTES

1028. POISONING, either from accident or design, is of such frequency
and danger, that it is of the greatest importance that every person
should know the proper mode of procedure in such cases, in order to
render immediate assistance when within his power.

1029. Poisons are divided into two classes--_mineral_ (which include
the acids) and _vegetable_.

1030. The first thing, usually, to be done, when it is ascertained
that a poison has been swallowed, is to evacuate the stomach, unless
vomiting takes place spontaneously. Emetics of the sulphate of zinc,
(white vitriol,) or ipecacuanha, (ipecac,) or ground mustard seed,
should be given.

1031. When vomiting has commenced, it should be aided by large and
frequent draughts of the following drinks: flaxseed tea, gum-water,
slippery-elm tea, barley water, sugar and water, or any thing of a
mucilaginous or diluent character.


MINERAL POISONS.

1032. AMMONIA.--The _water of ammonia_, if taken in an over-dose, and
in an undiluted state, acts as a violent corrosive poison.

1033. The best and most effectual antidote is _vinegar_. It should be
administered in water, without delay. It neutralizes the ammonia, and
renders it inactive. Emetics should not be given.


1034. ANTIMONY.--The _wine of antimony_ and _tartar emetic_, if taken
in over-doses, cause distressing vomiting. In addition to the diluent,
mucilaginous drinks, give a tea-spoonful of the sirup of poppies,
paregoric, or twenty drops of laudanum, every twenty minutes, until
five or six doses have been taken, or the vomiting ceases.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

1025. Is it useful to know the antidotes or remedies for poison? 1029.
Into how many classes are poisons divided? 1030. What is the first
thing to be done when it is ascertained that poison has been
swallowed? 1031. What should be taken after the vomiting has
commenced? 1032. What effect has an over-dose of ammonia? 1033. The
antidote? Should an emetic be given for this poison? 1034. What effect
has an over-dose of the wine of antimony or tartar emetic?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

1035. The antidotes are _nutgalls_ and _oak bark_, which may be
administered in infusion, or by steeping in water.


1036. ARSENIC.--When this has been taken, administer an emetic of
ipecac, speedily, in mucilaginous teas, and use the stomach-pump as
soon as possible.

1037. The antidote is the _hydrated peroxide of iron_. It should be
kept constantly on hand at the apothecaries' shops. It may be given in
any quantity, without injurious results.


1038. COPPER.--The most common cause of poisoning from this metal, is
through the careless use of cooking utensils made of it, on which the
_acetate of copper_ (verdigris) has been allowed to form. When this
has been taken, immediately induce vomiting, give mucilaginous drinks,
or the _white of eggs_, diffused in water.

1039. The antidote is the _carbonate of soda_, which should be
administered without delay.


1040. LEAD.--The _acetate_ (sugar) _of lead_ is the preparation of
this metal, which is liable to be taken accidentally, in poisonous
doses. Induce immediate vomiting, by emetics of ground mustard seed,
sulphate of zinc, and diluent drinks.

1041. The antidote is diluted _sulphuric acid_. When this acid is not
to be obtained, either the sulphate of magnesia, (epsom salts,) or the
sulphate of soda, (glauber's salts,) will answer every purpose.


1042. MERCURY.--The preparation of this mineral by which poisoning is
commonly produced, is _corrosive sublimate_. The mode of treatment to
be pursued when this poison has been swallowed, is as follows: The
_whites of a dozen eggs_ should be beaten in two quarts of cold water,
and a tumbler-full given every two minutes, to induce vomiting. When
the whites of eggs are not to be obtained, soap and water should be
mixed with wheat flour, and given in copious draughts, and the
stomach-pump introduced as soon as possible. Emetics or irritating
substances should not be given.


1043. NITRE--_Saltpetre._--This, in over-doses, produces violent
poisonous symptoms. Vomiting should be immediately induced by large
doses of mucilaginous, diluent drinks; but emetics which irritate the
stomach should not be given.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

1035. What is the antidote? 1036. What should immediately be done when
arsenic is swallowed? 1037. What is the antidote? Can any quantity of
this preparation of iron be given without injurious results? 1038.
What should be given when verdigris has been taken into the stomach?
1039. What is the antidote? 1040. What should immediately be given
when sugar of lead is taken? 1041. What is the antidote? 1042. Give
the treatment when corrosive sublimate has been swallowed. 1043. What
effect has an over-dose of saltpetre? What treatment should be
adopted?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=


1044. ZINC.--Poisoning is sometimes caused by the _sulphate of zinc_,
(white vitriol.) When this takes place, vomiting should be induced,
and aided by large draughts of mucilaginous and diluent drinks. Use
the stomach-pump as soon as possible.

1045. The antidote is the _carbonate_, or _super-carbonate of soda_.


1046. NITRIC, (aqua fortis,) MURIATIC, (MARINE ACID,) OR SULPHURIC
(OIL OF VITRIOL,) ACIDS, may be taken by accident, and produce
poisonous effects.

1047. The antidote is _calcined magnesia_, which should be freely
administered, to neutralize the acid and induce vomiting. When
magnesia cannot be obtained, the _carbonate of potash_ (salaeratus) may
be given. _Chalk_, powdered and given in solution, or strong _soap
suds_, will answer a good purpose, when the other articles are not at
hand. It is of very great importance that something be given speedily,
to neutralize the acid. One of the substances before mentioned should
be taken freely, in diluent and mucilaginous drinks, as gum-water,
milk, flaxseed, or slippery-elm tea. Emetics ought to be avoided.


1048. OXALIC ACID.--This acid resembles the sulphate of magnesia,
(epsom salts,) which renders it liable to be taken, by mistake, in
poisonous doses. Many accidents have occurred from this circumstance.
They can easily be distinguished by tasting a small quantity. _Epsom
salts_, when applied to the tongue, have a very bitter taste, while
_oxalic acid_ is intensely sour.

1049. The antidote is _magnesia_, between which and the acid a
chemical action takes place, producing the oxalate of magnesia, which
is inert. When magnesia is not at hand, _chalk_, _lime_, or _carbonate
of potash_, (salaeratus,) will answer as a substitute. Give the
antidote in some of the mucilaginous drinks before mentioned. No time
should be lost in introducing the stomach-pump as soon as a surgeon
can be obtained.


1050. LEY.--The ley obtained by the leaching of ashes may be taken by
a child accidentally. The antidote is vinegar, or oil of any kind. The
vinegar neutralizes the alkali by uniting with it, forming the acetate
of potash. The oil unites with the alkali, and forms soap, which is
less caustic than the ley. Give, at the same time, large draughts of
mucilaginous drinks, as flaxseed tea, &c.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

1044. What is the antidote for white vitriol? 1047. What is the
antidote for aqua fortis and oil of vitriol? Should emetics be
avoided? 1048. How can oxalic acid be distinguished from epsom salts?
1049. What is the antidote for an over-dose of oxalic acid? When
magnesia cannot be obtained, what will answer as a substitute? 1050.
What is the antidote when ley is swallowed?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=


VEGETABLE POISONS.

1051. The vegetable poisons are quite as numerous, and many of them
equally as virulent, as any in the mineral kingdom. We shall describe
the most common, and which, therefore, are most liable to be taken.


1052. OPIUM.--This is the article most frequently resorted to by those
wishing to commit suicide, and, being used as a common medicine, is
easily obtained. From this cause, also, mistakes are very liable to be
made, and accidents result from it. Two of its preparations,
_laudanum_ and _paregoric_, are frequently mistaken for each other;
the former being given when the latter is intended.

1053. _Morphia_, in solution, or _morphine_, as it is more commonly
called by the public, is a preparation of the drug under consideration,
with which many cases of poisoning are produced. It is the active
narcotic principle of the opium; and one grain is equal to six of this
drug in its usual form.

1054. When an over-dose of opium, or any of its preparations, has been
swallowed, the stomach should be evacuated as speedily as possible. To
effect this, a teaspoonful of ground mustard seed, or as much tartar
emetic as can be held on a five cent piece, or as much _ipecacuanha_
as can be held on a twenty-five cent piece, should be mixed in a
tumbler of warm water, and one half given at once, and the remainder
in twenty minutes, if the first has not, in the mean time, operated.
In the interval, copious draughts of warm water, or warm sugar and
water, should be drank.

1055. The use of the stomach-pump, in these cases, is of the greatest
importance, and should be resorted to without delay. After most of the
poison has been evacuated from the stomach, a strong infusion of
_coffee_ ought to be given; or some one of the vegetable acids, such
as _vinegar_, or _lemon-juice_, should be administered.

1056. The patient should be kept in motion, and salutary effects will
often be produced by dashing a bucket of cold water on the head.
_Artificial respiration_ ought to be established, and kept up for some
time. If the extremities are cold, apply warmth and friction to them.
After the poison has been evacuated from the stomach, stimulants, as
warm wine and water, or warm brandy and water, should be given, to
keep up and sustain vital action.


1057. STRAMONIUM--_Thorn-Apple._--This is one of the most active
narcotic poisons, and, when taken in over-doses, has, in numerous
instances, caused death.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

1051. Are vegetable poisons as numerous and as virulent in their
effects as mineral? 1052. What is said of opium and its preparations?
1054, 1055, 1056. What treatment should be adopted when an over-dose
of opium or any of its preparations is taken? 1057. What is said of
stramonium?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

1058. HYOSCIAMUS--_Henbane._--This article, which is used as a
medicine, if taken in improper doses, acts as a virulent irritating
and narcotic poison.

1059. The treatment for the two above-mentioned articles is similar to
that of poisoning from over-doses of opium.


1060. CONIUM--_Hemlock._--Hemlock, improperly called, by many,
_cicuta_, when taken in an over-dose, acts as a narcotic poison. It
was by this narcotic that the Athenians used to destroy the lives of
individuals condemned to death by their laws. Socrates is said to have
been put to death by this poison. When swallowed in over-doses, the
treatment is similar to that of opium, stramonium, and henbane, when
over-doses are taken.


1061. BELLADONNA--_Deadly Nightshade._--CAMPHOR. ACONITE--_Monkshood_,
_Wolfsbane._ BRYONIA--_Bryony._ DIGITALIS--_Foxglove._
DULCAMARA--_Bittersweet._ GAMBOGE. LOBELIA--_Indian Tobacco._
SANGUINARIA--_Bloodroot._ OIL OF SAVIN. SPIGELIA--_Pinkroot._
STRYCHNINE--_Nux vomica._ TOBACCO.--All of these, when taken in
over-doses, are poisons of greater or less activity. The treatment of
poisoning, by the use of any of these articles, is similar to that
pursued in over-doses of opium. (See OPIUM, page 442.)


1062. In _all_ cases of poisoning, call a physician as soon as
possible.

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

1058. Of henbane? 1059. What should be the treatment when an
over-dose of stramonium or henbane is taken? 1060. What name is
sometimes improperly given to _conium_, or hemlock? How was this
narcotic poison used by the Athenians? How are the effects of an
over-dose counteracted? 1061. What is the treatment when an
over-dose of deadly nightshade, monkshood, foxglove, bittersweet,
gamboge, lobelia, bloodroot, tobacco, &c., is taken? 1062. Should a
physician be called in all cases when poison is swallowed?

  -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=


A.

The essential parts of every secretory apparatus are a simple
membrane, apparently textureless, named the _primary_, or _basement
membrane_, certain cells and blood-vessels. The serous and mucous
membrane are examples.


B.

The division and description of the different membranes and tissues
are not well defined and settled by anatomical writers. This is not a
material defect, as a clear description of the different parts of the
system can be given by adopting the arrangement of almost any writer.


C.

FAT is one of the non-nitrogenous substances. It forms the essential
part of the adipose tissue. Chemical analysis shows that all fatty
substances are compounds of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. They are
lighter than water, generally fluid at the natural temperature of the
body, and burn with a bright flame, forming water and carbonic acid.

CASEINE is abundantly found in milk. When dried, it constitutes
cheese. Alcohol, acids, and the stomach of any of the mammalia
coagulate it; and it is also soluble in water. It is found in the
blood, bile, saliva, and the lens of the eye.

CHONDRINE is a variety of gelatin. It is obtained from cartilage. It
is soluble in warm water, but solidifies on cooling.

LACTIC ACID is common to all the solids and fluids of the system. It
is found united with potash, soda, lime, or magnesia.


D.

The word _duodenum_ is derived from the Latin, signifying "twelve,"
since the intestine, of which this is the name, is usually about
twelve fingers' breadth in length. The _jejunum_ is also from the
Latin _jejunum_, empty, since it is usually found in that condition
after death, as the food seems to pass rapidly through this part of
the intestine. The term _ileum_ is from the Greek, signifying "to
twist," since it always appears in a contorted condition. The name
_caecum_ is derived from the fact of its being a blind or short sack,
perforated by the extremity of the ileum. The name of the next
division of the intestine--_colon_--is from the Greek, "to prohibit,"
as the contents of the alimentary canal pass slowly through this
portion. The _rectum_ is named from the straight direction that it
assumes in the latter part of its course.


E.

The food is forced through the alimentary canal by contractions of its
muscular coat, produced by the nervous filaments of the sympathetic
system, not being at all dependent on the cerebro-spinal centre. This
is called the peristaltic, or vermicular motion. The great length of
intestine in all animals, and especially in the herbivorous ones, is
owing to the necessity of exposing the food to a large number of the
lacteals, that the nourishment may all be taken from it.


F.

The different processes through which the food passes before
assimilation are of considerable interest. The mastication and mixture
of the saliva with the food are purely of a mechanical nature. When
any solid or fluid substance is placed upon the tongue, or in contact
with the inner surface of the cheeks, by an involuntary act, the
salivary glands are stimulated to activity, and commence pouring the
saliva into the mouth through the salivary ducts. As soon as
mastication commences, the contraction of the masseter and other
muscles employed in mastication stimulates the salivary glands to
increased action, and a still greater quantity of saliva is secreted
and forced upon the food, which is constantly being ground to a finer
condition, until it is sufficiently reduced for deglutition.

Whether the salivary fluid acts any other part than simply that of a
demulcent to assist the gastric juice in still further dissolving the
food, is yet a matter of some doubt, although it is found that no
other liquid will equally well subserve the process of digestion and
promote health.

After the food is in the condition ready to be swallowed, by an
apparently involuntary motion, it is placed upon the back of the
tongue, which carries it backwards to the top of the pharynx, where
the constrictions of the pharynx, aided by the muscles of the tongue
and floor of the mouth, with a sudden and violent movement thrust it
beyond the epiglottis, in order to allow the least necessary time to
the closure of the glottis, after which, by the compression of the
oesophagus, it is forced into the stomach.

Here it is that the true business of digestion commences. For as soon
as any substance except water enters the stomach, this organ, with
involuntary movements, that seem almost like instinct, commences the
secretion of the gastric juice, and by long-continued contractions of
its muscular coat, succeeds in effecting a most perfect mixture of the
food with this juice, by which the contents of the stomach are reduced
to the softest pulp.

The gastric juice, in its pure state, is a colorless, transparent
fluid; "inodorous, a little saltish, and perceptibly acid. It
possesses the property of coagulating albumen, and separating the whey
of milk from its curd, and afterwards completely dissolving the curd.
Its taste, when applied to the tongue, is similar to that of
mucilaginous water, slightly acidulated with muriatic acid." The
organs of its secretion are an immense number of tubes or glands, of a
diameter varying from one five hundredth to one three hundredth of an
inch, situated in the mucous coat of the stomach, and receiving their
blood from the gastric arteries. A chemical analysis shows it to
consist of water, mucilage, and the several free acids--muriatic,
acetic, lactic, and butyric, together with a peculiar organic matter
called _pepsin_, which acts after the manner of ferments between the
temperature of 50 deg. and 104 deg. F.

The true process of digestion is probably owing to the action of
pepsin and the acids, especially if the presence of the chloro-hydric
or muriatic be admitted; since we know, by experiments out of the
body, that chlorine, one of its elements, is a powerful solvent of all
organic substances.

The antiseptic properties of the gastric juice, as discovered by
experiments made on Alexis St. Martin, doubtless have much influence
on digestion, although their true uses are probably not yet known.

As soon as the food is reduced to a state of fluidity, the pyloric
orifice of the stomach is unclosed, and it is thrust onwards through
the alimentary canal, receiving in the duodenum the secretions of the
liver and pancreas, after which it yields to the lacteals its nutrient
portion, and the residuum is expelled from the body.

There have been many hypotheses in regard to the nature of the
digestive process. Some have supposed that digestion is a mere
mechanical process, produced by the motion of the walls of the
stomach; while others, in later times, have considered it as under the
influence of a spirit separate from the individual, who took up his
residence in the stomach and regulated the whole affair; while others
still would make it out to be a chemical operation, and thus
constitute the stomach a sort of laboratory. But to all these
ridiculous hypotheses Sir John Hunter has applied the following
playful language: "Some will have it that the stomach is a mill;
others that it is a fermenting vat; and others that it is a stewpan;
but in my view of the matter, it is neither a mill, a fermenting vat,
nor a stewpan, but a stomach, _a stomach_!"

At the present day this process is regarded as a complex, and not a
simple operation. It seems to be a process in which the mechanical,
chemical, and vital agencies must all act in harmony and order; for if
one of these be withdrawn, the function cannot be sustained for any
considerable length of time; and of the chemical and mechanical parts
of the process, since the former is much more important, and, as a
matter of course, the vital powers are indispensable, therefore
digestion may be considered as a chemical operation, directly
dependent on the laws of vitality, or of life; since the proper
consistency of the food depends, in a great measure, upon the
character of the solvents, while the secretion of these fluids, their
proper amount, together with the peculiar instinct--as it almost
seems to be--necessary to direct the stomach in its many functions,
are exclusively and entirely dependent on the laws and conditions of
life.


G.

As food is necessary to supply the waste and promote the growth of the
body, it follows that that will be the best adapted to the system
which contains the same chemical elements of which the body is
composed; viz., oxygen, hydrogen, carbon, and nitrogen. These elements
are found in greater or less quantity in all animal food, and in many
vegetable products. Hence, that article of food which contains all
these elements in a proper proportion will tend much more to the
growth and strength of the body than those kinds which are deficient
in one or more of them. Much experience on this point, and scientific
research, seem to show that a reasonable amount of animal food in
health tends to give greater strength of muscle, and a more general
sense of fulness, than in ordinary cases a vegetable diet is able to
do, owing to the presence of nitrogen in animal tissues. Yet there are
examples of the healthiest and strongest men, who live years without a
morsel of animal food; and the fact can only be accounted for, by
supposing that the system has the power to make the most economical
use of the little nitrogen offered to it in the food; or else that it
has by some means the power to abstract it from the atmosphere, and
transform it to the living animal substance.


H.

The proximate principles, which are the most important in nourishing
the body, are albumen and fibrin. These constitute the greater part of
all the softer animal tissues, and are also found in certain classes
of vegetables, such as peas, beans, lentils, and many seeds. Hence, in
many cases, a vegetable diet, especially if embracing any of those
articles, would be sufficient to sustain life, even if no animal food
should be eaten. But no animal can exist for a long time if permitted
only to eat substances destitute of nitrogen, as in the case of a dog
fed entirely on sugar, which lived but thirty days. And owing to this
fact, Baron Liebig proposes to call substances used for food,
containing nitrogen, "elements of nutrition," and those containing an
excess of carbon, "elements of respiration;" since, according to his
view, the food is necessary to support the growth of the body by
replacing the effete and worn-out particles with new matter, and also
to keep up the supply of fuel, in order to promote a sufficient degree
of heat in the system. Accordingly, under the first division would be
included all lean meats and vegetables, such as peas, &c.; while the
fat of animals, vegetable oils, sugars, tubers, (as the potato,) and
all other substances containing starch, would be included under the
latter division.


I.

This definition of exhalants is from the theory of Haller and others.
It is now believed that the fluids exude through the thin coats of the
blood vessels. This process is called _exosmose_, and is the
_exhalation_ of old physiologists.


J.

It is a well-established fact, in animal and vegetable physiology,
that membranes possess the property of allowing fluids and gases to
pass through them in either direction, and also to permit two fluids
to pass in opposite directions at the same time. This property is
designated _endosmose_ when a fluid passes from without a body inward;
and _exosmose_ when the reverse takes place. The first is called
_imbibition_. One of the most striking instances of this, in the human
system, is shown in the lungs, where carbonic acid and water pass out
through the mucous membrane of the bronchial tubes and air-cells; and
the oxygen of the air enters the blood through the same membrane. By
this process of imbibition, the oxygenation of the blood is much more
readily and faithfully accomplished; inasmuch, as by the immense
number of bronchial tubes and air-cells a larger quantity of blood is
exposed to a greater portion of air, than if the blood were directly
laid open to the atmosphere in a mass, or the air were immediately
transmitted through it.

Since the function of respiration is to free the system of superfluous
carbon and hydrogen, by union with the oxygen of the air, it follows
that the greater the amount of the products to be expelled, the larger
the quantity of oxygen will be required to effect this purpose, as we
find to be the case with those who consume large quantities of food.

The quantity of oxygen daily consumed through the lungs by an adult is
about 32.5 oz., and the carbon in the food 13.9 oz. But in order to
convert this whole amount of carbon into carbonic acid, which passes
off through the lungs and skin, 37 oz. of oxygen are required; the
remaining 4.5 oz. being absorbed by the skin. If the supply of food
remain the same, while the amount of oxygen in the inspired air is
diminished, the superfluous carbon will induce disease in the system,
as is the case of those persons who are limited in their supply of air
of a proper quality or quantity, and, consequently, have less appetite
for food than those who are abundantly supplied with air of the proper
standard of health; and in children, who proportionally consume more
food than adults, and who are more active, thereby causing a more
rapid circulation of blood, and, consequently, the removal of more
superfluous particles of matter.

In children we notice the need of air, by their disposition to be much
in the open air, and often inspiring more deeply than is common in
older persons. Also, if the carbon of the food does not have a
requisite supply of oxygen from the air, or other sources, the body
becomes emaciated, although nourishing food may be used. And on the
other hand, if there be a diminished supply of food, but an abundance
of atmospheric air, leanness and emaciation are sure to follow; owing
to the fact that if the oxygen has no waste carbon from the body to
unite with, it combines with the fat, and some other soft portions of
the body, which the Author of nature seems to have provided for this
very purpose; as is seen in the case of hibernating animals, who enter
their places of winter abode sleek and fat, but crawl out in the
spring not merely deprived of their fatty matter, but also with great
diminution of all the softer parts, which have given up their share of
carbon to supply animal heat. One important cause of emaciation in
febrile diseases is the greater rapidity of the pulse and respiration,
which consume more carbon than is afforded by the scanty supply of
food that is taken, although profuse perspiration, which almost always
occurs in some stages of fevers, greatly diminishes the full state of
the body.


K.

The theory of Baron Liebig concerning the change which the blood
experiences in color, in its passage through the lungs, meets with
the approbation of many physiologists, although there are some
important difficulties in the way of fully receiving it. A chemical
analysis of the blood shows it to be composed of albumen and
fibrin, together with some other substances, in small proportions, and
always perceptible traces of iron. He attributes the change in color
to the iron, as this substance enters into combination with carbon
and oxygen. For, as the blood passes through the trunks of the larger
vessels and capillaries, it receives the carbon from the tissues
which are continually transformed, and taking up the oxygen from the
arterialized blood, forms carbonic acid, which unites with the iron,
forming proto-carbonate of iron. This being of a gray color, he
supposes it to be that which, with the other impurities of the blood,
gives the venous blood the dark blue color. Then, as the blood
comes in contact with the oxygen, as it is returned and exposed to
this element in the lungs, the carbonic acid leaves the iron, which
has a stronger affinity for oxygen than for carbonic acid, and forms
the scarlet red peroxide of iron, that gives the characteristic
color to the arterial blood. After this, as the blood is sent out
through the smaller arteries and capillaries, it again gathers carbon
and other impurities from the system, and becomes the dark, venous
blood, thus completing the whole change of color in the circulation.


L.

As already mentioned, different articles of food have been divided
into the azotized and non-azotized, or those which contain nitrogen as
one of their constituents, and those which are nearly destitute of it.
Of these, according to Liebig, the azotized portions are simply to
supply the waste that is continually going on in the body, and promote
its growth in the early stages of existence, or, in other words, the
nutrient portion; while the sugar, starch, &c., are mainly of use in
the respiratory organs. The correctness of this view may be understood
from the fact, that the inhabitants in the colder regions of the earth
consume a much larger quantity of oil and fat than the residents of
hotter climates; and also those dwelling in the temperate zones can
eat with greater impunity a larger quantity of fat meats in the winter
than in the summer, there being then so much more demand for animal
heat than in the summer.


M.

The suggestion of using the bellows in asphyxia, is from the
directions of that distinguished and veteran surgeon, Valentine Mott,
of New York city. The directions in the first part of the paragraph
are the most practical, and best adapted to the wants of the
community.




GLOSSARY

