The Downer well at Corry, Pa., is now down over 1,300 feet, and an oil
bearing sand has been struck of about five feet thickness.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: "Communications.", in Gothic script.]


                           =Our Patent Law.=

_To the Editor of the Scientific American_:

While I cannot handle this subject with any master talent, nor afford to
devote the time which should be given to so important a subject before
expressing an opinion, yet I can less afford to keep quiet and allow
shrewd avarice to manipulate or titled ignorance to legislate my
property out of existence. "Property! There is no property in patents,"
I often hear said. And how about the invention covered by a patent? Is
that property? A large majority of people may say no, and deny the
justice of a patent law. On the contrary, I, as an inventor, think an
invention is genuine property, and as such should be under the same
protection in common law as all other property, instead of requiring a
special law by which the people magnanimously grant me the privilege for
a short time of using what was never theirs, what they never knew of
until I brought it into existence.

But what is real property, and by what title is it held? Mother earth,
from which we sprung, by which we exist, and to which we return, is,
without question, real estate. How is it obtained; how held? History
answers, By conquest, by subjugation. But these words, conquest and
subjugation, have a more significant meaning than the spoiling of one
people by another; they are the actual price of possession. He who,
toiling, subjugates the soil, is undoubted owner of its production, by
virtue of the highest blessing on record--"By the sweat of thy brow
shalt thou obtain bread." And this principle is so far acknowledged that
the laborer holds a lien on the product of his labor, even though the
property belongs to another.

Mr. A has an unpromising piece of land on which he would like to raise
corn. He analyzes the soil, experiments upon it chemically, reads up on
the properties and components of corn, the effects of fertilizers and
acids upon the soil, and makes himself a fool and laughing-stock
generally among his neighbors because he steps out of the beaten track
by which they have succeeded in making the ground barren. He does not
have much success the first year, and is sympathizingly consoled with "I
told you so." But he perseveres and wins the reputation of being
"visionary" and "as stubborn as a mule." In the meantime he becomes more
familiar with his subject, sees more clearly the requirements of the
case, finds he must post himself more thoroughly in certain branches of
science in order to conduct his experiments, wrestles with this obstacle
and that, and finally discovers a fertilizer based on some natural law
of rotation, and produces a crop of corn never before equaled. Now his
neighbors come out with this very intelligent question, "How did you
happen to think of it?" And they further very condescendingly remark,
"That is a rousing crop; I guess I'll try the same thing myself. How did
you say you mixed the stuff?" This man is the true conqueror. He has
endured privation and scorn, fought obstacles, and in subduing them has
eliminated a new principle in agriculture that is an engine of power to
all generations. Shall his crops be his only reward? Shall they who
laughed him to scorn step into his reward without sharing the labor that
produced it?

This is a simile for thousands of inventions, only that the inventor is
seldom situated to plant the corn on his own land and reap the harvest.
Then which of you will say that he has not a just lien on every man's
crop raised by his process for a per cent of the gains thereby? There is
a bill before Congress favoring a periodical taxation of patents under
the pretext of removing useless patents from the path of later
inventors. Let me show you how one inventor looks at that. My neighbor
has a vacant lot on which he is unable to build; but joined to mine it
would increase the value of my property vastly. Now can't you legislate
that old heap of rubbish into my possession somehow? Of course he is
waiting for the rise of property around him to sell his lot well; but
can't you make that appear unnatural, and that he is a dog in the
manger? It is also said that sharpers get control of old patents and lay
an embargo on legitimate business. I reply, first, no one could be
damaged by the owner of a patent unless he infringed that owner's right;
second, if he does infringe, it shows that said patent is valuable,
otherwise he need not infringe; and if valuable why should not he pay
for it? Mr. B, in the employ of Mr. C, watches the machine he uses, and
spends his leisure hours in working out an improvement, which he patents
and offers to C for sale; but as the invention is useless except as
attached to C's machine, he thinks B can't help himself, and adopts the
improvement without paying for it. When a few years have built up a
great industry, and C is rich from his spoils, B steps in with a few
friends at his back, incorporated especially to make C shell out.

Of course this is bad and ought to be legislated against. If it were not
valuable C need not use it. It is not becoming to the Congress of a
great nation to spend its time in legislating worthless patents out of
existence. All such will die a natural death. And if there is sufficient
worth in any patent to claim your consideration, the inventor is
entitled to its price, whether he waits four years or fifteen for his
pay.

I speak of myself, not as an individual, but as representing in this
letter a class, without whose achievements America, in her proud length
and breadth, could not to-day have been. For the last half of my past
life, over twenty years, I have been an inventor. Schooled in adversity,
accustomed to disappointment, sometimes successful, enjoying no
luxuries but the conquest of obstacles, and often forced to simple
pursuits to keep the pot boiling, yet I expect to spend the rest of my
life inventing, feeling strong in the school of experience, and hoping
for such prosperity as will enable me to work out some of the larger
problems in view.

If those in power would really aid the inventor, let them increase his
facilities for information. Circulate the Patent Office _Gazette_ at one
dollar a year, a nominal subscription to insure _bona fide_ readers, and
pay the balance out of the Patent Office surplus now accumulated. This
both to educate and to save inventors from going over old ground,
bringing more talent up to the standard of to-day. Lessen rather than
increase Patent Office fees. Enable the Commissioner to give the
strictest possible examination on every application for a patent, that
when issued it shall bear a _bona fide_ value, by retaining the most
competent examiners at a salary adequate to keep them. Reduce the
cumbrous machinery of patent litigation to about this text, in two
headings: First, Is plaintiff the first inventor? Allow one month to
find that out. If not disproved in that time, allow it. Second, Does
defendant infringe? Allow one month to decide that. If not proven,
discharge the case, with cost to plaintiff. If proved, cost and damage
to be settled by defendant in thirty days.

The ability of wealthy corporations to absorb with impunity the product
of all talent within their reach, and put off the day of reckoning until
plaintiff is swallowed in cost, is the greatest present discouragement
to inventors. Our patent law is now better than any amendment yet
proposed will leave it. If you must tinker over it, remember all laws
are for protection of the weak. The bulldog does not need law to take
the bone from the spaniel. Just in proportion as you damage the patent
law, you destroy the accomplishments and purpose of my life. Therefore I
have spoken; so could a thousand more.                 W. X. STEVENS.
  East Brookfield, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *


         =The Edison Carbon Telephone and Hughes' Microphone.=

_To the Editor of the Scientific American_:

Mr. Edison finds a resemblance between his carbon telephone and my
microphone.

I can find none whatever; the microphone in its numerous forms that I
have already made, and varied by many others since, is simply the
embodiment of a discovery I have made, in which I consider the
microphone as the first step to new and perhaps more wonderful
applications.

I have proved that all bodies, solid, liquid, and gaseous, are in a
state of molecular agitation when under the influence of sonorous
vibrations; no matter if it is a piece of board, walls of a house,
street, fields or woods, sea or air, all are in this constant state of
vibration, which simply becomes more evident as the sonorous vibrations
are more powerful. This I have proved by the discovery that when two or
more electrical conducting bodies are placed in contact under very
slight constant pressure, resting on any body whatever, they will of
themselves transform a constant electrical current into an undulatory
current, representing in its exact form the vibrations of the matter on
which it reposes; it requires no complicated arrangement and no special
material, and to most experimenters the three simple iron nails that I
have described form the best and most sensitive microphone. But these
contact points would soon oxidize, so naturally I prefer some conducting
material which will not oxidize.

Mr. Edison's carbon telephone represents the principle of the varying
pressure of a diaphragm or its equivalent on a button of carbon varying
the amount of electricity in accordance with this change of pressure; it
represents no field of discovery, and its uses are restricted to
telephony.

The three nails I have spoken of will not only do all, and that far
better than Edison's carbon telephone in telephony, but has the power of
taking up sounds inaudible to human ears, and rendering them audible, in
fact a true microphone; besides it has the merit of demonstrating the
molecular action which is constantly occurring in all matter under the
influence of sonorous vibrations.

Here we have certainly no resemblance in form, materials, or principles
to Mr. Edison's telephone. The carbon telephone represents a special
material in a special way to a special purpose.

The microphone demonstrates and represents the whole field of nature;
the whole world of matter is suitable to act upon, and the whole of the
electrical conducting materials are suitable to its demonstrations.

The one represents a patentable improvement; the other a discovery too
great and of too wide bearing for any one to be justified in holding it
by patent, and claiming as his own that which belongs to the world's
domain.

  London, July 2, 1878.      D. E. HUGHES.

       *       *       *       *       *




                     =New Industrial Enterprises.=

The increasing wealth of a nation, as well as the profitable and steady
employment of its capital and people, depends upon a continual increase
of the producing power. Whenever there are latent resources undeveloped
or opportunities for establishing the first foundation of an industry,
leading as it will to the originating of hundreds of auxiliary ones, an
unusual effort should be made to bring it into existence. If in the
power of individuals to accomplish, so much the better; if needing an
association with State or national influence, then this association
should be formed. It is incumbent upon individuals that they possess a
sufficient pride in the prosperity of the country to give every possible
attention and assistance to a careful practical demonstration of the
feasibility of all the new industrial enterprises which may be presented
with reasonable assurance of final success.

Not in a great expenditure of money: influence is better than money, and
a potential interest in a new enterprise is often better than capital.
The industrial resources of the United States are by no means worked to
their full capacity. The people by no means make all they consume. The
finer articles of use, and requiring much labor and often the highest
skill, are imported from foreign nations. A premium of $10,000 offered
for an improved method in any known present process of production or
manufacture would be almost sure to be called for.

While America exports $175,000,000 worth of raw cotton annually to be
worked up by other people, is it not possible to so increase the
manufacture in America as to keep the greater part of that raw material
and to export the cloth instead? Is it not practicable to establish
great numbers more of sugar estates in the same tropical climate? Is it
not practicable to lay the foundation of half a dozen beet sugar mills
in the country? To begin the weaving of linen goods, and to teach our
farmers that they may produce all the flax fiber as fast as required? To
start a ramie industry in a small way and teach the process to those who
will engage in it?

Will not our silk men put a velvet industry into operation as a germ
from which a future industry may grow? And we might name a hundred other
lesser enterprises which have hardly name in this country, but every one
of which is needed and will add to the wealth of the people.

       *       *       *       *       *




                 =Replanting and Transplanting Teeth.=

Dr. G. R. Thomas, of Detroit, in the current number of the _Dental
Cosmos_, states that this operation of "replanting" has become so common
with him, and the results so uniformly satisfactory, that he does not
hesitate to perform it on any tooth in the mouth, if the case demands
it; and he finds the cases that demand it, and the number that he
operates upon, continually multiplying.

He makes it a point to examine the end of the roots of nearly all his
cases of abscessed teeth; and a record of more than 150 cases, with but
one loss (and that in the mouth of a man so timid that he utterly
refused to bear the pain which nearly always follows for a few minutes,
therefore necessitating re-extraction), convinces him that the operation
is not only practical, but decidedly beneficial to both patient and
operator. For one sitting is all that he has ever really found necessary
to the full and complete restoration of the case.

In the present article, however, Dr. Thomas states that it is his object
not so much to speak of replanting as of transplanting, which he has
reason to believe is just as practical, so far as the mere re-attachment
is concerned, as is replanting. He details, in illustration, a case in
which he successfully performed the operation; inserting in the mouth of
a gentleman, who had lost a right superior cuspidate, a solid and
healthy tooth that he had removed from a lady's mouth four weeks
previously. He opened into canal and pulp chamber of the tooth, from the
apex of the root only; cut the end off one eighth of an inch (it being
that much too long), reduced the size somewhat in the center of the root
(it being a trifle larger than the root extracted), filled and placed it
in position. He states that the occlusion, shape, and color were
perfect, so much so that several dentists who saw the case were not able
to distinguish the transplanted tooth from the others. The two features
in the case that he calls particular attention to are: first, that
although the tooth had been in his office four weeks, there is to-day no
perceptible change in color; and second, that the re-attachment is as
perfect as though it had been transplanted or replanted the same day of
extraction. The operation was performed about three months ago. Dr.
Thomas knows of but two obstacles in the way of the perfect
practicability of "transplanting:" first, the difficulty of obtaining
the proper teeth at the proper time; and second, the possibility of
inoculation. The latter is the more formidable of the two, and, to
escape the ills that might follow, the greatest caution is necessary.
The first difficulty is more easily gotten over, for it is not necessary
that the tooth transplanted should correspond exactly in shape and size
to the one extracted; if it is too large, it may be carefully reduced;
or if too small, new osseous deposit will supply the deficiency. Neither
is it necessary, as we have seen, that the transplanted tooth should be
a freshly extracted one.

As a demonstration of what modern dental surgery is capable of
performing Dr. Thomas' statements are very interesting; it is doubtful,
however, whether popular prejudice will allow this practice of
"transplanting" to become of much use.

       *       *       *       *       *




                    =American Institute Exhibition.=

For forty-seven years the American Institute of New York has opened its
doors and invited American inventors and manufacturers to exhibit their
productions; and again this year it renews its invitation to all. To
such as wish to reach the capitalist and consumer, they must admit that
New York is the place. For details apply to the General Superintendent
by mail or otherwise.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 22d of June, cloud bursts occurred in the mountains northeast of
San Buenaventura, Cal., causing the Ventura river to pour down such a
volume of muddy water that the ocean was discolored for a distance of
six miles.

       *       *       *       *       *




                      =THE DISTILLATION OF COAL.=

Bituminous coal, of which there are several varieties, is the best
suited for the production of coal gas. The Newcastle coal is principally
used in the manufacture of London gas. Scotch parrot coal produces a
superior gas, but the coke produced is of inferior quality. Boghead coal
is also used for gas making--in fact, every kind of coal, except
anthracite, may be used for this purpose. The bituminous shale produces
a very good gas, and it is used partly to supply the place of cannel or
parrot coal. As carbon and hydrogen, principally with oxygen, are the
elements from which gas is formed, most substances containing these
elements can be partially converted into gas. And gas has been made from
grease or kitchen waste, oil peat, rosin, and wood, besides coal. A ton
of Newcastle or caking coal yields about 9,000 cubic feet of gas, Scotch
coal about 11,000, English cannel about 10,000, and shale about 7,000,
with illuminating powers in the ratio of about 13, 25, 22, and 36
respectively. The coal is put in retorts, _r_, commonly made of fire
clay and often of cast iron. These retorts are from 6 feet to 9 feet
long, and from 1 foot to 1 foot 8 inches in breadth. They are made like
the letter D, elliptical, cylindrical, or bean shaped. They are built
into an arched oven, and heated by furnaces, _f_, beneath. One, three,
five, seven, or more are built in the same oven. The mouthpieces are of
cast iron, and project outward from the oven, so as to allow ascension
pipes, _a p_, to be fixed, to convey the gas generated from the coal to
the hydraulic main, _h m_. After the coal has been introduced into the
retorts, their mouths are closed with lids luted round the edges with
clay, and kept tight by a screw. The retorts are kept at a bright red
heat. If the temperature be too low, less gas and more tar are produced,
less residue being left; while, should the temperature be too high, the
product is more volatile, more residue remaining. And should the gas
remain for any length of time in contact with the highly heated retort,
it is partially decomposed, carbon being deposited, thereby lessening
the illuminating power, and choking up the retort, and more carbon
disulphide is produced at a high temperature. The object is to maintain
a medium temperature, in order to obtain a better gas having the
greatest illuminating power. In about four or five hours the coal in the
retort will have given off all its gas. The mouth of the retort is
opened, and the coke is raked out into large iron vessels, and
extinguished by water. A fresh charge is immediately introduced by means
of a long scoop in the cherry-red retort, and the door luted to. The
ascension pipes, which convey the gas from the retorts, pass straight up
for a few feet, then turn round, forming an arch, then pass downward
into the hydraulic main, beneath the level of the liquid contained in
it, and bubble up through the liquid into the upper portion of the main.
On commencing the main is half filled with water, but after working some
time, this water is displaced by the fluid products of distillation. In
this way, the opening into each retort is closed, so that a charge can
be withdrawn and replaced without interfering with the action of the
other retorts and pipes. The liquid tar, ammoniacal water, and gas pass
from the end, _e_, of the hydraulic main, down through the pipe, P, and
the liquid falls down into the tar well, T W, while the crude gas goes
on into the chest, C, partially filled with the liquid, so that the
plates, _p p_, from the top dip into it to within a few inches of the
bottom. These dip plates are placed in the chest, so as to separate the
openings into each pair of condensing pipes, _c c_, so that the gas
passing into the chest finds no exit except up _c_{1}, and down
_c_{2}; and there being no dip plate between _c_{2} and _c_{3} it
passes up _c_{3}, and down _c_{4}, and as there is no dip plate to
prevent its progress, it passes up _c_{5}, and down _c_{6}, into the
lime or iron purifiers, L I. The condensers are kept cool by exposure to
the atmosphere, and are often cooled by a stream of water from a tank
above. The gas cools quickly, and liquids passing along with the gas in
a state of vapor are condensed and fall into the chest, and pass by an
overflow pipe into the tar well. The purifier is a cast iron vessel, L
I, containing a number of perforated shelves, _s_{1} _s_{1} _s_{1},
on which slaked lime, to the depth of about 4 inches, or much greater
thickness of iron oxide and sawdust, is placed. The gas passes up
through the shelves, _s s s_, and down through the shelves, _s_{1}
_s_{1} _s_{1}, through the pipe, G, into the gas holder, and from
thence through the pipe, M, to the main pipe. The lime abstracts
carbonic anhydride, sulphureted hydrogen, cyanogen, naphthalin, and a
portion of the ammonia, but not carbon disulphide, which latter may be
absorbed by passing the gas through a solution of sodic hydrate and
plumbic oxide, mixed with sawdust. Gas containing CS{2}, on burning,
produces H{2}SO{4}, which injures books and furniture in rooms.
However, the quantity of CS{2} in gas is generally so minute as to be
practically uninjurious. By a proper regulation of the temperature
during distillation, the quantity produced is infinitesimal. When the
lime is saturated it is removed, and fresh supplied; but the iron, after
use, can be reconverted into oxide by exposure to the atmosphere, and
used repeatedly. When iron is used a separate lime purifier is necessary
to remove carbonic anhydride. The last traces of ammonia are removed
before passing to the gas holder, by passing the gas through dilute
sulphuric acid, or up through the interior of a tower having perforated
shelves covered with coke in small pieces, through which a constant
supply of fresh water percolates. This washing removes some of the more
condensable hydrocarbons, and lessens the illuminating power of the gas.
Before the gas passes from the condensers into the purifiers, it passes
through a kind of pump, termed an exhauster, driven by steam power. This
action relieves the retorts from the pressure of the gas passing through
the hydraulic main, etc. It diminishes the deposit of graphite in the
retorts, and lessens leakage in them, should there be any flaws. It also
has the beneficial effect of producing a gas of a higher illuminating
power, since the relief of pressure in the retorts produces a more
favorable condition of combustion.

[Illustration: THE DISTILLATION OF COAL.]

The following are some of the bodies produced in the manufacture of gas,
namely, acetylene, _g_, the carbonate, _s_, chloride, _s_, cyanide, _s_,
sulphide, _s_, and sulphate, _s_, of ammonium; aniline, _t_, anthracene,
_s_, benzine, _l_, carbonic oxide, _g_, carbonic anhydride, _g_,
carbonic disulphide, _l_, chrysene, _s_, cumene, _l_, cymene, _l_,
ethylene, _g_, hydrogen, _g_, leucoline, _l_, methyl-hydride, _g_,
naphthaline, _s_, nitrogen, _g_, paraffine, _s_, phenylic alcohol, _l_,
picoline, _l_, propene, _g_, quartene, _g_, sulphureted hydrogen, _g_,
toluene, _l_, water, _l_, xylene, _l_, etc.

The most of the above solid and liquid substances, with the letters _s_
and _l_ written after, are removed by cooling the gas in the condensers,
and the gaseous substances marked _g_, that are injurious in the
consumption of the gas, are removed by purification. The impurities in
the gas may consist of ammonic carbonate and sulphide, carbonic
anhydride and disulphide, nitrogen, oxygen, sulphureted hydrogen, and
water in the form of vapor; and acetylene, ethylene, and the vapors of
the acetylene, ethylene, and phenylene series of hydrocarbons are the
illuminating ingredients diluted with carbonic oxide, hydrogen, and
methyl-hydride. The approximate percentage composition of coal gas is:
H, 45.6; Me, 34.8; CO, 6.5; C{2}H{4}, 4; CO{2}, 3.6; N, 2.4;
C{4}H{8}, 2.3; SH{2}, 0.3, etc.--_Hugh Clements in English Mechanic._

       *       *       *       *       *




                    =A Short History of Petroleum.=

The _Lumberman's Gazette_ gives the following short history of
petroleum: The production of petroleum as an article of trade dates from
the 28th of August, 1859, when Colonel Drake, in a well 69-1/2 feet
deep, "struck oil," and coined a phrase that will last as long as the
English language. From that beginning it has increased to an annual
production of 14,500,000 barrels of crude oil. The first export was in
1861, of 27,000 barrels, valued at $1,000,000, and the export of
petroleum in the year 1877 was, in round numbers, $62,000,000. The
annual product of petroleum to-day--crude and refined--is greater in
value than the entire production of iron, and is more than double that
of the anthracite coal of the State of Pennsylvania, and exceeds the
gold and silver product of the whole country. As an article of export it
is fourth, and contests closely for the third rank. Our leading exports
are relatively as follows: Cotton annually from $175,000,000 to
$227,000,000; flour from $69,000,000 to $130,000,000; pork and its
products (bacon, ham and lard) from $57,000,000 to $82,000,000; and
petroleum from $48,000,000 to $62,000,000. The total export of petroleum
from 1861 to and including 1877 (16 years) has been $442,698,968, custom
house valuation. From the best sources of information there are at this
time 10,000 oil wells, producing and drilling, which, at a cost of
$5,000 per well, would make an investment of $50,000,000 in this branch
of the business. Tankage now existing of a capacity of 6,000,000 barrels
cost $2,000,000, and $7,000,000 has been invested in about 2,000 miles
of pipe lines connected with the wells. The entire investment for the
existing oil production, including purchase money of territory, is
something over $100,000,000, which amount cannot be lessened much, if
any, for as wells cease to produce new ones have been constantly drilled
to take their place.

       *       *       *       *       *




                        =Minute Forms of Life.=

The Rev. W. H. Dallinger lately delivered a lecture at the Royal
Institution, descriptive of the recent researches of Dr. Drysdale and
himself. The object of the lecture was mainly to explain the method of
research which had been employed. The first essays of the opticians to
produce "high powers" were, as might be expected, feeble. These powers
amplified, but did not analyze; hence it began to be questioned whether
"one could see more really with a high power than with a moderate one."
And this was true at the time. But it is not so now. The optician has
risen to the emergency, and provided us with powers of great magnifying
capacity which carry an equivalent capacity for analysis. They open up
structure in a wonderful way when rightly used. The lecturer began by
projecting upon the screen the magnified image of a wasp's sting--an
object about the 1-20th of an inch in natural size--and beside it was
placed a piece of the point of a cambric sewing needle of the same
length, magnified to the same extent. The details of the sting were very
delicate and refined, but the minute needle point became riven and torn
and blunt under the powerful analysis of the lens, showing what the
lecturer meant by "magnifying power;" not mere enlargement, but the
bringing out of details infinitely beyond us save through the well made
lens. This was further illustrated by means of the delicate structure of
the _Radiolaria_, and still further by means of a rarely delicate valve
of the diatom known as _N. rhomboides_. With a magnification of 600
diameters no structure of any kind was visible; but by gradually using
1,200, 1,800, and 2,400 diameters, it was made manifest how the ultimate
structure of this organic atom displayed itself.

But this power of analysis was carried still further by means of the
minutest known organic form, _Bacterium termo_. The lecturer had, in
connection with Dr. Drysdale, discovered that the movements of this
marvelously minute living thing were effected by means of a pair of fine
fibers or "flagella." These were so delicate as to be invisible to
everything but the most powerful and specially constructed lenses and
the most delicate retinas. But since this discovery, Dr. Koch, of
Germany, had actually photographed the flagella of much larger bacteria,
such as _Bacillus subtilis_, and expressed his conviction that the whole
group was flagellate. Mr. Dallinger determined then to try to measure
the diameter of this minute _flagellum_ of _B. termo_ that the real
power of magnification in our present lenses might be tested. This was a
most difficult task, but 200 measurements were made with four different
lenses, and the results were for the mean of the first 50 measurements
0.00000489208; for the second, 0.00000488673; for the third,
0.00000488024; for the fourth, 0.00000488200, giving a mean value for
the whole, expressed in vulgar fractions, of the 1/204700 of an inch as
the diameter of the flagellum of _B. termo_.

With such power of analysis it was manifest that immense results might
be expected from a good use of the "highest powers." The proper method
of using them was next dwelt on, and then the apparatus was described,
by means of which a drop of fluid containing any organism that was being
studied might be prevented from evaporating while under the scrutiny of
the most powerful lenses, and for an indefinite length of time. The
importance of studying such organisms in this way--by continuous
observation--was then plainly shown, some of the peculiar inferences of
Dr. Bastian, as to the transmutation of bacteria into monads, and monads
into amoebae, etc., being explained by discontinuity of observation.

       *       *       *       *       *




                          =Wages in England.=

Consul General Badeau reports that during the past five years wages have
increased gradually about 10 per cent, while the cost of living has
increased about 25 per cent. Clothing is about 30 per cent higher, while
fuel has not risen in price. Agricultural laborers get from $2 to $3 per
week, including beer; building laborers and gardeners from $4.40 to
$5.10 per week; bricklayers, carpenters, masons, and engineers from
$6.80 to $11 per week; cabinetmakers, printers, and jewelers from $8 to
$12.30 per week, although the best marble masons and jewelers receive
$14.75. Bootmakers and tailors get from $4.86 to $7.65 per week, and
bakers from $4.65 to $7.25, with partial board. Women servants are paid
from $70 to $240 per annum. Railway porters and laborers on public works
get from $4.45 to $12 per week. Rents have risen some 30 per cent, and
