did you make out to-day?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The second day was a repetition of the first, as were the third and
fourth. A week passed before Dr. Bird entered the cell in evident
excitement.

"Has Hanac brought our evening food yet?" he asked anxiously.

"No, Doctor."

"Good. Take this light. As soon as he enters throw the light full on
him and hold him until I work on him. We've got to make our escape."

"Why?"

"The king is due back to-morrow. Saranoff is frightened at the good
impression I have made on the Selom. He is supreme in the monarch's
absence, so he plans to operate on both of us before he returns. He is
afraid to allow me to see the king with an unimpaired intellect and
memory. Shh! Here comes Hanac." The door to their cell opened
noiselessly. When the mole who brought their food was well inside,
Carnes turned on the tiny flashlight. The mole dropped on all fours
and tried to turn its back. Dr. Bird sprang forward. For an instant
his slim muscular fingers worked on the mole's neck and shoulders.
Silently the animal sank in a heap.

"Come on, Carnes," cried the doctor. "Turn off the light."

"Did you kill him, Doctor?" asked Carnes as he raced down a pitch dark
corridor at the scientist's heels.

"No, I merely paralyzed him temporarily. He'll be all right in a day
or so. Turn here."

       *       *       *       *       *

For ten minutes they ran down corridor after corridor. Carnes soon
lost all track of direction, but Dr. Bird never hesitated. Presently
he slowed down to a walk.

"It's a good thing I have a good memory," he said. "I planned that
course out from a map, and I had to memorize every turn and distance
of it. We are now behind your flying hall and away from any of the
regular dwellings of the Selom. Straight west about four miles is one
of the time-ray machines with a guard over it. Aside from them, there
isn't a mole between here and Detroit."

"What are we going to do, Doctor?"

"Keep out of their way and avoid recapture if we can. If we merely
wanted to escape we would try to get possession of that time-ray
machine and open a road to the surface. However, I am not content with
that. I want to stay underground until Astok, their king, returns.
When he comes, we will surrender to him."

"Suppose they operate without giving us a chance to present our side
of the affair."

"If they do, Saranoff wins; but they won't. The more I have seen of
the Selom, the more impressed I am by their sense of justice. They'll
give us a hearing, all right, and a fair one."

For two hours the doctor led the way. At the end of that time he
stopped.

"We've gone as far as we need to," he said. "They'll undoubtedly send
out searching parties, but if we can avoid thinking they won't be able
to find us. The tunnels are a perfect labyrinth. If you care to sleep,
go to it. We'll be safer sleeping than awake, for we won't be sending
out thoughts so fast."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Bird threw himself down on the rubber floor of the tunnel and was
soon asleep. Carnes tried to follow his example, but sleep would not
come to him. Frantically he tried to think of nothing. By an effort he
would sit for a few minutes with his mind a conscious blank, but
thoughts would throng in in spite of him. Time and again he brought
himself up with a jerk and forced his mind to become a blank. The
hours passed slowly. Carnes grew cramped from long immobility and
rose. A sudden thought intruded itself into his mind. "I might as well
throw that light away," he murmured to himself. "It will be no good
now. The Selom won't hurt us if they do catch us."

He reached in his pocket for the light. He was about to hurl it from
him when a moment of sanity came to him. He stared about. The impulse
to hurl the light away came stronger. He strove in vain to turn it on.

"Doctor!" he cried suddenly. "Wake up! They're after us!"

With a bound, Dr. Bird was on his feet.

"The light!" he cried. "Where is it?"

"In--my--hand," murmured Carnes with stiffening lips.

Dr. Bird seized the light. A beam stabbed the darkness. Less than
fifty feet from them stood two moles. As the light flashed on Carnes
regained control of himself.

"Take the light, Carnes," snapped the doctor. "I've got to put these
fellows to sleep."

Slowly he advanced toward the motionless Selom. He had almost reached
them when the light flickered out. He turned and raced at full speed
toward the detective. Carnes was standing rigid and motionless. Dr.
Bird took the light from his hand. Despite the almost overpowering
drag on his mind, he managed to turn it on. He swung the beam around
in a circle. Besides the two Selom he had seen before, the light
revealed a pair standing behind him. As the light struck them, the
numbing influence vanished for an instant from the doctor's mind. He
moved a step forward and then halted. The moles behind him were
hurling waves of mental power at him. Again the light cleared him for
an instant, but he got a brief glance of other moles hurrying from
every direction.

"The jig's up, I guess," he muttered. He strove to free himself by the
use of his light, but the tiny battery had done its duty, and
gradually the light grew dimmer. The influence grew too strong for
him. With a sigh he shut off the feeble ray and hurled the light from
him. The moles closed in.

"All right," said the doctor audibly. "We'll go peaceably."

       *       *       *       *       *

As he spoke the paralyzing power was withdrawn. With Carnes at his
side he retraced the route he had taken from the cell. Before they
reached it they turned off. Dr. Bird realized that they were treading
the familiar path to the laboratory.

Outside the laboratory the Selom halted. A wave of mental power
enveloped the prisoners and they remained silent and motionless while
their escort withdrew. From the laboratory came three of the Selom
scientists. As the laboratory door opened they could see that it was
bathed in a flood of light, and that the moles wore helmets covering
their heads. They moved inside. Clad in a white gown stood Saranoff.

"So, my friends, you would run away and leave me, would you?" gloated
the Russian. "And just when I had planned a very beneficial operation
for you! I will remove permanently from your brains all the delusions
which now encumber them, and for your own puny wills I will substitute
my own."

The power which had held the prisoners silent disappeared.

"You have caught us, Saranoff," said Dr. Bird. "I know the power you
wield and that you are making no idle boast. I appeal, however, to
these others, my friends. The operation you are planning to perform
is not a routine one. It is one that should have the sanction of the
king before it is done. I appeal from you to him."

"He is far away," laughed Saranoff. "When he returns, your plea will
be presented to him, but it will be too late to do you any good. You
are right, Doctor--I do not plan a mere routine operation. Not only
will I remove your memory, but I'm going to use the time-ray on you
and banish forever into the unknown a portion of your brains. Without
knowing which adjustment I make of the infinite number possible, no
one, not even the king, can ever recall it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Bird turned to the Selom scientists and hurled his thoughts at
them.

"This man intends to commit a horrible crime," he thought, "and one
which he has no authority to perform. To you I appeal for justice. Bid
him wait until Astok returns, and let him be the judge as to whether
it shall be done. Jumor, you know me well. You know that my brain is
the equal of one of the Selom. Even you cannot read my thoughts
against my will. Are you willing to see that brain destroyed? Astok
will be here soon and nothing will be lost by a short delay."

"He thinks truly," was the answering thought of Jumor. "It would be
better to wait."

"We will not wait," crashed Saranoff's thought into their
consciousness. "He killed Hanac when he escaped, and his punishment
shall be as I have decreed. Did not the king give me full power while
he was away?"

"It is true that he ordered us to obey this man in all things dealing
with upper-world men," thought Jumor. "If it is true that he killed
Hanac his punishment is doubtless just."

"I did not kill Hanac," returned the doctor. "He is paralyzed and will
be all right in a few hours, if he isn't already. I demand that you
wait until Astok returns. When an appeal is made to him, no other may
judge. So says the Selom law."

"That is true," replied Jumor. "We will wait until the king returns."

"We will _not_ wait," came Saranoff's thought. "The king delegated to
me his powers during his absence, as far as all the world, save the
Selom, were concerned. Were it one of the Selom appealing to the king,
I would be powerless before the appeal. These are not bound by Selom
law and are not entitled to its benefits. We will operate at once."

"Then you will operate alone," retorted Jumor. "I will not assist
you."

"I need none of your help," thought Saranoff. "Asmo and Camol, will
you help me? If you refuse I will report to Astok that you have
disobeyed and defied his chosen delegate."

"We had better assist him, Jumor," thought Asmo. "Astok did delegate
his authority. I am not of the nobility and I dare not refuse to
help."

"Suit yourself, Asmo," replied Jumor. "I refuse to assist, and will
appeal to Astok against him."

       *       *       *       *       *

The third mole hesitated.

"You are higher in rank than we are, Jumor," he thought at length,
"and like Asmo, I dare not resist him. I heard the king give this
upper-earth man his authority while he was away. I will assist."

"And I will leave the room," retorted Jumor.

He moved to a door and threw it open. At the threshold he paused and
sent back a final thought.

"I will appeal to Astok, our ruler. I will send now a message to him
to hurry home that he may judge between us."

The door closed behind him. Saranoff chuckled audibly.

"Good-by, Carnes," said Dr. Bird sadly. "This devil can do all he says
he can, and more. I'm sorry I brought you and Garland into this mess."

"Oh, well, it can't be helped, Doctor," replied the detective with an
attempt at cheerfulness. "What is he going to do to us?"

"He'll have to use instruments for what he plans," said the doctor.
"Ordinarily a routine mental operation is performed without the use of
extraneous power. The mind of the operator is electrically connected
to the mind of the victim. By means of thought waves the operator
banishes from the mind of the subject such portions of his memory and
mentality as he chooses. He may then substitute other things in place
of what he has removed. Any of the Selom could operate on you, but I
doubt whether Jumor himself could do it successfully on me without aid
from power. Here come the instruments."

       *       *       *       *       *

Asmo and Camol took from a cabinet on the side of the wall what looked
like a cloth helmet. Attached to it were a dozen wires which they
connected to a box on a table. The box was made of crystal and inside
it could be seen a number of vacuum tubes and coils of various
designs. Other leads ran to a similar helmet which Asmo placed on
Saranoff's head. A heavy cable ran to a switch on the wall.

As Camol closed the switch the tubes in the box began to glow with
weird lights. Violet, green and orange streamers of light came from
them to dance in wild patterns on the laboratory walls. For five
minutes Saranoff made adjustments to dials on the front of the crystal
box. The colored lights died away and a gentle golden glow came from
the apparatus. He threw off the helmet.

Camol left the laboratory and returned with a large coil on the top
of which was mounted a parabolic reflector. A device like a clock on
the front of the coil was constantly marking the passage of time. The
dial had two indicators which were together. Saranoff chuckled.

"You may not have seen this device work, Doctor," he said. "In order
to let you know what you are facing, I will demonstrate."

He turned the reflector so that it bore on the wall. He adjusted the
moving dial so that the two indicators were no longer together. As he
closed a switch, the wall before the reflector vanished. Saranoff
turned off the power.

"That portion of the wall has gone back in time exactly three
seconds," he announced. "As far as the present is concerned, it has
ceased to exist. It is following us through time three seconds behind
us, but in all eternity it will never catch up unless I aid it. Since
the exact time is known, it can be restored. If I were to alter this
adjustment ever so little, it could never be recalled. Watch me."

       *       *       *       *       *

He again closed the switch, this time in a reverse direction. The wall
instantly filled up as it had been before. He moved the time dial so
that the two indicators coincided.

"After I have sent a portion of your physical brain into the past or
the future as the fancy strikes me, I will change the adjustment of
that dial. Since there are an infinite number of adjustments to which
I might have set it, the chances that any one could ever duplicate my
setting and restore it are the complement of infinity, or zero," he
said. "I am now ready to remove your memory. If the impossible should
happen and your physical brain be restored it would be useless. Asmo,
adjust the helmet. I will operate on my friend, the Doctor, first."

Carnes strove to rush to Dr. Bird's assistance, but he was helpless
before the force of Camol's will. Asmo adjusted the helmet to Dr.
Bird's head and buckled it firmly in place. With an evil grin,
Saranoff donned the other helmet.

"Good-by, Dr. Bird," he said mockingly. "You will continue to see me,
but you won't know me, except as your master."

       *       *       *       *       *

His hand reached for the switch. It had almost closed on it when
Saranoff stopped convulsively. He sat motionless while the laboratory
door opened and Jumor entered the room. He was followed by another
mole. The newcomer was fully six inches taller than the others. His
head was hidden by a helmet, but around his arms he wore strings of
sparkling jewels.

"Ivan Saranoff, what means this?" his powerful thoughts dominated the
room.

"I was merely engaged in rectifying some of the mental errors of this
man of the upper earth," explained the Russian eagerly. "It is merely
a routine operation such as you gave me authority to perform."

"An operation which uses power is not routine," replied the king. "I
am told that this upper-earth man has a brain equal to those of my
most advanced scientist. I am also told that you planned to do more
than rectify his mental errors."

"You have been falsely informed. I was merely about to adjust his
memory."

"Then what means this?" The king pointed to the time-ray machine.

"That was brought here in order that it could be used when you
returned," thought the Russian eagerly. "This upper-earth man killed
Hanac when he brought him food."

The door opened and Hanac entered.

"Oh, Astok," objected Hanac's thoughts, "when these upper-earth men
had me at their mercy, with a light, they spared me. They paralyzed me
for a time so that they might escape but they did it in such a manner
that no harm came to me."

"So Jumor told me," replied the king. "Release them."

