in the stars we have an innumerable throng of individuals belonging to
the same species but in different stages of development, and that the
sun is only one of these individuals, of something less than medium size
and in a stage of development which is not at all peculiar, since it is
shared by nearly a fourth of all the stars.

213. STAR CLUSTERS.--In previous chapters we have noted the Pleiades and
Præsepe as star clusters visible to the naked eye, and to them we may
add the Hyades, near Aldebaran, and the little constellation Coma
Berenices. But more impressive than any of these, although visible only
in a telescope, is the splendid cluster in Hercules, whose appearance in
a telescope of moderate size is shown in Fig. 135, while Fig. 136 is a
photograph of the same cluster taken with a very large reflecting
telescope. This is only a type of many telescopic clusters which are
scattered over the sky, and which are made up of stars packed so closely
together as to become indistinguishable, one from another, at the center
of the cluster. Within an area which could be covered by a third of the
full moon's face are crowded in this cluster more than five thousand
stars which are unquestionably close neighbors, but whose apparent
nearness to each other is doubtless due to their great distance from us.
It is quite probable that even at the center of this cluster, where more
than a thousand stars are included within a radius of 160", the actual
distances separating adjoining stars are much greater than that
separating earth and sun, but far less than that separating the sun from
its nearest stellar neighbor.

[Illustration: FIG 135.--Star cluster in Hercules.]

An interesting discovery of recent date, made by Professor Bailey in
photographing star clusters, is that some few of them, which are
especially rich in stars, contain an extraordinary number of variable
stars, mostly very faint and of short period. Two clusters, one in the
northern and one in the southern hemisphere, contain each more than a
hundred variables, and an even more extraordinary case is presented by
a cluster, called Messier 5, not far from the star [a] Serpentis,
which contains no less than sixty-three variables, all about of the
fourteenth magnitude, all having light periods which differ but little
from half a day, all having light curves of about the same shape, and
all having a range of brightness from maximum to minimum of about one
magnitude. An extraordinary set of coincidences which "points
unmistakably to a common origin and cause of variability."

[Illustration: FIG. 136.--Star cluster in Hercules.--KEELER.]

[Illustration: FIG. 137.--The Andromeda nebula as seen in a very small
telescope.]

[Illustration: FIG. 138.--The Andromeda nebula and Holmes's comet.
Photographed by BARNARD.]

[Illustration: FIG. 139.--A drawing of the Andromeda nebula.]

[Illustration: FIG. 140.--A photograph of the Andromeda
nebula.--ROBERTS.]

214. NEBULÆ.--Returning to Fig. 136, we note that its background has a
hazy appearance, and that at its center the stars can no longer be
distinguished, but blend one with another so as to appear like a bright
cloud. The outer part of the cluster is _resolved_ into stars, while in
the picture the inner portion is not so resolved, although in the
original photographic plate the individual stars can be distinguished to
the very center of the cluster. In many cases, however, this is not
possible, and we have an _irresolvable cluster_ which it is customary to
call a _nebula_ (Latin, _little cloud_).

The most conspicuous example of this in the northern heavens is the
great nebula in Andromeda (R. A. 0^{h} 37^{m}, Dec. + 41°), which may be
seen with the naked eye as a faint patch of foggy light. Look for it.
This appears in an opera glass or very small telescope not unlike Fig.
137, which is reproduced from a sketch. Fig. 138 is from a photograph of
the same object showing essentially the same shape as in the preceding
figure, but bringing out more detail. Note the two small nebulæ
adjoining the large one, and at the bottom of the picture an object
which might easily be taken for another nebula but which is in fact a
tailless comet that chanced to be passing that part of the sky when the
picture was taken. Fig. 139 is from another drawing of this nebula,
although it is hardly to be recognized as a representation of the same
thing; but its characteristic feature, the two dark streaks near the
center of the picture, is justified in part by Fig. 140, which is from a
photograph made with a large reflecting telescope.

[Illustration: FIG. 141.--Types of nebulæ.]

A comparison of these several representations of the same thing will
serve to illustrate the vagueness of its outlines, and how much the
impressions to be derived from nebulæ depend upon the telescopes
employed and upon the observer's own prepossessions. The differences
among the pictures can not be due to any change in the nebula itself,
for half a century ago it was sketched much as shown in the latest of
them (Fig. 140).

[Illustration: FIG. 142.--The Trifid nebula.--KEELER.]

215. TYPICAL NEBULÆ.--Some of the fantastic forms which nebulæ present
in the telescope are shown on a small scale in Fig. 141, but in recent
years astronomers have learned to place little reliance upon drawings
such as these, which are now almost entirely supplanted by photographs
made with long exposures in powerful telescopes. One of the most
exquisite of these modern photographs is that of the Trifid nebula in
Sagittarius (Fig. 142). Note especially the dark lanes that give to this
nebula its name, Trifid, and which run through its brightest parts,
breaking it into seemingly independent sections. The area of the sky
shown in this cut is about 15 per cent less than that covered by the
full moon.

[Illustration: FIG. 143.--A nebula in Cygnus.--KEELER.]

Fig. 143 shows a very different type of nebula, found in the
constellation Cygnus, which appears made up of filaments closely
intertwined, and stretches across the sky for a distance considerably
greater than the moon's diameter.

[Illustration: FIG. 144.--Spiral nebula in Canes Venatici.--KEELER.]

A much smaller but equally striking nebula is that in the constellation
Canes Venatici (Fig. 144), which shows a most extraordinary spiral
structure, as if the stars composing it were flowing in along curved
lines toward a center of condensation. The diameter of the circular part
of this nebula, omitting the projection toward the bottom of the
picture, is about five minutes of arc, a sixth part of the diameter of
the moon, and its thickness is probably very small compared with its
breadth, perhaps not much exceeding the width of the spiral streams
which compose it. Note how the bright stars that appear within the area
of this nebula fall on the streams of nebulous matter as if they were
part of them. This characteristic grouping of the stars, which is
followed in many other nebulæ, shows that they are really part and
parcel of the nebula and not merely on line with it. Fig. 145 shows how
a great nebula is associated with the star [r] Ophiuchi.

[Illustration: FIG. 145.--Great nebula about the star [r]
Ophiuchi.--BARNARD.]

Probably the most impressive of all nebulæ is the great one in Orion
(Fig. 146), whose position is shown on the star map between Rigel and
[z] Orionis. Look for it with an opera glass or even with the unaided
eye. This is sometimes called an _amorphous_--i. e., shapeless--nebula,
because it presents no definite form which the eye can grasp and little
trace of structure or organization. It is "without form and void" at
least in its central portions, although on its edges curved filaments
may be traced streaming away from the brighter parts of the central
region. This nebula, as shown in Fig. 146, covers an area about equal
to that of the full moon, without counting as any part of this the
companion nebula shown at one side, but photographs made with suitable
exposures show that faint outlying parts of the nebula extend in curved
lines over the larger part of the constellation Orion. Indeed, over a
large part of the entire sky the background is faintly covered with
nebulous light whose brighter portions, if each were counted as a
separate nebula, would carry the total number of such objects well into
the hundreds of thousands.

[Illustration: FIG. 146.--The Orion nebula.]

The Pleiades (Plate IV) present a case of a resolvable star cluster
projected against such a nebulous background whose varying intensity
should be noted in the figure. A part of this nebulous matter is shown
in wisps extending from one star to the next, after the fashion of a
bridge, and leaving little doubt that the nebula is actually a part of
the cluster and not merely a background for it.

[Illustration: THE PLEIADES (AFTER A PHOTOGRAPH)]

Fig. 147 shows a series of so-called double nebulæ perhaps comparable
with double stars, although the most recent photographic work seems to
indicate that they are really faint spiral nebulæ in which only the
brightest parts are shown by the telescope.

According to Keeler, the spiral is the prevailing type of nebulæ, and
while Fig. 144 presents the most perfect example of such a nebula, the
student should not fail to note that the Andromeda nebula (Fig. 140)
shows distinct traces of a spiral structure, only here we do not see its
true shape, the nebula being turned nearly edgewise toward us so that
its presumably circular outline is foreshortened into a narrow ellipse.

[Illustration: FIG. 147.--Double nebulæ. HERSCHEL.]

Another type of nebula of some consequence presents in the telescope
round disks like those of Uranus or Neptune, and this appearance has
given them the name _planetary nebulæ_. The comet in Fig. 138, if
smaller, would represent fairly well the nebulæ of this type. Sometimes
a planetary nebula has a star at its center, and sometimes it appears
hollow, like a smoke ring, and is then called a ring nebula. The most
famous of these is in the constellation Lyra, not far from Vega.

216. SPECTRA OF NEBULÆ.--A star cluster, like the one in Hercules,
shows, of course, stellar spectra, and even when irresolvable the
spectrum is a continuous one, testifying to the presence of stars,
although they stand too close together to be separately seen. But in a
certain number of nebulæ the spectrum is altogether different, a
discontinuous one containing only a few bright lines, showing that here
the nebular light comes from glowing gases which are subject to no
considerable pressure. The planetary nebulæ all have spectra of this
kind and make up about half of all the known gaseous nebulæ. It is
worthy of note that a century ago Sir William Herschel had observed a
green shimmer in the light of certain nebulæ which led him to believe
that they were "not of a starry nature," a conclusion which has been
abundantly confirmed by the spectroscope. The green shimmer is, in fact,
caused by a line in the green part of the spectrum that is always
present and is always the brightest part of the spectrum of gaseous
nebulæ.

In faint nebulæ this line constitutes the whole of their visible
spectrum, but in brighter ones two or three other and fainter lines are
usually associated with it, and a very bright nebula, like that in
Orion, may show a considerable number of extra lines, but for the most
part they can not be identified in the spectrum of any terrestrial
substances. An exception to this is found in the hydrogen lines, which
are well marked in most spectra of gaseous nebulæ, and there are
indications of one or two other known substances.

217. DENSITY OF NEBULÆ.--It is known from laboratory experiments that
diminishing the pressure to which an incandescent gas is subject,
diminishes the number of lines contained in its spectrum, and we may
surmise from the very simple character and few lines of these nebular
spectra that the gas which produces them has a very small density. But
this is far from showing that the nebula itself is correspondingly
attenuated, for we must not assume that this shining gas is all that
exists in the nebula; so far as telescope or camera are concerned, there
may be associated with it any amount of dark matter which can not be
seen because it sends to us no light. It is easy to think in this
connection of meteoric dust or the stuff of which comets are made, for
these seem to be scattered broadcast on every side of the solar system
and may, perchance, extend out to the region of the nebulæ.

But, whatever may be associated in the nebula with the glowing gas which
we see, the total amount of matter, invisible as well as visible, must
be very small, or rather its average density must be very small, for the
space occupied by such a nebula as that of Orion is so great that if the
average density of its matter were equal to that of air the resulting
mass by its attraction would exert a sensible effect upon the motion of
the sun through space. The brighter parts of this nebula as seen from
the earth subtend an angle of about half a degree, and while we know
nothing of its distance from us, it is easy to see that the farther it
is away the greater must be its real dimensions, and that this increase
of bulk and mass with increasing distance will just compensate the
diminishing intensity of gravity at great distances, so that for a given
angular diameter--e. g., half a degree--the force with which this nebula
attracts the sun depends upon its density but not at all upon its
distance. Now, the nebula must attract the sun in some degree, and must
tend to move it and the planets in an orbit about the attracting center
so that year after year we should see the nebula from slightly different
points of view, and this changed point of view should produce a change
in the apparent direction of the nebula from us--i. e., a proper motion,
whose amount would depend upon the attracting force, and therefore upon
the density of the attracting matter. Observations of the Orion nebula
show that its proper motion is wholly inappreciable, certainly far less
than half a second of arc per year, and corresponding to this amount of
proper motion the mean density of the nebula must be some millions of
times (10^{10} according to Ranyard) less than that of air at sea
level--i. e., the average density throughout the nebula is comparable
with that of those upper parts of the earth's atmosphere in which
meteors first become visible.

218. MOTION OF NEBULÆ.--The extreme minuteness of their proper motions
is a characteristic feature of all nebulæ. Indeed, there is hardly a
known case of sensible proper motion of one of these bodies, although a
dozen or more of them show velocities in the line of sight ranging in
amount from +30 to -40 miles per second, the plus sign indicating an
increasing distance. While a part of these velocities may be only
apparent and due to the motion of earth and sun through space, a part at
least is real motion of the nebulæ themselves. These seem to move
through the celestial spaces in much the same way and with the same
velocities as do the stars, and their smaller proper motions across the
line of sight (angular motions) are an index of their great distance
from us. No one has ever succeeded in measuring the parallax of a nebula
or star cluster.

[Illustration: FIG. 148.--A part of the Milky Way.]

The law of gravitation presumably holds sway within these bodies, and
the fact that their several parts and the stars which are involved
within them, although attracted by each other, have shown little or no
change of position during the past century, is further evidence of
their low density and feeble attraction. In a few cases, however, there
seem to be in progress within a nebula changes of brightness, so that
what was formerly a faint part has become a brighter one, or _vice
versa_; but, on the whole, even these changes are very small.

[Illustration: FIG. 149.--The Milky Way near [th] Ophiuchi.--BARNARD.]

219. THE MILKY WAY.--Closely related to nebulæ and star clusters is
another feature of the sky, the _galaxy_ or _Milky Way_, with whose
appearance to the unaided eye the student should become familiar by
direct study of the thing itself. Figs. 148 and 149 are from photographs
of two small parts of it, and serve to bring out the small stars of
which it is composed. Every star shown in these pictures is invisible to
the naked eye, although their combined light is easily seen. The general
course of the galaxy across the heavens is shown in the star maps, but
these contain no indication of the wealth of detail which even the naked
eye may detect in it. Bright and faint parts, dark rifts which cut it
into segments, here and there a hole as if the ribbon of light had been
shot away--such are some of the features to be found by attentive
examination.

[Illustration: FIG. 150.--The Milky Way near [b] Cygni.--BARNARD.]

Speaking generally, the course of the Milky Way is a great circle
completely girdling the sky and having its north pole in the
constellation Coma Berenices. The width of this stream of light is very
different in different parts of the heavens, amounting where it is
widest, in Lyra and Cygnus, to something more than 30°, although its
boundaries are too vague and ill defined to permit much accuracy of
measurement. Observe the very bright part between [b] and [g] Cygni,
nearly opposite Vega, and note how even an opera glass will partially
resolve the nebulous light into a great number of stars, which are here
rather brighter than in other parts of its course. But the resolution
into stars is only partial, and there still remains a background of
unresolved shimmer. Fig. 150 is a photograph of a small part of this
region in which, although each fleck of light represents a separate
star, the galaxy is not completely resolved. Compare with this region,
rich in stars, the nearly empty space between the branches of the galaxy
a little west of Altair. Another hole in the Milky Way may be found a
little north and east of [a] Cygni, and between the extremes of
abundance and poverty here noted there may be found every gradation of
nebulous light.

The Milky Way is not so simple in its structure as might at first be
thought, but a clear and moonless night is required to bring out its
details. The nature of these details, the structure of the galaxy, its
shape and extent, the arrangement of its parts, and their relation to
stars and nebulæ in general, have been subjects of much speculation by
astronomers and others who have sought to trace out in this way what is
called the _construction of the heavens_.

220. DISTRIBUTION OF THE STARS.--How far out into space do the stars
extend? Are they limited or infinite in number? Do they form a system of
mutually related parts, or are they bunched promiscuously, each for
itself, without reference to the others? Here is what has been well
called "the most important problem of stellar astronomy, the acquisition
of well-founded ideas about the distribution of the stars." While many
of the ideas upon this subject which have been advanced by eminent
astronomers and which are still current in the books are certainly
wrong, and few of their speculations along this line are demonstrably
true, the theme itself is of such grandeur and permanent interest as to
demand at least a brief consideration. But before proceeding to its
speculative side we need to collect facts upon which to build, and
these, however inadequate, are in the main simple and not far to seek.

Parallaxes, proper motions, motions in the line of sight, while
pertinent to the problem of stellar distribution, are of small avail,
since they are far too scanty in number and relate only to limited
classes of stars, usually the very bright ones or those nearest to the
sun. Almost the sole available data are contained in the brightness of
the stars and the way in which they seem scattered in the sky. The most
casual survey of the heavens is enough to show that the stars are not
evenly sprinkled upon it. The lucid stars are abundant in some regions,
few in others, and the laborious star gauges, actual counting of the
stars in sample regions of the sky, which have been made by the
Herschels, Celoria, and others, suffice to show that this lack of
uniformity in distribution is even more markedly true of the telescopic
stars.

The rate of increase in the number of stars from one magnitude to the
next, as shown in § 187, is proof of another kind of irregularity in
their distribution. It is not difficult to show, mathematically, that if
in distant regions of space the stars were on the average as numerous
and as bright as they are in the regions nearer to the sun, then the
stars of any particular magnitude ought to be four times as numerous as
those of the next brighter magnitude--e. g., four times as many
sixth-magnitude stars as there are fifth-magnitude ones. But, as we have
already seen in § 187, by actual count there are only three times as
many, and from the discrepancy between these numbers, an actual
threefold increase instead of a fourfold one, we must conclude that on
the whole the stars near the sun are either bigger or brighter or more
numerous than in the remoter depths of space.

221. THE STELLAR SYSTEM.--But the arrangement of the stars is not
altogether lawless and chaotic; there are traces of order and system,
and among these the Milky Way is the dominant feature. Telescope and
photographic plate alike show that it is made up of stars which,
although quite irregularly scattered along its course, are on the
average some twenty times as numerous in the galaxy as at its poles,
and which thin out as we recede from it on either side, at first rapidly
and then more slowly. This tendency to cluster along the Milky Way is
much more pronounced among the very faint telescopic stars than among
the brighter ones, for the lucid stars and the telescopic ones down to
the tenth or eleventh magnitude, while very plainly showing the
clustering tendency, are not more than three times as numerous in the
galaxy as in the constellations most remote from it. It is remarkable as
showing the condensation of the brightest stars that one half of all the
stars in the sky which are brighter than the second magnitude are
included within a belt extending 12° on either side of the center line
of the galaxy.

In addition to this general condensation of stars toward the Milky Way,
there are peculiarities in the distribution of certain classes of stars
which are worth attention. Planetary nebulæ and new stars are seldom, if
ever, found far from the Milky Way, and stars with bright lines in their
spectra especially affect this region of the sky. Stars with spectra of
the first type--Sirian stars--are much more strongly condensed toward
the Milky Way than are stars of the solar type, and in consequence of
this the Milky Way is peculiarly rich in light of short wave lengths.
Resolvable star clusters are so much more numerous in the galaxy than
elsewhere, that its course across the sky would be plainly indicated by
their grouping upon a map showing nothing but clusters of this kind.

On the other hand, nebulæ as a class show a distinct aversion for the
galaxy, and are found most abundantly in those parts of the sky farthest
