chariot rolls."--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _Lectures on Science, Philosophy and Art
                         (New York, 1908), p. 31._


=247.= ... the reasoning process [employed in mathematics] is not
different from that of any other branch of knowledge, ... but
there is required, and in a great degree, that attention of mind
which is in some part necessary for the acquisition of all
knowledge, and in this branch is indispensably necessary. This
must be given in its fullest intensity; ... the other elements
especially characteristic of a mathematical mind are quickness
in perceiving logical sequence, love of order, methodical
arrangement and harmony, distinctness of conception.--PRICE, B.

                         _Treatise on Infinitesimal Calculus
                         (Oxford, 1868), Vol. 3, p. 6._


=248.= Histories make men wise; poets, witty; the mathematics,
subtile; natural philosophy, deep; moral, grave; logic and
rhetoric, able to contend.--BACON, FRANCIS.

                         _Essays, Of Studies._


=249.= The Mathematician deals with two properties of objects
only, number and extension, and all the inductions he wants have
been formed and finished ages ago. He is now occupied with
nothing but deduction and verification.--HUXLEY, T. H.

                         _On the Educational Value of the Natural
                         History Sciences; Lay Sermons, Addresses
                         and Reviews; (New York, 1872), p. 87._


=250.= [Mathematics] is that [subject] which knows nothing of
observation, nothing of experiment, nothing of induction, nothing
of causation.--HUXLEY, T. H.

                         _The Scientific Aspects of Positivism,
                         Fortnightly Review (1898); Lay Sermons,
                         Addresses and Reviews, (New York, 1872),
                         p. 169._


=251.= We are told that "Mathematics is that study which knows
nothing of observation, nothing of experiment, nothing of induction,
nothing of causation." I think no statement could have been made
more opposite to the facts of the case; that mathematical analysis
is constantly invoking the aid of new principles, new ideas, and
new methods, not capable of being defined by any form of words,
but springing direct from the inherent powers and activities of
the human mind, and from continually renewed introspection of that
inner world of thought of which the phenomena are as varied and
require as close attention to discern as those of the outer physical
world (to which the inner one in each individual man may, I think,
be conceived to stand somewhat in the same relation of correspondence
as a shadow to the object from which it is projected, or as the
hollow palm of one hand to the closed fist which it grasps of the
other), that it is unceasingly calling forth the faculties of
observation and comparison, that one of its principal weapons is
induction, that it has frequent recourse to experimental trial and
verification, and that it affords a boundless scope for the exercise
of the highest efforts of the imagination and invention.

                                                --SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _Presidential Address to British
                         Association, Exeter British Association
                         Report (1869), pp. 1-9.; Collected
                         Mathematical Papers, Vol. 2, p. 654._


=252.= The actual evolution of mathematical theories proceeds by a
process of induction strictly analogous to the method of induction
employed in building up the physical sciences; observation,
comparison, classification, trial, and generalisation are
essential in both cases. Not only are special results, obtained
independently of one another, frequently seen to be really
included in some generalisation, but branches of the subject
which have been developed quite independently of one another are
sometimes found to have connections which enable them to be
synthesised in one single body of doctrine. The essential nature
of mathematical thought manifests itself in the discernment of
fundamental identity in the mathematical aspects of what are
superficially very different domains. A striking example of this
species of immanent identity of mathematical form was exhibited by
the discovery of that distinguished mathematician ... Major MacMahon,
that all possible Latin squares are capable of enumeration by the
consideration of certain differential operators. Here we have a
case in which an enumeration, which appears to be not amenable to
direct treatment, can actually be carried out in a simple manner
when the underlying identity of the operation is recognised with
that involved in certain operations due to differential operators,
the calculus of which belongs superficially to a wholly different
region of thought from that relating to Latin squares.

                                                  --HOBSON, E. W.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science (1910); Nature, Vol. 84, p.
                         290._


=253.= It has been asserted ... that the power of observation is not
developed by mathematical studies; while the truth is, that; from
the most elementary mathematical notion that arises in the mind of
a child to the farthest verge to which mathematical investigation
has been pushed and applied, this power is in constant exercise.
By observation, as here used, can only be meant the fixing of the
attention upon objects (physical or mental) so as to note distinctive
peculiarities--to recognize resemblances, differences, and other
relations. Now the first mental act of the child recognizing the
distinction between _one_ and more than one, between _one_ and
_two_, _two_ and _three_, etc., is exactly this. So, again, the
first geometrical notions are as pure an exercise of this power as
can be given. To know a straight line, to distinguish it from
a curve; to recognize a triangle and distinguish the several
forms--what are these, and all perception of form, but a series
of observations? Nor is it alone in securing these fundamental
conceptions of number and form that observation plays so important
a part. The very genius oning--a system of investigation--is, that
it is but a series of observations. The figure being before the
eye in actual representation, or before the mind in conception, is
so closely scrutinized, that all its distinctive features are
perceived; auxiliary lines are drawn (the imagination leading in
this), and a new series of inspections is made; and thus, by means
of direct, simple observations, the investigation proceeds. So
characteristic of common geometry is this method of investigation,
that Comte, perhaps the ablest of all writers upon the philosophy
of mathematics, is disposed to class geometry, as to its method,
with the natural sciences, being based upon observation. Moreover,
when we consider applied mathematics, we need only to notice that
the exercise of this faculty is so essential, that the basis of
all such reasoning, the very material with which we build, have
received the name _observations_. Thus we might proceed to consider
the whole range of the human faculties, and find for the most of
them ample scope for exercise in mathematical studies. Certainly,
the _memory_ will not be found to be neglected. The very first
steps in number--counting, the multiplication table, etc., make
heavy demands on this power; while the higher branches require
the memorizing of formulas which are simply appalling to the
uninitiated. So the _imagination_, the creative faculty of the mind,
has constant exercise in all original mathematical investigations,
from the solution of the simplest problems to the discovery of the
most recondite principle; for it is not by sure, consecutive steps,
as many suppose, that we advance from the known to the unknown.
The imagination, not the logical faculty, leads in this advance.
In fact, practical observation is often in advance of logical
exposition. Thus, in the discovery of truth, the imagination
habitually presents hypotheses, and observation supplies facts,
which it may require ages for the tardy reason to connect logically
with the known. Of this truth, mathematics, as well as all other
sciences, affords abundant illustrations. So remarkably true is
this, that today it is seriously questioned by the majority of
thinkers, whether the sublimest branch of mathematics,--the
_infinitesimal calculus_--has anything more than an empirical
foundation, mathematicians themselves not being agreed as to its
logical basis. That the imagination, and not the logical faculty,
leads in all original investigation, no one who has ever succeeded
in producing an original demonstration of one of the simpler
propositions of geometry, can have any doubt. Nor are _induction_,
_analogy_, the _scrutinization_ of _premises_ or the _search_ for
them, or the _balancing_ of _probabilities_, spheres of mental
operations foreign to mathematics. No one, indeed, can claim
pre-eminence for mathematical studies in all these departments
of intellectual culture, but it may, perhaps, be claimed that
scarcely any department of science affords discipline to so great a
number of faculties, and that none presents so complete a gradation
in the exercise of these faculties, from the first principles of
the science to the farthest extent of its applications, as
mathematics.--OLNEY, EDWARD.

                         _Kiddle and Schem's Encyclopedia of
                         Education, (New York, 1877), Article
                         "Mathematics."_


=254.= The opinion appears to be gaining ground that this very
general conception of functionality, born on mathematical ground,
is destined to supersede the narrower notion of causation,
traditional in connection with the natural sciences. As an
abstract formulation of the idea of determination in its most
general sense, the notion of functionality includes and
transcends the more special notion of causation as a one-sided
determination of future phenomena by means of present conditions;
it can be used to express the fact of the subsumption under a
general law of past, present, and future alike, in a sequence of
phenomena. From this point of view the remark of Huxley that
Mathematics "knows nothing of causation" could only be taken to
express the whole truth, if by the term "causation" is understood
"efficient causation." The latter notion has, however, in recent
times been to an increasing extent regarded as just as irrelevant
in the natural sciences as it is in Mathematics; the idea of
thorough-going determinancy, in accordance with formal law, being
thought to be alone significant in either domain.--HOBSON, E. W.

                         _Presidential Address British
                         Association for the Advancement of
                         Science (1910); Nature, Vol. 84, p.
                         290._


=255.= Most, if not all, of the great ideas of modern mathematics
have had their origin in observation. Take, for instance, the
arithmetical theory of forms, of which the foundation was laid in
the diophantine theorems of Fermat, left without proof by their
author, which resisted all efforts of the myriad-minded Euler to
reduce to demonstration, and only yielded up their cause of being
when turned over in the blow-pipe flame of Gauss's transcendent
genius; or the doctrine of double periodicity, which resulted
from the observation of Jacobi of a purely analytical fact of
transformation; or Legendre's law of reciprocity; or Sturm's
theorem about the roots of equations, which, as he informed me
with his own lips, stared him in the face in the midst of some
mechanical investigations connected (if my memory serves me
right) with the motion of compound pendulums; or Huyghen's method
of continued fractions, characterized by Lagrange as one of the
principal discoveries of that great mathematician, and to which
he appears to have been led by the construction of his Planetary
Automaton; or the new algebra, speaking of which one of my
predecessors (Mr. Spottiswoode) has said, not without just reason
and authority, from this chair, "that it reaches out and
indissolubly connects itself each year with fresh branches of
mathematics, that the theory of equations has become almost new
through it, algebraic geometry transfigured in its light, that
the calculus of variations, molecular physics, and mechanics" (he
might, if speaking at the present moment, go on to add the theory
of elasticity and the development of the integral calculus) "have
all felt its influence."--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _A Plea for the Mathematician, Nature,
                         Vol. 1, p. 238; Collected Mathematical
                         Papers, Vol. 2, pp. 655, 656._


=256.= The ability to imagine relations is one of the most
indispensable conditions of all precise thinking. No subject can
be named, in the investigation of which it is not imperatively
needed; but it can be nowhere else so thoroughly acquired as in
the study of mathematics.--FISKE, JOHN.

                         _Darwinism and other Essays (Boston,
                         1893), p. 296._


=257.= The great science [mathematics] occupies itself at least
just as much with the power of imagination as with the power of
logical conclusion.--HERBART, F. J.

                         _Pestalozzi's Idee eines ABC der
                         Anschauung. Werke [Kehrbach]
                         (Langensaltza, 1890), Bd. 1, p. 174._


=258.= The moving power of mathematical invention is not
reasoning but imagination.--DE MORGAN, A.

                         _Quoted in Graves' Life of Sir W. R.
                         Hamilton, Vol. 3 (1889), p. 219._


=259.= There is an astonishing imagination, even in the science
of mathematics.... We repeat, there was far more imagination in
the head of Archimedes than in that of Homer.--VOLTAIRE.

                         _A Philosophical Dictionary (Boston,
                         1881), Vol. 3, p. 40. Article
                         "Imagination."_


=260.= As the prerogative of Natural Science is to cultivate a
taste for observation, so that of Mathematics is, almost from the
starting point, to stimulate the faculty of invention.

                                               --SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _A Plea for the Mathematician, Nature,
                         Vol. 1, p. 261; Collected Mathematical
                         Papers, Vol. 2 (Cambridge, 1908), p.
                         717._


=261.= A marveilous newtrality have these things mathematicall,
and also a strange participation between things supernaturall,
immortall, intellectuall, simple and indivisible, and things
naturall, mortall, sensible, componded and divisible.--DEE, JOHN.

                         _Euclid (1570), Preface._


=262.= Mathematics stands forth as that which unites, mediates
between Man and Nature, inner and outer world, thought and
perception, as no other subject does.--FROEBEL.

                         _[Herford translation] (London, 1893),
                         Vol. 1, p. 84._


=263.= The intrinsic character of mathematical research and
knowledge is based essentially on three properties: first, on its
conservative attitude towards the old truths and discoveries of
mathematics; secondly, on its progressive mode of development,
due to the incessant acquisition of new knowledge on the basis of
the old; and thirdly, on its self-sufficiency and its consequent
absolute independence.--SCHUBERT, H.

                         _Mathematical Essays and Recreations
                         (Chicago, 1898), p. 27._


=264.= Our science, in contrast with others, is not founded on a
single period of human history, but has accompanied the
development of culture through all its stages. Mathematics is as
much interwoven with Greek culture as with the most modern
problems in Engineering. She not only lends a hand to the
progressive natural sciences but participates at the same time in
the abstract investigations of logicians and philosophers.

                                                      --KLEIN, F.

                         _Klein und Riecke: Ueber angewandte
                         Mathematik und Physik (1900), p. 228._


=265.= There is probably no other science which presents such
different appearances to one who cultivates it and to one who
does not, as mathematics. To this person it is ancient,
venerable, and complete; a body of dry, irrefutable, unambiguous
reasoning. To the mathematician, on the other hand, his science
is yet in the purple bloom of vigorous youth, everywhere
stretching out after the "attainable but unattained" and full of
the excitement of nascent thoughts; its logic is beset with
ambiguities, and its analytic processes, like Bunyan's road, have
a quagmire on one side and a deep ditch on the other and branch
off into innumerable by-paths that end in a wilderness.

                                                 --CHAPMAN, C. H.

                         _Bulletin American Mathematical Society,
                         Vol. 2 (First series), p. 61._


=266.= Mathematical science is in my opinion an indivisible whole,
an organism whose vitality is conditioned upon the connection of
its parts. For with all the variety of mathematical knowledge, we
are still clearly conscious of the similarity of the logical
devices, the _relationship_ of the _ideas_ in mathematics as a
whole and the numerous analogies in its different departments. We
also notice that, the farther a mathematical theory is developed,
the more harmoniously and uniformly does its construction proceed,
and unsuspected relations are disclosed between hitherto separated
branches of the science. So it happens that, with the extension of
mathematics, its organic character is not lost but manifests
itself the more clearly.--HILBERT, D.

                         _Mathematical Problems, Bulletin
                         American Mathematical Society, Vol. 8,
                         p. 478._


=267.= The mathematics have always been the implacable enemies of
scientific romances.--ARAGO.

                         _Oeuvres (1855), t. 3, p. 498._


=268.= Those skilled in mathematical analysis know that its
object is not simply to calculate numbers, but that it is also
employed to find the relations between magnitudes which cannot be
expressed in numbers and between functions whose law is not
capable of algebraic expression.--COURNOT, AUGUSTIN.

                         _Mathematical Theory of the Principles
                         of Wealth [Bacon, N. T.], (New York,
                         1897), p. 3._


=269.= Coterminous with space and coeval with time is the Kingdom
of Mathematics; within this range her dominion is supreme;
otherwise than according to her order nothing can exist; in
contradiction to her laws nothing takes place. On her mysterious
scroll is to be found written for those who can read it that
which has been, that which is, and that which is to come.
Everything material which is the subject of knowledge has number,
order, or position; and these are her first outlines for a sketch
of the universe. If our feeble hands cannot follow out the
details, still her part has been drawn with an unerring pen, and
her work cannot be gainsaid. So wide is the range of mathematical
sciences, so indefinitely may it extend beyond our actual powers
of manipulation that at some moments we are inclined to fall down
with even more than reverence before her majestic presence. But
so strictly limited are her promises and powers, about so much
that we might wish to know does she offer no information
whatever, that at other moments we are fain to call her results
but a vain thing, and to reject them as a stone where we had
asked for bread. If one aspect of the subject encourages our
hopes, so does the other tend to chasten our desires, and he is
perhaps the wisest, and in the long run the happiest, among his
fellows, who has learned not only this science, but also the
larger lesson which it directly teaches, namely, to temper our
aspirations to that which is possible, to moderate our desires to
that which is attainable, to restrict our hopes to that of which
accomplishment, if not immediately practicable, is at least
distinctly within the range of conception.--SPOTTISWOODE, W.

                         _Quoted in Sonnenschein's Encyclopedia
                         of Education (London, 1906), p. 208._


=270.= But it is precisely mathematics, and the pure science
generally, from which the general educated public and independent
students have been debarred, and into which they have only rarely
attained more than a very meagre insight. The reason of this is
twofold. In the first place, the ascendant and consecutive
character of mathematical knowledge renders its results
absolutely insusceptible of presentation to persons who are
unacquainted with what has gone before, and so necessitates on
the part of its devotees a thorough and patient exploration of
the field from the very beginning, as distinguished from those
sciences which may, so to speak, be begun at the end, and which
are consequently cultivated with the greatest zeal. The second
reason is that, partly through the exigencies of academic
instruction, but mainly through the martinet traditions of
antiquity and the influence of mediaeval logic-mongers, the
great bulk of the elementary text-books of mathematics have
unconsciously assumed a very repellant form,--something similar
to what is termed in the theory of protective mimicry in biology
"the terrifying form." And it is mainly to this formidableness
and touch-me-not character of exterior, concealing withal a
harmless body, that the undue neglect of typical mathematical
studies is to be attributed.--MCCORMACK, T. J.

                         _Preface to De Morgan's Elementary
                         Illustrations of the Differential and
                         Integral Calculus (Chicago, 1899)._


=271.= Mathematics in gross, it is plain, are a grievance in
natural philosophy, and with reason: for mathematical proofs,
like diamonds, are hard as well as clear, and will be touched
with nothing but strict reasoning. Mathematical proofs are out of
the reach of topical arguments; and are not to be attacked by the
equivocal use of words or declaration, that make so great a part
of other discourses,--nay, even of controversies.--LOCKE, JOHN.

                         _Second Reply to the Bishop of
                         Worcester._


=272.= The belief that mathematics, because it is abstract, because
it is static and cold and gray, is detached from life, is a mistaken
belief. Mathematics, even in its purest and most abstract estate,
is not detached from life. It is just the ideal handling of the
problems of life, as sculpture may idealize a human figure or as
poetry or painting may idealize a figure or a scene. Mathematics
is precisely the ideal handling of the problems of life, and the
central ideas of the science, the great concepts about which its
stately doctrines have been built up, are precisely the chief
ideas with which life must always deal and which, as it tumbles
and rolls about them through time and space, give it its interests
and problems, and its order and rationality. That such is the case
a few indications will suffice to show. The mathematical concepts
of constant and variable are represented familiarly in life by the
notions of fixedness and change. The concept of equation or that
of an equational system, imposing restriction upon variability,
is matched in life by the concept of natural and spiritual law,
giving order to what were else chaotic change and providing partial
freedom in lieu of none at all. What is known in mathematics under
the name of limit is everywhere present in life in the guise of
some ideal, some excellence high-dwelling among the rocks, an
"ever flying perfect" as Emerson calls it, unto which we may
approximate nearer and nearer, but which we can never quite attain,
save in aspiration. The supreme concept of functionality finds its
correlate in life in the all-pervasive sense of interdependence
and mutual determination among the elements of the world. What is
known in mathematics as transformation--that is, lawful transfer
of attention, serving to match in orderly fashion the things of
one system with those of another--is conceived in life as a
process of transmutation by which, in the flux of the world, the
content of the present has come out of the past and in its turn,
in ceasing to be, gives birth to its successor, as the boy is
father to the man and as things, in general, become what they are
not. The mathematical concept of invariance and that of infinitude,
especially the imposing doctrines that explain their meanings and
bear their names--What are they but mathematicizations of that
which has ever been the chief of life's hopes and dreams, of that
which has ever been the object of its deepest passion and of its
dominant enterprise, I mean the finding of the worth that abides,
the finding of permanence in the midst of change, and the discovery
of a presence, in what has seemed to be a finite world, of being
that is infinite? It is needless further to multiply examples of a
correlation that is so abounding and complete as indeed to suggest
a doubt whether it be juster to view mathematics as the abstract
idealization of life than to regard life as the concrete realization
of mathematics.--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _The Humanization of the Teaching of
                         Mathematics; Science, New Series, Vol.
                         35, pp. 645-646._


=273.= Mathematics, like dialectics, is an organ of the inner
higher sense; in its execution it is an art like eloquence. Both
alike care nothing for the content, to both nothing is of value
but the form. It is immaterial to mathematics whether it
computes pennies or guineas, to rhetoric whether it defends truth
or error.--GOETHE.

                         _Wilhelm Meisters Wanderjahre, Zweites
                         Buch._


=274.= The genuine spirit of Mathesis is devout. No intellectual
pursuit more truly leads to profound impressions of the existence
and attributes of a Creator, and to a deep sense of our filial
relations to him, than the study of these abstract sciences. Who
can understand so well how feeble are our conceptions of Almighty
Power, as he who has calculated the attraction of the sun and the
planets, and weighed in his balance the irresistible force of the
lightning? Who can so well understand how confused is our
estimate of the Eternal Wisdom, as he who has traced out the
secret laws which guide the hosts of heaven, and combine the
atoms on earth? Who can so well understand that man is made in
the image of his Creator, as he who has sought to frame new laws
and conditions to govern imaginary worlds, and found his own
thoughts similar to those on which his Creator has acted?

                                                  --HILL, THOMAS.

                         _The Imagination in Mathematics; North
                         American Review, Vol. 85, p. 226._


=275.= ... what is physical is subject to the laws of
mathematics, and what is spiritual to the laws of God, and the
laws of mathematics are but the expression of the thoughts of
God.--HILL, THOMAS.

                         _The Uses of Mathesis; Bibliotheca
                         Sacra, Vol. 32, p. 523._


=276.= It is in the inner world of pure thought, where all
_entia_ dwell, where is every type of order and manner of
correlation and variety of relationship, it is in this infinite
ensemble of eternal verities whence, if there be one cosmos or
many of them, each derives its character and mode of being,--it
is there that the spirit of mathesis has its home and its life.

Is it a restricted home, a narrow life, static and cold and grey
with logic, without artistic interest, devoid of emotion and mood
and sentiment? That world, it is true, is not a world of _solar_
light, not clad in the colours that liven and glorify the things
of sense, but it is an illuminated world, and over it all and
everywhere throughout are hues and tints transcending _sense_,
painted there by radiant pencils of _psychic_ light, the light in
which it lies. It is a silent world, and, nevertheless, in
respect to the highest principle of art--the interpenetration of
content and form, the perfect fusion of mode and meaning--it even
surpasses music. In a sense, it is a static world, but so, too,
are the worlds of the sculptor and the architect. The figures,
however, which reason constructs and the mathematic vision
beholds, transcend the temple and the statue, alike in simplicity
and in intricacy, in delicacy and in grace, in symmetry and in
poise. Not only are this home and this life thus rich in aesthetic
interests, really controlled and sustained by motives of a
sublimed and supersensuous art, but the religious aspiration,
too, finds there, especially in the beautiful doctrine of
invariants, the most perfect symbols of what it seeks--the
changeless in the midst of change, abiding things in a world of
flux, configurations that remain the same despite the swirl and
stress of countless hosts of curious transformations. The domain
of mathematics is the sole domain of certainty. There and there
alone prevail the standards by which every hypothesis respecting
the external universe and all observation and all experiment must
be finally judged. It is the realm to which all speculation and
all thought must repair for chastening and sanitation--the court
of last resort, I say it reverently, for all intellection
whatsoever, whether of demon or man or deity. It is there that
mind as mind attains its highest estate, and the condition of
knowledge there is the ultimate object, the tantalising goal of
the aspiration, the _Anders-Streben_, of all other knowledge of
every kind.--KEYSER, C. J.

                         _The Universe and Beyond; Hibbert
                         Journal, Vol. 3 (1904-1905), pp.
                         313-314._




  CHAPTER III

  ESTIMATES OF MATHEMATICS


=301.= The world of ideas which it [mathematics] discloses or
illuminates, the contemplation of divine beauty and order which
it induces, the harmonious connection of its parts, the infinite
hierarchy and absolute evidence of the truths with which
mathematical science is concerned, these, and such like, are the
surest grounds of its title of human regard, and would remain
unimpaired were the plan of the universe unrolled like a map at
our feet, and the mind of man qualified to take in the whole
scheme of creation at a glance.--SYLVESTER, J. J.

                         _A Plea for the Mathematician, Nature,
                         1, p. 262; Collected Mathematical Papers
                         (Cambridge, 1908), 2, p. 659._


=302.= It may well be doubted whether, in all the range of
Science, there is any field so fascinating to the explorer--so
rich in hidden treasures--so fruitful in delightful surprises--as
that of Pure Mathematics. The charm lies chiefly ... in the
absolute _certainty_ of its results: for that is what, beyond all
mental treasures, the human intellect craves for. Let us only be
sure of _something_! More light, more light! [Greek: En de phaei
kai olesson] "And if our fate be death, give light and let us
die!" This is the cry that, through all the ages, is going up
from perplexed Humanity, and Science has little else to offer,
that will really meet the demands of its votaries, than the
conclusions of Pure Mathematics.--DODGSON, C. L.

                         _A New Theory of Parallels (London,
                         1895), Introduction._


=303.= In every case the awakening touch has been the
mathematical spirit, the attempt to count, to measure, or to
calculate. What to the poet or the seer may appear to be the very
death of all his poetry and all his visions--the cold touch of
the calculating mind,--this has proved to be the spell by which
knowledge has been born, by which new sciences have been created,
and hundreds of definite problems put before the minds and into
the hands of diligent students. It is the geometrical figure, the
dry algebraical formula, which transforms the vague reasoning of
the philosopher into a tangible and manageable conception; which
represents, though it does not fully describe, which corresponds
to, though it does not explain, the things and processes of
nature: this clothes the fruitful, but otherwise indefinite,
ideas in such a form that the strict logical methods of thought
can be applied, that the human mind can in its inner chamber
evolve a train of reasoning the result of which corresponds to
the phenomena of the outer world.--MERZ, J. T.

                         _A History of European Thought in the
                         Nineteenth Century (Edinburgh and
                         London, 1904), Vol. 1, p. 314._


=304.= Mathematics ... the ideal and norm of all careful
thinking.--HALL, G. STANLEY.

                         _Educational Problems (New York, 1911),
                         p. 393._


=305.= Mathematics is the only true metaphysics.

                                     --THOMSON, W. (LORD KELVIN).

                         _Thompson, S. P.: Life of Lord Kelvin
                         (London, 1910), p. 10._


=306.= He who knows not mathematics and the results of recent
scientific investigation dies without knowing _truth_.

                                              --SCHELLBACH, C. H.

                         _Quoted in Young's Teaching of
                         Mathematics (London, 1907), p. 44._


=307.= The reasoning of mathematics is a type of perfect
reasoning.--BARNETT, P. A.

                         _Common Sense in Education and Teaching
                         (New York, 1905), p. 222._


=308.= Mathematics, once fairly established on the foundation of
a few axioms and definitions, as upon a rock, has grown from age
to age, so as to become the most solid fabric that human reason
can boast.--REID, THOMAS.

                         _Essays on the Intellectual Powers of
                         Man, 4th. Ed., p. 461._


=309.= The analytical geometry of Descartes and the calculus of
Newton and Leibniz have expanded into the marvelous mathematical
method--more daring than anything that the history of philosophy
records--of Lobachevsky and Riemann, Gauss and Sylvester. Indeed,
mathematics, the indispensable tool of the sciences, defying the
senses to follow its splendid flights, is demonstrating today, as
it never has been demonstrated before, the supremacy of the pure
reason.--BUTLER, NICHOLAS MURRAY.

                         _The Meaning of Education and other
                         Essays and Addresses (New York, 1905),
                         p. 45._


=310.= Mathematics is the gate and key of the sciences....
Neglect of mathematics works injury to all knowledge, since he
who is ignorant of it cannot know the other sciences or the
things of this world. And what is worse, men who are thus
ignorant are unable to perceive their own ignorance and so do not
seek a remedy.--BACON, ROGER.

