A.M. 20th. Figure reduced to one-half of the original scale.

Phalaris Canariensis.--A cotyledon of this plant (1.3 inch in height) has
already been described as rising in 4 h. 30 m. from 40o beneath the horizon
into a vertical position, passing through an angle of 130o in a nearly
straight line, and then abruptly beginning to circumnutate. Another
somewhat old cotyledon of the same height (but from which a true leaf had
not yet protruded), was similarly placed at 40o beneath the horizon. For
the first 4 h. it rose in a nearly straight course (Fig. 186), so that by
1.10 P.M. it was highly inclined, and now apogeotropism acted on it with
much less power than before, and it began to zigzag. At 4.15 P.M. (i.e. in
7 h. from the commencement) it stood vertically, and afterwards continued
to circumnutate in the usual manner about the same spot. Here then we have
a graduated change from a straight upward apogeotropic course into
circumnutation, instead of an abrupt change, as in the former case.

Avena sativa.--The sheath-like cotyledons, whilst young, are strongly
apogeotropic; and some which were placed at 45o beneath the horizon rose
90o in 7 or 8 h. in lines almost absolutely straight. An oldish cotyledon,
from which the first leaf began to
[page 500]
protrude whilst the following observations were being made, was placed at
10o beneath the horizon, and it rose only 59o in 24h. It behaved rather
differently from any other plant, observed by us, for during the first 4 ½
h. it rose in a line not far from straight; during the next 6 ½ h. it
circumnutated, that is, it descended and again ascended in a strongly
marked zigzag course; it then resumed its upward movement in a moderately
straight line, and, with time allowed, no doubt would have become upright.
In this case, after the first 4 ½ h., ordinary circumnutation almost
completely conquered for a time apogeotropism.

Fig 186. Phalaris Canariensis: apogeotropic movement of cotyledon, traced
on a vertical and horizontal glass, from 9.10 A.M. Sept. 19th to 9 A.M.
20th. Figure here reduced to one-fifth of original scale.

Brassica oleracea.--The hypocotyls of several young seedlings placed
horizontally, rose up vertically in the course of 6 or 7 h. in nearly
straight lines. A seedling which had grown in darkness to a height of 2 1/4
inches, and was therefore rather old and not highly sensitive, was placed
so that the hypocotyl projected at between 30o and 40o beneath the horizon.
The upper part alone became curved
[page 501]
upwards, and rose during the first 3 h. 10 m. in a nearly straight line
(Fig. 187); but it was not possible to trace the upward movement on the
vertical glass for the first 1 h. 10 m., so that the nearly straight line
in the diagram ought to have been much longer. During the next 11 h. the
hypocotyl circumnutated, describing irregular figures, each of which rose a
little above the one previously formed. During the night and following
early morning it continued to rise in a zigzag course, so that
apogeotropism was still acting. At the close of our observations, after 23
h. (represented by the highest dot in the diagram) the hypocotyl was still
32o from the perpendicular. There can be little doubt that it would
ultimately have become upright by describing an additional number of
irregular ellipses, one above the other.

Fig 187. Brassica oleracea: apogeotropic movement of hypocotyl, traced on
vertical glass, from 9.20 A.M., Sept. 12th to 8.30 A.M. 13th. The upper
part of the figure is more magnified than the lower part. If the whole
course had been traced, the straight upright line would have been much
longer. Figure here reduced to one-third of the original scale.

Apogeotropism retarded by Heliotropism.--When the stem of any plant bends
during the day towards a lateral light, the movement is opposed by
apogeotropism; but as the light gradually wanes in the evening the latter
power slowly gains the upper hand, and draws the stem back into a vertical
position. Here then we have a good opportunity for observing how
apogeotropism acts when very nearly balanced by an opposing force. For
instance, the plumule of Tropaeolum majus (see former Fig. 175) moved
towards the dim evening light in a slightly zigzag line until 6.45 P.M., it
then returned on its course until
[page 502]
10.40 P.M., during which time it zigzagged and described an ellipse of
considerable size. The hypocotyl of Brassica oleracea (see former Fig. 173)
moved in a straight line to the light until 5.15 P.M., and then from the
light, making in its backward course a great rectangular bend, and then
returned for a short distance towards the former source of the light; no
observations were made after 7.10 P.M., but during the night it recovered
its vertical position. A hypocotyl of Cassia tora moved in the evening in a
somewhat zigzag line towards the failing light until 6 P.M., and was now
bowed 20o from the perpendicular; it then returned on its course, making
before 10.30 P.M. four great, nearly rectangular bends and almost
completing an ellipse. Several other analogous cases were casually
observed, and in all of them the apogeotropic movement could be seen to
consist of modified circumnutation.

Apogeotropic Movements effected by the aid of joints or pulvini.--Movements
of this kind are well known to occur in the Gramineae, and are effected by
means of the thickened bases of their sheathing leaves; the stem within
being in this part thinner than elsewhere.* According to the analogy of all
other pulvini, such joints ought to continue circumnutating for a long
period, after the adjoining parts have ceased to grow. We therefore wished
to ascertain whether this was the case with the Gramineae; for if so, the
upward curvature of their stems, when extended horizontally or laid
prostrate, would be explained in accordance with our view--namely, that
apogeotropism results from modified circumnutation. After these joints have
curved upwards, they are fixed in their new position by increased growth
along their lower sides.

Lolium perenne.--A young stem, 7 inches in height, consisting of 3
internodes, with the flower-head not yet protruded, was selected for
observation. A long and very thin glass filament was cemented horizontally
to the stem close above the second joint, 3 inches above the ground. This
joint was subsequently proved to be in an active condition, as its lower
side swelled much through the action of apogeotropism (in the manner
described by De Vries) after the haulm had been fastened down for 24 h. in
a horizontal position. The pot was

* This structure has been recently described by De Vries in an interesting
article, 'Ueber die Aufrichtung des gelagerten Getreides,' in
'Landwirthschaftliche Jahrbücher,' 1880, p. 473.
[page 503]

so placed that the end of the filament stood beneath the 2-inch object
glass of a microscope with an eye-piece micrometer, each division of which
equalled 1/500 of an inch. The end of the filament was repeatedly observed
during 6 h., and was seen to be in constant movement; and it crossed 5
divisions of the micrometer (1/100 inch) in 2 h. Occasionally it moved
forwards by jerks, some of which were 1/1000 inch in length, and then
slowly retreated a little, afterwards again jerking forwards. These
oscillations were exactly like those described under Brassica and Dionaea,
but they occurred only occasionally. We may therefore conclude that this
moderately old joint was continually circumnutating on a small scale.

Alopecurus pratensis.--A young plant, 11 inches in height, with the
flower-head protruded, but with the florets not yet expanded, had a glass
filament fixed close above the second joint, at a height of only 2 inches
above the ground. The basal internode, 2 inches in length, was cemented to
a stick to prevent any possibility of its circumnutating. The extremity of
the filament, which projected about 50o above the horizon, was often
observed during 24 h. in the same manner as in the last case. Whenever
looked at, it was always in movement, and it crossed 30 divisions of the
micrometer (3/50 inch) in 3 ½ h.; but it sometimes moved at a quicker rate,
for at one time it crossed 5 divisions in 1 ½ h. The pot had to be moved
occasionally, as the end of the filament travelled beyond the field of
vision; but as far as we could judge it followed during the daytime a
semicircular course; and it certainly travelled in two different directions
at right angles to one another. It sometimes oscillated in the same manner
as in the last species, some of the jerks forwards being as much as 1/1000
of an inch. We may therefore conclude that the joints in this and the last
species of grass long continue to circumnutate; so that this movement would
be ready to be converted into an apogeotropic movement, whenever the stem
was placed in an inclined or horizontal position.

Movements of the Flower-peduncles of Oxalis carnosa, due to apogeotropism
and other forces.--The movements of the main peduncle, and of the three or
four sub-peduncles which each main peduncle of this plant bears, are
extremely complex, and are determined by several distinct causes. Whilst
the flowers are expanded, both kinds of peduncles circumnutate about the
same spot, as we have seen (Fig. 91) in the fourth chapter. But soon after
the flowers have begun to wither the sub-
[page 504]
peduncles bend downwards, and this is due to epinasty; for on two occasions
when pots were laid horizontally, the sub-peduncles assumed the same
position relatively to the main peduncle, as would have been the case if
they had remained upright; that is, each of them formed with it an angle of
about 40o. If they had been acted on by geotropism or apheliotropism (for
the plant was illuminated from above), they would have directed themselves
to the centre of the earth. A main peduncle was secured to a stick in an
upright position, and one of the upright sub-peduncles which had been
observed circumnutating whilst the flower was expanded, continued to do so
for at least 24 h. after it had withered. It then began to bend downwards,
and after 36 h. pointed a little beneath the horizon. A new figure was now
begun (A, Fig. 188), and the sub-peduncle was traced descending in a zigzag
line from 7.20 P.M. on the 19th to 9 A.M. on the 22nd. It now pointed
almost perpendicularly downwards, and the glass filament had to be removed
and fastened transversely across the base of the young capsule. We expected
that the sub-peduncle would have been motionless in its new position; but
it continued slowly to swing, like a pendulum, from side to side, that is,
in a plane at right angles to that in which it had descended. This
circumnutating movement was observed from 9 A.M. on 22nd to 9 A.M. 24th, as
shown at B in the diagram. We were not able to observe this particular
sub-peduncle any longer; but it would certainly have gone on circumnutating
until the capsule was nearly ripe (which requires only a short time), and
it would then have moved upwards.

The upward movement (C, Fig. 188) is effected in part by the whole
sub-peduncle rising in the same manner as it had previously descended
through epinasty--namely, at the joint where united to the main peduncle.
As this upward movement occurred with plants kept in the dark and in
whatever position the main peduncle was fastened, it could not have been
caused by heliotropism or apogeotropism, but by hyponasty. Besides this
movement at the joint, there is another of a very different kind, for the
sub-peduncle becomes upwardly bent in the middle part. If the sub-peduncle
happens at the time to be inclined much downwards, the upward curvature is
so great that the whole forms a hook. The upper end bearing the capsule,
thus always places itself upright, and as this occurs in darkness, and in
whatever position the main peduncle may have been secured,
[page 505]
the upward curvature cannot be due to heliotropism or hyponasty, but to
apogeotropism.

Fig. 188. Oxalis carnosa: movements of flower-peduncle, traced on a
vertical glass: A, epinastic downward movement; B, circumnutation whilst
depending vertically; C, subsequent upward movement, due to apogeotropism
and hyponasty combined.
[page 506]

In order to trace this upward movement, a filament was fixed to a
sub-peduncle bearing a capsule nearly ripe, which was beginning to bend
upwards by the two means just described. Its course was traced (see C, Fig
188) during 53 h., by which time it had become nearly upright. The course
is seen to be strongly zigzag, together with some little loops. We may
therefore conclude that the movement consists of modified circumnutation.

The several species of Oxalis probably profit in the following manner by
their sub-peduncles first bending downwards and then upwards. They are
known to scatter their seeds by the bursting of the capsule; the walls of
which are so extremely thin, like silver paper, that they would easily be
permeated by rain. But as soon as the petals wither, the sepals rise up and
enclose the young capsule, forming a perfect roof over it as soon as the
sub-peduncle has bent itself downwards. By its subsequent upward movement,
the capsule stands when ripe at a greater height above the ground by twice
the length of the sub-peduncle, than it did when dependent, and is thus
able to scatter its seeds to a greater distance. The sepals, which enclose
the ovarium whilst it is young, present an additional adaptation by
expanding widely when the seeds are ripe, so as not to interfere with their
dispersal. In the case of Oxalis acetosella, the capsules are said
sometimes to bury themselves under loose leaves or moss on the ground, but
this cannot occur with those of O. carnosa, as the woody stem is too high.

Oxalis acetosella.--The peduncles are furnished with a joint in

Fig. 189. Oxalis acetosella: course pursued by the upper part of a
peduncle, whilst rising, traced from 11 A.M. June 1st to 9 A.M. 3rd. Figure
here reduced to one-half of the original scale.

the middle, so that the lower part answers to the main peduncle,
[page 507]
and the upper part to one of the sub-peduncles of O. carnosa. The upper
part bends downwards, after the flower has begun to wither, and the whole
peduncle then forms a hook; that this bending is due to epinasty we may
infer from the case of O. carnosa. When the pod is nearly ripe, the upper
part straightens itself and becomes erect; and this is due to hyponasty or
apogeotropism, or both combined, and not to heliotropism, for it occurred
in darkness. The short, hooked part of the peduncle of a cleistogamic
flower, bearing a pod nearly ripe, was observed in the dark during three
days. The apex of the pod at first pointed perpendicularly down, but in the
course of three days rose 90o, so that it now projected horizontally. The
course during the two latter days is shown in Fig. 189; and it may be seen
how greatly the peduncle, whilst rising, circumnutated. The lines of chief
movement were at right angles to the plane of the originally hooked part.
The tracing was not continued any longer; but after two additional days,
the peduncle with its capsule had become straight and stood upright.]

Concluding Remarks on Apogeotropism.--When apogeotropism is rendered by any
means feeble, it acts, as shown in the several foregoing cases, by
increasing the always present circumnutating movement in a direction
opposed to gravity, and by diminishing that in the direction of gravity, as
well as that to either side. The upward movement thus becomes unequal in
rate, and is sometimes interrupted by stationary periods. Whenever
irregular ellipses or loops are still formed, their longer axes are almost
always directed in the line of gravity, in an analogous manner as occurred
with heliotropic movements in reference to the light. As apogeotropism acts
more and more energetically, ellipses or loops cease to be formed, and the
course becomes at first strongly, and then less and less zigzag, and
finally rectilinear. From this gradation in the nature of the movement, and
more especially from all growing parts, which alone (except when pulvini
are present) are acted on by apogeotropism, con-
[page 508]
tinually circumnutating, we may conclude that even a rectilinear course is
merely an extremely modified form of circumnutation. It is remarkable that
a stem or other organ which is highly sensitive to apogeotropism, and which
has bowed itself rapidly upwards in a straight line, is often carried
beyond the vertical, as if by momentum. It then bends a little backwards to
a point round which it finally circumnutates. Two instances of this were
observed with the hypocotyls of Beta vulgaris, one of which is shown in
Fig. 183, and two other instances with the hypocotyls of Brassica. This
momentum-like movement probably results from the accumulated effects of
apogeotropism. For the sake of observing how long such after-effects
lasted, a pot with seedlings of Beta was laid on its side in the dark, and
the hypocotyls in 3 h. 15 m. became highly inclined. The pot, still in the
dark, was then placed upright, and the movements of the two hypocotyls were
traced; one continued to bend in its former direction, now in opposition to
apogeotropism, for about 37 m., perhaps for 48 m.; but after 61 m. it moved
in an opposite direction. The other hypocotyl continued to move in its
former course, after being placed upright, for at least 37 m.

Different species and different parts of the same species are acted on by
apogeotropism in very different degrees. Young seedlings, most of which
circumnutate quickly and largely, bend upwards and become vertical in much
less time than do any older plants observed by us; but whether this is due
to their greater sensitiveness to apogeotropism, or merely to their greater
flexibility we do not know. A hypocotyl of Beta traversed an angle of 109o
in 3 h. 8 m., and a cotyledon of Phalaris an angle of 130o in 4 h. 30 m. On
the other hand, the stem of a herbaceous
[page 509]
Verbena rose 90o in about 24 h.; that of Rubus 67o, in 70 h.; that of
Cytisus 70o, in 72 h.; that of a young American Oak only 37o, in 72 h. The
stem of a young Cyperus alternifolius rose only 11o in 96 h.; the bending
being confined to near its base. Though the sheath-like cotyledons of
Phalaris are so extremely sensitive to apogeotropism, the first true leaves
which protrude from them exhibited only a trace of this action. Two fronds
of a fern, Nephrodium molle, both of them young and one with the tip still
inwardly curled, were kept in a horizontal position for 46 h., and during
this time they rose so little that it was doubtful whether there was any
true apogeotropic movement.

The most curious case known to us of a difference in sensitiveness to
gravitation, and consequently of movement, in different parts of the same
organ, is that offered by the petioles of the cotyledons of Ipomoea
leptophylla. The basal part for a short length where united to the
undeveloped hypocotyl and radicle is strongly geotropic, whilst the whole
upper part is strongly apogeotropic. But a portion near the blades of the
cotyledons is after a time acted on by epinasty and curves downwards, for
the sake of emerging in the form of an arch from the ground; it
subsequently straightens itself, and is then again acted on by
apogeotropism.

A branch of Cucurbita ovifera, placed horizontally, moved upwards during 7
h. in a straight line, until it stood at 40o above the horizon; it then
began to circumnutate, as if owing to its trailing nature it had no
tendency to rise any higher. Another upright branch was secured to a stick,
close to the base of a tendril, and the pot was then laid horizontally in
the dark. In this position the tendril circumnutated and made
[page 510]
several large ellipses during 14 h., as it likewise did on the following
day; but during this whole time it was not in the least affected by
apogeotropism. On the other hand, when branches of another Cucurbitaceous
plant, Echinocytis lobata, were fixed in the dark so that the tendrils
depended beneath the horizon, these began immediately to bend upwards, and
whilst thus moving they ceased to circumnutate in any plain manner; but as
soon as they had become horizontal they recommenced to revolve
conspicuously.* The tendrils of Passiflora gracilis are likewise
apogeotropic. Two branches were tied down so that their tendrils pointed
many degrees beneath the horizon. One was observed for 8 h., during which
time it rose, describing two circles, one above the other. The other
tendril rose in a moderately straight line during the first 4 h., making
however one small loop in its course; it then stood at about 45o above the
horizon, where it circumnutated during the remaining 8 h. of observation.

A part or organ which whilst young is extremely sensitive to apogeotropism
ceases to be so as it grows old; and it is remarkable, as showing the
independence of this sensitiveness and of the circumnutating movement, that
the latter sometimes continues for a time after all power of bending from
the centre of the earth has been lost. Thus a seedling Orange bearing only
3 young leaves, with a rather stiff stem, did not curve in the least
upwards during 24 h. whilst extended horizontally; yet it circumnutated all
the time over a small space. The hypocotyl of a young seedling of Cassia
tora, similarly placed, became vertical in 12 h.; that of an older
seedling, 1 1/4 inch in height,

* For details see 'The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants,' 1875, p.
131.
[page 511]

became so in 28 h.; and that of another still older one, 1 ½ inch in
height, remained horizontal during two days, but distinctly circumnutated
during this whole time.

When the cotyledons of Phalaris or Avena are laid horizontally, the
uppermost part first bends upwards, and then the lower part; consequently,
after the lower part has become much curved upwards, the upper part is
compelled to curve backwards in an opposite direction, in order to
straighten itself and to stand vertically; and this subsequent
straightening process is likewise due to apogeotropism. The upper part of 8
young cotyledons of Phalaris were made rigid by being cemented to thin
glass rods, so that this part could not bend in the least; nevertheless,
the basal part was not prevented from curving upward. A stem or other organ
which bends upwards through apogeotropism exerts considerable force; its
own weight, which has of course to be lifted, was sufficient in almost
every instance to cause the part at first to bend a little downwards; but
the downward course was often rendered oblique by the simultaneous
circumnutating movement. The cotyledons of Avena placed horizontally,
besides lifting their own weight, were able to furrow the soft sand above
them, so as to leave little crescentic open spaces on the lower sides of
their bases; and this is a remarkable proof of the force exerted.

As the tips of the cotyledons of Phalaris and Avena bend upwards through
the action of apogeotropism before the basal part, and as these same tips
when excited by a lateral light transmit some influence to the lower part,
causing it to bend, we thought that the same rule might hold good with
apogeotropism. Consequently, the tips of 7 cotyledons of Phalaris were
[page 512]
cut off for a length in three cases of .2 inch and in the four other cases
of .14, .12, .1, and .07 inch. But these cotyledons, after being extended
horizontally, bowed themselves upwards as effectually as the unmutilated
specimens in the same pots, showing that sensitiveness to gravitation is
not confined to their tips.

GEOTROPISM.

This movement is directly the reverse of apogeotropism. Many organs bend
downwards through epinasty or apheliotropism or from their own weight; but
we have met with very few cases of a downward movement in sub-aërial organs
due to geotropism. We shall however, give one good instance in the
following section, in the case of Trifolium subterraneum, and probably in
that of Arachis hypogaea.

On the other hand, all roots which penetrate the ground (including the
modified root-like petioles of Megarrhiza and Ipomoea leptophylla) are
guided in their downward course by geotropism; and so are many aërial
roots, whilst others, as those of the Ivy, appear to be indifferent to its
action. In our first chapter the movements of the radicles of several
seedlings were described. We may there see (Fig. 1) how a radicle of the
cabbage, when pointing vertically upwards so as to be very little acted on
by geotropism, circumnutated; and how another (Fig. 2) which was at first
placed in an inclined position bowed itself downwards in a zigzag line,
sometimes remaining stationary for a time. Two other radicles of the
cabbage travelled downwards in almost rectilinear courses. A radicle of the
bean placed upright (Fig. 20) made a great sweep and zigzagged; but as it
sank downwards and was more strongly acted on by geotropism, it moved in an
[page 513]
almost straight course. A radicle of Cucurbita, directed upwards (Fig. 26),
also zigzagged at first, and described small loops; it then moved in a
straight line. Nearly the same result was observed with the radicles of Zea
mays. But the best evidence of the intimate connection between
circumnutation and geotropism was afforded by the radicles of Phaseolus,
Vicia, and Quercus, and in a less degree by those of Zea and Aesculus (see
Figs. 18, 19, 21, 41, and 52); for when these were compelled to grow and
slide down highly inclined surfaces of smoked glass, they left distinctly
serpentine tracks.

[The Burying of Seed-capsules: Trifolium subterraneum.--The flower-heads of
this plant are remarkable from producing only 3 or 4 perfect flowers, which
are situated exteriorly. All the other many flowers abort, and are modified
into rigid points, with a bundle of vessels running up their centres. After
a time 5 long, elastic, claw-like projections, which represent the
divisions of the calyx, are developed on their summits. As soon as the
perfect flowers wither they bend downwards, supposing the peduncle to stand
upright, and they then closely surround its upper part. This movement is
due to epinasty, as is likewise the case with the flowers of T. repens. The
imperfect central flowers ultimately follow, one after the other, the same
course. Whilst the perfect flowers are thus bending down, the whole
peduncle curves downwards and increases much in length, until the
flower-head reaches the ground. Vaucher* says that when the plant is so
placed that the heads cannot soon reach the ground, the peduncles grow to
the extraordinary length of from 6 to 9 inches. In whatever position the
branches may be placed, the upper part of the peduncle at first bends
vertically upwards through heliotropism; but as soon as the flowers begin
to wither the downward curvature of the whole peduncle commences. As this
latter movement occurred in complete darkness, and with peduncles arising
from upright and from dependent branches, it cannot be due to
apheliotropism or to epinasty, but must be attributed to geotropism.
Nineteen

* 'Hist. Phys. des Plantes d'Europe,' tom. ii. 1841, p. 106.
[page 514]

upright flower-heads, arising from branches in all sorts of positions, on
plants growing in a warm greenhouse, were marked with thread, and after 24
h. six of them were vertically dependent; these therefore had travelled
through 180o in this time. Ten were extended sub-horizontally, and these
had moved through about 90o. Three very young peduncles had as yet moved
only a little downwards, but after an additional 24 h. were greatly
inclined.

At the time when the flower-heads reach the ground, the younger imperfect
flowers in the centre are still pressed closely together, and form a
conical projection; whereas the perfect and imperfect flowers on the
outside are upturned and closely surround the peduncle. They are thus
adapted to offer as little resistance, as the case admits of, in
penetrating the ground, though the diameter of the flower-head is still
considerable. The means by which this penetration is effected will
presently be described. The flower-heads are able to bury themselves in
common garden mould, and easily in sand or in fine sifted cinders packed
rather closely. The depth to which they penetrated, measured from the
surface to the base of the head, was between 1/4 and ½ inch, but in one
case rather above 0.6 inch. With a plant kept in the house, a head partly
buried itself in sand in 6 h.: after 3 days only the tips of the reflexed
calyces were visible, and after 6 days the whole had disappeared. But with
plants growing out of doors we believe, from casual observations, that they
bury themselves in a much shorter time.

After the heads have buried themselves, the central aborted flowers
increase considerably in length and rigidity, and become bleached. They
gradually curve, one after the other, upwards or towards the peduncle, in
the same manner as did the perfect flowers at first. In thus moving, the
long claws on their summits carry with them some earth. Hence a flower-head
which has been buried for a sufficient time, forms a rather large ball,
consisting of the aborted flowers, separated from one another by earth, and
surrounding the little pods (the product of the perfect flowers) which lie
close round the upper part of the peduncle. The calyces of the perfect and
imperfect flowers are clothed with simple and multicellular hairs, which
have the power of absorption; for when placed in a weak solution of
carbonate of ammonia (2 gr. to 1 oz. of water) their protoplasmic contents
immediately became aggregated and afterwards displayed the usual slow
movements. This clover generally
[page 515]
grows in dry soil, but whether the power of absorption by the hairs on the
buried flower-heads is of any importance to them we do not know. Only a few
of the flower-heads, which from their position are not able to reach the
ground and bury themselves, yield seeds; whereas the buried ones never
failed, as far as we observed, to produce as many seeds as there had been
perfect flowers.

We will now consider the movements of the peduncle whilst

Fig. 190. Trifolium subterraneum: downward movement of peduncle from 19o
beneath the horizon to a nearly vertically dependent position, traced from
11 A.M. July 22nd to the morning of 25th. Glass filament fixed transversely
across peduncle, at base of flower-head.

curving down to the ground. We have seen in Chap. IV., Fig. 92, p. 225,
that an upright young flower-head circumnutated conspicuously; and that
this movement continued after the peduncle had begun to bend downwards. The
same peduncle was observed when inclined at an angle of 19o above the
horizon, and it circumnutated during two days. Another
[page 516]
which was already curved 36o beneath the horizon, was observed from 11 A.M.
July 22nd to the 27th, by which latter date it had become vertically
dependent. Its course during the first 12 h. is shown in Fig. 190, and its
position on the three succeeding mornings until the 25th, when it was
nearly vertical. During the first day the peduncle clearly circumnutated,
for it moved 4 times down and 3 times up; and on each succeeding day, as it
sank downwards, the same movement continued, but was only occasionally
observed and was less strongly marked. It should be stated that these
peduncles were observed under a double skylight in the house, and that they
generally moved downwards very much more slowly than those on plants
growing out of doors or in the greenhouse.

Fig. 191. Trifolium subterraneum: circumnutating movement of peduncle,
whilst the flower-head was burying itself in sand, with the reflexed tips
of the calyx still visible; traced from 8 A.M. July 26th to 9 A.M. on 27th.
Glass filament fixed transversely across peduncle, near flower-head.

Fig. 192. Trifolium subterraneum: movement of same peduncle, with
flower-head completely buried beneath the sand; traced from 8 A.M. to 7.15
P.M. on July 29th.

The movement of another vertically dependent peduncle with the flower-head
standing half an inch above the ground, was traced, and again when it first
touched the ground; in both cases irregular ellipses were described every 4
or 5 h. A peduncle on a plant which had been brought into the house, moved
from an upright into a vertically dependent position in a single day; and
here the course during the first 12 h. was nearly straight, but with a few
well-marked zigzags which betrayed the essential nature of the movement.
Lastly the circumnutation of a peduncle was traced during 51 h. whilst in
the act of burying itself obliquely in a little heap of sand. After it had
buried itself to such a depth that the tips of the sepals were alone
visible, the above figure (Fig 191) was traced during 25 h. When the
flower-head had completely disappeared beneath the sand, another tracing
was made during 11 h. 45 m. (Fig. 192); and here again we see that the
peduncle was circumnutating.
[page 517]

Any one who will observe a flower-head burying itself, will be convinced
that the rocking movement, due to the continued circumnutation of the
peduncle, plays an important part in the act. Considering that the
flower-heads are very light, that the peduncles are long, thin, and
flexible, and that they arise from flexible branches, it is incredible that
an object as blunt as one of these flower-heads could penetrate the ground
by means of the growing force of the peduncle, unless it were aided by the
rocking movement. After a flower-head has penetrated the ground to a small
depth, another and efficient agency comes into play; the central rigid
aborted flowers, each terminating in five long claws, curve up towards the
peduncle; and in doing so can hardly fail to drag the head down to a
greater depth, aided as this action is by the circumnutating movement,
which continues after the flower-head has completely buried itself. The
aborted flowers thus act something like the hands of the mole, which force
the earth backwards and the body forwards.

It is well known that the seed-capsules of various widely distinct plants
either bury themselves in the ground, or are produced from imperfect
flowers developed beneath the surface. Besides the present case, two other
well-marked instances will be immediately given. It is probable that one
chief good thus gained is the protection of the seeds from animals which
prey on them. In the case of T. subterraneum, the seeds are not only
concealed by being buried, but are likewise protected by being closely
surrounded by the rigid, aborted flowers. We may the more confidently infer
that protection is here aimed at, because the seeds of several species in
this same genus are protected in other ways;* namely, by the swelling and
closure of the calyx, or by the persistence and bending down of the
standard-petal, etc. But the most curious instance is that of T. globosum,
in which the upper flowers are sterile, as in T. subterraneum, but are here
developed into large brushes of hairs which envelop and protect the
seed-bearing flowers. Nevertheless, in all these cases the capsules, with
their seeds, may profit, as Mr. T. Thiselton Dyer has remarked,** by their
being kept somewhat damp; and the advantage of such dampness perhaps throws
light on the presence of the absorbent hairs on the buried flower-heads of
T. subterraneum. According to Mr. Bentham, as quoted by Mr. Dyer,

* Vaucher, 'Hist. Phys. des Plantes d'Europe,' tom. ii. p. 110.

** See his interesting article in 'Nature,' April 4th, 1878, p. 446.
[page 518]

the prostrate habit of Helianthemum prostratum "brings the capsules in
contact with the surface of the ground, postpones their maturity, and so
favours the seeds attaining a larger size." The capsules of Cyclamen and of
Oxalis acetosella are only occasionally buried, and this only beneath dead
leaves or moss. If it be an advantage to a plant that its capsules should
be kept damp and cool by being laid on the ground, we have in these latter
cases the first step, from which the power of penetrating the ground, with
the aid of the always present movement of circumnutation, might afterwards
have been gained.

Arachis hypogoea.--The flowers which bury themselves, rise from stiff
branches a few inches above the ground, and stand upright. After they have
fallen off, the gynophore, that is the part which supports the ovarium,
grows to a great length, even to 3 or 4 inches, and bends perpendicularly
downwards. It resembles closely a peduncle, but has a smooth and pointed
apex, which contains the ovules, and is at first not in the least enlarged.
The apex after reaching the ground penetrates it, in one case observed by
us to a depth of 1 inch, and in another to 0.7 inch. It there becomes
developed into a large pod. Flowers which are seated too high on the plant
for the gynophore to reach the ground are said* never to produce pods.

The movement of a young gynophore, rather under an inch in length and
vertically dependent, was traced during 46 H. by means of a glass filament
(with sights) fixed transversely a little above the apex. It plainly
circumnutated (Fig. 193) whilst increasing in length and growing downwards.
It was then raised up, so as to be extended almost horizontally, and the
terminal part curved itself downwards, following a nearly straight course
during 12 h., but with one attempt to circumnutate, as shown in Fig. 194.
After 24 h. it had become nearly vertical. Whether the exciting cause of
the downward movement is geotropism or apheliotropism was not ascertained;
but probably it is not apheliotropism, as all the gynophores grew straight
down towards the ground, whilst the light in the hot-house entered from one
side as well as from above. Another and older gynophore, the apex of which
had nearly reached the ground, was observed during 3 days in the same
manner as the first-mentioned short one; and it was found to be always
circumnutating. During the first 34 h. it described a figure which

* 'Gard. Chronicle,' 1857, p. 566.
[page 519]

represented four ellipses. Lastly, a long gynophore, the apex of which had
buried itself to the depth of about half an inch, was

Fig. 193 Arachis hypogoea: circumnutation of vertically dependent young
gynophore, traced on a vertical glass from 10 A.M. July 31st to 8 A.M. Aug.
2nd.

Fig. 194. Arachis hypogoea: downward movement of same young gynophore,
after being extended horizontally; traced on a vertical glass from 8.30
A.M. to 8.30 P.M. Aug. 2nd.

pulled up and extended horizontally: it quickly began to curve downwards in
a zigzag line; but on the following day the ter-
[page 520]
minal bleached portion was a little shrivelled. As the gynophores are rigid
and arise from stiff branches, and as they terminate in sharp smooth
points, it is probable that they could penetrate the ground by the mere
force of growth. But this action must be aided by the circumnutating
movement, for fine sand, kept moist, was pressed close round the apex of a
gynophore which had reached the ground, and after a few hours it was
surrounded by a narrow open crack. After three weeks this gynophore was
uncovered, and the apex was found at a depth of rather above half an inch
developed into a small, white, oval pod.

Amphicarpoea monoica.--This plant produces long thin shoots, which twine
round a support and of course circumnutate. Early in the summer shorter
shoots are produced from the lower parts of the plant, which grow
perpendicularly downwards and penetrate the ground. One of these,
terminating in a minute bud, was observed to bury itself in sand to a depth
of 0.2 inch in 24 h. It was lifted up and fixed in an inclined position
about 25o beneath the horizon, being feebly illuminated from above. In this
position it described two vertical ellipses in 24 h.; but on the following
day, when brought into the house, it circumnutated only a very little round
the same spot. Other branches were seen to penetrate the ground, and were
afterwards found running like roots beneath the surface for a length of
nearly two inches, and they had grown thick. One of these, after thus
running, had emerged into the air. How far circumnutation aids these
delicate branches in entering the ground we do not know; but the reflexed
hairs with which they are clothed will assist in the work. This plant
produces pods in the air, and others beneath the ground; which differ
greatly in appearance. Asa Gray says* that it is the imperfect flowers on
the creeping branches near the base of the plant which produce the
