slight importance, yet perhaps greater than at first appears. The plant
lives in humid districts, and the insects which adhere to all parts of
the leaf are washed by every heavy shower of rain into the narrow
channel formed by the naturally incurved edges. For instance, my friend
in North Wales placed several insects on some leaves, and two days
afterwards (there having been heavy rain in the interval) found some of
them quite washed away, and many others safely tucked under the now
closely inflected margins, the glands of which all round the insects
were no doubt secreting. We can thus, also, understand how it is that
so many insects, and fragments of insects, are generally found lying
within the incurved margins of the leaves.

The incurvation of the margin, due to the presence of an exciting
object, must be serviceable in another [page 379] and probably more
important way. We have seen that when large bits of meat, or of sponge
soaked in the juice of meat, were placed on a leaf, the margin was not
able to embrace them, but, as it became incurved, pushed them very
slowly towards the middle of the leaf, to a distance from the outside
of fully .1 of an inch (2.54 mm.), that is, across between one-third
and one-fourth of the space between the edge and midrib. Any object,
such as a moderately sized insect, would thus be brought slowly into
contact with a far larger number of glands, inducing much more
secretion and absorption, than would otherwise have been the case.
That this would be highly serviceable to the plant, we may infer from
the fact that Drosera has acquired highly developed powers of movement,
merely for the sake of bringing all its glands into contact with
captured insects. So again, after a leaf of Dionaea has caught an
insect, the slow pressing together of the two lobes serves merely to
bring the glands on both sides into contact with it, causing also the
secretion charged with animal matter to spread by capillary attraction
over the whole surface. In the case of Pinguicula, as soon as an insect
has been pushed for some little distance towards the midrib, immediate
re-expansion would be beneficial, as the margins could not capture
fresh prey until they were unfolded. The service rendered by this
pushing action, as well as that from the marginal glands being brought
into contact for a short time with the upper surfaces of minute
captured insects, may perhaps account for the peculiar movements of the
leaves; otherwise, we must look at these movements as a remnant of a
more highly developed power formerly possessed by the progenitors of
the genus.

In the four British species, and, as I hear from [page 380] Prof. Dyer,
in most or all the species of the genus, the edges of the leaves are in
some degree naturally and permanently incurved. This incurvation
serves, as already shown, to prevent insects from being washed away by
the rain; but it likewise serves for another end. When a number of
glands have been powerfully excited by bits of meat, insects, or any
other stimulus, the secretion often trickles down the leaf, and is
caught by the incurved edges, instead of rolling off and being lost. As
it runs down the channel, fresh glands are able to absorb the animal
matter held in solution. Moreover, the secretion often collects in
little pools within the channel, or in the spoon-like tips of the
leaves; and I ascertained that bits of albumen, fibrin, and gluten, are
here dissolved more quickly and completely than on the surface of the
leaf, where the secretion cannot accumulate; and so it would be with
naturally caught insects. The secretion was repeatedly seen thus to
collect on the leaves of plants protected from the rain; and with
exposed plants there would be still greater need of some provision to
prevent, as far as possible, the secretion, with its dissolved animal
matter, being wholly lost.

It has already been remarked that plants growing in a state of nature
have the margins of their leaves much more strongly incurved than those
grown in pots and prevented from catching many insects. We have seen
that insects washed down by the rain from all parts of the leaf often
lodge within the margins, which are thus excited to curl farther
inwards; and we may suspect that this action, many times repeated
during the life of the plant, leads to their permanent and well-marked
incurvation. I regret that this view did not occur to me in time to
test its truth.

It may here be added, though not immediately [page 381] bearing on our
subject, that when a plant is pulled up, the leaves immediately curl
downwards so as almost to conceal the roots,--a fact which has been
noticed by many persons. I suppose that this is due to the same
tendency which causes the outer and older leaves to lie flat on the
ground. It further appears that the flower-stalks are to a certain
extent irritable, for Dr. Johnson states that they "bend backwards if
rudely handled."*

Secretion, Absorption, and Digestion.--I will first give my
observations and experiments, and then a summary of the results.

[The Effects of Objects containing Soluble Nitrogenous Matter.

(1) Flies were placed on many leaves, and excited the glands to secrete
copiously; the secretion always becoming acid, though not so before.
After a time these insects were rendered so tender that their limbs and
bodies could be separated by a mere touch, owing no doubt to the
digestion and disintegration of their muscles. The glands in contact
with a small fly continued to secrete for four days, and then became
almost dry. A narrow strip of this leaf was cut off, and the glands of
the longer and shorter hairs, which had lain in contact for the four
days with the fly, and those which had not touched it, were compared
under the microscope and presented a wonderful contrast. Those which
had been in contact were filled with brownish granular matter, the
others with homogeneous fluid. There could therefore be no doubt that
the former had absorbed matter from the fly.

(2) Small bits of roast meat, placed on a leaf, always caused much acid
secretion in the course of a few hours--in one case within 40 m. When
thin fibres of meat were laid along the margin of a leaf which stood
almost upright, the secretion ran down to the ground. Angular bits of
meat, placed in little pools of the secretion near the margin, were in
the course of

* 'English Botany,' by Sir J.E. Smith; with coloured figures by J.
Sowerby; edit. of 1832, tab.  24, 25, 26.  [page 382]

two or three days much reduced in size, rounded, rendered more or less
colourless and transparent, and so much softened that they fell to
pieces on the slightest touch. In only one instance was a very minute
particle completely dissolved, and this occurred within 48 hrs.  When
only a small amount of secretion was excited, this was generally
absorbed in from 24 hrs. to 48 hrs.; the glands being left dry. But
when the supply of secretion was copious, round either a single rather
large bit of meat, or round several small bits, the glands did not
become dry until six or seven days had elapsed. The most rapid case of
absorption observed by me was when a small drop of an infusion of raw
meat was placed on a leaf, for the glands here became almost dry in 3
hrs. 20 m. Glands excited by small particles of meat, and which have
quickly absorbed their own secretion, begin to secrete again in the
course of seven or eight days from the time when the meat was given
them.

(3) Three minute cubes of tough cartilage from the leg-bone of a sheep
were laid on a leaf.  After 10 hrs. 30 m. some acid secretion was
excited, but the cartilage appeared little or not at all affected.
After 24 hrs. the cubes were rounded and much reduced in size; after 32
hrs.  they were softened to the centre, and one was quite liquefied;
after 35 hrs. mere traces of solid cartilage were left; and after 48
hrs. a trace could still be seen through a lens in only one of the
three. After 82 hrs. not only were all three cubes completely
liquefied, but all the secretion was absorbed and the glands left dry.

(4) Small cubes of albumen were placed on a leaf; in 8 hrs. feebly acid
secretion extended to a distance of nearly 1/10 of an inch round them,
and the angles of one cube were rounded.  After 24 hrs. the angles of
all the cubes were rounded, and they were rendered throughout very
tender; after 30 hrs. the secretion began to decrease, and after 48
hrs. the glands were left dry; but very minute bits of albumen were
still left undissolved.

(5) Smaller cubes of albumen (about 1/50 or 1/60 of an inch, .508 or
.423 mm.) were placed on four glands; after 18 hrs. one cube was
completely dissolved, the others being much reduced in size, softened,
and transparent. After 24 hrs. two of the cubes were completely
dissolved, and already the secretion on these glands was almost wholly
absorbed. After 42 hrs. the two other cubes were completely dissolved.
These four glands began to secrete again after eight or nine days.

(6) Two large cubes of albumen (fully 1/20 of an inch, 1.27 mm.) were
placed, one near the midrib and the other near the margin [page 383] of
a leaf; in 6 hrs. there was much secretion, which after 48 hrs.
accumulated in a little pool round the cube near the margin. This cube
was much more dissolved than that on the blade of the leaf; so that
after three days it was greatly reduced in size, with all the angles
rounded, but it was too large to be wholly dissolved. The secretion was
partially absorbed after four days. The cube on the blade was much less
reduced, and the glands on which it rested began to dry after only two
days.

(7) Fibrin excites less secretion than does meat or albumen. Several
trials were made, but I will give only three of them. Two minute shreds
were placed on some glands, and in 3 hrs. 45 m. their secretion was
plainly increased. The smaller shred of the two was completely
liquefied in 6 hrs. 15 m., and the other in 24 hrs.; but even after 48
hrs. a few granules of fibrin could still be seen through a lens
floating in both drops of secretion. After 56 hrs. 30 m. these granules
were completely dissolved. A third shred was placed in a little pool of
secretion, within the margin of a leaf where a seed had been lying, and
this was completely dissolved in the course of 15 hrs. 30 m.

(8) Five very small bits of gluten were placed on a leaf, and they
excited so much secretion that one of the bits glided down into the
marginal furrow. After a day all five bits seemed much reduced in size,
but none were wholly dissolved. On the third day I pushed two of them,
which had begun to dry, on to fresh glands. On the fourth day
undissolved traces of three out of the five bits could still be
detected, the other two having quite disappeared; but I am doubtful
whether they had really been completely dissolved. Two fresh bits were
now placed, one near the middle and the other near the margin of
another leaf; both excited an extraordinary amount of secretion; that
near the margin had a little pool formed round it, and was much more
reduced in size than that on the blade, but after four days was not
completely dissolved. Gluten, therefore, excites the glands greatly,
but is dissolved with much difficulty, exactly as in the case of
Drosera. I regret that I did not try this substance after having been
immersed in weak hydrochloric acid, as it would then probably have been
quickly dissolved.

(9) A small square thin piece of pure gelatine, moistened with water,
was placed on a leaf, and excited very little secretion in 5 hrs. 30
m., but later in the day a greater amount. After 24 hrs. the whole
square was completely liquefied; and this would not have occurred had
it been left in water. The liquid was acid.

(10) Small particles of chemically prepared casein excited [page 384]
acid secretion, but were not quite dissolved after two days; and the
glands then began to dry.  Nor could their complete dissolution have
been expected from what we have seen with Drosera.

(11) Minute drops of skimmed milk were placed on a leaf, and these
caused the glands to secrete freely. After 3 hrs. the milk was found
curdled, and after 23 hrs. the curds were dissolved. On placing the now
clear drops under the microscope, nothing could be detected except some
oil-globules. The secretion, therefore, dissolves fresh casein.

(12) Two fragments of a leaf were immersed for 17 hrs., each in a
drachm of a solution of carbonate of ammonia, of two strengths, namely
of one part to 437 and 218 of water. The glands of the longer and
shorter hairs were then examined, and their contents found aggregated
into granular matter of a brownish-green colour. These granular masses
were seen by my son slowly to change their forms, and no doubt
consisted of protoplasm. The aggregation was more strongly pronounced,
and the movements of the protoplasm more rapid, within the glands
subjected to the stronger solution than in the others. The experiment
was repeated with the same result; and on this occasion I observed that
the protoplasm had shrunk a little from the walls of the single
elongated cells forming the pedicels. In order to observe the process
of aggregation, a narrow strip of leaf was laid edgeways under the
microscope, and the glands were seen to be quite transparent; a little
of the stronger solution (viz. one part to 218 of water) was now added
under the covering glass; after an hour or two the glands contained
very fine granular matter, which slowly became coarsely granular and
slightly opaque; but even after 5 hrs. not as yet of a brownish tint.
By this time a few rather large, transparent, globular masses appeared
within the upper ends of the pedicels, and the protoplasm lining their
walls had shrunk a little. It is thus evident that the glands of
Pinguicula absorb carbonate of ammonia; but they do not absorb it, or
are not acted on by it, nearly so quickly as those of Drosera.

(13) Little masses of the orange-coloured pollen of the common pea,
placed on several leaves, excited the glands to secrete freely. Even a
very few grains which accidentally fell on a single gland caused the
drop surrounding it to increase so much in size, in 23 hrs., as to be
manifestly larger than the drops on the adjoining glands. Grains
subjected to the secretion for 48 hrs. did not emit their tubes; they
were quite discoloured, and seemed to contain less matter than before;
that [page 385] which was left being of a dirty colour, including
globules of oil. They thus differed in appearance from other grains
kept in water for the same length of time. The glands in contact with
the pollen-grains had evidently absorbed matter from them; for they had
lost their natural pale-green tint, and contained aggregated globular
masses of protoplasm.

(14) Square bits of the leaves of spinach, cabbage, and a saxifrage,
and the entire leaves of Erica tetralix, all excited the glands to
increased secretion. The spinach was the most effective, for it caused
the secretion evidently to increase in 1 hr. 40 m., and ultimately to
run some way down the leaf; but the glands soon began to dry, viz.
after 35 hrs. The leaves of Erica tetralix began to act in 7 hrs. 30
m., but never caused much secretion; nor did the bits of leaf of the
saxifrage, though in this case the glands continued to secrete for
seven days.  Some leaves of Pinguicula were sent me from North Wales,
to which leaves of Erica tetralixand of an unknown plant adhered; and
the glands in contact with them had their contents plainly aggregated,
as if they had been in contact with insects; whilst the other glands on
the same leaves contained only clear homogeneous fluid.

(15) Seeds.--A considerable number of seeds or fruits selected by
hazard, some fresh and some a year old, some soaked for a short time in
water and some not soaked, were tried. The ten following kinds, namely
cabbage, radish, Anemone nemorosa, Rumex acetosa, Carex sylvatica,
mustard, turnip, cress, Ranunculus acris, and Avena pubescens, all
excited much secretion, which was in several cases tested and found
always acid. The five first-named seeds excited the glands more than
the others. The secretion was seldom copious until about 24 hrs. had
elapsed, no doubt owing to the coats of the seeds not being easily
permeable.  Nevertheless, cabbage seeds excited some secretion in 4
hrs. 30 m.; and this increased so much in 18 hrs. as to run down the
leaves. The seeds or properly the fruits of Carex are much oftener
found adhering to leaves in a state of nature than those of any other
genus; and the fruits of Carex sylvatica excited so much secretion that
in 15 hrs. it ran into the incurved edges; but the glands ceased to
secrete after 40 hrs. On the other hand, the glands on which the seeds
of the Rumex and Avena rested continued to secrete for nine days.

The nine following kinds of seeds excited only a slight amount of
secretion, namely, celery, parsnip, caraway, Linum grandiflorum,
Cassia, Trifolium pannonicum, Plantago, onion, [page 386] and Bromus.
Most of these seeds did not excite any secretion until 48 hrs. had
elapsed, and in the case of the Trifolium only one seed acted, and this
not until the third day. Although the seeds of the Plantago excited
very little secretion, the glands continued to secrete for six days.
Lastly, the five following kinds excited no secretion, though left on
the leaves for two or three days, namely lettuce, Erica tetralix,
Atriplex hortensis, Phalaris canariensis, and wheat. Nevertheless, when
the seeds of the lettuce, wheat, and Atriplex were split open and
applied to leaves, secretion was excited in considerable quantity in 10
hrs., and I believe that some was excited in six hours. In the case of
the Atriplex the secretion ran down to the margin, and after 24 hrs. I
speak of it in my notes "as immense in quantity and acid." The split
seeds also of the Trifolium and celery acted powerfully and quickly,
though the whole seeds caused, as we have seen, very little secretion,
and only after a long interval of time. A slice of the common pea,
which however was not tried whole, caused secretion in 2 hrs.  From
these facts we may conclude that the great difference in the degree and
rate at which various kinds of seeds excite secretion, is chiefly or
wholly due to the different permeability of their coats.

Some thin slices of the common pea, which had been previously soaked
for 1 hr. in water, were placed on a leaf, and quickly excited much
acid secretion. After 24 hrs. these slices were compared under a high
power with others left in water for the same time; the latter contained
so many fine granules of legumin that the slide was rendered muddy;
whereas the slices which had been subjected to the secretion were much
cleaner and more transparent, the granules of legumin apparently having
been dissolved. A cabbage seed which had lain for two days on a leaf
and had excited much acid secretion, was cut into slices, and these
were compared with those of a seed which had been left for the same
time in water. Those subjected to the secretion were of a paler colour;
their coats presenting the greatest differences, for they were of a
pale dirty tint instead of chestnut-brown. The glands on which the
cabbage seeds had rested, as well as those bathed by the surrounding
secretion, differed greatly in appearance from the other glands on the
same leaf, for they all contained brownish granular matter, proving
that they had absorbed matter from the seeds.

That the secretion acts on the seeds was also shown by some of them
being killed, or by the seedlings being injured. Fourteen cabbage seeds
were left for three days on leaves and excited [page 387] much
secretion; they were then placed on damp sand under conditions known to
be favourable for germination. Three never germinated, and this was a
far larger proportion of deaths than occurred with seeds of the same
lot, which had not been subjected to the secretion, but were otherwise
treated in the same manner. Of the eleven seedlings raised, three had
the edges of their cotyledons slightly browned, as if scorched; and the
cotyledons of one grew into a curious indented shape. Two mustard seeds
germinated; but their cotyledons were marked with brown patches and
their radicles deformed. Of two radish seeds, neither germinated;
whereas of many seeds of the same lot not subjected to the secretion,
all, excepting one, germinated. Of the two Rumex seeds, one died and
the other germinated; but its radicle was brown and soon withered. Both
seeds of the Avena germinated, one grew well, the other had its radicle
brown and withered. Of six seeds of the Erica none germinated, and when
cut open after having been left for five months on damp sand, one alone
seemed alive. Twenty-two seeds of various kinds were found adhering to
the leaves of plants growing in a state of nature; and of these, though
kept for five months on damp sand, none germinated, some being then
evidently dead.

The Effects of Objects not containing Soluble Nitrogenous Matter.

(16) It has already been shown that bits of glass, placed on leaves,
excite little or no secretion. The small amount which lay beneath the
fragments was tested and found not acid.  A bit of wood excited no
secretion; nor did the several kinds of seeds of which the coats are
not permeable to the secretion, and which, therefore, acted like
inorganic bodies. Cubes of fat, left for two days on a leaf, produced
no effect.

(17) A particle of white sugar, placed on a leaf, formed in 1 hr. 10 m.
a large drop of fluid, which in the course of 2 additional hours ran
down into the naturally inflected margin. This fluid was not in the
least acid, and began to dry up, or more probably was absorbed, in 5
hrs.  30 m. The experiment was repeated; particles being placed on a
leaf, and others of the same size on a slip of glass in a moistened
state; both being covered by a bell-glass. This was done to see whether
the increased amount of fluid on the leaves could be due to mere
deliquescence; but this was proved not to be the case. The particle on
the leaf caused so much secretion that in the course of 4 hrs. it ran
down across two-thirds of the leaf. After 8 hrs. the leaf, which was
concave, was actually filled with very viscid [page 388] fluid; and it
particularly deserves notice that this, as on the former occasion, was
not in the least acid. This great amount of secretion may be attributed
to exosmose. The glands which had been covered for 24 hrs. by this
fluid did not differ, when examined under the microscope, from others
on the same leaf, which had not come into contact with it. This is an
interesting fact in contrast with the invariably aggregated condition
of glands which have been bathed by the secretion, when holding animal
matter in solution.

(18) Two particles of gum arabic were placed on a leaf, and they
certainly caused in 1 hr. 20 m. a slight increase of secretion. This
continued to increase for the next 5 hrs., that is for as long a time
as the leaf was observed.

(19) Six small particles of dry starch of commerce were placed on a
leaf, and one of these caused some secretion in 1 hr. 15 m., and the
others in from 8 hrs. to 9 hrs. The glands which had thus been excited
to secrete soon became dry, and did not begin to secrete again until
the sixth day. A larger bit of starch was then placed on a leaf, and no
secretion was excited in 5 hrs. 30 m.; but after 8 hrs. there was a
considerable supply, which increased so much in 24 hrs. as to run down
the leaf to the distance of 3/4 of an inch. This secretion, though so
abundant, was not in the least acid. As it was so copiously excited,
and as seeds not rarely adhere to the leaves of naturally growing
plants, it occurred to me that the glands might perhaps have the power
of secreting a ferment, like ptyaline, capable of dissolving starch; so
I carefully observed the above six small particles during several days,
but they did not seem in the least reduced in bulk. A particle was also
left for two days in a little pool of secretion, which had run down
from a piece of spinach leaf; but although the particle was so minute
no diminution was perceptible. We may therefore conclude that the
secretion cannot dissolve starch. The increase caused by this substance
may, I presume, be attributed to exosmose. But I am surprised that
starch acted so quickly and powerfully as it did, though in a less
degree than sugar. Colloids are known to possess some slight power of
dialysis; and on placing the leaves of a Primula in water, and others
in syrup and diffused starch, those in the starch became flaccid, but
to a less degree and at a much slower rate than the leaves in the
syrup; those in water remaining all the time crisp.]

From the foregoing experiments and observations we [page 389] see that
objects not containing soluble matter have little or no power of
exciting the glands to secrete. Non-nitrogenous fluids, if dense, cause
the glands to pour forth a large supply of viscid fluid, but this is
not in the least acid. On the other hand, the secretion from glands
excited by contact with nitrogenous solids or liquids is invariably
acid, and is so copious that it often runs down the leaves and collects
within the naturally incurved margins. The secretion in this state has
the power of quickly dissolving, that is of digesting, the muscles of
insects, meat, cartilage, albumen, fibrin, gelatine, and casein as it
exists in the curds of milk.  The glands are strongly excited by
chemically prepared casein and gluten; but these substances (the latter
not having been soaked in weak hydrochloric acid) are only partially
dissolved, as was likewise the case with Drosera. The secretion, when
containing animal matter in solution, whether derived from solids or
from liquids, such as an infusion of raw meat, milk, or a weak solution
of carbonate of ammonia, is quickly absorbed; and the glands, which
were before limpid and of a greenish colour, become brownish and
contain masses of aggregated granular matter. This matter, from its
spontaneous movements, no doubt consists of protoplasm. No such effect
is produced by the action of non-nitrogenous fluids. After the glands
have been excited to secrete freely, they cease for a time to secrete,
but begin again in the course of a few days.

Glands in contact with pollen, the leaves of other plants, and various
kinds of seeds, pour forth much acid secretion, and afterwards absorb
matter probably of an albuminous nature from them. Nor can the benefit
thus derived be insignificant, for a considerable [page 390] amount of
pollen must be blown from the many wind-fertilised carices, grasses,
&c., growing where Pinguicula lives, on to the leaves thickly covered
with viscid glands and forming large rosettes. Even a few grains of
pollen on a single gland causes it to secrete copiously. We have also
seen how frequently the small leaves of Erica tetralix and of other
plants, as well as various kinds of seeds and fruits, especially of
Carex, adhere to the leaves. One leaf of the Pinguicula had caught ten
of the little leaves of the Erica; and three leaves on the same plant
had each caught a seed. Seeds subjected to the action of the secretion
are sometimes killed, or the seedlings injured. We may, therefore,
conclude that Pinguicula vulgaris, with its small roots, is not only
supported to a large extent by the extraordinary number of insects
which it habitually captures, but likewise draws some nourishment from
the pollen, leaves, and seeds of other plants which often adhere to its
leaves. It is therefore partly a vegetable as well as an animal
feeder.

                    PINGUICULA GRANDIFLORA.

This species is so closely allied to the last that it is ranked by Dr.
Hooker as a sub-species. It differs chiefly in the larger size of its
leaves, and in the glandular hairs near the basal part of the midrib
being longer. But it likewise differs in constitution; I hear from Mr.
Ralfs, who was so kind as to send me plants from Cornwall, that it
grows in rather different sites; and Dr. Moore, of the Glasnevin
Botanic Gardens, informs me that it is much more manageable under
culture, growing freely and flowering annually; whilst Pinguicula
vulgaris has to be renewed every year. Mr. Ralfs found numerous [page
391] insects and fragments of insects adhering to almost all the
leaves. These consisted chiefly of Diptera, with some Hymenoptera,
Homoptera, Coleoptera, and a moth. On one leaf there were nine dead
insects, besides a few still alive. He also observed a few fruits of
Carex pulicaris, as well as the seeds of this same Pinguicula, adhering
to the leaves. I tried only two experiments with this species; firstly,
a fly was placed near the margin of a leaf, and after 16 hrs. this was
found well inflected. Secondly, several small flies were placed in a
row along one margin of another leaf, and by the next morning this
whole margin was curled inwards, exactly as in the case of Pinguicula
vulgaris.

                    PINGUICULA LUSITANICA.

This species, of which living specimens were sent me by Mr. Ralfs from
Cornwall, is very distinct from the two foregoing ones. The leaves are
rather smaller, much more transparent, and are marked with purple
branching veins. The margins of the leaves are much more involuted;
those of the older ones extending over a third of the space between the
midrib and the outside. As in the two other species, the glandular
hairs consist of longer and shorter ones, and have the same structure;
but the glands differ in being purple, and in often containing granular
matter before they have been excited. In the lower part of the leaf,
almost half the space on each side between the midrib and margin is
destitute of glands; these being replaced by long, rather stiff,
multicellular hairs, which intercross over the midrib. These hairs
perhaps serve to prevent insects from settling on this part of the
leaf, where there are no viscid glands by which they could be caught;
but it is hardly probable that they were developed for this purpose.
The spiral vessels pro- [page 392] ceeding from the midrib terminate at
the extreme margin of the leaf in spiral cells; but these are not so
well developed as in the two preceding species. The flower-peduncles,
sepals, and petals, are studded with glandular hairs, like those on the
leaves.

The leaves catch many small insects, which are found chiefly beneath
the involuted margins, probably washed there by the rain. The colour of
the glands on which insects have long lain is changed, being either
brownish or pale purple, with their contents coarsely granular; so that
they evidently absorb matter from their prey. Leaves of the Erica
tetralix, flowers of a Galium, scales of grasses, &c. likewise adhered
to some of the leaves. Several of the experiments which were tried on
Pinguicula vulgaris were repeated on Pinguicula lusitanica, and these
will now be given.

[(1) A moderately sized and angular bit of albumen was placed on one
side of a leaf, halfway between the midrib and the naturally involuted
margin. In 2 hrs. 15 m. the glands poured forth much secretion, and
this side became more infolded than the opposite one. The inflection
increased, and in 3 hrs. 30 m. extended up almost to the apex. After 24
hrs. the margin was rolled into a cylinder, the outer surface of which
touched the blade of the leaf and reached to within the 1/20 of an inch
of the midrib. After 48 hrs. it began to unfold, and in 72 hrs. was
completely unfolded. The cube was rounded and greatly reduced in size;
the remainder being in a semi-liquefied state.

(2) A moderately sized bit of albumen was placed near the apex of a
leaf, under the naturally incurved margin. In 2 hrs. 30 m. much
secretion was excited, and next morning the margin on this side was
more incurved than the opposite one, but not to so great a degree as in
the last case. The margin unfolded at the same rate as before. A large
proportion of the albumen was dissolved, a remnant being still left.

(3) Large bits of albumen were laid in a row on the midribs of two
leaves, but produced in the course of 24 hrs. no effect; [page 393] nor
could this have been expected, for even had glands existed here, the
long bristles would have prevented the albumen from coming in contact
with them. On both leaves the bits were now pushed close to one margin,
and in 3 hrs. 30 m. this became so greatly inflected that the outer
surface touched the blade; the opposite margin not being in the least
affected. After three days the margins of both leaves with the albumen
were still as much inflected as ever, and the glands were still
secreting copiously. With Pinguicula vulgaris I have never seen
inflection lasting so long.

(4) Two cabbage seeds, after being soaked for an hour in water, were
placed near the margin of a leaf, and caused in 3 hrs. 20 m. increased
secretion and incurvation. After 24 hrs. the leaf was partially
unfolded, but the glands were still secreting freely. These began to
dry in 48 hrs., and after 72 hrs. were almost dry. The two seeds were
then placed on damp sand under favourable conditions for growth; but
they never germinated, and after a time were found rotten. They had no
doubt been killed by the secretion.
