It is a peculiar, but nevertheless well-founded fact, that there is
something magnetic in fantastic fiction that will attract the reader
as no other type of fiction can. One of the consequences resulting
from the reading of this absorbing and fascinating type of fiction is
that the fantasy fan feels the urge to save and collect fantasy
stories, and will, indeed, go to extreme ends to make his collection
complete as possible.

But how is he to go about accumulating a good, worthy collection?

The first rule is simple: collect all the fantastic fiction that is
appearing in the current magazines. Wonder Stories, Amazing Stories
and their quarterlies, and Science Fiction are the current magazines
that specialize in the printing of science fiction, probably the most
popular type of fantastic fiction.

However, without a shadow of a doubt the foremost magazine that
specializes in fantastic fiction is Weird Tales. Its editor,
Farnsworth Wright, insists that the stories appearing there be of high
literary quality, and thus we find that many stories have copped
honorable mentions in O'Brien's list of the best stories of the year
and in the O'Henry Memorial Prize list. The range of Weird Tales
comprises every type of fantastic fiction: from the occult to science
fiction, from ghost stories to the supernatural, from voodoo thrillers
to vampire tales, from werewolf yarns to reincarnation, and from the
mystic to the physic.

Other current magazines may occasionally print fantasyarns. Keep an
eye on Argosy, Blue Book, Magic Carpet, Ten Detective Aces, Dime
Detective, Thrilling Adventures, Doc Savage, the Science Fiction
Digest, and The Fantasy Fan, and, in truth, any of the detective, air,
and adventure magazines.

(Next month Mr. Schwartz takes up the more difficult tasks in the
collecting of fantasy fiction. No collector should miss this series.)

                     *      *      *      *      *

Boost The Fantasy Fan to your pals.




FAMOUS FANTASY FANS

1--Allen Glasser


Allen Glasser has had stories published in more than a dozen different
mags--but only two of them were science fiction. Therefore, his claim
to fame in the latter field must rest mainly on his activities as a
fan.

Glasser's first effort in behalf of science fiction was the founding
of The Scienceers, a fan club, early in 1930. For his work in this
connection, he was awarded a prize by Science Wonder Quarterly.

During 1931 he began a one-man campaign for more scientifilms, having
coined that term himself. He wrote to various producers and magazines
on this subject, and he believes he really started something.

In January, 1932, he became editor of The Time Traveller, science
fiction's first fan magazine, and conducted it successfully (for
himself) during its brief career. He also founded the Fantasy Fan
Fraternity in this period.

In addition to his fan activities, he has several other items to his
credit in connection with science fiction. He won third prize in
Wonder Quarterly's Interplanetary Plot Contest, his story, "The
Martian," appearing in their Winter 1932 edition. A poem of his was
published in the Summer 1933 issue of Amazing Quarterly; and a short
story, "Across the Ages," in the August-September 1933 Amazing
Stories. He has also had two articles on science fiction in The Author
& Journalist, a prominent writers' magazine. They were "Wells Started
It," published September, 1932, and "The Wane of Science Fiction"
which appeared last June.

Despite the pessimistic title of his last named work, Glasser still
has strong faith and deep interest in science fiction--as proven by
his contributions to THE FANTASY FAN.

He may not have the beautiful vocabulary of Clark Ashton Smith, the
ironic humor of Stanton A. Coblentz, the psychology of Dr. Keller, or
the science of John W. Campbell, Jr., but it is our sincere belief
that Allen Glasser is one of science fiction's potential authors.

    (Another in this series will soon appear.)




CLUB NEWS


In this department will be discussed news of any science fiction or
weird story club and their activities. If you belong to a club devoted
to fantasy, tell us about it, and we will let the rest of the readers
know. Some may want to join your club.

For the benefit of those fans that would like to belong to a science
fiction club, but have not as yet had the opportunity to join, we wish
to make an important announcement. Allen Glasser, former editor of The
Time Traveller, had formed a club for his readers named "Fantasy Fan's
Fraternity." Because of the discontinuance of The Time Traveller, the
club became unorganized. We are happy to inform you, however, that Mr.
Glasser wishes to re-organize this association with the readers of THE
FANTASY FAN as members. There will be no dues in the new club. Every
loyal fan should join. For particulars write direct to Mr. Allen
Glasser at 1610 University Ave., New York City and we'll wager you
will never regret it.

Forrest J. Ackerman, the world's most active, science fiction fan, is
a member of the British Science Fiction Club, and he has this to say
about it:

The membership is one dollar a year. Some of the advantages received
in return are: the magazine-book service, and Book Information
Department; the general scientific information bureau, and
correspondence between BSFC members of oversea clubs. In time, a
monthly magazine of the club is hoped to be produced to be solely the
work of the members. The Society is affiliated with the International
Scientific Association of America. Professor J. Graham Kerr, J.P.,
F.R.S., Professor of Zoology in the University of Glasgow, is an
honorary Member of the Society, and Dr. C. G. Jung, because of his
distinguished contributions to the Literature of Psychology, and Hugo
Gernsback, well-known editor of Wonder Stories, both of whom have
expressed great interest in the work of the Association, have been
nominated for new Honorary Members. Officers are: J. R. Elliot, Esq.,
