    Have revolv'd, and I return
    To the spot where now I burn.
    Other stars anon shall rise
    To the axis of the skies;
    Stars that soothe and stars that bless
    With a sweet forgetfulness:
    Only when my round is o'er
    Shall the past disturb thy door."

Vainly did I struggle with my drowsiness, seeking to connect these
strange words with some lore of the skies which I had learnt from the
Pnakotic manuscripts. My head, heavy and reeling, drooped to my
breast, and when next I looked up it was in a dream; with the Pole
Star grinning at me through a window from over the horrible swaying
trees of a dream-swamp. And I am still dreaming.

In my shame and despair I sometimes scream frantically, begging the
dream-creatures around me to waken me ere the Inutos steal up the pass
behind the peak Noton and take the citadel by surprise; but these
creatures are daemons, for they laugh at me and tell me I am not
dreaming. They mock me whilst I sleep, and whilst the squat yellow foe
may be creeping silently upon us. I have failed in my duty and
betrayed the marble city of Olathoe; I have proven false to Alos, my
friend and commander. But still these shadows of my dreams deride me.
They say there is no land of Lomar, save in my nocturnal imaginings;
that in those realms where the Pole Star shines high, and red
Aldebaran crawls low around the horizon, there has been naught save
ice and snow for thousands of years, and never a man save squat,
yellow creatures, blighted by the cold, whom they call "Esquimaux."

And as I writhe in my guilty agony, frantic to save the city whose
peril every moment grows, and vainly striving to shake off this
unnatural dream of a house of stone and brick south of a sinister
swamp and a cemetery on a low hillock; the Pole Star, evil and
monstrous, leers down from the black vault, winking hideously like an
insane watching eye which strives to convey some message, yet recalls
nothing save that it once had a message to convey.

                     *      *      *      *      *

    Watch for another story by H. P. Lovecraft in an early issue.




FACTS AND PROPHECY


W. A. Conrad, assistant professor in mathematics at the United States
Naval Academy, says that a trip to the moon in a rocket is possible.
According to him, it would cost as much as two battleships--$100,000,000,
but it would be worth it. The biggest obstacle to overcome would be
the fuel problem, he declares. It would take a huge amount of oxygen
to make the trip. Other problems would be dodging meteors and
overcoming the falling-in-an-elevator feeling. He likens the benefits
derived from such a voyage, to those derived from Columbus' trip
across the Atlantic.

During the National Inventor's Congress in Cleveland, September 5 to
9, Arthur Shenderlein, of Oakland, California, exhibited a motor which
he claims will carry passengers to Mars, or any other planet in record
time. He declared his motor will go 100,000 miles without gasoline.




HOWLS FROM THE ETHER

by The Spacehound


Some copies of the August, 1929, _Amazing Stories_ contained "Out of
the Void" printed twice and "The Grim Inheritance" omitted. This
happens every so often in the binding of magazines, when one of the
several sections is left out and two of another inserted. In the above
case, this means that several issues of the magazine contained no "Out
of the Void," and two copies of "The Grim Inheritance".... Voltaire's
"Micromegas" is an excellent interplanetary story concerning a
Sirian's visit to Saturn and Earth.... In the days of "Science
Fiction" (the pamphlet mimeographed in Cleveland), Hugh Langley was
the pseudonym for the joint efforts of Jerome Siegel and Bernard
Kenton.... P. S. Miller mentions working on his "Arrhenius Horror" in
an early 1930 mag.... "Desolation's War", an excellent science fiction
tale was in _Top-Notch_ a short while ago. They present stories of
this type at odd intervals.... Roy Rockwood's "Great Miracle" series
have been reissued.... An English newspaper runs science fiction
regularly. Roy's "Prince of Atlantis," while a stf classic is also a
subtle treatise on sociology.... _Radio Guild_ carried an illustrated
feature on Buck Rogers.... The December 1932 Happy Hours Magazine
carried an editorial on "Science Fiction in the Dime Novels," by Ralph
P. Smith.... O. O. Mclntyre and Philip Wylie are good friends.... In
regards to the question in the August 1932 Time Traveller, "The Nth
Man," by Homer Eon Flint, was written especially for the Amazing
Quarterly.... The Doc Savage magazine is running a number of good
adventure fantasies. Recent issues have had "The Land of Terror," and
a tale of adventure at the North Pole among several others, including
one about super-gangs attempting to conquer a nation.... And keep an
eye on _Thrilling Adventure_ and the new companion mag to Nickel
Detective.... Austin Hall had a humorous western in a recent
_Argosy_.... You cover fans keep an eye on the fine work Paul is doing
for Science and Mechanics, the sister magazine of _Wonder Stories_....
One of H. G. Wells' latest contributions is "Love on Mars" in a
romance magazine.... "Conflict," a new magazine issued by the Central
Pub. Co. at the old Miracle Stories address, will use "weird adventure
stories".... R. F. Starzl had a review of the science fiction market
in the Author and Journalist over two years ago.... The staff of the
Dallas Journal serialized the first chapter of Burroughs' "A Fighting
Man of Mars" over WFAA last June.... Edison's last work is said to
have been on a machine to communicate with the dead.... Your scribe is
No. 1 in the Jules Verne Prize Club.... Two recent radio fantasies are
"The Man with the Golden Head" and Stevenson's "Dr. Jekyll and Mr.
Hyde".... An excellent satire on interplanetary stories ran through
the comic sheets of the AP newspapers, which showed Sappo and
Professor Whattasnozzle going through adventures on Man and Venus....
A vote taken in the early days of _Amazing Stories_ showed 32,644 in
favor of a bi-weekly publication, and 498 who thought otherwise....
Edgar Wallace's "The Fourth Plague" is a good scientific mystery novel.

    ...o. x. o...        ...o. x. o...

    Come over to "Our Readers Say"




A VISIT TO JULES DE GRANDIN

by Marianne Ferguson


I got off the train at the Harrisonville Railroad Station, filled with
mixed feelings, for I was to visit the world renowned detective, Jules
de Grandin, and Dr. Trowbridge. As I walked uncertainly up the street,
I inquired of a policeman, who directed me to Jules de Grandin's
house.

I am afraid that I knocked at the door somewhat timidly, and I soon
heard footsteps coming down the hall. The door opened, and there stood
a tall, dark man.

"Is this where Mr. de Grandin lives?" I asked rather shakily, for I
