nevertheless, his manner of telling seems to me admirably fitted to
weird fiction.

"Point 2--I agree heartily with Mr. Crawford; science fiction would
indeed be dull, if it consisted of nothing but the ideas Mr. Barlow
lists. Fantasy is an integral part of stf; and while the three above
mentioned stories were, for a large part, fantasy, they also contained
the elements of strict stf.

"Point 3--Finally, if no other explaining will suffice, I can only
offer this last fact: Such stories provide variety, and there are many
who will like them. So, if you don't, Forrest, just forget about it.
Stf can not be composed of all interplanetar yarns, or all medical,
or all of any other type."

We hereby give notice that the Smith-Ackerman debate will be concluded
in the February issue. It has just about run its course. If you have
anything to say, you'd better say it now. It's your last chance. In
next month's column, Clark Ashton Smith presents a rebuttal to the
vociferous letter of D. Alexander's in our December issue. Mr. Smith
is glad to know that Ackerman is being given an even break. We hope
that this friendly argument has been well-taken by all concerned and
will cause no hard feelings.




The Ghoul

by Clark Ashton Smith


During the reign of the Caliph Vathek, a young man of good repute and
family, named Noureddin Hassan, was haled before the Cadi Ahmed ben
Becar at Bussorah. Now Noureddin was a comely youth, of open and
gentle mien; and great was the astonishment of the Cadi and of all
others present when they heard the charges that were preferred against
him. He was accused of having slain seven people, one by one, on seven
successive nights, and of having left the corpses in a cemetery near
Bussorah, where they were found lying with their bodies and members
devoured in a fearsome manner, as if by jackals. Of the people he was
said to have slain three were women, two were travelling merchants,
one was a mendicant, and one a grave-digger.

Ahmed ben Becar was filled with the learning and wisdom of honorable
years, and withal was possessed of much perspicacity. But he was
deeply perplexed by the strangeness and atrocity of these crimes and
by the mild demeanor and well-bred aspect of Noureddin Hassan, which
he could in no wise reconcile with them. He heard in silence the
testimony of witnesses who had seen Noureddin bearing on his shoulders
the body of a woman at yester-eve in the cemetery; and others who on
several occasions had observed him coming from the neighborhood at
unseemly hours when only thieves and murderers would be abroad. Then,
having considered all these, he questioned the youth closely.

"Noureddin Hassan," he said, "thou hast been charged with crimes of
exceeding foulness, which thy bearing and thy lineaments belie. Is
there haply an explanation of these things by which thou canst wholly
clear thyself, or in some measure mitigate the heinousness of thy
deeds, if so it be that thou art guilty? I adjure thee to tell me the
truth in this matter."

Now Noureddin Hassan arose before the Cadi; and the heaviness of
extreme shame and sorrow was visible on his countenance.

"Alas, O Cadi," he replied, "for the charges that have been brought
against me are indeed true. It was I and none other, who slew these
people; nor can I offer any extenuation of my act."

The Cadi was sorely grieved and astonished when he heard this answer.

"I must perforce believe thee," he said sternly. "But thou hast
confessed a thing which will make thy name hence forward an
abomination in the ears and mouths of men. I command thee to tell me
why these crimes were committed, and what offense these persons had
given thee, or what injury they had done to thee; or if perchance thou
slewest them for gain, like a common robber."

"There was neither offense given nor injury wrought by any of them
against me," replied Noureddin. "And I did not kill them for their
money or belongings or apparel, since I had no need of such things,
and, aside from that, have always been an honest man."

"Then," cried Ahmed ben Becar, greatly puzzled, "what was thy reason
if it was none of these?"

Now the face of Noureddin Hassan grew heavier still with sorrow; and
he bowed his head in a shamefaced manner that bespoke the utterness of
profound remorse. And standing thus before the Cadi, he told this
story:


The reversals of fortune, O Cadi, are swift and grievous, and beyond
the foreknowing or advertence of men. Alas! for less than a fortnight
agone I was the happiest and most guiltless of mortals, with no
thought of wrongdoing toward anyone. I was wedded to Amina, the
daughter of the jewel-merchant Aboul Cogia; and I loved her deeply and
was much beloved by her in turn; and moreover we were at this time
anticipating the birth of our first child. I had inherited from my
father a rich estate and many slaves; the cares of life were light
upon my shoulders; and I had, it would seem, every reason to count
myself among those whom Allah has blest with an earthly foretaste of
Heaven.

Judge, then, the excessive nature of my grief when Amina died in the
same hour when she was to have been delivered. From that time, in the
dire extremity of my lamentation, I was as one bereft of light and
knowledge; I was deaf to all those who sought to condole with me, and
blind to their friendly offices.

After the burial of Amina my sorrow became a veritable madness, and I
wandered by night to her grave in the cemetery near Bussorah and flung
myself prostrate before the newly lettered tombstone, on the earth
that been digged that very day. My senses deserted me, and I knew not
how long I remained on the damp clay beneath the cypresses, while the
horn of a decrescent moon arose in the heavens.

Then, in my stupor of abandonment, I heard a terrible voice that bade
me rise from the ground on which I was lying. And lifting my head a
little, I saw a hideous demon of gigantic frame and stature, with eyes
of scarlet fire beneath brows that were coarse as tangled rootlets,
and fangs that overhung a cavernous mouth, and earth-black longer and
sharper than those of the hyena. And the demon said to me:

"I am a ghoul, and it is my office to devour the bodies of the dead. I
have now come to claim the corpse that was interred today beneath the
soil on which thou art lying in a fashion so unmannerly. Begone, for I
have fasted since yester-night, and I am much anhungered."

Now, at the sight of this demon, and the sound of his dreadful voice,
and the still more dreadful meaning of his words, I was like to have
swooned with terror on the cold clay. But I recovered myself in a
manner, and besought him, saying:

"Spare this grave, I implore thee; for she who lies buried therein it
dearer to me than any living mortal; and I would not that her fair
body should be the provender of an unclean demon such as thou."

At this the ghoul was angered, and I thought that he would have done
me some bodily violence. But again I besought him, swearing by Allah
and Mohammed with many solemn oaths that I would grant him anything
