_Distribution_--Throughout the United States and Canada; not so common
in the South and West.

Myriads and myriads of daisies, whitening our fields as if a belated
blizzard had covered them with a snowy mantle in June, fill the farmer
with dismay, the flower-lover with rapture. When vacation days have
come; when chains and white-capped old women are to be made of daisies
by happy children turned out of schoolrooms into meadows; when pretty
maids, like Goethe's Marguerite, tell their fortunes by the daisy
"petals"; when music bubbles up in a cascade of ecstasy from the
throats of bobolinks nesting among the daisies, timothy, and clover;
when the blue sky arches over the fairest scenes the year can show, and
all the world is full of sunshine and happy promises of fruition, must
we Americans always go to English literature for a song to fit our
joyous mood?

  "When daisies pied, and violets blue,
  And lady-smocks all silver white,
  And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue,
    Do paint the meadows with delight--"

sang Shakespeare. His lovely suggestion of an English spring recalls no
familiar picture to American minds. No more does Burns's.

  "Wee, modest, crimson-tippit flower."

Shakespeare, Burns, Chaucer, Wordsworth, and all the British poets who
have written familiar lines about the daisy, extolled a quite different
flower from ours--_Bellis perennis_, the little pink and white blossom
that hugs English turf as if it loved it--the true day's-eye, for it
closes at nightfall and opens with the dawn.

Now, what is the secret of the large, white daisy's triumphal conquest
of our territory? A naturalized immigrant from Europe and Asia, how
could it so quickly take possession? In the over-cultivated Old World
no weed can have half the chance for unrestricted colonizing that it has
in our vast, unoccupied area. Most of our weeds are naturalized
foreigners, not natives. Once released from the harder conditions of
struggle at home (the seeds bring safely smuggled in among the ballast
of freight ships, or hay used in packing), they find life here easy,
pleasant; as if to make up for lost time, they increase a thousandfold.
If we look closely at a daisy--and a lens is necessary for any but the
most superficial acquaintance--we shall see that, far from being a
single flower, it is literally a host in itself. Each of the so-called
white "petals" is a female floret, whose open corolla has grown large,
white, and showy, to aid its sisters in advertising for insect
visitors--a prominence gained only by the loss of its stamens. The
yellow centre is composed of hundreds of minute tubular florets huddled
together in a green cup as closely as they can be packed. Inside each of
these tiny yellow tubes stand the stamens, literally putting their heads
together. As the pistil within the ring of stamens develops and rises
through their midst, two little hair brushes on its tip sweep the pollen
from their anthers as a rounded brush would remove the soot from a lamp
chimney. Now the pollen is elevated to a point where any insect crawling
over the floret must remove it. The pollen gone, the pistil now spreads
its two arms, that were kept tightly closed together while any danger of
self-fertilization lasted. Their surfaces become sticky, that pollen
brought from another flower may adhere to them. Notice that the pistils
in the white ray florets have no hair brushes on their tips, because, no
stamens being there, there is no pollen to be swept out. Because daisies
are among the most conspicuous of flowers, and have facilitated dining
for their visitors by offering them countless cups of refreshment that
may be drained with a minimum loss of time, almost every insect on wings
alights on them sooner or later. In short, they run their business on
the principle of a cooperative department store. Immense quantities of
the most vigorous, because cross-fertilized, seed being set in every
patch, small wonder that our fields are white with daisies--a long and a
merry life to them!


Tansy; Bitter-buttons

_Tanacetum vulgare_

_Flower-heads_--Small, round, of tubular florets only, packed within a
depressed involucre, and borne in flat-topped corymbs. _Stem:_ 1-1/2 to
3 ft. tall, leafy. _Leaves:_ Deeply and pinnately cleft into narrow,
toothed divisions; strong scented.

_Preferred Habitat_--Roadsides; commonly escaped from gardens.

_Flowering Season_--July-September.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia, westward to Minnesota, south to Missouri
and North Carolina. Naturalized from Europe.

"In the spring time, are made with the leaves hereof newly sprung up,
and with eggs, cakes or Tansies which be pleasant in taste and goode for
the Stomache," wrote quaint old Gerarde. That these were popular
dainties in the seventeenth century we further know through Pepys who
made a "pretty dinner" for some guests, to wit: "A brace of stewed
carps, six roasted chickens, and a jowl of salmon, hot, for the first
course; a tansy, and two neat's tongues, and cheese, the second." Cole's
"Art of Simpling," published in 1656, assures maidens that tansy leaves
laid to soak in buttermilk for nine days "maketh the complexion very
fair." Tansy tea, in short, cured every ill that flesh is heir to,
according to the simple faith of medieval herbalists--a faith surviving
in some old women even to this day. The name is said to be a corruption
of _athanasia_, derived from two Greek words meaning immortality. When
some monks in reading Lucian came across the passage where Jove,
speaking of Ganymede to Mercury, says, "Take him hence, and when he has
tasted immortality let him return to us," their literal minds inferred
that this plant must have been what Ganymede tasted, hence they named it
athanasia! So great credence having been given to its medicinal powers
in Europe, it is not strange the colonists felt they could not live in
the New World without tansy. Strong-scented pungent tufts topped with
bright yellow buttons--runaways from old gardens--are a conspicuous
feature along many a roadside leading to colonial homesteads.


Common or Plumed Thistle

_Cirsium_

Is land fulfilling the primal curse because it brings forth thistles?
So thinks the farmer, no doubt, but not the goldfinches which daintily
feed among the fluffy seeds, nor the bees, nor the "painted lady,"
which may be seen in all parts of the world where thistles grow,
hovering about the beautiful rose-purple flowers. In the prickly
cradle of leaves, the caterpillar of this thistle butterfly weaves a
web around its main food store.

When the Danes invaded Scotland, they stole a silent night march upon
the Scottish camp by marching barefoot; but a Dane inadvertently stepped
on a thistle, and his sudden, sharp cry, arousing the sleeping Scots,
saved them and their country; hence the Scotch emblem.

From July to November blooms the Common, Burr, Spear, Plume, Bank,
Horse, Bull, Blue, Button, Bell, or Roadside Thistle (_C. lanceolatum_
or _Carduus lanceolatus_), a native of Europe and Asia, now a most
thoroughly naturalized American from Newfoundland to Georgia, westward
to Nebraska. Its violet flower-heads, about an inch and a half across,
and as high as wide, are mostly solitary at the ends of formidable
branches, up which few crawling creatures venture. But in the deep tube
of each floret there is nectar secreted for the flying visitor who can
properly transfer pollen from flower to flower. Such a one suffers no
inconvenience from the prickles, but, on the contrary, finds a larger
feast saved for him because of them. Dense, matted, wool-like hairs,
that cover the bristling stems of most thistles, make climbing mighty
unpleasant for ants, which ever delight in pilfering sweets. Perhaps one
has the temerity to start upward.

  "Fain would I climb, yet fear I to fall,"
  "If thy heart fail thee, climb not at all,"

might be the ant's passionate outburst to the thistle, and the thistle's
reply, instead of a Sir Walter and Queen Elizabeth couplet. Long,
lance-shaped, deeply cleft, sharply pointed, and prickly dark green
leaves make the ascent almost unendurable; nevertheless, the ant
bravely mounts to where the bristle-pointed, overlapping scales of the
deep green cup hold the luscious flowers. Now his feet becoming
entangled in the cottony fibres wound about the scaly armor, and a
bristling bodyguard thrusting spears at him in his struggles to escape,
death happily releases him. All this tragedy to insure the thistle's
cross-fertilized seed that, seated on the autumn winds, shall be blown
far and wide in quest of happy conditions for the offspring!

Sometimes the Pasture or Fragrant Thistle (_C. pumilum_ or _Carduus
odoratus_) still further protects its beautiful, odorous purple or
whitish flower-head, that often measures three inches across, with a
formidable array of prickly small leaves just below it. In case a
would-be pilferer breaks through these lines, however, there is a slight
glutinous strip on the outside of the bracts that compose the cup
wherein the nectar-filled florets are packed; and here, in sight of
Mecca, he meets his death, just as a bird is caught on limed twigs. The
Pasture Thistle, whose range is only from Maine to Delaware, blooms from
July to September.


Chicory; Succory; Blue Sailors; Bunk

_Cichorium Intybus_

_Flower-head_--Bright, deep azure to gray blue, rarely pinkish or white,
1 to 1-1/2 in. broad, set close to stem, often in small clusters for
nearly the entire length; each head a composite of ray flowers only,
5-toothed at upper edge, and set in a flat green receptacle. _Stem:_
Rigid, branching, 1 to 3 ft. high. _Leaves:_ Lower ones spreading on
ground, 3 to 6 in. long, spatulate, with deeply cut or irregular edges,
narrowed into petioles, from a deep tap-root; upper leaves of stem and
branches minute, bract-like.

_Preferred Habitat_--Roadsides, waste places, fields.

_Flowering Season_--July-October.

_Distribution_--Common in eastern United States and Canada, south to the
Carolinas; also sparingly westward to Nebraska.

At least the dried and ground root of this European invader is known to
hosts of people who buy it undisguised or not, according as they count
it an improvement to their coffee or a disagreeable adulterant. So great
is the demand for chicory that, notwithstanding its cheapness, it is
often in its turn adulterated with roasted wheat, rye, acorns, and
carrots. Forced and blanched in a warm, dark place, the bitter leaves
find a ready market as a salad known as "barbe de Capucin" by the
fanciful French. Endive and dandelion, the chicory's relatives, appear
on the table, too in spring, where people have learned the possibilities
of salads, as they certainly have in Europe.

From the depth to which the tap-root penetrates, it is not unlikely
the succory derived its name from the Latin _succurrere_ = to run
under. The Arabic name _chicourey_ testifies to the almost universal
influence of Arabian physicians and writers in Europe after the
Conquest. As _chicoree, achicoria, chicoria, cicorea, chicorie,
cichorei, cikorie, tsikorei_, and _cicorie_ the plant is known
respectively to the French, Spanish, Portuguese, Italians, Germans,
Dutch, Swedes, Russians, and Danes.

On cloudy days or in the morning only throughout midsummer the "peasant
posy" opens its "dear blue eyes"

  "Where tired feet
  Toil to and fro;
  Where flaunting Sin
  May see thy heavenly hue,
  Or weary Sorrow look from thee
  Toward a tenderer blue!"
                          --Margaret Deland.

In his "Humble Bee" Emerson, too, sees only beauty in the

  "Succory to match the sky;"

but, _mirabile dictu_, Vergil, rarely caught in a prosaic, practical
mood, wrote,

  "And spreading succ'ry chokes the rising field."


Common Dandelion; Blowball; Lion's-tooth; Peasant's Clock

_Taraxacum officinale (T. Dens-leonis)_

_Flower-head_--Solitary, golden yellow, 1 to 2 in. across, containing
150 to 200 perfect ray florets on a flat receptacle at the top of a
hollow, milky scape 2 to 18 in. tall. _Leaves:_ From a very deep, thick,
bitter root; oblong to spatulate in outline, irregularly jagged.

_Preferred Habitat_--Lawns, fields, grassy waste places.

_Flowering Season_--Every month in the year.

_Distribution_--Around the civilized world.

 "Dear common flower that grow'st beside the way,
    Fringing the dusty road with harmless gold.

       *       *       *       *       *

 "Gold such as thine ne'er drew the Spanish prow
    Through the primeval hush of Indian seas,
  Nor wrinkled the lean brow
    Of age, to rob the lover's heart of ease.
  'Tis the spring's largess, which she scatters now
    To rich and poor alike, with lavish hand;
    Though most hearts never understand
  To take it at God's value, but pass by
    The offered wealth with unrewarded eye."

Let the triumphant Anglo-Saxon with dreams of expansion that include the
round earth, the student of sociology who wishes an insight into
cooperative methods as opposed to individualism, the young man anxious
to learn how to get on, parents with children to be equipped for the
struggle for existence, business men and employers of labor, all sit
down beside the dandelion and take its lesson to heart. How has it
managed without navies and armies--for it is no imperialist--to land its
peaceful legions on every part of the civilized world and take
possession of the soil? How can this neglected wayside composite weed
triumph over the most gorgeous hothouse individual on which the
horticulturist expends all the science at his command; to flourish where
others give up the struggle defeated; to send its vigorous offspring
abroad prepared for similar conquest of adverse conditions wherever met;
to attract myriads of customers to its department store, and by
consummate executive ability to make every visitor unwittingly
contribute to its success? Any one who doubts the dandelion's fitness to
survive should humble himself by spending days and weeks on his knees,
trying to eradicate the plant from even one small lawn with a knife,
only to find the turf starred with golden blossoms, or, worse still from
his point of view, hoary with seed balloons the following spring.

Deep, very deep, the stocky bitter root penetrates where heat and
drought affect it not, nor nibbling rabbits, moles, grubs of insects,
and other burrowers break through and steal. Cut off the upper portion
only with your knife, and not one, but several, plants will likely
sprout from what remains; and, however late in the season, will
economize stem and leaf to produce flowers and seeds, cuddled close
within the tuft, that set all your pains at naught. "Never say die" is
the dandelion's motto. An exceedingly bitter medicine is extracted
from the root of this dandelion. Likewise are the leaves bitter.
Although they appear so early in the spring, they must be especially
tempting to grazing cattle and predaceous insects, the rosettes remain
untouched, while other succulent, agreeable plants are devoured
wholesale. Only Italians and other thrifty Old World immigrants, who
go about then with sack and knife collecting the fresh young tufts,
give the plants pause; but even they leave the roots intact. When
boiled like spinach or eaten with French salad dressing, the bitter
juices are extracted from the leaves or disguised--mean tactics by an
enemy outside the dandelion's calculation. All nations know the plant
by some equivalent for the name _dent de lion_ = lion's tooth, which
the jagged edges of the leaves suggest.

After flowering, it again looks like a bud, lowering its head to mature
seed unobserved. Presently rising on a gradually lengthened scape to
elevate it where there is no interruption for the passing breeze from
surrounding rivals, the transformed head, now globular, white, airy, is
even more exquisite, set as it is with scores of tiny parachutes ready
to sail away. A child's breath puffing out the time of day, a vireo
plucking at the fluffy ball for lining to put in its nest, the summer
breeze, the scythe, rake, and mowing machines, sudden gusts of winds
sweeping the country before thunderstorms--these are among the agents
that set the flying vagabonds free. In the hay used for packing they
travel to foreign lands in ships, and, once landed, readily adapt
themselves to conditions as they find them. After soaking in the briny
ocean for twenty-eight days--long enough for a current to carry them a
thousand miles along the coast--they are still able to germinate.


Tall or Wild Lettuce; Wild Opium; Horse-weed

_Lactuca canadensis_

_Flower-heads_--Numerous, small, about 1/4 in. across, involucre,
cylindric, rays pale yellow; followed by abundant, soft, bright white
pappus; the heads growing in loose, branching, terminal clusters.
_Stem:_ Smooth, 3 to 10 ft. high, leafy up to the flower panicle;
juice milky. _Leaves:_ Upper ones lance-shaped; lower ones often 1
ft. long, wavy-lobed, often pinnatifid, taper pointed, narrowed into
flat petioles.

_Preferred Habitat_--Moist, open ground; roadsides.

_Flowering Season_--June-November.

_Distribution_--Georgia, westward to Arkansas, north to the British
Possessions.
