Whitehead's letters. It will contain some fifty extremely interesting
letters to the editor of Weird Tales and various other important
persons in the fantastic group. The entire edition will consist of but
thirty-five copies.

       *       *       *       *       *

H. P. Lovecraft has written a story in collaboration with E. Hoffmann
Price--"Through the Gates of the Silver Key" which will appear in the
July issue of Weird Tales.

       *       *       *       *       *

Seabury Quinn, who was formerly a lawyer, is now editor of a trade
journal.

       *       *       *       *       *

A 1927 issue of Amazing Stories contained a fan letter of 2300 words
and a 1928 number presented one of 2600. How have you been doing,
Forrie?

[Illustration: Decorative motif]




    The Ancient Voice

    by Eando Binder


First of all I want to say that Norman Ross was normal. What I mean is
that there was nothing odd or peculiar about him. He was just a common,
ordinary, likable, erring human being like the rest of us. I say this
now so that at the end of the story you won't have any illusions about
him.

Sometimes I wonder if I shouldn't escape all this--these tossing
nights of sleeplessness, that awakening in a cold sweat of horror, the
tortured thoughts that rack my brain continuously? It would be so easy;
a quiet, dark night, the rippling water--one splash and it would be
done. Perhaps I will be driven to it; I feel that way sometimes.

But I will tell the story as best I can.

Norman Ross and I were operators for the International Radio News
Service. Thrown together by chance, we had become good friends in the
two years before this happened. We had always been on the day shift and
handled calls from Europe. We liked the work and got good pay and often
went out together for a little recreation. That is why I can say that
Norman Ross was normal; two years of friendship means a lot.

Well, one day just after working hours Hegstrom, our boss, called us
into his office--both of us together.

"Boys," he said, "I need two operators for Central Asia calls in the
night shift. I've always had my eye on you two and I'm going to offer
the positions to you two first. There's a little more responsibility
and difficulty, but the pay is higher. Then it's night work. Do you
want it? Think it over and tell me tomorrow. It's nothing compulsory."

We thought it over that evening, over glasses of beer, and decided to
take it for a change. Hegstrom was pleased.

So we took up the night work. A veteran Oriental call operator broke us
in the first night and then we went on our own.

We found the work mightily interesting. Many of the calls came in in
broken English. You know, the English that a foreigner speaks that he
learned from a book. I handled Persia and a couple of little countries
with funny names. My friend Ross took the calls from China.

It was a little odd at first getting used to being alone. When we
had the day shift, we were only two out of fifteen operators taking
calls from Europe. In the night shift, the big room was empty except
for us two. The sound of our typewriters was always extra loud in the
silence. But we got used to it, and inside three weeks didn't mind the
loneliness a bit. We had a chance to talk to each other occasionally,
if Ross and I both happened to get short calls at the same time, and
had to wait for the next ones. But the rest of the time the calls kept
us busy, taking the messages from the Far East.

We had a little trouble, too, getting used to sleeping in daylight.
Even with the blinds down you can't forget it's daylight outside and
that makes it hard to go to sleep. Neither of us was married so we
would hop right home after work (Ross lived with an uncle and aunt)
I roomed alone and sleep until middle afternoon. Then we'd dress
up and have a meal together and later roam around together looking
for diversion. With the increased pay we got for the night work, we
were able to see all kinds of expensive shows. Our lady companions
liked that and we had just about a choice of any. Then after the show
we would steer to some beer garden (thank the Lord Prohibition was
repealed ten years ago) and laugh and talk the hours away. Ross and
I would boast about our work and tell the girls strange--and a bit
distorted--stories of some of the calls we took in from the mysterious
East.

But I had better leave these abstract ruminations and return to the
story. Only I wanted to show you that Norman Ross was really normal in
all respects. Then, too, it eases my troubled mind now to think back to
those happy days--days that will never be again.

It was just a month after our transfer that it all happened. Ross was
sitting as usual with one leg off the floor, the heel of his shoe on a
big throw switch on the control panel. It was a dead switch, though,
that had never been taken out. Down low close to his stomach was the
typewriter and he typed with his elbows resting on the arms of the
chair. It was his own chair that he had bought for that particular
purpose because he said he couldn't do any work with the regular
armless chair that other operators used. He had used that chair for two
years; Hegstrom didn't care a bit, so long he did his work and did it
good. Personally, I think Ross had a spark of laziness in him.

Well the particular night this whole story centers about--now my hand
is trembling, I hate to go on. But I must. It will explain things to
others. Anyway, Ross was imbedded as per custom with that right leg of
his in the air. During ordinary calls he would slowly swing his toe
back and forth as his heel rested on the dead switch. Once in a while
it would stop and then I would know that something a little exciting
was coming to him, war news from the north or perhaps a bandit raid in
the stormy western part of China. His typewriter, too, would clack a
little sharper as he bore down harder on the keys.

It was along about three a. m. that we had a breathing spell after
we both had short calls. We discussed a few clipped plans for the
following evening and which of the ladies we would take out. When Ross
talked to me, he wouldn't budge an inch. He would merely twist his
neck in my direction and talk with that toe of his swinging lazily.
We both kept our eye on the clock so that we wouldn't be late for a
call--Hegstrom would get mighty fussy over complaints from the central
wave-traffic office that operators at our station took calls late, even
a few seconds.

So about half a minute before his next call was due, Ross turned from
me with a sigh--that is, turned his neck back--and stretched a lazy
hand to the dial to get ready for the carrier wave. My next call
wasn't due for another two minutes so I watched my friend without any
particular purpose in mind.

He reached a slow hand to his head and adjusted the phones on his ears
a bit. Then both his hands dropped into position above the typewriter
and I heard him say tonelessly, "Call-call-call--xxw2 call--" and then
his voice clipped off like a voice in a broadcast clips off when a tube
blows out.
