congelation evaporates faster than water in its fluid form; which may be
accounted for from the heat given out at the instant of freezing;
(Saussure's Essais sur Hygromet. p. 249.) but this effect is only
momentary.

Thus the vegetables that are covered with snow are seldom injured;
since, as they lie between the thawing snow, which has 32 degrees of
heat, and the covered earth which has 48, they are preserved in a degree
of heat between these; viz. in 40 degrees of heat. Whence the moss on
which the rein-deer feed in the northern latitudes vegetates beneath the
snow; (See note on Muschus, Vol. II.) and hence many Lapland and Alpine
plants perished through cold in the botanic garden at Upsal, for in
their native situations, though the cold is much more intense, yet at
its very commencement they are covered deep with snow, which remains
till late in the spring. For this fact see Amaenit. Academ. Vol. I. No.
48. In our climate such plants do well covered with dried fern, under
which they will grow, and even flower, till the severe vernal frosts
cease. For the increase of glaciers see Note on Canto I. l. 529.




                          NOTE XXXIII.--WINDS.


     _While southern gales o'er western oceans roll,
     And Eurus steals his ice-winds from the pole._

                                            CANTO IV. l. 15.


The theory of the winds is yet very imperfect, in part perhaps owing to
the want of observations sufficiently numerous of the exact times and
places where they begin and cease to blow, but chiefly to our yet
imperfect knowledge of the means by which great regions of air are
either suddenly produced or suddenly destroyed.

The air is perpetually subject to increase or diminution from its
combination with other bodies, or its evolution from them. The vital
part of the air, called oxygene, is continually produced in this climate
from the perspiration of vegetables in the sunshine, and probably from
the action of light on clouds or on water in the tropical climates,
where the sun has greater power, and may exert some yet unknown laws of
luminous combination. Another part of the atmosphere, which is called
azote, is perpetually set at liberty from animal and vegetable bodies by
putrefaction or combustion, from many springs of water, from volatile
alcali, and probably from fixed alcali, of which there is an exhaustless
source in the water of the ocean. Both these component parts of the air
are perpetually again diminished by their contact with the soil, which
covers the surface of the earth, producing nitre. The oxygene is
diminished in the production of all acids, of which the carbonic and
muriatic exist in great abundance. The azote is diminished in the growth
of animal bodies, of which it constitutes an important part, and in its
combinations with many other natural productions.

They are both probably diminished in immense quantities by uniting with
the inflammable air, which arises from the mud of rivers and lakes at
some seasons, when the atmosphere is light: the oxygene of the air
producing water, and the azote producing volatile alcali by their
combinations with this inflammable air. At other seasons of the year
these principles may again change their combinations, and the
atmospheric air be reproduced.

Mr. Lavoisier found that one pound of charcoal in burning consumed two
pounds nine ounces of vital air, or oxygene. The consumption of vital
air in the process of making red lead may readily be reduced to
calculation; a small barrel contains about twelve hundred weight of this
commodity, 1200 pounds of lead by calcination absorb about 144 pounds of
vital air; now as a cubic foot of water weighs 1000 averdupois ounces,
and as vital air is above 800 times lighter than water, it follows that
every barrel of red lead contains nearly 2000 cubic feet of vital air.
If this can be performed in miniature in a small oven, what may not be
done in the immense elaboratories of nature!

These great elaboratories of nature include almost all her fossil as
well as her animal and vegetable productions. Dr. Priestley obtained air
of greater or less purity, both vital and azotic, from almost all the
fossil substances he subjected to experiment. Four ounce-weight of lava
from Iceland heated in an earthen retort yielded twenty ounce-measures
of air.

  4  ounce-weight of lava           gave   20 ounce measures of air.
  7  ............... basaltes       ....  104 ......................
  2  ............... toadstone      ....   40 ......................
  11/2 ............... granite        ....   20 ......................
  1  ............... elvain         ....   30 ......................
  7  ............... gypsum         ....  230 ......................
  4  ............... blue slate     ....  230 ......................
  4  ............... clay           ....   20 ......................
  4  ............... limestone-spar ....  830 ......................
  5  ............... limestone      .... 1160 ......................
  3  ............... chalk          ....  630 ......................
  31/2 ............... white iron-ore ....  560 ......................
  4  ............... dark iron-ore  ....  410 ......................
   1/2 ............... molybdena      ....   25 ......................
   1/2 ............... stream tin     ....   20 ......................
  2  ............... steatites      ....   40 ......................
  2  ............... barytes        ....   26 ......................
  2  ............... black wad      ....   80 ......................
  4  ............... sand stone     ....   75 ......................
  3  ............... coal           ....  700 ......................

In this account the fixed air was previously extracted from the
limestones by acids, and the heat applied was much less than was
necessary to extract all the air from the bodies employed. Add to this
the known quantities of air which are combined with the calciform ores,
as the ochres of iron, manganese, calamy, grey ore of lead, and some
idea may be formed of the great production of air in volcanic eruptions,
as mentioned in note on Chunda, Vol. II. and of the perpetual
absorptions and evolutions of whole oceans of air from every part of the
earth.

But there would seem to be an officina aeris, a shop where air is both
manufactured and destroyed in the greatest abundance within the polar
circles, as will hereafter be spoken of. Can this be effected by some
yet unknown law of the congelation of aqueous or saline fluids, which
may set at liberty their combined heat, and convert a part both of the
acid and alcali of sea-water into their component airs? Or on the
contrary can the electricity of the northern lights convert inflammable
air and oxygene into water, whilst the great degree of cold at the poles
unites the azote with some other base? Another officina aeris, or
manufacture of air, would seem to exist within the tropics or at the
line, though in a much less quantity than at the poles, owing perhaps to
the action of the sun's light on the moisture suspended in the air, as
will also be spoken of hereafter; but in all other parts of the earth
these absorptions and evolutions of air in a greater or less degree are
perpetually going on in inconceivable abundance; increased probably, and
diminished at different seasons of the year by the approach or
retrocession of the sun's light; future discoveries must elucidate this
part of the subject. To this should be added that as heat and
electricity, and perhaps magnetism, are known to displace air, that it
is not impossible but that the increased or diminished quantities of
these fluids diffused in the atmosphere may increase its weight a well
as its bulk; since their specific attractions or affinities to matter
are very strong, they probably also possess general gravitation to the
earth; a subject which wants further investigation. See Note XXVI.


                           SOUTH-WEST WINDS.

The velocity of the surface of the earth in moving round its axis
diminishes from the equator to the poles. Whence if a region of air in
this country should be suddenly removed a few degrees towards the north
it must constitute a western wind, because from the velocity it had
previously acquired in this climate by its friction with the earth it
would for a time move quicker than the surface of the country it was
removed to; the contrary must ensue when a region of air is transported
from this country a few degrees southward, because the velocity it had
acquired in this climate would be less than that of the earth's surface
where it was removed to, whence it would appear to constitute a wind
from the east, while in reality the eminent parts of the earth would be
carried against the too slow air. But if this transportation of air from
south to north be performed gradually, the motion of the wind will blow
in the diagonal between south and west. And on the contrary if a region
of air be gradually removed from north to south it would also blow
diagonally between the north and east, from whence we may safely
conclude that all our winds in this country which blow from the north or
east, or any point between them, consist of regions of air brought from
the north; and that all our winds blowing from the south or west, or
from any point between them, are regions of air brought from the south.

It frequently happens during the vernal months that after a north-east
wind has passed over us for several weeks, during which time the
barometer has flood at above 301/2 inches, it becomes suddenly succeeded
by a south-west wind, which also continues several weeks, and the
barometer sinks to nearly 281/2 inches. Now as two inches of the mercury
in the barometer balance one-fifteenth part of the whole atmosphere, an
important question here presents itself, _what is become of all this
air_.

1. This great quantity of air can not be carried in a superior current
towards the line, while the inferior current slows towards the poles,
because then it would equally affect the barometer, which should not
therefore subside from 301/2 inches to 281/2 for six weeks together.

2. It cannot be owing to the air having lost all the moisture which was
previously dissolved in it, because these warm south-west winds are
replete with moisture, and the cold north-east winds, which weigh up the
mercury in the barometer to 31 inches, consist of dry air.

3. It can not be carried over the polar regions and be accumulated on
the meridian, opposite to us in its passage towards the line, as such an
accumulation would equal one-fifteenth of the whole atmosphere, and can
not be supposed to remain in that situation for six weeks together.

4. It can not depend on the existence of tides in the atmosphere, since
it must then correspond to lunar periods. Nor to accumulations of air
from the specific levity of the upper regions of the atmosphere, since
its degree of fluidity must correspond with its tenuity, and
consequently such great mountains of air can not be supposed to exist
for so many weeks together as the south west winds sometimes continue.

5. It remains therefore that there must be at this time a great and
sudden absorption of air in the polar circle by some unknown operation
of nature, and that the south wind runs in to supply the deficiency. Now
as this south wind consists of air brought from a part of the earth's
surface which moves faster than it does in this climate it must have at
the same time a direction from the west by retaining part of the
velocity it had previously acquired. These south-west winds coming from
a warmer country, and becoming colder by their contact with the earth of
this climate, and by their expansion, (so great a part of the
superincumbent atmosphere having vanished,) precipitate their moisture;
and as they continue for several weeks to be absorbed in the polar
circle would seem to receive a perpetual supply from the tropical
regions, especially over the line, as will hereafter be spoken of.

It may sometimes happen that a north-east wind having passed over us may
be bent down and driven back before it has acquired any heat from the
climate, and may thus for a few hours or a day have a south-west
direction, and from its descending from a higher region of the
atmosphere may possess a greater degree of cold than an inferior north
east current of air.

The extreme cold of Jan. 13, 1709, at Paris came on with a gentle south
wind, and was diminished when the wind changed to the north, which is
accounted for by Mr. Homberg from a reflux of air which had been flowing
for some time from the north. Chemical Essays by R. Watson, Vol. V. p.
182.

It may happen that a north-east current may for a day or two pass over
us and produce incessant rain by mixing with the inferior south-west
current; but this as well as the former is of short duration, as its
friction will soon carry the inferior current along with it, and dry or
frosty weather will then succeed.


                           NORTH-EAST WINDS.

The north-east winds of this country consist of regions of air from the
north, travelling sometimes at the rate of about a mile in two minutes
during the vernal months for several weeks together from the polar
regions toward the south, the mercury in the barometer standing above
30. These winds consist of air greatly cooled by the evaporation of the
ice and snow over which it passes, and as they become warmer by their
contact with the earth of this climate are capable of dissolving more
moisture as they pass along, and are thence attended with frosts in
winter and with dry hot weather in summer.

1. This great quantity of air can not be supplied by superior currents
passing in a contrary direction from south to north, because such
currents must as they arise into the atmosphere a mile or two high
become exposed to so great cold as to occasion them to deposit their
moisture, which would fall through the inferior current upon the earth
in some part of their passage.

2. The whole atmosphere must have increased in quantity, because it
appears by the barometer that there exists one-fifteenth part more air
over us for many weeks together, which could not be thus accumulated by
difference of temperature in respect to heat, or by any aerostatic laws
at present known, or by any lunar influence.

From whence it would appear that immense masses of air were set at
liberty from their combinations with solid bodies, along with a
sufficient quantity of combined heat, within the polar circle, or in
some region to the north of us; and that they thus perpetually increase
the quantity of the atmosphere; and that this is again at certain times
re-absorbed, or enters into new combinations at the line or tropical
regions. By which wonderful contrivance the atmosphere is perpetually
renewed and rendered fit for the support of animal and vegetable life.


                           SOUTH-EAST WINDS.

The south-east winds of this country consist of air from the north which
had passed by us, or over us, and before it had obtained the velocity of
the earth's surface in this climate had been driven back, owing to a
deficiency of air now commencing at the polar regions. Hence these are
generally dry or freezing winds, and if they succeed north-east winds
should prognosticate a change of wind from north-east to south-west; the
barometer is generally about 30. They are sometimes attended with cloudy
weather, or rain, owing to their having acquired an increased degree of
warmth and moisture before they became retrograde; or to their being
mixed with air from the south.

2. Sometimes these south-east winds consist of a vertical eddy of north-
east air, without any mixture of south-west air; in that case the
barometer continues above 30, and the weather is dry or frosty for four
or five days together.

It should here be observed, that air being an elastic fluid must be more
liable to eddies than water, and that these eddies must extend into
cylinders or vortexes of greater diameter, and that if a vertical eddy
of north-east air be of small diameter or has passed but a little way to
the south of us before its return, it will not have gained the velocity
of the earth's surface to the south of us, and will in consequence
become a south-east wind.--But if the vertical eddy be of large
diameter, or has passed much to the south of us, it will have acquired
velocity from its friction with the earth's surface to the south of us,
and will in consequence on its return become a south-west wind,
producing great cold.


                           NORTH-WEST WINDS.

There seem to be three sources of the north-west winds of this
hemisphere of the earth. 1. When a portion of southern air, which was
passing over us, is driven back by accumulation of new air in the polar
regions. In this case I suppose they are generally moist or rainy winds,
with the barometer under 30, and if the wind had previously been in the
south-west, it would seem to prognosticate a change to the north-east.

2. If a current of north wind is passing over us but a few miles high,
without any easterly direction; and is bent down upon us, it must
immediately possess a westerly direction, because it will now move
faster than the surface of the earth where it arrives; and thus becomes
changed from a north-east to a north-west wind. This descent of a north-
east current of air producing a north-west wind may continue some days
with clear or freezing weather, as it may be simply owing to a vertical
eddy of north-east air, as will be spoken of below. It may otherwise be
forced down by a current of south-west wind passing over it, and in this
case it will be attended with rain for a few days by the mixture of the
two airs of different degrees of heat; and will prognosticate a change
of wind from north-east to south-west if the wind was previously in the
north-east quarter.

3. On the eastern coast of North America the north-west winds bring
frost, as the north-east winds do in this country, as appears from
variety of testimony. This seems to happen from a vertical spiral eddy
made in the atmosphere between the shore and the ridge of mountains
which form the spine or back-bone of that continent. If a current of
water runs along the hypothenuse of a triangle an eddy will be made in
the included angle, which will turn round like a water-wheel as the
stream passes in contact with one edge of it. The same must happen when
a sheet of air flowing along from the north-east rises from the shore in
a straight line to the summit of the Apalachian mountains, a part of the
stream of north-east air will flow over the mountains, another part will
revert and circulate spirally between the summit of the country and the
eastern shore, continuing to move toward the south; and thus be changed
from a north-east to a north-west wind.

This vertical spiral eddy having been in contact with the cold summits
of these mountains, and descending from higher parts of the atmosphere
will lose part of its heat, and thus constitute one cause of the greater
coldness of the eastern sides of North America than of the European
shores opposite to them, which is said to be equal to twelve degrees of
north latitude, which is a wonderful fact, not otherwise easy to be
explained, since the heat of the springs at Philadelphia is said to be
50, which is greater than the medium heat of the earth in this country.

The existence of vertical eddies, or great cylinders of air rolling on
the surface of the earth, is agreeable to the observations of the
constructors of windmills; who on this idea place the area of the sails
leaning backwards, inclined to the horizon; and believe that then they
have greater power than when they are placed quite perpendicularly. The
same kind of rolling cylinders of water obtain in rivers owing to the
friction of the water against the earth at their bottoms; as is known by
bodies having been observed to float upon their surfaces quicker than
when immersed to a certain depth. These vertical eddies of air probably
exist all over the earth's surface, but particularly at the bottom or
sides of mountains; and more so probably in the course of the south-west
than of the north-east winds; because the former fall from an eminence,
as it were, on a part of the earth where there is a deficiency of the
quantity of air; as is shewn by the sinking of the barometer: whereas
the latter are pushed or squeezed forward by an addition to the
atmosphere behind them, as appears by the rising of the barometer.


                              TRADE-WINDS.

A column of heated air becomes lighter than before, and will therefore
ascend, by the pressure of the cold air which surrounds it, like a cork
in water, or like heated smoke in a chimney.

Now as the sun passes twice over the equator for once over either
tropic, the equator has not time to become cool; and on this account it
is in general hotter at the line than at the tropics; and therefore the
air over the line, except in some few instances hereafter to be
mentioned, continues to ascend at all seasons of the year, pressed
upwards by regions of air brought from the tropics.

This air thus brought from the tropics to the equator, would constitute
a north wind on one side of the equator, and a south wind on the other;
but as the surface of the earth at the equator moves quicker than the
surface of the earth at the tropics, it is evident that a region of air
brought from either tropic to the equator, and which had previously only
acquired the velocity of the earth's surface at the tropics, will now
move too slow for the earth's surface at the equator, and will thence
appear to move in a direction contrary to the motion of the earth. Hence
the trade-winds, though they consist of regions of air brought from the
north on one side of the line, and from the south on the other, will
appear to have the diagonal direction of north-east and south-west
winds.

Now it is commonly believed that there are superior currents of air
passing over these north-east and south-west currents in a contrary
direction, and which descending near the tropics produce vertical
whirlpools of air. An important question here again presents itself,
_What becomes of the moisture which this heated air ought to deposit, as
it cools in the upper regions of the atmosphere in its journey to the
tropics?_ It has been shewn by Dr. Priestley and Mr. Ingenhouz that the
green matter at the bottom of cisterns, and the fresh leaves of plants
immersed in water, give out considerable quantities of vital air in the
sun-shine; that is, the perspirable matter of plants (which is water
much divided in its egress from their minute pores) becomes decomposed
by the sun's light, and converted into two kinds of air, the vital and
inflammable airs. The moisture contained or dissolved in the ascending
heated air at the line must exist in great tenuity; and by being exposed
to the great light of the sun in that climate, the water may be
decomposed, and the new airs spread on the atmosphere from the line to
the poles.

1. From there being no constant deposition of rains in the usual course
of the trade-winds, it would appear that the water rising at the line is
decomposed in its ascent.

2. From the observations of M. Bougner on the mountain Pinchinca, one of
the Cordelieres immediately under the line, there appears to be no
condensible vapour above three or four miles high. Now though the
atmosphere at that height may be cold to a very considerable degree; yet
its total deprivation of condensible vapour would seem to shew, that its
water was decomposed; as there are no experiments to evince that any
degree of cold hitherto known has been able to deprive air of its
moisture; and great abundance of snow is deposited from the air that
flows to the polar regions, though it is exposed to no greater degrees
of cold in its journey thither than probably exists at four miles height
in the atmosphere at the line.

3. The hygrometer of Mr. Sauffure also pointed to dryness as he ascended
into rarer air; the single hair of which it was constructed, contracting
from deficiency of moisture. Essais sur l'Hygromet. p. 143.

From these observations it appears either that rare and cold air
requires more moisture to saturate it than dense air; or that the
moisture becomes decomposed and converted into air, as it ascends into
these cold and rare regions of the atmosphere.

4. There seems some analogy between the circumstance of air being
produced or generated in the cold parts of the atmosphere both at the
line and at the poles.


                        MONSOONS AND TORNADOES.

1. In the Arabian and Indian seas are winds, which blow six months one
way, and six months the other, and are called Monsoons; by the
accidental dispositions of land and sea it happens, that in some places
the air near the tropic is supposed to become warmer when the sun is
vertical over it, than at the line.  The air in these places
consequently ascends pressed upon one side by the north-east regions of
air, and on the other side by the south-west regions of air. For as the
air brought from the south has previously obtained the velocity of the
earth's surface at the line, it moves faster than the earth's surface
near the tropic where it now arrives, and becomes a south-west wind,
while the air from the north becomes a north-east wind as before
explained. These two winds do not so quietly join and ascend as the
north-east and south-east winds, which meet at the line with equal
warmth and velocity and form the trade-winds; but as they meet in
contrary directions before they ascend, and cannot be supposed
accurately to balance each other, a rotatory motion will be produced as
they ascend like water falling through a hole, and an horizontal or
spiral eddy is the consequence; these eddies are more or less rapid, and
are called Tornadoes in their most violent state, raising water from the
ocean in the west or sand from the deserts of the east, in less violent
degrees they only mix together the two currents of north-east and south-
