A few paces off the trail, John Drinkard pried up a stone, slipped the
tin underneath.

"Lights, yours; no lights, mine. Right?"

"Right," said Evers, and he grinned at the little added spice for the
two days ahead.

       *       *       *       *       *

Their steady plodding passage up the ever-dimming trail was an
appreciative one. Going into the world above the trees was one of
the good things of a peak climb. Hoary marmots whistled from their
rocks, conies scurried, brown- and gray-barred ptarmigan crouched
almost invisibly among the gaudy alpine fields of avens and mountain
sun-flowers and tiny forget-me-nots.

At near dusk, they laid out their bedrolls on a level bit of tundra in
the lee of a massive outcrop near Bighorn Glacier. A small fire of dead
branches of firs and pines that literally crawled on their bellies at
this altitude cooked a kettle of stew and heated the water for tea.

The men went through the simple chores of an evening camp with the ease
that comes when things have been done many times. And when Chuck Evers
walked a few paces from the fire, stepped on a small stone that rolled
with his weight, he felt with a sort of irritated surprise the little
thread of pain that ran through his ankle. Tentatively he tested the
foot, then hobbled back to the fire. He knew that he wouldn't climb the
peak in the morning.

He said nothing to big John until he had stripped off the boot and
heavy sock. Then, as Drinkard came back to the fire with more wood, he
held out the ballooning ankle.

"How are you at taping, friend?" he asked casually.

Drinkard looked at the foot, already purpling as it swelled. He reached
for his first-aid kit.

"Well, anyway," he said resignedly, "you got close enough to watch for
lights."

Evers set his teeth as Drinkard's big fingers probed the sprain.

"We'll pack ice on it," Drinkard decided, "then tape it in an hour.
Maybe it's a simple twist."

"You know it isn't."

"Sure," admitted Drinkard. "I thought you wanted to be cheerful, that's
all. It's like when I broke three ribs climbing to look into a bird's
nest the day before we were tackling the East Face of Long's. Then
_you_ were chin-up."

"That was different," said Evers. "I wasn't hurting."

When the stars were out and the quarter moon rose from the plains, John
Drinkard got up from his bedroll seat by the fire. The two men had sat
talking quietly for an hour. Evers' ankle was taped and he was easing
it before him as best he could.

"I'm going to have a look before I turn in," said Drinkard. "My five
still says there won't be lights, but the technical crew may be
monkeying around somewhere."

"Take it easy," Chuck Evers said.

"I'll just skirt along the edge of the glacier. Back in half an hour.
_You_ take it easy!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Drinkard knew Bighorn Glacier. Its crevasses were so consistent that
they were shown on maps. He carried his ice axe, but had no mind to use
it. Only after he had worked his way for a number of minutes along the
edge of the moonlit ice sheet did the whim to cross it seize him. The
glacier had a good snow covering. The going was easy and the view was
something few men see.

Drinkard automatically avoided the big ice cracks, then slipped
through a snow roof into a shallow, temporary one. He wasn't hurt. The
moonlight from the crack above showed his ice axe beside him. It was a
lucky fall, except for the fact that he couldn't get out again.

Time after time, he tried to dig hand- and foot-holes into the
splintery icewall. But he was freezing his fingers and making no
headway. He was stoutly but not heavily clothed. The cold began to bite
into him. He settled himself on his heels quietly and tried to decide
what to do.

After an hour, Chuck Evers began to call. John Drinkard knew that if he
answered, Chuck would probably attempt the ice himself. Evers' voice
came now in measured, regular yips. And, while John wavered, from the
crags above the glacier he was answered. It was a strange voice, yet
oddly not unfamiliar. To John Drinkard it was muffled, but it had a
reassuring sound.

Drinkard waited in silence. Not many minutes later, a dark silhouette
showed in the narrow crack of sky above. From the voice's first call,
Drinkard had realized that they had been watched, probably all day.

"Are you injured?" asked the man's odd voice.

"I'm okay," Drinkard said. "Just drop me a rope and I can walk up the
