
"The radiation count is about forty right here at the mouth of this
prospect hole," he pointed out.

"That is interesting," the nurse said. The tone of her voice said it
was not important.

"Halfway up the slope, it will hit a hundred. At the top of the ridge,
where the explosion took place, the count may reach a thousand." In his
opinion, he had said enough.

In her opinion, he had not said anything at all. "That makes no
difference. Wounded men are up there. I am a nurse. My duty is clear to
me."

"If you try to help them under these circumstances, you will become a
casualty yourself."

"But what of the men who need help?"

"They will simply have to get out of the radiation zone themselves, or
wait until the area is clear and help can reach them."

"You are heartless!"

"Not at all," he denied. "If anything could be done to help them I
would be doing it. Don't you understand what has happened? That was an
Asian N bomb that exploded. In an N bomb the immediate effect is minor.
The real purpose of the weapon is to spray the area with high intensity
radiation, to make the ground unfit for living for months. Any living
creature caught within the direct blast of the radiation is doomed, and
neither you, nor I, nor the medics, can do anything to help them--" He
broke off as another man began screaming up the slope.

The nurse was irresolute. "But that man needs help," she pointed out.

"Certainly he needs help," Zen agreed.

"Well--"

Zen watched her carefully. She seemed to understand his words but
something else pulled at her far more strongly: the screaming of the
injured man. Each time the soldier cried out, she started in his
direction.

"Well, well, thank you, colonel." Turning, she moved with a sure stride
up the slope.

Zen swore under his breath and started after her, then caught the
motion as the question rose in him as to why she should throw her
life away. She knew the meaning of radiation in lethal quantities.
Unquestionably, she also knew what would happen to any normal human who
ventured into a hot zone.

Was she, then, a normal human being? Was he actually witnessing one of
the miracles performed by the new people? If she came off the mountain
slope alive, it would certainly prove something. Zen cursed again. She
was going where he could not safely follow. If she returned unharmed,
he had enough proof to warrant following her to the ends of the earth,
if need be.




III


The radio transmitter inside Zen's pack was small but very powerful.
It did not look like a radio transmitter at all; there was no antenna
and no apparent source of power. Only the tiny earphone and the throat
microphone revealed its true nature.

He slipped the phone into his ear, fitted the microphone against his
throat, then picked up the piece of plastic tubing that was red on one
end and green on the other. Wires ran from each end of this tube to the
small box that housed the transmitter.

"Red goes to the right hand," he muttered. "Green to the left. Or is it
the other way around?" Making up his mind that red went to the right,
he closed his fingers around the ends of the plastic tube, then watched
the tiny meter on top of the small box that contained the transmitter.

The needle moved on the dial.

"Calling nine dash nine," he spoke. "This is six one calling nine dash
nine." He repeated the call three times, then sat back on his haunches
to await an answer.

"Come in six one," the earphone said. "What color is red?"

"It's green this week," Zen answered promptly.

"What color was it last week?"

"Last week? Um. Oh, yes. No color."

"And that means--"

"White. This is Kurt Zen, colonel, intelligence, reporting. Connect me
immediately with General Stocker."

Satisfied with the identity of the caller, the operator said, "Just a
minute, colonel, I'll see if the general will talk to you."

"Tell him it's important," Zen urged.

"They always say that," the operator sighed. "I'll put you through as
soon as I can."

"Kurt, boy, where are you?" General Stacker's voice boomed into a
distant microphone. The general's voice always boomed, he was always
hearty, he was always sure that while things might look black right
now, they would work out all right in the end. By the time the booming
voice reached Zen's earphone, it had been transformed into a tinny
squeak. Kurt thought he detected an uneasy note in the squeak and he
wondered if the general had finally glimpsed the end, and was finding
it not quite as he had supposed.

"In hell, general," Zen answered. He swiftly told where he was and what
had happened. "Cuso's blooper knocked out the last pass by which we can
bring an effective force against him. This whole area is loaded with
radiation."

"How will we ever root that bastard out of his hole now?"

"That's for the staff to decide. I have more important news."

"Yes? Talk, Kurt, and fast. You don't mean that you--"

"Yes. I mean I think this nurse may be it. I don't know yet." Zen
explained what had happened.

"Damn it, Kurt, do you mean to tell me that if she comes back alive,
you will know she is immune to the radiation, and hence must be one of
the new people? But if she comes back dead, or so loaded with radiation
that she will die within a few days, then you will know she was just
like all the rest of us?" Even through Zen's earphone, the general's
voice had begun to boom.

"That's the way I see it," Zen answered.

"But goddammit--Are you hurt, Kurt?" The general's voice was suddenly
solicitous. "Are you all right?"

"Damn it, I'm in my right mind," Zen answered. "I was in a prospect
hole when the blast went off. Don't you think I've got enough sense
to take cover?" Stocker's suddenly solicitous attitude irritated him.
"Sorry, sir," he apologized an instant later.

"It's quite all right, boy. I know that nerves get frayed in combat.
But this nurse--"

"That's the way I see it, sir," Zen said doggedly. "I request
permission to follow her."

"If she comes back alive, you mean?"

"I would appreciate it if you would stop reminding me of that
possibility."

"Oh. So you are emotionally interested in her?"

"Well, what if I am? She's a nice kid."

"They all are, boy. They all are--until you get to know them. As to
permission to follow her, you've not only got it, but it's an order.
We've got to find out about these new people. One of them appeared in
President Wilkerson's private office this morning and told him to call
off a planned landing in Asia."

"Really?" Zen said. "In the President's office!"

"That's what I said."

"Did it really happen? I mean, was anyone present?"

"No one except the President's secretary. She's under heavy sedation
right now, from shock. She thought God Almighty Himself had come
walking in. The old man is not in much better shape." Stocker's voice
showed signs of strain. "I've got my orders from Wilkerson himself and
I'm passing them on to you. _Find these new people!_ Follow that nurse
to hell if you have to."

"Right, sir."

"Report to me when you have something to report--that is, something
besides going to bed with her. Off." Zen grimaced as he pulled the tiny
phone out of his ear. He slipped the transmitter back into the pack and
slung it over his shoulder. The radiation count was dropping but it was
still too high for safety. He looked longingly up the trail. Wounded
men were coming down but Nedra was not in sight.

The wounded men were no longer a fighting unit, but had become
individuals, each one intent only on his own survival. Patriotism had
gone from their minds, they no longer gave a hoot about saving their
country, but were only interested in saving their own lives.

Far up the trail, Zen could see a tall figure moving upward. The nurse!
He unslung the pair of field glasses from his shoulder. Through the
powerful lenses Nedra's lithe figure was very clear. He saw her move
to the side of the trail and kneel beside a wounded man who lacked
the courage to walk downhill. Somehow she got the man to his feet
and started him along the trail. He stumbled and fell. Again the
nurse knelt beside him but this time she made no attempt to lift him.
Instead, she got to her own feet.

Zen decided the man had died as he fell.

She continued on up the slope.

Down below, motors roared and then came to a halt. Turning, Zen saw
that a first aid station was being set up down there. The medics worked
fast; already they were directing the wounded men to the back end of a
truck, where an examination station had been set up. But, fast as they
worked, they were too late to help the vast majority of the wounded.
The futility of the effort depressed Zen, so he returned his attention
to the nurse.

She was in the middle of the trail again. The avalanche, directly ahead
of her, had stopped her progress. A man was with her.

Through the glasses, the man looked as tall and craggy as a mountain
peak. No soldier, he was without helmet or other headgear. His hair,
white as the snow on top of a mountain, was flying in the wind. His
face looked like a statue hewn in granite. Zen guessed that he was a
resident of this region, a mountaineer who had sought safety in these
remote fastnesses, and who had been blasted out of his hiding place by
Cuso's radioactive blooper and was wandering down this trail to die.
The nurse was talking to him.

Involuntarily, as if they had a will of their own, Zen's legs started
carrying him up the slope. He had taken a dozen steps before he
remembered the counter on his wrist.

"To hell with the count!" he thought. "I'm going up there and drag her
down here. She's not going to throw her life away while I skulk like
a coward down below. I don't give a damn whether she's one of the new
people or not. She's human!"

He climbed the slope with giant strides. Then he saw that Nedra was
running toward him and waving him back.

"Colonel! You can't come up here."

"I _am_ coming up there!" he shouted in reply.

"No!"

When he did not stop, she ran faster toward him. The craggy man kept
pace with her. Reaching Zen, she caught his sleeve, turned him around,
and started him down the slope. "You can't be here." Her voice was
breathless with protest.

"Are you giving me orders?" Zen growled. Secretly he was pleased
because she was concerned about him.

"If you will permit me, colonel, I think Nedra's intention is to save
your life," the craggy man spoke. He had a voice like a bell tolling
in the distance, sweet-toned and musical, but with overtones of great
strength.

"What about _her_ life?" Zen demanded.

"I'm going down now, colonel," the nurse said hastily. "They've set up
a first aid station. They will need me there."

"You will need their attention is what you mean," Zen said.

"Colonel, the counter!" she answered.

The needle was well over the hundred mark and was still rising.

"Come, colonel." Hooking her arm in his, Nedra began moving down the
rough, boulder-strewn trail. Zen did not move. She tugged harder.

"Your life is in danger here, sir," the craggy man said, politely.

"That is of interest to me only," Zen answered. "And what about your
life?"

"Colonel, I'd like you to meet a friend of mine," the nurse said
quickly. "Colonel Zen, Sam West. We'll talk while we walk down to the
first aid station."

"A pleasure to meet you, sir," West said, extending his hand. His
handclasp was firm but there was a suggestion of additional power in
his fingers.

"Nice to meet you, Mr. West. Do you live around here?"

"Over that way," the craggy man said, nodding vaguely over his
shoulder.

Again the nurse tugged at Zen's arm. He set his feet solidly on the
mountain trail. "We'll talk right here."

"But you are taking an unfair advantage of Nedra," the craggy man
protested. "This area is heavy with radiation and this is neither the
time nor the place to be swapping horses."

"Then why are you two here?"

"I was getting out of the area as fast as I could when I met Nedra,"
West said. "I would still be getting out of it, but fast, if you were
not stopping me."

