I saw Antinea. She stood erect, both hands resting on her ebony
scepter, watching the struggle with a smile of contemptuous interest.

Suddenly I gave a loud cry and loosed the hold I had on my victim. A
cracking in my left arm: one of the Tuareg had seized it and twisted
until my shoulder was dislocated.

When I completely lost consciousness, I was being carried down the
corridor by two white phantoms, so bound that I could not move a
muscle.




XVIII

THE FIRE-FLIES


Through the great open window, waves of pale moonlight surged into my
room.

A slender white figure was standing beside the bed where I lay.

"You, Tanit-Zerga!" I murmured. She laid a finger on her lips.

"Sh! Yes, it is I."

I tried to raise myself up on the bed. A terrible pain seized my
shoulder. The events of the afternoon came back to my poor harassed
mind.

"Oh, little one, if you knew!"

"I know," she said.

I was weaker than a baby. After the overstrain of the day had come a
fit of utter nervous depression. A lump rose in my throat, choking me.

"If you knew, if you only knew!... Take me away, little one. Get me
away from here."

"Not so loud," she whispered. "There is a white Targa on guard at the
door."

"Take me away; save me," I repeated.

"That is what I came for," she said simply.

I looked at her. She no longer was wearing her beautiful red silk
tunic. A plain white _haik_ was wrapped about her; and she had drawn
one corner of it over her head.

"I want to go away, too," she said in a smothered voice.

"For a long time, I have wanted to go away. I want to see Gao, the
village on the bank of the river, and the blue gum trees, and the
green water.

"Ever since I came here, I have wanted to get away," she repeated,
"but I am too little to go alone into the great Sahara. I never dared
speak to the others who came here before you. They all thought only of
_her_.... But you, you wanted to kill her."

I gave a low moan.

"You are suffering," she said. "They broke your arm."

"Dislocated it anyhow."

"Let me see."

With infinite gentleness, she passed her smooth little hands over my
shoulder.

"You tell me that there is a white Targa on guard before my door,
Tanit-Zerga," I said. "Then how did you get in?"

"That way," she said, pointing to the window. A dark perpendicular
line halved its blue opening.

Tanit-Zerga went to the window. I saw her standing erect on the sill.
A knife shone in her hands. She cut the rope at the top of the
opening. It slipped down to the stone with a dry sound.

She came back to me.

"How can we escape?" I asked.

"That way," she repeated, and she pointed again at the window.

I leaned out. My feverish gaze fell upon the shadowy depths, searching
for those invisible rocks, the rocks upon which little Kaine had
dashed himself.

"That way!" I exclaimed, shuddering. "Why, it is two hundred feet from
here to the ground."

"The rope is two hundred and fifty," she replied. "It is a good strong
rope which I stole in the oasis; they used it in felling trees. It is
quite new."

"Climb down that way, Tanit-Zerga! With my shoulder!"

"I will let you down," she said firmly. "Feel how strong my arms are.
Not that I shall rest your weight on them. But see, on each side of
the window is a marble column. By twisting the rope around one of
them, I can let you slip down and scarcely feel your weight.

"And look," she continued, "I have made a big knot every ten feet. I
can stop the rope with them, every now and then, if I want to rest."

"And you?" I asked.

"When you are down, I shall tie the rope to one of the columns and
follow. There are the knots on which to rest if the rope cuts my hands
too much. But don't be afraid: I am very agile. At Gao, when I was
just a child, I used to climb almost as high as this in the gum trees
to take the little toucans out of their nests. It is even easier to
climb down."

"And when we are down, how will we get out? Do you know the way
through the barriers?"

"No one knows the way through the barriers," she said, "except
Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, and perhaps Antinea."

"Then?"

"There are the camels of Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, those which he uses on
his forays. I untethered the strongest one and led him out, just below
us, and gave him lots of hay so that he will not make a sound and will
be well fed when we start."

"But...." I still protested.

She stamped her foot.

"But what? Stay if you wish, if you are afraid. I am going. I want to
see Gao once again, Gao with its blue gum-trees and its green water."

I felt myself blushing.

"I will go, Tanit-Zerga. I would rather die of thirst in the midst of
the desert than stay here. Let us start."

"Tut!" she said. "Not yet."

She showed me that the dizzy descent was in brilliant moonlight.

"Not yet. We must wait. They would see us. In an hour, the moon will
have circled behind the mountain. That will be the time."

She sat silent, her _haik_ wrapped completely about her dark little
figure. Was she praying? Perhaps.

Suddenly I no longer saw her. Darkness had crept in the window. The
moon had turned.

Tanit-Zerga's hand was on my arm. She drew me toward the abyss. I
tried not to tremble.

Everything below us was in shadow. In a low, firm voice, Tanit-Zerga
began to speak:

"Everything is ready. I have twisted the rope about the pillar. Here
is the slip-knot. Put it under your arms. Take this cushion. Keep it
pressed against your hurt shoulder.... A leather cushion.... It is
tightly stuffed. Keep face to the wall. It will protect you against
the bumping and scraping."

I was now master of myself, very calm. I sat down on the sill of the
window, my feet in the void. A breath of cool air from the peaks
refreshed me.

I felt little Tanit-Zerga's hand in my vest pocket.

"Here is a box. I must know when you are down, so I can follow. You
will open the box. There are fire-flies in it; I shall see them and
follow you."

She held my hand a moment.

"Now go," she murmured.

I went.

I remember only one thing about that descent: I was overcome with
vexation when the rope stopped and I found myself, feet dangling,
against the perfectly smooth wall.

"What is the little fool waiting for?" I said to myself. "I have been
hung here for a quarter of an hour. Ah ... at last! Oh, here I am
stopped again." Once or twice I thought I was reaching the ground, but
it was only a projection from the rock. I had to give a quick shove
with my foot.... Then, suddenly, I found myself seated on the ground.
I stretched out my hands. Bushes.... A thorn pricked my finger. I was
down.

Immediately I began to get nervous again.

I pulled out the cushion and slipped off the noose. With my good hand,
I pulled the rope, holding it out five or six feet from the face of
the mountain, and put my foot on it.

Then I took the little cardboard box from my pocket and opened it.

One after the other, three little luminous circles rose in the inky
night. I saw them rise higher and higher against the rocky wall. Their
pale rose aureols gleamed faintly. Then, one by one, they turned,
disappeared.

"You are tired, Sidi Lieutenant. Let me hold the rope."

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh rose up at my side.

I looked at his tall black silhouette. I shuddered, but I did not let
go of the rope on which I began to feel distant jerks.

"Give it to me," he repeated with authority.

And he took it from my hands.

I don't know what possessed me then. I was standing beside that great
dark phantom. And I ask you, what could I, with a dislocated
shoulder, do against that man whose agile strength I already knew?
What was there to do? I saw him buttressed against the wall, holding
the rope with both hands, with both feet, with all his body, much
better than I had been able to do.

A rustling above our heads. A little shadowy form.

"There," said Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, seizing the little shadow in his
powerful arms and placing her on the ground, while the rope, let
slack, slapped back against the rock.

Tanit-Zerga recognized the Targa and groaned.

He put his hand roughly over her mouth.

"Shut up, camel thief, wretched little fly."

He seized her arm. Then he turned to me.

"Come," he said in an imperious tone.

I obeyed. During our short walk, I heard Tanit-Zerga's teeth
chattering with terror.

We reached a little cave.

"Go in," said the Targa.

He lighted a torch. The red light showed a superb mehari peacefully
chewing his cud.

"The little one is not stupid," said Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, pointing to
the animal. "She knows enough to pick out the best and the strongest.
But she is rattle-brained."

He held the torch nearer the camel.

"She is rattle-brained," he continued. "She only saddled him. No
water, no food. At this hour, three days from now, all three of you
would have been dead on the road, and on what a road!"

Tanit-Zerga's teeth no longer chattered. She was looking at the Targa
with a mixture of terror and hope.

"Come here, Sidi Lieutenant," said Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, "so that I can
explain to you."

When I was beside him, he said:

"On each side there is a skin of water. Make that water last as long
as possible, for you are going to cross a terrible country. It may be
that you will not find a well for three hundred miles.

"There," he went on, "in the saddle bags, are cans of preserved meat.
Not many, for water is much more precious. Here also is a carbine,
your carbine, sidi. Try not to use it except to shoot antelopes. And
there is this."

He spread out a roll of paper. I saw his inscrutible face bent over
it; his eyes were smiling; he looked at me.

"Once out of the enclosures, what way did you plan to go?" he asked.

"Toward Ideles, to retake the route where you met the Captain and me,"
I said.

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh shook his head.

"I thought as much," he murmured.

Then he added coldly:

"Before sunset to-morrow, you and the little one would have been
caught and massacred."

"Toward the north is Ahaggar," he continued, "and all Ahaggar is under
the control of Antinea. You must go south."

"Then we shall go south."

