the range."

Moments after he spoke, the Admiral's order
transformed into action. Abruptly, the gun circuits
snapped shut. Lights dimmed and the Ruthless
throbbed as the beamers sucked up massive amounts
of energy. The Avenger and the Implacable joined in.

Indicators swung wildly. The technicians watched
the dials and verified that a stream of highly
charged, invisible particles had erupted from the
beamer tubes. The lights returned to normal, and
the throbbing tapered off.

The bolts struck the leading INOR warship full
length from bow to stern, and moved on the second
in line as soon as it came into range. The INOR
battle cruisers shuddered, smitten as by a
giant hammer. Their hulls collapsed and the
ships exploded into enormous, silent fireballs.
Destroyers and support ships in close screens
were caught in the blasts and shattered.

The INOR fleet's will to continue the battle was
gone; they had disintegrated as a fighting force.

The battle ground to a halt. What was left of the
INOR armada withdrew beyond the reach of the UIPS
fleet's long-range weapons, careful to demonstrate
that their retreat was in a direction away from
the Slingshot Terminals. It was just as well, lines
of UIPS destroyers and gunships had formed up as
a shield between the work sites and any potential
attacker from the residue of the INOR Combined
Fleet.

The arena quieted. UIPS search, rescue and medical
craft searched the area, marking wrecks of both
sides with electronic signals, collecting the dead
and treating the wounded.

Communications lines opened between the fleets.
Admiral Selvin requested the INOR commanders to
order a stand down from all weapons. All Plutonian
Assault Force vessels were ordered to form up and
prepare for boarders.

Brad and Selvin stood in a corner of the command
deck, heads close. Brad drew an object from
a pocket as he spoke: the control for the
communications barrier Zolan had erected.
Selvin, hand to chin, stared at the device,
listening. He pointed to it, and then in the
direction of the companionway.

"Notify Camari," he said. "Now."

Brad nodded and raced away.





 Chapter FORTY-FIVE


Camari's impassive gaze roamed the faces of the
Solar System's leaders at the conference table. The
discussions had quickly degenerated into an open
clash of wills between Camari and Narval. The other
INOR Chiefs of State sat back to enjoy the contest,
posing occasional questions to Camari or Narval,
or to both. All knew they were in a waiting game.

Camari went along, drawing Narval out. Each was
eager for a message from the Planet Pluto Special
Zone that would present a new reality and the
defining course for the conference.

Narval realized that he was being goaded by his
INOR allies to exacerbate the confrontation between
the Regions. Noting the time, he decided to drop
the first bombshell.

"We have been called together to prepare a course
for the future," he rumbled, looking about with
scorn. "Yet we of INOR sit here and quibble among
ourselves, lacking a unified will to confront the
UIPS directly and compel them to respect our
demands. The circumstances of the times call for
the raw strength of an iron fist, not for a press
of beggars with outstretched, pleading palms."

"I take exception," President Straber of Titan
leaned forward and waggled his finger at Narval.
"We are a confederation of nation-states. Are you
suggesting that we abdicate our sovereignty to a
single authority? If we were to do that we face the
same chaos that preceded the separation of the
Regions. We of Titan would find that intolerable."

Narval seized the moment to pave the way for
the supreme power he felt would soon be his.
The message from Drummer would surely come
within minutes.

"The old United Planetary System from which we
broke away," he countered, "was based on so-called
democratic principles and due process. The United
Planetary System fell apart. The fragmented,
international order that replaced it, this
grotesque arrangement of nation-states, is equally
ineffective and therefore obsolete. Our system
of authority and governance must be raised above
the antiquated, interminable rules of the desperate
bickering we now witness here at play among us.
I will personally impose such changes."

"Through tyranny?" Camari's words were dry as the
desert winds of Mars.

Narval's eyes narrowed to slits of hatred as he glared
at Camari. Damn, where was Drummer's message?

Camari continued in the same tone, confronting
Narval directly, "I voice the profound hopes of the
peoples of our diverse cultures, and yet, of our
common species, that your threat is nothing but
idle chatter."

He turned his head to right and left, taking in the
others at the table.

"What say you, leaders of INOR, to this threat from
a criminal let loose among us from Callisto? Will
you yield to Narval your constitutional rights and
authority so that he personally assumes the power
to dictate to your nation and to your people?

"I, for one, reject his proposal with contempt and
declare, here and now, that the UIPS will fight to
the death any attempt by Narval to impose his will
on the United Inner Planetary System or, for that
matter, on any nation in the Solar System."

Around the table, and in the seats beyond, a
shocked silence fell. They were indeed cynical and
self-seeking politicians, and devious ploys were
their stock in trade for getting and holding power.
Narval's past was well known to them all. His words
were a direct challenge to their positions, their
regimes, and their lives. Faces clouded, they
appeared overcome by the realization that Narval's
capture of the Terminals was merely one part of a
far greater conspiracy to destroy their sovereignty.

Advisors leaned forward to whisper to their
Masters. Suspicious glances were cast at Narval
who responded with a look of mocking amusement.

"This is all without significance," he thought, "by
now INOR military forces are committed to me."

Camari sat quietly, letting it all happen. The dice
had been cast elsewhere.

 ##

Ram entered and strode swiftly around the
conference table toward Camari. Something in the
way Ram's elongated frame stooped and flexed
as he walked created an impression of suppressed
excitement. Camari tensed with apprehension. Ram
caught Camari's eye as the UIPS leader leaned back
in his chair.

Ram bent and whispered into Camari's ear. His
urgent manner and Camari's close attention stirred
the conferees. Several at the table and in the
seats beyond glanced at each other, eyebrows
raised; others eyed Narval. This was to have been
his show.

Narval sat motionless, eyes hooded, his normally
ruddy face visibly graying.

Camari held up his hand for attention. It was an
unnecessary gesture; all eyes had been on him and
Ram from the moment Ram entered.

"I understand an unusual spunnel communication has
arrived from the Planet Pluto Special Zone." Camari
announced. "It is addressed to all Heads of State
attending this convocation. The message calls for
an audio-visual presentation in the view tank. Any
objections?"

Without waiting for a response, he nodded over his
shoulder. Ram murmured into the tiny transmitter
in his hand.

The view tank, centered above the conference
table, lost its soft neutral glow, blinked, and the
Planet Pluto sector appeared. The tank displayed
the debris of a space battle: ruptured ships,
unrecognizable masses and fragments, and bloated
human bodies. In the background were the Slingshot
Terminals, intact.

From around the table came sounds of breath
drawn sharply, gasps and muttered curses.

The view narrowed and zoomed in on a broad sheet
of drifting metal. It bore the emblem of the Jovian
Combined Strike Team. Large letters emblazoned
above the emblem spelled out the partial word
"Windst..."

All eyes in the room were spellbound, fixed on the
tank. All, except for President Pazzim of Callisto.
At the sight of a drifting scrap that had once been
the pride of his fleet, he groaned loudly, hunched
his shoulders and lowered his head. He did not look
up again.

The hull of a battle cruiser formed along the
tank's outer edge and tumbled slowly end over end
toward center. Bow collapsed, the ship drifted into
and out of view. Experts from the back seats leaned
forward and whispered. The lifeless hulk had been
the Plutonian Battle Cruiser Dragon.

Camari shifted his eyes to Narval, half up from
his seat, face putty-white, lips quivering, eyes
transfixed on the view tank. Tearing his eyes
away, he pointed at Camari and screeched.

"It's a trap." His voice trembled in panic and
became a wail. "This is another stratagem
concocted by Camari to frighten us."

He gestured wildly and his mouth dribbled. "I know
your ways, Camari. You're trying to divide and pit
us against each other so that you can move in and
take over. It won't work. Since you cannot shake
our unity and resolve with empty appeals for
Slingshot, you now invent battles that never took
place. They just couldn't have happened. We're
on to you. You're a fraud and a cheat. I move this
convocation be terminated immediately. I, for one,
have no intention to remain and be subjected to
further lies."

Even as Narval squealed and pounded the table, the
scene in the tank faded into a broader view of a
phalanx of disabled warships, several bow-to-stern,
and others in a disorganized cluster. Again, the
secure Terminals were the backdrop.

The scene cut to the command deck of a warship.
A face, contorted in anger and despair, appeared
and addressed them.

"I am Captain Klars Abou, Commander of the
Saturnian Combined Strike Team, now acting
as Commander of the INOR Combined Fleet, or
what's left of it. I make this statement of my own
free will. The original mission given to me by my
President was to join with other military forces
of INOR to take and hold the Slingshot Terminals
hostage as insurance for an outcome in negotiations
that would be favorable to INOR.

"The mission to take the Terminals has failed. We
were attacked and defeated by the military forces
of the United Inner Planetary System. We were
betrayed by the Plutonians. The Commander of
the UIPS Military Space Force has ordered all our
warships, except those of Planet Pluto, to return
to their home stations. The INOR military forces,
at the outset, had neither strategic nor tactical
plans for the confrontation that we have
experienced. Our forces are in utter disarray; we
have no choice but to comply with the orders of the
UIPS Fleet Commander. I have therefore directed
the dissolution of the INOR Combined Fleet and
ordered the vessels to return home. The UIPS fleet
commander has granted us leave to use the spunnel
system for this purpose."

Captain Abou's features faded. An ominous quiet
descended on the conference room. Narval, stricken
and silent, remained half-standing, looking from
the tank to Camari, and at the faces of his
co-conspirators. Camari returned Narval's gape
impassively.

There was more. Drummer's features replaced
those of Captain Abou. His features were stern
and his head shook slightly with tension and anger.
However, his voice was grave and measured in tone,
deep and vibrant.

"Leaders of Solar Governments. To those who do
not recognize me, I am Deke Drummer, formerly
an advisor to Reen Narval and, also formerly the
Commander of the INOR Combined Fleet. I confirm
Captain Abou's words. The mission against Slingshot
failed. The reasons are many, but failure is the
fact. You now have the task, at your convocation,
to seek solutions to our common problems through
other means.

"All military forces and government administrators
of Planet Pluto are under my command. I proclaim
the Government of Reen Narval is fallen. I have
established myself as Regent over Planet Pluto
until a lawful President is chosen by the will of
our people. I hereby declare Reen Narval persona
non grata on Planet Pluto, and have instructed my
warships to attack and destroy his vessel should
he enter Plutonian jurisdiction. I remind you all that
Narval came to Planet Pluto as a criminal outcast
from Callisto. I suggest to the President of
Callisto that he take custody of Narval and deal
with him on the basis of the crimes he committed
within Callistonian jurisdictions.

"To President Camari, I herewith declare that
the original understandings on cooperation and
collaboration with the Government of Planet
Pluto until Slingshot is launched remain in
effect. Planet Pluto is an independent nation,
nevertheless, I request that, in this singular
situation, that you personally represent our
interests at the Conference. I look forward to an
early exchange of Ambassadors and consultations
to review our mutual interests and objectives.
I have in mind three people whom I hope you will
consider for high position in your representation
to my Government. I shall communicate with you
separately on that matter."





 Chapter FORTY-SIX


 SOLAR LEADERS REACH ACCORD
 TRANS-SOLAR NEWS SERVICE
 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE
 FLASH: SYSTEM-WIDE
 Filed at Solar Conference Site

The meeting of the Solar System's Heads of State
is a success. President Camari of the UIPS opened
the proceedings with a brief speech. Ignoring past
differences, he emphasized common interests,
interdependence of peoples and nations, and
benefits through collective efforts to meet the
needs of the dispersed communities of humankind.

"The singular authority of the old United Planetary
System," Camari said, "had no need for means
to resolve issues among separate nation-states.
That is no longer true. We must provide for
interregional and international deliberations and
decision-making. Furthermore, our diminished
reserves of metals, minerals and other essential
substances, on the one hand, and the benefits of
an operational Slingshot, on the other, creates new
challenges of common concern and more options in
the search for solutions. Unless we accelerate our
collaboration to resolve the resources crisis our
civilizations may well erupt once more toward
potential disasters such as the one we are here
trying to escape."

Following President Camari's opening remarks, the
conference was addressed by INOR Chiefs of State.
Each expressed the aspirations of his or her people
and their capabilities toward attainment. All agreed
that their meeting was timely, that the problems
were mutual, and that the agenda be addressed
without delay.

The exchanges were intense as the conferees sought
a balance between inalienable rights and solemn
obligations. Many issues were extremely complex:
What are an inhabited planet's or satellite's
jurisdictional limits within territorial and
contiguous space? What are the rights and
obligations of one Region's military and commercial
vessels and citizens when inside the lawful
boundaries of another? What is the definition
of "innocent passage" in the context of a
multi-national Solar Community? How are our
dynamic and constantly changing interplanetary
and interregional space lanes to be maintained? Who
will pay for such services? Questions posed in one
context were injected into others or phrased to
highlight a wide range of diverse interests and
nuances.

Discussions among the primary conferees were, at
times, suspended for caucuses of Heads of States
orbiting a central planet with their advisors. Ad
hoc committees were set up to explore options
in depth, or at minimum, to provide clarity and
context to the issue. The meeting rooms along
the periphery of the assembly hall filled with
specialists who argued loudly, in whispers, and at
length.

Often, additional data was needed from Seats of
Government. The spunnel communications channels
were loaded with traffic, and archives throughout
the system opened, many for the first time in
millennia. The Conference Disk's computers absorbed
facts and expert opinions and spewed distillations
of new conclusions.

Slowly, positions clarified and consensus took form.

A draft Declaration of Principles emerged from
the back rooms. It dealt with only a few of many
problems that needed immediate attention, leaving
a broad array of issues open for further review.

After hours of debate the Draft Declaration of
Principles was approved by the Leaders of the Solar
Community. (See Appendix.)

All agreed that the First UIPS-INOR Conference
augured well for the future of humankind.





 Epilogue


The networks of mass attractors that tethered
the Extractor to Planet Pluto disengaged nine
Earth centuries after construction began. Pluto
contributed its orbital momentum to the launch.
In time the integrated drives of the most advanced
propulsion thrusters took on the full load, and the
dream of humankind was on its way to the Alpha
Centauri star system, on schedule.

Scientists and technicians on The Solar System's
Slingshot Control Center maintained constant
