Perhaps my sensitivity perceived these signs before they were common
property, but in a few days they were spread all over Europe, through
what insane impulse I do not know. For whatever reason, symbols of the
Grass blossomed on the Arc de Triomphe, on the Brandenburger Tor, on the
pavement of the Ringstrasse and on the bridges spanning the Danube
between Buda and Pesth.


_88._ I find myself, in retrospect, involuntarily telescoping the time
of events. Looking backward, years become days, and months minutes. At
the time I saw the first reproductions of the Grass in London the thing
itself was continents away, busy absorbing the fringes of Asia. But its
heralds and victims went before it, changing the life of man as it had
itself changed the face of the world.

The breakdown of civilization beyond the Channel was almost complete.
Only Consolidated Pemmican and the World Government still maintained
communication facilities; and with the blocking of the normal ways of
commerce the World Government found it difficult to spread either news
or decrees to the general public. The most fantastic and contradictory
ideas about the Grass were held by the masses.

When the Grass was in the Deccan and still well below the Yangtze, the
Athenians were thrown into panic by the rumor it had appeared in
Salonika. At the same time there was wild rejoicing in the streets of
Marseilles based on the belief large stretches of North America had
become miraculously free. The cult of the Grass idolaters flourished
despite the strictest interdictions and great massmeetings were
frequently held during which the worshipers turned their faces toward
the southeast and prayed fervently for speedy immolation. It was quite
useless for the World Government to attempt to spread the actual facts;
the earlier censorship together with a public temper that preferred to
believe the extremes of good or bad rather than the truth of gradual yet
relentless approach, made people heedless of broadcasts rarely received
even by state operated publicaddress systems or of handbills which even
the still literate could not bother to decipher.

The idealization of the Socialist Union--once the Soviet Union--which
had risen and fallen through the years, was quickened among those not
enamored of the Grass. There must be some intrinsic virtue in this land
which had not only been immune to inoculation by the Metamorphizer, but
kept the encroaching weed from invading its borders in spite of its long
continued proximity across Bering Strait and the Aleutians. The Grass
had jumped gaps thousands of ocean miles and yet it had not bridged that
narrow strip of water. It would have been a shock to these people had
they known, as I knew and as the World Government had vainly tried to
tell them, what Moscow had recently and reluctantly admitted: the Grass
had long since crossed into Siberia and was now working its will from
Kamchatka to the Lena River.

The people of Japan, caught between the jaws of a closing vise,
responded in a manner peculiar to themselves. The Christians, now
forming a majority, declared the Grass a punishment for the sins of the
world and hoped, by their steadfastness in the face of certain death, to
earn a national martyr's crown and thus perhaps redeem those still
benighted. The Shintoists, on the other hand, agreed the Grass was a
punishment--but for a different crime. Had the doctrine of the Eight
Corners of the World never been abandoned the Japanese would never have
permitted the Grass to overwhelm the Yamato race. The new emperor's
reign name, Saiji, they argued, ought not to mean rule by the people as
it was usually interpreted, but rule of the people and they called for
an immediate Saiji Restoration, under which the subjects of the Mikado
would welcome death on the battlefield in a manner compatible with
bushido, thus redeeming previous aberrations for which they were now
being chastised. Both parties agreed that under no circumstances would
any Japanese demean himself by leaving Nippon and the world was
therefore spared an additional influx from these islands.

But the Japanese were the only ones who refused to join the westward
stampede plunging the world daily deeper into barbarism. We in England
had cause to congratulate ourselves on our unique position. The Channel
might have been a thousand miles wide instead of twenty. The turmoil of
the Continent and of Africa was but dimly reflected. There was still a
skeletal vestige of trade, the dole kept the lazy from starvation,
railways still functioned on greatly reduced schedules, and the wireless
continued to operate from, "Good morning, everybody, this is London," to
the last strains of _God Save the Queen_. Although I was constantly
rasped by inactivity and by the slowness of the researchworkers to find
a weapon against the Grass, I was happy to be able to wait out this
terrible period in so ameliorative a spot.

True, our depots in the Arabian and Sahara deserts were unthreatened by
either the Grass or the horde, but I should have found it uncomfortable
indeed to have lived in either place. In Hampshire or London I felt
myself the center of what was left of the world, ready to jump into
action the moment the great discovery was finally made and the Grass
began to recede.

Preblesham, my right hand, flew weekly to Africa and Asia Minor, weeding
out those workers who threatened to become useless to us because of
their reaction to the isolated and monotonous conditions at the depots;
keeping the heavily armed guards about our closed continental properties
alert and seeing our curtailed activities in Great Britain were
judiciously profitable. This period of quiescence suited his talents
perfectly, for it required of him little imagination, but great industry
and force.

I had noticed for some time a slight air of preoccupation and constraint
in his demeanor during his reports to me, but I put it down to his
engrossment with our affairs and resolved to make him take an extended
vacation as soon as he could be spared, never dreaming of disloyalty
from him.

I was shocked, then, and deeply wounded when at the close of one of our
conferences he announced, "Mr Weener, I'm leaving you."

I begged him to tell me what was wrong, what had caused him to come to
this decision. I knew, I said, that he was overworked and offered him
the badly needed vacation. He shook his head.

"It aint that. Overwork! I don't believe there is such a thing. At least
Ive never suffered from it. No, Mr Weener, my trouble is something no
amount of vacations can help, because I can't get away from a Voice."

"Voice, Tony?" Hallucinations were certainly a symptom of overwork. I
began mentally recalling names of prominent psychiatrists.

"A Voice within," he repeated firmly. "I am a sinful man, a miserable
backslider. Maybe Brother Paul was not treading a true path; I doubt if
he was or I would not have been led aside from following him so easily;
but when I was doing his work I was at least trying to do the will of
God and not the will of another man no better--spiritually, you
understand, Mr Weener, spiritually--than myself.

"But now His Voice has sought me out again and I must once more take up
the cross. I feel a call to go on a mission to the poor heathens and
urge on them submission to their Father's rod."

"Among those savages across the Channel! They will tear you limb from
limb."

"Christ will make me whole again."

"Tony, you are not yourself. Youre upset."

"I am not myself, Mr Weener, I have become as a little child again and
do my Father's bidding. I am upset, yes, turned upsidedown and insideout
by a Force not content to leave men in wrong attitudes or sinful
states. But upset, I stand upright and go about my Father's business.
God bless you, Mr Weener."

Miss Francis and Preblesham, at opposite ends of the intellectual scale,
both maundering on about doing the Will of God and General Thario
talking about marks on foreheads--what sort of feebleminded,
retrogressive world was I living in? All the outworn superstitions of
religion taking hold of people and intruding themselves into otherwise
normal conversation. A wave of madness, akin to the plague of the Grass,
must be sweeping over the earth, was my conclusion.

If General Thario's desertion had thrown an extra weight on my
shoulders, Preblesham's burdened me with all the petty details of
routine. It was now I who had to inspect our depots periodically and
make constant trips into the dangerous regions across the Channel to see
that the shutdown plants were being properly cared for. I resented
bitterly the trick of fate preventing me from finding for any length of
time subordinates to whom I could delegate authority.

Nor even on whom I could rely. What were Miss Francis and her wellpaid
staff doing all this time? Why had they produced nothing in return for
the fat living they got from me? The Grass was halfway across Asia,
lapping the High Pamirs from the south and from the north, digesting
Korea, Manchuria, Mongolia, thrusting runners into Turkestan--and still
no progress made against it. It would be a matter of mere months now
until our Arabian depots would be in the danger zone. I could only
conclude these socalled scientists were little better than fakers,
completely incompetent when confronted by emergency.

They were ready enough to announce useless and inapplicable discoveries
and conclusions; byproducts of their research, they called them, with an
obviously selfconscious attempt to speak the language of industry. The
insects living in and below the Grass were growing ever larger and more
numerous. Expeditions had found worms the size of snakes and bugs big as
birds, happy in their environment. The oceans, they announced, were
drying up, due to the retention of moisture in the soil by the Grass,
and added complacently that in a million years or so, assuming the Grass
in the meantime covered the earth, there would be no bodies of water
left. Climates were equalizing themselves, the polar icecaps were
melting and spots previously too cold for _Cynodon dactylon_ were now
covered. I felt it to be a clear case of embezzlement that they had used
my money, paid for a specific purpose, to make these useless, if
possibly interesting, deductions.

For while they dawdled and read learned papers to each other, the Grass
touched the Persian Gulf and the Caspian, paused before Lake Balkash and
reached the Yenisei at the Arctic Circle. Far to the south it jumped
from India to the Maldives, from the Maldives to the Seychelles and from
the Seychelles on to the great island of Madagascar. I hammered the
theme of "Time, time" at Miss Francis, but her only response was a
helpless sneer at my impatience.

At intervals Burlet inquired of me what progress was being made with his
plan for cities of refuge. I could only answer him truthfully that as
far as I knew the World Government had it under consideration.

"But--if you will excuse my saying so, sir--in the meantime those people
are dying."

"Quite so, Burlet, but there is nothing you or I can do about it."

For the first time since he entered my service I caught him looking
almost impertinently at me. I faced him back and he dropped his eyes.
"Very good, sir. Thank you."

He had made an understatement when he talked about "those people" dying.
Europe was a madhouse. In selfdefense all strangers were instantly put
to death and in retaliation the invading throngs spared no native.
Peasants feared to stay their ground in terror of the oncoming Orientals
and equally dared not move westward where certain killing awaited them
at the hands of those who yesterday had been their neighbors. In an
effort to cling to life they formed small bands and fought impartially
both the static and dynamic forces. Farming was practically abandoned
and the swollen population lived entirely on wild growth or upon human
flesh.

In Africa the situation was little better. Internecine wars and slavery
made their reappearance; the South African whites mercilessly
slaughtered the blacks against a possible uprising and the Kaffirs,
fleeing northward, repeated the European pattern of overcrowding, famine
and pestilence.


_89._ The day our Arabian depots were abandoned before the oncoming
Grass I felt my heart would nearly break with anguish. All that labor,
all that forethought, all those precious goods gone. And all because
Miss Francis and those like her were too lazy or incompetent to do the
work for which they were paid. I flew to the spot, trying vainly to
salvage something, but lack of planes and fuel made it impossible.
During this trip I caught my first sight of the Grass for years.

I suppose no human eye sees anything abstractly, but only in relation to
other things known and observed. With more than half the world in its
grip, the towering wave of green bore no more resemblance to its
California prototype than a brontosaurus to the harmless lizard
scuttling over the sunny floor of an outhouse. Between the dirtysugar
sands of the desert and the oleograph sky it was a third band of
brilliant color, monstrously outofplace. A tidalwave would have seemed
less alien and awful.

The distance was great enough so that no individual part stood out
distinctly; instead, it presented itself as a flat belt of green,
menacing and obdurate. As my plane rose I looked back at it stretching
northward, southward and eastward to the horizon, a new invader in a
land weary of many invaders; and I thought of the dead civilizations it
covered: Bactria, Parthia, Babylon; the Empire of Lame Timur, Cathay,
Cambodia, and the dominions of the Great Mogul.

The refuge of mankind narrowed continually, an island diminished daily
by a lapping surf. Africa was thrice beset, in the south from
Madagascar; in the center from the steppingstones in the Indian Ocean,
and across the Red Sea where the Grass sucked renewed life from the
steaming jungles and grew with unbelievable rapidity; in the highlands
of Rhodesia and Abyssinia it crept slowly over the plateaus toward the
slopes of Kilimanjaro and the Drakensberg. Unless something were done
quickly our Sahara depots would go the way of the Arabian ones and we
would be left with only our limited British facilities until the day
when Africa and Asia would be reconquered.

The violence and murder which had gone before were tame compared with
the new fury that shook the feartortured people of Europe, helpless in
the nightmareridden days, dreaming through twitching nights of an escape
geographically nonexistent. Dismembered corpses in the streets, arenas
packed with dead bodies, fallow fields newly fertilized with human blood
added their stench to that of an unwashed, disease riddled continent. A
rumor was circulated that there were still Jews alive and those who but
yesterday had sought each other in mortal combat now happily united to
hunt down a common prey. And sure enough, in miserable caverns and
cellars hitherto overlooked, shunning daylight, a few men in skullcaps
and prayingshawls were found, dragged out into the disinterested
sunlight with their families and exterminated. It was at this time the
Grass crossed the Urals and leaped the Atlantic into Iceland.

In England, George Bernard Shaw, whose reported death some years before
had been mourned by those who had never read a word of his, rose
apparently from the grave to deliver himself of a last message:

    "If any who wept over my senile and useless carcass had taken the
    trouble to read _Back to Methuselah_, they could have reassured
    themselves regarding my premature demise. If ever there was to be a
    Longliver, that Longliver would have to be me. This was determined
    by the Life Force in the middle of the XIX Century. That Life Force
    could not afford to rob a squinting world of a man of perfect
    vision.

    "Like Haslam (I forget his first name--see my complete works if
    you're interested) I gave myself out as dead in order to avoid the
    gawking of a curious and idle multitude. I was recuperating from the
    labors of my first century in order to throw myself into the more
    arduous ones of the second.

    "But as I have pointed out so many times, the race was between
    maturity and the petulant self-destruction of protracted
    adolescence. Mankind had either to take thought or to perish, and it
    has chosen (perhaps sensibly after all) to perish. I am too old now
    to protest against selfindulgence.

    "Is it too late? Is it still possible to survive? The ship is now
    indeed upon the rocks and the skipper in his bunk below drinking
    bottled ditchwater. But perhaps a Captain Shotover, drunk on the
    milk of human kindness rather than rum, will emerge upon the
    quarterdeck and, blowing his whistle, call all hands on deck before
    the last rending crash. In that unlikely event, one of those
    emerging from the forecastle will be
                                                     G. Bernard Shaw."


_90._ In spite of the anarchic and unspeakable conditions on the
Continent, I could not refrain from making one last tour of inspection.
The thought of flooded mines, pillaged factories and gutted mills was
more than I could bear. The stocks of oil in England were running short,
but I commanded enough to fill my great transportplane. We flew low over
roads crawling with humanity as a sick animal crawls with vermin. Some
cities were empty, obscenely bereft of population; others choked with
wanderers.

The Ruhr was a valley filled with the dead, with men tearing each
other's throats in a frenzy of hunger, with the unburied and the soon to
be buried sleeping sidebyside through restless nights. Not a building
was still whole; what had not been torn down in pointless rage had been
razed by reasonless arson. Not one brick of the great openhearths had
been left in place, not one girder of the great sheds remained erect.

The Saar was in little better case and the mines of Alsace were useless
for the next quartercentury. The industrial district around Paris had
been leveled to the ground by the mobs and Belgium looked as it had
after the worst devastation of war. I had expected to find a shambles,
but my utmost anticipations were exceeded. I could bring myself to look
upon no more and my pilot informing me that our gas was low, I ordered
him to return.

We were in sight of the Channel, not far from Calais, when both
starboard engines developed trouble simultaneously and my pilot headed
for a landingfield below. "What are you about, you fool?" I shouted at
him.

"Gasline fouled. I think I can fix it in a few minutes, Mr Weener."

"Not down among those savages. We wouldnt have a chance."

"We wouldnt have a chance over the Channel, sir. I'd rather risk my neck
among fellow humans than in the water."

"Maybe you would, but I wouldnt. Straighten out the plane and go on."

"Sorry, Mr Weener; I'm going to have to land here."

And in spite of my protests he did so. I was instantly proved right, for
before we came to a stop we were surrounded by an assortment of filthy
and emaciated men and women bearing scythes and pitchforks, shouting,
yelling and gesticulating, making in fact, such an uproar that no
comprehension was possible. However, there was no misunderstanding their
brusque motions ordering us away from the plane or the threatening
noises which reinforced the command. No sooner had we reluctantly
complied than they proceeded methodically to puncture the tires and
smash the propellers.

My horror at this marooning among the degenerates was not lessened by
their ugly and illdisposed looks and I feared they would not be content
with smashing the plane, but would take out their animus against those
who had not sunk into their own bestial state by destroying us as well.
Since I do not speak much French, I could only say to the man nearest
me, a sinister fellow in a blue smock with a brown stockingcap on his
head, "C'est un disgrace, ca; je demandez le pourquoi."

He looked at me for a baffled moment before calling, "Jean, Jean!"

Jean was even more illfavored, having a scar across his mouth which gave
him an artificial harelip. However, he spoke English of a kind. "Your
airship has been confiscated, citizen."

"What the devil do you mean? That plane is my personal property."

"There is no personal property in the Republic One and Indivisible,"
replied Jean. "Be thankful your life is spared, Citizen Englishman, and
go without further argumentations."

I suppose it was reasonable to take this advice, but I could not resist
informing him, "I am not an Englishman, but an American. We also had a
Republic one and indivisible."

He shook his head. "On your ways, citizen. The Republic does not make
distinctions between one bourgeois and another."

I looked around for the pilot, but he had vanished. Alone, furious at
the act of robbery and not a little apprehensive, I began walking toward
the coast; but I was not steeled against isolation among the barbarians
of the Continent, nor dressed for such an excursion. Between anxiety
lest I run into a less pompous and more bloodthirsty group of
representatives of the Republic One and Indivisible--when it had come
into being, how far its authority extended or how long it lasted I never
learned--and the burning and blistering of my feet in their thinsoled
shoes, I doubt if I was more than a few miles from the airfield and
therefore many from the coast when darkness fell. I kept on, tired,
anxious, hungry, in no better plight than thousands of other wretches
who at the same moment were heading the same way under identical
conditions.

The only advantage of traveling by night was the removal of my fear of
the intentions of men, but nature made up for this by putting her own
obstacles in my way. The hedgerows which had been allowed to grow wild,
the unrepaired roadways, sunken and marked by deep holes and ruts and a
hundred other pitfalls made my progress agonizingly slow.

As the moon rose I had a sudden feeling of being near water, and coming
out from a thicket I was confirmed in this by seeing the light break
into ripples on an uneven surface. But tragically, it was not the
Channel I had come upon, merely a river, too wide to cross, which though
it undoubtedly led to my goal, would increase the length of my journey
by many miles. I'm afraid I gave way to a quite unmanly weakness as I
threw myself upon the hard ground and thought of my miserable fate.

I may have lain there for ten minutes, or twenty. The moon went behind a
cloud, the air grew chilly. I was nerving myself to get up and resume my
journey--though to what purpose I could not conceive for I would be
little better off on a Norman beach than inland--when a timid hand was
put upon my shoulder and someone said questioningly, "Angleterre?"

I sprang up. "England. Oh, yes, England. Can you help me get there?"

The moon stayed covered and I could not see his face in the dark.
"England," he said. "Yes, I'll take you."

I followed him to a little backwater, where was beached a rowboat. Even
by feel, in the blackness, it seemed to me a very small and frail craft
to chance the voyage across the choppy sea, but I had no choice. I
seated myself in the stern while he took the oars, cast off and rowed us
down the river toward the estuary.

I decided he must be one of that company of smugglers who were ferrying
refugees into Britain despite the strictest watch. No doubt he thinks to
make a pretty penny for tonight's work, I thought, but no coastguard
would turn back Albert Weener. I would pay him well for his help, but he
could not blackmail me for fabulous ransom.

Still the moon did not come out. My eyes, accustoming themselves to the
dark, vaguely discerned the shape opposite me and I saw he was a short
man, but beyond this I could not distinguish his features. The river
broadened, the air became salty, the wind rose and soon the little boat
was bobbing up and down in a manner to give discomfort to my stomach.
The water, building terraces and battlements, reflected enough light to
impress me with the diminutiveness of the boat, set in the vastness on
which it floated.

Behind us the French coast was a looming mass, then a thick blob,
finally a thin blur hardly perceptible to strained eyes. I was
thoroughly seasick, retching and vomiting over the narrow freeboard.
Steadily and rhythmically the man rowed with tireless arms, apparently
unaffected by the boat's leaping and dropping in response to the impulse
of the waves and in my intervals of relief from nausea I reflected that
he must have gained plenty of practice, that he was an old hand in
making this trip. It was a peculiar way to gain wealth, I thought,
caught in another spasm of sickness, enriching oneself on the misery of
others.

I vomited and dozed, dozed and vomited. The night was endless, the wind
was bitter. What riches, I wondered, could compensate a man for such
hardships? By the time the wanderers got to the Channel they could not
very well have much left and unless my smuggler were gifted with
secondsight he could not know, judging by the way he had accosted me,
whether he was carrying a man who could pay L10, L100 or L500 for the
accommodation. Well, I philosophized, it takes all kinds to make a
world, and who am I to say this illicit trafficker isnt doing as much
good in his way as I in mine?

