nothing about as yet."

"But what do they want?" she persisted. "What do they intend to do? I
saw those horrible creatures through the magnascope when they came
swarming out of the inside of that thing on the water and I thought, at
first, that they were going to kill you all."

"No, they seem to come in peace," Dirk replied. "Teuxical, their leader,
seems to be gracious and kindly."

       *       *       *       *       *

"We are all doomed," asserted Stanton, "unless something happens. They
can crumble our cities with heat and bury us under the ruins of them."

"Keep your silence!" breathed Dirk, quietly but tensely. "We will find a
way to destroy those creatures if it becomes necessary."

"That man who keeps staring at me, who is he?" asked Inga in a voice
that betrayed her nervousness.

Dirk turned and saw that Zitlan was still standing where he had paused
and that he still was looking with searching eyes in the direction of
the girl.

He returned the insolent gaze of the young Lodorian with an impatient
and threatening stare and the countenance of Zitlan at once became
stern and menacing. He came striding in the direction of Inga, Dirk and
Stanton and paused within a few feet of them, his rapacious eyes still
fixed on the girl.

"My lady," he said, "your beauty pleases me. I have walked on many
worlds but never before have I seen one as lovely as yourself. Of the
spoils of this world, all that I crave possession of is you. When we
return to Lodore," he added with an air of finality, "I will take you
with me and place you with my other women in the Seraglio of the
Stars."

Dirk swiftly stepped close to Zitlan and the latter quickly clasped a
tube that hung at his side, a tube of the sort that the soldiers had
carried.

"Your words and your manner are insolent," asserted Dirk angrily, "and I
warn you now to cease making yourself offensive."

"Dog!" exclaimed Zitlan fiercely, leveling the metal tube, "I'll--"

But the left fist of Dirk cut short his threat as it made a sudden
impact with his chin, and the Lodorian went crashing backward into some
exotic shrubbery with a look of surprise on his countenance.

Then Dirk heard an odd hissing and crackling sound, and he felt himself
becoming dizzy and weak.

Darkness seemed to sweep in upon him; he felt that he was dropping
swiftly through space, and then he lost consciousness.

       *       *       *       *       *

A vague and shadowy figure was standing close by his side and peering
down into his face. After a while he realized that it was Steinholt.

"Steinholt!" he gasped. "Why--why am I here--in Fragoni's? I must have
had a dream--and yet...."

He furrowed his brow in thought and, gradually, he commenced to remember
what had happened.

"It was no dream," said the scientist softly. "Do you remember the
trouble that you had with Zitlan?"

"Yes," replied Dirk. "I remember that he was insolent to Inga and that I
lost my temper and struck him. But what happened to me? I don't recall
that anybody hit me. I did hear sort of a peculiar sound just before I
started to pass out, but--"

"Teuxical took a shot at you," said Steinholt, "and you have been
unconscious for over thirty-six hours."

"Took a shot at me!" exclaimed Dirk. "What did he shoot me with?"

"That is what we all would like to know," said Steinholt. "He leveled
one of those damn tubes at you and pressed a button on it. There was a
hissing sound, a flash of light, and you got groggy, and went out. He
potted Zitlan, too," continued Steinholt, "and he apologized for the
trouble that his son was responsible for. Do you know," he added, "I
sort of like the old man."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lazarre, with a sympathetic smile on his face, entered the room at that
moment and overheard the conversation.

"Old man is right," he remarked, with a little note of awe in his voice.
"Teuxical admits that he is three thousand years old and that he has at
least two thousand more ahead of him. That Lodore must be a queer
world," he commented, shaking his grizzly head.

"It is not so queer when you take everything into consideration," said
Steinholt. "It seems quite natural when Teuxical explains it. Lodore it
seems, is something like a hundred thousand times as big as this
miniature world we live on. It took Lodore infinitely longer to solidify
from a gaseous state than it took this world, and its entire evolution
has been relatively slower than ours. Therefore, according to Teuxical,
the people up there live longer and, incidentally, know infinitely more
than we do."

       *       *       *       *       *

"What time is it now?" asked Dirk, after a moment of thought.

"It is just about twelve o'clock at night," Steinholt informed him.

"Have these Lodorians made any demands yet?" Dirk asked. "Does anybody
know what they are going to do or what they want?"

"They are liable to do almost anything," said Lazarre, "and it looks as
though they will be able to get anything that they want. Teuxical, as I
understand it, just gave you a slight shock with his death-ray device.
If he had pulled the trigger all the way you would have become just a
little pile of dust that the first breeze would have blown away."

"Our own death-rays are somewhat similar," said Steinholt, "but they are
not a hundredth as powerful. And they won't work on the Lodorians,
either," he added, "because those metal sheaths that they wear make them
immune to all kinds of destructive rays."

       *       *       *       *       *

"It appears," remarked Lazarre morosely, "as if this little world of
ours is going to be taken for a ride. And it's too bad, considering that
it's the only world we've got. There has been no formal presentation of
demands yet, but it seems to be sort of understood that the earth is
going to become a tributary of Lodore. It is a good thing," he added,
"that Teuxical, and not Zitlan, is the boss of that outfit. I don't like
the looks of that young fellow. He's only twelve hundred years old and
he is sort of hot-blooded, I guess."

"I was talking with Anteucan," said Steinholt, "and he told me that the
Lodorians usually make heavy levies on worlds which they discover and
dominate. As soon as Teuxical returns to Lodore and announces a new
discovery a fleet of those damned monsters is sent out to mop up the new
planet. That Malfero, who is the emperor of Lodore, is considerable of a
monarch, and it seems that he has a passion for piling up wealth. Gold
and platinum are as precious on Lodore as they are here and he also
likes pretty stones."

"And what is worse," added Steinholt, "is his practice of enslaving
entire populations and making toilers or warriors out of them. Those
soldiers on the ship are not Lodorians. Millions of them were seized on
some planet and converted into troops. It was a strange conversion,
too," said Steinholt with a shudder. "Their brains were operated on and
most of their faculties removed. They have no sense of fear, no
consciences, no power of reasoning. They respond only to certain signals
on a whistle and their only definite and active impulse is that of
murder and destruction."

"There is nothing to do," said Dirk positively, "but to kill all of
these interlopers, if we hope to save our world from being desolated."

       *       *       *       *       *

The three men looked at each other in silence for a moment and then
Dirk, somewhat weakly, rose into a sitting position in the bed which he
had been occupying.

"But how," asked Steinholt, "can we kill them? We might, of course, get
rid of a few of them, but that simply would lead to our destruction by
those who were left."

"There must be some way," asserted Dirk, "and it is up to us to think of
it without delay. If we let those Lodorians get a foothold on the world
all will be lost."

"The old man seems to be reasonable enough," said Lazarre. "He doesn't
seem inclined to be destructive."

"We must not trust him or any of the others," said Dirk imperatively.
"We must rid the earth of every one of them. And the sooner we strike
the better!"

"It had best be soon if it is to be at all," said Steinholt. "Fragoni
has arranged to have Teuxical appear before the Congress, and the
meeting has been called for to-night when, I imagine, certain specific
demands will be made upon us. We all will go to The Hague together on
the ship of the Lodorians."

"And we leave?" questioned Dirk.

"The meeting is set for ten P. M., New York time," said Lazarre. "We
will start east at about four o'clock in the morning, I guess, because
it will only take a minute or so to arrive at our destination."

"Is Fragoni going?" asked Dirk.

"Naturally," replied Lazarre.

"And Inga?"

"I believe so," Lazarre told him. "Fragoni was both afraid to take her
and to leave her behind, but finally he decided that he wanted her with
him in case of trouble."

       *       *       *       *       *

"And are they--the Lodorians--still here?" queried Dirk.

"Yes," responded Lazarre. "Teuxical returned to his ship last night with
Zitlan and his other followers, but they came back late this afternoon,
and they are still here. Zitlan seemed to be all right this afternoon,
too. They must have used some means of bringing him out of the daze that
he was in. We did everything we could to revive you, but none of our
measures were effective."

"I'm all right now," asserted Dirk, as he finished attiring himself. "I
want to see Fragoni at once."

"We'll go out on the terrace then," said Steinholt. "They are all out
there."

Dirk, with his two companions, strolled out through the maze of rooms
and corridors that led to the garden which hung so high above the city
and the Sound below it.

The first thing that Dirk saw, when he passed out onto the terrace, was
the white tunic of Inga, who was leaning against a coping and talking
with Zitlan.

The latter was pointing skyward and, very apparently, he was telling her
of worlds which circled high among the stars.

As if she were suddenly aware of his presence, Inga turned and saw Dirk
and he realized, by the expression on her face, that she was distraught
and nervous. She came toward him quickly, after a few words to Zitlan,
and the face of the latter darkened. There was hatred in his expression
as he stared malevolently at Dirk.

       *       *       *       *       *

Steinholt and Lazarre passed along and joined Fragoni and Teuxical, who
were the center of a group that had formed in another part of the
terrace.

"Oh, Dirk," said Inga, "I am so afraid of that frightful Zitlan. He has
been telling me again that he is going to take me back to his own world
with him and it makes me shudder to think of it. He is so strange and
queer and his eyes are so terrible. He can't be as young as he looks,
because he speaks of years like we speak of minutes. I will die if I
ever find myself in that monster's power! He has been telling me of all
the creatures he has slain on the worlds on which he has landed, and I
tell you, Dirk, that he is cruel and ruthless and horrible."

"He will never have you!" swore Dirk. "And if I hear of any more of his
insolence, I will throw him headlong from this terrace."

"Please, Dirk," she begged, "don't do anything--not yet. He is utterly
unscrupulous, Dirk. He told me that, even now, he is plotting against
some Malfero who rules Lodore like a god, and that he is planning to
seize the throne of the planet. He wants to make me the queen of that
fearful world when he becomes king. He boasted that, if I were on the
throne, millions of people from other worlds would be sacrificed in my
honor in the temples of Lodore." Her voice trembled and her eyes were
terror-stricken as she continued. "They tear out the hearts of living
victims," she whispered, "and burn them on their high and mammoth
pyramids."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rage took possession of Dirk and, casting a glance at Zitlan, he saw
that the Lodorian was smiling insolently at him.

"I'll kill that beast, if it's the last thing that I do!" he exclaimed
to Inga.

"Dirk, Dirk," she implored, "don't even look at him. He is proud and
impetuous, and he will kill you in defiance of his own father."

"We will find some way to rid the world of the scourge that has
descended upon it," asserted Dirk confidently, "and he will die with the
rest of that monstrous crew."

"I am going in, Dirk," Inga said. "Please," she begged, "don't do
anything rash. If--something--should happen to you, I would lose all the
hope that I have and I would, I think, kill myself."

"Don't lose hope, my dear," said Dirk reassuringly. "I believe that I
know of a way to destroy the plague that menaces us."

He pressed her hand and, after she left him, he walked over and joined
the other men on the terrace. Zitlan, coming from the terrace wall,
stretched out in a chair not far from Dirk.

Teuxical regarded the latter with a countenance that was calm and
amicable. "I am sorry, my young friend," he apologized, "that I had to
intervene between you and my son." He paused a moment and sat in
silence, a thoughtful expression on his face. "Ah," he then said, "what
disasters have arisen out of the desire of men for women. In my
wanderings over the starlit worlds, I have seen...." He ceased speaking,
brooded for a moment, and then shook his head slowly. "But you cannot
say that I was not just," he continued, addressing Dirk. "I punished
Zitlan for his presumption. Fragoni tells me that the woman has pledged
herself to you. Let her pledge be kept!" he exclaimed sternly, looking
straight at Zitlan.

"We are the conquerors," asserted the latter boldly, "and to us should
belong the spoils of our daring!"

"Silence!" thundered Teuxical. "My own son, above all others, shall be
obedient to my commands! Or, like others have done, he shall die because
of insubordination!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Zitlan, a defiant expression on his face, ceased to speak, but Dirk
could see that he was livid with suppressed rage.

"As I was saying," Teuxical remarked, turning to Fragoni, "I am getting
old and long have I been weary of conquest. I have seen your world and
it pleases me. It is a tiny and peaceful place, far removed from the
strife and turbulence of the restless centers of the universe. So it is
my will to leave you unscathed and return to Lodore for a brief time to
ask of the mighty Malfero the grant of this little provincial land. And
then, with his permission, I will return here and rule it with wisdom
and benevolence.

"I will bring to you much knowledge, and peace will be to the people of
this earth and peace will be to me."

"It is well," replied Fragoni. "No world, I am certain, could hope for a
wiser and more just ruler than yourself, and our Congress surely will
receive you with acclaim."

Teuxical bowed in recognition of the compliment, and his countenance
indicated that he was gratified.

"We will go, now, back to our vessel," he said, addressing the other
Lodorians. "We will return for you at the appointed hour and conduct you
to our ship," he added, speaking to Fragoni.

