
"I saw a world, a vast world, Goodwin, marching stately through space.
It was no globe--it was a world of many facets, of smooth and polished
planes; a huge blue jewel world, dimly luminous; a crystal world cut
out from Aether. A geometric thought of the Great Cause, of God, if you
will, made material. It was airless, waterless, sunless.

"I seemed to draw closer to it. And then I saw that over every facet
patterns were traced; gigantic symmetrical designs; mathematical
hieroglyphs. In them I read unthinkable calculations, formulas of
interwoven universes, arithmetical progressions of armies of stars,
pandects of the motions of the suns. In the patterns was an appalling
harmony--as though all the laws from those which guide the atom to those
which direct the cosmos were there resolved into completeness--totalled.

"The faceted world was like a cosmic abacist, tallying as it marched the
errors of the infinite.

"The patterned symbols constantly changed form. I drew nearer--the
symbols were alive. They were, in untold numbers--These!"

He pointed to the Thing that bore us.

"I was swept back; looked again upon it from afar. And a fantastic
notion came to me--fantasy it was, of course, yet built I know around
a nucleus of strange truth. It was"--his tone was half whimsical,
half apologetic--"it was that this jeweled world was ridden by some
mathematical god, driving it through space, noting occasionally with
amused tolerance the very bad arithmetic of another Deity the reverse
of mathematical--a more or less haphazard Deity, the god, in fact, of us
and the things we call living.

"It had no mission; it wasn't at all out to do any reforming; it wasn't
in the least concerned in rectifying any of the inaccuracies of the
Other. Only now and then it took note of the deplorable differences
between the worlds it saw and its own impeccably ordered and tidy temple
with its equally tidy servitors.

"Just an itinerant demiurge of supergeometry riding along through space
on its perfectly summed-up world; master of all celestial mechanics;
its people independent of all that complex chemistry and labor for
equilibrium by which we live; needing neither air nor water, heeding
neither heat nor cold; fed with the magnetism of interstellar space and
stopping now and then to banquet off the energy of some great sun."

A thrill of amazement passed through me; fantasy all this might be
but--how, if so, had he gotten that last thought? He had not seen, as
we had, the orgy in the Hall of the Cones, the prodigious feeding of the
Metal Monster upon our sun.

"That passed," he went on, unnoticing. "I saw vast caverns filled with
the Things; working, growing, multiplying. In caverns of our Earth--the
fruit of some unguessed womb? I do not know.

"But in those caverns, under countless orbs of many colored
lights"--again the thrill of amaze shook me--"they grew. It came to me
that they were reaching out toward sunlight and the open. They burst
into it--into yellow, glowing sunlight. Ours? I do not know. And that
picture passed."

His voice deepened.

"There came a third vision. I saw our Earth--I knew, Goodwin,
indisputably, unmistakably that it was our earth. But its rolling
hills were leveled, its mountains were ground and shaped into cold and
polished symbols--geometric, fashioned.

"The seas were fettered, gleaming like immense jewels in patterned
settings of crystal shores. The very Polar ice was chiseled. On the
ordered plains were traced the hieroglyphs of the faceted world. And on
all Earth, Goodwin, there was no green life, no city, no trace of man.
On this Earth that had been ours were only--These.

"Visioning!" he said. "Don't think that I accept them in their entirety.
Part truth, part illusion--the groping mind dazzled with light of
unfamiliar truths and making pictures from half light and half shadow to
help it understand.

"But still--SOME truth in them. How much I do not know. But this I
do know--that last vision was of a cataclysm whose beginnings we face
now--this very instant."

The picture flashed behind my own eyes--of the walled city, its
thronging people, its groves and gardens, its science and its art; of
the Destroying Shapes trampling it flat--and then the dreadful, desolate
mount.

And suddenly I saw that mount as Earth--the city as Earth's cities--its
gardens and groves as Earth's fields and forests--and the vanished
people of Cherkis seemed to expand into all humanity.

"But Martin," I stammered, fighting against choking, intolerable terror,
"there was something else. Something of the Keeper of the Cones and of
our striking through the sun to destroy the Things--something of them
being governed by the same laws that govern us and that if they broke
them they must fall. A hope--a PROMISE, that they would NOT conquer."

"I remember," he replied, "but not clearly. There WAS something--a
shadow upon them, a menace. It was a shadow that seemed to be born of
our own world--some threatening spirit of earth hovering over them.

"I cannot remember; it eludes me. Yet it is because I remember but a
little of it that I say those drums may not be--taps--for us."


As though his words had been a cue, the sounds again burst forth--no
longer muffled nor faint. They roared; they seemed to pelt through air
and drop upon us; they beat about our ears with thunderous tattoo like
covered caverns drummed upon by Titans with trunks of great trees.

The drumming did not die; it grew louder, more vehement; defiant and
deafening. Within the Thing under us a mighty pulse began to throb,
accelerating rapidly to the rhythm of that clamorous roll.

I saw Norhala draw herself up, sharply; stand listening and alert. Under
me, the throbbing turned to an uneasy churning, a ferment.

"Drums?" muttered Drake. "THEY'RE no drums. It's drum fire. It's like a
dozen Marnes, a dozen Verduns. But where could batteries like those come
from?"

"Drums," whispered Ventnor. "They ARE drums. The drums of Destiny!"

Louder the roaring grew. Now it was a tremendous rhythmic cannonading.
The Thing halted. The tower that upheld Ruth and Norhala swayed, bent
over the gap between us, touched the top on which we rode.

Gently the two were plucked up; swiftly they were set beside us.

Came a shrill, keen wailing--louder than ever I had heard before. There
was an earthquake trembling; a maelstrom swirling in which we spun; a
swift sinking.

The Thing split in two. Up before us rose a stupendous, stepped pyramid;
little smaller it was than that which Cheops built to throw its shadows
across holy Nile. Into it streamed, over it clicked, score upon score of
cubes, building it higher and higher. It lurched forward--away from us.

From Norhala came a single cry--resonant, blaring like a wrathful,
golden trumpet.

The speeding shape halted, hesitated; it seemed about to return. Crashed
down upon us an abrupt crescendo of the distant drumming; peremptory,
commanding. The shape darted forward; raced away crushing to straw the
trees beneath it in a full quarter-mile-wide swath.

Great gray eyes wide, filled with incredulous wonder, stunned disbelief,
Norhala for an instant faltered. Then out of her white throat, through
her red lips pelted a tempest of staccato buglings.

Under them what was left of the Thing leaped, tore on. Norhala's flaming
hair crackled and streamed; about her body of milk and pearl--about
Ruth's creamy skin--a radiant nimbus began to glow.

In the distance I saw a sapphire spark; knew it for Norhala's home. Not
far from it now was the rushing pyramid--and it came to me that within
that shape was strangely neither globe nor pyramid. Nor except for
the trembling cubes that made the platform on which we stood, did the
shrunken Thing carrying us hold any unit of the Metal Monster except its
spheres and tetrahedrons--at least within its visible bulk.

The sapphire spark had grown to a glimmering azure marble. Steadily we
gained upon the pyramid. Never for an instant ceased that scourging hail
of notes from Norhala--never for an instant lessened the drumming clamor
that seemed to try to smother them.

The sapphire marble became a sapphire ball, a great globe. I saw the
Thing we sought to join lift itself into a prodigious pillar; the
pillar's base thrust forth stilts; upon them the Thing stepped over the
blue dome of Norhala's house.

The blue bubble was close; now it curved below us. Gently we were lifted
down; were set before its portal. I looked up at the bulk that had
carried us.

I had been right--built it was only of globe and pyramid; an
inconceivably grotesque shape, it hung over us.

Throughout the towering Shape was awful movement; its units writhed
within it. Then it was lost to sight in the mists through which the
Thing we had pursued had gone.

In Norhala's face as she watched it go was a dismay, a poignant
uncertainty, that held in it something indescribably pitiful.

"I am afraid!" I heard her whisper.

She tightened her grasp upon dreaming Ruth; motioned us to go within.
We passed, silently; behind us she came, followed by three of the great
globes, by a pair of her tetrahedrons.

Beside a pile of the silken stuffs she halted. The girl's eyes dwelt
upon hers trustingly.

"I am afraid!" whispered Norhala again. "Afraid--for you!"

Tenderly she looked down upon her, the galaxies of stars in her eyes
soft and tremulous.

"I am afraid, little sister," she whispered for the third time. "Not yet
can you go as I do--among the fires." She hesitated. "Rest here until I
return. I shall leave these to guard you and obey you."

She motioned to the five shapes. They ranged themselves about Ruth.
Norhala kissed her upon both brown eyes.

"Sleep till I return," she murmured.

She swept from the chamber--with never a glance for us three. I heard a
little wailing chorus without, fast dying into silence.

Spheres and pyramids twinkled at us, guarding the silken pile whereon
Ruth lay asleep--like some enchanted princess.

Beat down upon the blue globe like hollow metal worlds, beaten and
shrieking.

The drums of Destiny!

The drums of Doom!

Beating taps for the world of men?




CHAPTER XXVIII. THE FRENZY OF RUTH

For many minutes we stood silent, in the shadowy chamber, listening,
each absorbed in his own thoughts. The thunderous drumming was
continuous; sometimes it faded into a background for clattering storms
as of thousands of machine guns, thousands of riveters at work at once
upon a thousand metal frameworks; sometimes it was nearly submerged
beneath splitting crashes as of meeting meteors of hollow steel.

But always the drumming persisted, rhythmic, thunderous. Through it
all Ruth slept, undisturbed, cheek pillowed in one rounded arm, the two
great pyramids erect behind her, watchful; a globe at her feet, a globe
at her head, the third sphere poised between her and us, and, like the
pyramids--watchful.

What was happening out there--over the edge of the canyon, beyond the
portal of the cliffs, behind the veils, in the Pit of the Metal Monster?
What was the message of the roaring drums? What the rede of their
clamorous runes?

Ventnor stepped by the sentinel globe, bent over the tranced girl.
Sphere nor pointed pair stirred; only they watched him--like a palpable
thing one felt their watchfulness. He listened to her heart, caught up
a wrist, took note of her pulse of life. He drew a deep breath, stood
upright, nodded reassuringly.

Abruptly Drake turned, walked out through the open portal, his strain
and a very deep anxiety written plainly in deep lines that ran from
nostrils to firm young mouth.

"Just went out to look for the pony," he muttered when he returned.
"It's safe. I was afraid it had been stepped on. It's getting dusk.
There's a big light down the canyon--over in the valley."

Ventnor drew back past the globe; rejoined us.

The blue bower trembled under a gust of sound. Ruth stirred; her brows
knitted; her hands clenched. The sphere that stood before her spun on
its axis, swept up to the globe at her head, glided from it to the globe
at her feet--as though whispering. Ruth moaned--her body bent upright,
swayed rigidly. Her eyes opened; they stared through us as though upon
some dreadful vision; and strangely was it as though she were seeing
with another's eyes, were reflecting another's sufferings.

The globes at her feet and at her head swirled out, clustering against
the third sphere--three weird shapes in silent consultation. On
Ventnor's face I saw pity--and a vast relief. With shocked amaze I
realized that Ruth's agony--for in agony she clearly was--was calling
forth in him elation. He spoke--and I knew why.

"Norhala!" he whispered. "She is seeing with Norhala's eyes--feeling
what Norhala feels. It's not going well with--That--out there. If we
dared leave Ruth--could only, see--"

Ruth leaped to her feet; cried out--a golden bugling that might have
been Norhala's own wrathful trumpet notes. Instantly the two pyramids
flamed open, became two gleaming stars that bathed her in violet
radiance. Beneath their upper tips I saw the blasting ovals
glitter--menacingly.

The girl glared at us--more brilliant grew the glittering ovals as
though their lightnings trembled on their lips.

"Ruth!" called Ventnor softly.

A shadow softened the intolerable, hard brilliancy of the brown eyes. In
them something struggled to arise, fighting its way to the surface like
some drowning human thing.

It sank back--upon her face dropped a cloud of heartbreak, appalling
woe; the despair of a soul that, having withdrawn all faith in its
own kind to rest all faith, as it thought, on angels--sees that faith
betrayed.

There stared upon us a stripped spirit, naked and hopeless and terrible.

Despairing, raging, she screamed once more. The central globe swam to
her; it raised her upon its back; glided to the doorway. Upon it she
stood poised like some youthful, anguished Victory--a Victory who faced
and knew she faced destroying defeat; poised upon that enigmatic orb
on bare slender feet, one sweet breast bare, hands upraised, virginally
archaic, nothing about her of the Ruth we knew.

"Ruth!" cried Drake; despair as great as that upon her face was in his
voice. He sprang before the globe that held her; barred its way.

For an instant the Thing paused--and in that instant the human soul of
the girl rushed back.

"No!" she cried. "No!"

A weird call issued from the white lips--stumbling, uncertain, as though
she who sent it forth herself wondered whence it sprang. Abruptly the
angry stars closed. The three globes spun--doubting, puzzled! Again she
called--now a tremulous, halting cadence. She was lifted; dropped gently
to her feet.

For an instant the globes and pyramids whirled and danced before
her--then sped away through the portal.

Ruth swayed, sobbing. Then as though drawn, she ran to the doorway,
fled through it. As one we sprang after her. Rods ahead her white
body flashed, speeding toward the Pit. Like fleet-footed Atalanta she
fled--and far, far behind us was the blue bower, the misty barrier of
the veils close, when Drake with a last desperate burst reached her
side, gripped her. Down the two fell, rolling upon the smooth roadway.
Silently she fought, biting, tearing at Drake, struggling to escape.

"Quick!" gasped Ventnor, stretching out to me an arm. "Cut off the
sleeve. Quick!"

Unquestioningly, I drew my knife, ripped the garment at the shoulder. He
snatched the sleeve, knelt at Ruth's head; rapidly he crumpled an end,
thrust it roughly into her mouth; tied it fast, gagging her.

"Hold her!" he ordered Drake; and with a sob of relief sprang up. The
girl's eyes blazed at him, filled with hate.

"Cut that other sleeve," he said; and when I had done so, he knelt
again, pinned Ruth down with a knee at her throat, turned her over and
knotted her hands behind her. She ceased struggling; gently now he drew
up the curly head; swung her upon her back.

"Hold her feet." He nodded to Drake, who caught the slender bare ankles
in his hands.


She lay there, helpless, being unable to use her hands or feet.

"Too little Ruth, and too much Norhala," said Ventnor, looking up at me.
"If she'd only thought to cry out! She could have brought a regiment of
those Things down to blast us. And would--if she HAD thought. You don't
think THAT is Ruth, do you?"

He pointed to the pallid face glaring at him, the eyes from which cold
fires flamed.

"No, you don't!" He caught Drake by the shoulder, sent him spinning a
dozen feet away. "Damn it, Drake--don't you understand!"

