
For a moment nothing happened, save the hum of the motor. Then a
strange, leafy rustling sounded from the mechanism, and next, without
any warning, a high-pitched voice, nasal and plaintive but distinctly
human, spoke from the big metal disk.

The words were unintelligible. The language was totally unlike anything
ever heard on the earth. And yet, deliberately if somewhat cringingly,
the voice proceeded with what was apparently a recitation. There were
modulations, pauses, sentences; but seemingly the paragraphs were all
short and to the point.

As the thing went on the four men came closer and watched the operation
of the machine. The ribbon unrolled slowly; it was plain that, if the
one topic occupied the whole reel, then it must have the length of an
ordinary chapter. And as the voice continued, certain dramatic qualities
came out and governed the words, utterly incomprehensible though they
were. There was a real thrill to it.

After a while they stopped the thing. "No use listening to this now," as
the doctor said. "We've got to learn a good deal more about these people
before we can guess what it all means."

And yet, although all were very hungry, on Jackson's suggestion they
tried out one of the "records" that was brought from that baffling
anteroom. Smith was very much interested in that unopened door, and Van
Emmon was in the midst of it when Jackson started the motor.

The geologist's words stuck in his throat. The disk was actually shaking
with the vibrations of a most terrific voice. Prodigiously loud and
powerful, its booming, resonant bass smote the ears like the roll of
thunder. It was irresistible in its force, compelling in its assurance,
masterful and strong to an overpowering degree. Involuntarily the men
from the earth stepped back.

On it roared and rumbled, speaking the same language as that of the
other record; but whereas the first speaker merely USED the words, the
last speaker demolished them. One felt that he had extracted every ounce
of power in the language, leaving it weak and flabby, unfit for further
use. He threw out his sentences as though done with them; not boldly,
not defiantly, least of all, tentatively, he spoke with a certainty and
force that came from a knowledge that he could compel, rather than
induce his hearers to believe.

It took a little nerve to shut him off; Van Emmon was the one who did
it. Somehow they all felt immensely relieved when the gigantic voice was
silenced; and at once began discussing the thing with great earnestness.
Jackson was for assuming that the first record was worn and old, the
last one, fresh and new; but after examining both tapes under a glass,
and seeing how equally clear cut and sharp the impressions all were,
they agreed that the extraordinary voice they had heard was practically
true to life.

They tried out the rest of the records in that batch, finding that they
were all by the same speaker. Nowhere among the ribbons brought from the
library was another of his making, although a great number of different
voices was included; neither was there another talker with a fifth the
volume, the resonance, the absolute power of conviction that this
unknown colossus possessed.

Of course this is no place to describe the laborious process of
interpreting these documents, records of a past which was gone before
earth's mankind had even begun. The work involved the study of countless
photos, covering everything from inscriptions to parts of machinery, and
other details which furnished clue after clue to that superancient
language. It was not deciphered, in fact, until several years after the
explorers had submitted their finds to the world's foremost
lexicographers, antiquarians and paleontologists. Even today some of it
is disputed.

But right here is, most emphatically, the place to insert the tale told
by that unparalleled voice. And incredible though it may seem, as judged
by the standards of the peoples of this earth, the account is fairly
proved by the facts uncovered by the expedition. It would be but begging
the question to doubt the genuineness of the thing; and if,
understanding the language, one were to hear the original as it fell,
word for word from the iron mouth of Strokor [Footnote: Translator's
note--In the Mercurian language, stroke means iron, or heart.] the
Great-hearing, one would believe; none could doubt, nor would.

And so it does not do him justice to set it down in ordinary print. One
must imagine the story being related by Stentor himself; must conceive
of each word falling like the blow of a mammoth sledge. The tale was not
told--it was BELLOWED; and this is how it ran:



PART II

THE STORY

I

THE MAN


I am Strokor, son of Strok, the armorer. I am Strokor, a maker of tools
of war; Strokor, the mightiest man in the world; Strokor, whose wisdom
outwitted the hordes of Klow; Strokor, who has never feared, and never
failed. Let him who dares, dispute it. I--I am Strokor!

In my youth I was, as now, the marvel of all who saw. I was ever robust
and daring, and naught but much older, bigger lads could outdo me. I
balked at nothing, be it a game or a battle; it was, and forever shall
be, my chief delight to best all others.

'Twas from my mother that I gained my huge frame and sound heart. In
truth, I am very like her, now that I think upon it. She, too, was
indomitable in battle, and famed for her liking for strife. No doubt
'twas her stalwart figure that caught my father's fancy.

Aye, my mother was a very likely woman, but she boasted no brains. "I
need no cunning," I remember she said; and he who was so unlucky in
battle as to fall into her hands could vouch for the truth of it--as
long as he lived, which would not be long. She was a grand woman, slow
to anger and a match for many a good pair of men. Often, as a lad, have
I carried the marks of her punishment for the most of a year.

And thus it seems that I owe my head to my father. He was a marvelously
clever man, dexterous with hand and brain alike. Moreover, he was no
weakling; perchance I should credit him with some of my agility, for he
was famed as a gymnast, though not a powerful one. 'Twas he who taught
me how to disable my enemy with a mere clutch of the neck at a certain
spot.

But Strok, the armorer, was feared most because of his brain, and his
knack of using his mind to the undoing of others. And he taught me all
that he knew; taught me all that he had learned in a lifetime of
fighting for the emperor, of mending the complicated machines in the
armory, of contact with the chemists who wrought the secret alloy, and
the chiefs who led the army.

Some of this he taught me when I was not yet a man. Why he should have
done so, I know not, save that he seemed to value my affection, and
liked not my mother's demands that I heed her call, not his. At all
events, I oft found his shop a place of refuge from her wrath; and I
early came to value his teachings.

When I became a man he abruptly ended the practice. I think he saw that
I was become as dexterous as he with the tools of the craft, and he
feared lest I know more than he. Well he might; the day I realized this
I laughed long and loud. And from that time forth he taught me, not
because he chose to, but because I bent a chisel in my bare hands,
before his eyes, and told him his place.

Many times he strove to trick me, and more than once he all but caught
me in some trap. He was a crafty man, and relied not upon brawn, but
upon wits. Yet I was ever on the watch, and I but learned the more from
him.

"Ye are very kind," I mocked him one morning. When I had taken my seat a
huge weight had dropped from above and crushed my stool to splinters,
much as it would have crushed my skull had I not leaped instantly aside.
"Ye are kinder than most fathers, who teach their sons nothing at all."

He foamed at his mouth in his rage and discomfiture. "Insolent whelp!"
he snarled. "Thou art quick as a cat on thy feet!"

But I was not to be appeased by words. I smote him on the chest with my
bare hand, so that he fell on the far side of the room. "Let that be a
warning," I told him, when he had recovered, some time later. "If ye
have any more tricks, try them for, not on, me." Which I claim to be a
neat twist of words.

It was not long after that when I saw a change in my father. He no
longer tried to snare me; instead, he began, of his own free will, to
train my mind to other than warlike things. At first, I was suspicious
enough. I looked for new traps, and watched all the closer. I told him
that his next try would surely be his last, and I meant it.

But the time came when I saw that my father was reconciled to his
master. I saw that he genuinely admitted my prowess; and where he
formerly envied me, he now took great pride in all I accomplished, and
claimed that it was but his own brains acting through my body.

I let him indulge in the conceit. I grudged it not to him, so long as he
taught me. In truth, he was so eager to add to my store of facts, so
intent upon filling my head with what filled his, that at times I was
fairly compelled to stop him, lest I tire.

My mother opposed all this. "The lad needs none of thy wiles," she
gibed. "He is no stripling; he is a man's man, and a fit son of his
mother."

"Aye," quoth my father slyly. "He has thy muscle and thy courage. Thank
Jon, he hath not thy empty head!"

Whereat she flew at him. Had she caught him, she would have destroyed
him, such was her rage; and afterwards she would have mourned her folly
and mayhap have injured herself; for she loved him greatly. But he
stepped aside just in the nick of time, and she crashed into the wall
behind him with such force that she was senseless for a time. I remember
it well.

And yet, to give credit where credit is due, I must admit that I owe a
great deal to that gray-beard, Maka, the star-gazer. But for him,
perchance, the name of Strokor would mean but little, for 'twas he who
gave me ambition.

Truly it was an uncommon affair, my first meeting with him. Now that I
shake my memory for it, it seems that something else of like consequence
came to pass on the same occasion. Curious; but I have not thought on it
for many days.

Yes, it is true; I met Maka on the very morn that I first laid eyes on
the girl Ave.

I was returning from the northland at the time. A rumor had come down to
Vlama that one of the people in the snow country had seen a lone
specimen of the mulikka. Now these were but a myth. No man living
remembers when the carvings on the House of Learning were made, and all
the wise men say that it hath been ages since any being other than man
roamed the world. Yet, I was young. I determined to search for the thing
anyhow; and 'twas only after wasting many days in the snow that I cursed
my luck, and turned back.

I was afoot, for the going was too rough for my chariot. I had not yet
quit the wilderness before, from a height, I spied a group of people
ascending from the valley. Knowing not whether they be friends or foes,
I hid beside the path up which they must come; for I was weary and
wanting no strife.

Yet I became alert enough when the three--they were two ditch-tenders,
one old, one young, and a girl--came within earshot. For they were
quarreling. It seemed that the young man, who was plainly eager to gain
the girl, had fouled in a try to force her favor. The older man chided
him hotly.

And just when they came opposite my rock, the younger man, whose passion
had got the better of him, suddenly tripped the older, so that he fell
upon the ledge and would have fallen to his death on the rocks below had
not the girl, crying out in her terror, leaped forward and caught his
hand.

At once the ditch-tender took the lass about the waist, and strove to
pull her away. For a moment she held fast, and in that moment I,
Strokor, stood forth from behind the rock.

Now, be it known that I am no champion of weaklings. I have no liking
for the troubles of others; enough of my own, say I. I was but angered
that the ditch-tender should have done the trick so clumsily, and upon
an old man, at that. I cared not for the gray beard, nor what became of
the chit. I clapped the trickster upon the shoulder and spun him about.

"Ye clumsy coward!" I jeered. "Have ye had no practice that ye should
trip the old one no better than that?"

"Who are ye?" he stuttered, like the coward he was. I laughed and helped
the chit drag Maka--for it was he--up to safety.

"I am a far better man than ye," I said, not caring to give my name.
"And I can show ye how the thing should be done. Come; at me, if ye are
a man!"

At that he dashed upon me; and such was his fear of ridicule--for the
girl was laughing him to scorn now--he put up a fair, stiff fight. But I
forgot my weariness when he foully clotted me on the head with a stone.
I drove at him with all the speed and suddenness my father had taught
me, caught the fellow by the ankle, and brought him down atop me.

The rest was easy. I bent my knee under his middle, and tossed him high.
In a flash I was upon my feet, and caught him from behind. And in
another second I had rushed him to the cliff; and when he turned to save
himself, I tripped him as neatly as father himself could have done it,
so that the fellow will guard the ditch no more, save in the caverns of
Hofe.

I laughed and picked up my pack. My head hurt a bit from the fellow's
blow, but a little water would do for that. I started to go.

"Ye are a brave man!" cried the girl. I turned carelessly, and then,
quite for the first time, I had a real look at her.

She was in no way like any woman I had seen. All of them had been much
like the men: brawny and close-knit, as well fitted for their work as
are men for war. But this chit was all but slender; not skinny, but
prettily rounded out, and soft like. I cannot say that I admired her at
first glance; she seemed fit only to look at, not to live. I was minded
of some of the ancient carvings, which show delicate, lightly built
animals that have long since been killed off; graceful trifles that
rested the eye.

As for the old man: "Aye, thou art brave, and wondrous strong, my lad,"
said he, still a bit shaky from his close call. I was pleased with the
acknowledgment, and turned back.

"It was nothing," I told them; and I recounted some of my exploits,
notably one in which I routed a raiding party of men from Klow, six in
all, carrying in two alive on my shoulders. "I am the son of Strok, the
armorer."

"Ye are Strokor!" marveled the girl, staring at me as though I were a
god. Then she threw back her head and stepped close.

"I am Ave. This is Maka; he is my uncle, but best known as a star-gazer.
My father was Durok, the engine-maker." She watched my face.

"Durok?" I knew him well. My father had said that he was quite as brainy
as himself. "He were a fine man, Ave."

"Aye," said she proudly. She stepped closer; I could not but see how
like him she was, though a woman. And next second she laid a hand on my
arm.

"I am yet a free woman, Strokor. Hast thou picked thy mate?" And her
cheeks flamed.

Now, 'twas not my first experience of the kind. Many women had looked
like that at me before. But I had always been a man's man, and had ever
heeded my father's warning to have naught whatever to do with women.
"They are the worst trick of all," he told me; and I had never forgot.
Belike I owe much of my power to just this.

But Ave had acted too quickly for me to get away. I laughed again, and
shook her off.

"I will have naught to do with ye," I told her, civilly enough. "When I
am ready to take a woman, I shall take her; not before."

At that the blood left her face; she stood very straight, and her eyes
flashed dangerously. Were she a man I should have stood on my guard. But
she made no move; only the softness in her eyes gave way to such a
savage look that I was filled with amaze. And thus I left them; the old
man calling down the blessing of Jon upon me for having saved his life,
and the chit glaring after me as though no curses would suffice.

A right queer matter, I thought at the time. I guessed not what would
come of it; not then.



II

THE VISION


'Twas a fortnight later, more or less, when next I saw Maka. I was
lumbering along in my chariot, feeling most uncomfortable under the eyes
of my friends; for one foot of my machine had a loose link, and 'twas
flapping absurdly. And I liked it none too well when Maka stopped his
own rattletrap in front of mine, and came running to my window. Next
moment I forgot his impertinence.

"Strokor," he whispered, his face alive with excitement, "thou art a
brave lad, and didst save my life. Now, know you that a party of the men
of Klow have secreted themselves under the stairway behind the emperor's
throne. They have killed the guards, and will of a certainty kill the
emperor, too!"

"'Twould serve the dolt right," I replied, for I really cared but
little. "But why have ye come to me, old man? I am but a lieutenant in
the armory; I am not the captain of the palace guard."

"Because," he answered, gazing at me very pleasingly, "thou couldst
dispose of the whole party single handed--there are but four--and gain
much glory for thyself."

"By Jon!" I swore, vastly delighted; and without stopping to ask Maka
whence he had got his knowledge, I went at once to the spot. However,
when I got back, I sought the star-gazer--I ought to mention that I had
no trouble with the louts, and that the emperor himself saw me finishing
off the last of them--I sought the star-gazer and demanded how he had
known.

"Hast ever heard of Edam?" he inquired in return.

"Edam?" I had not; the name was strange to me. "Who is he?"

"A man as young as thyself, but a mere stripling," quoth Maka. "He was a
pupil of mine when I taught in the House of Learning. Of late he has
turned to prophecy; and it is fair remarkable how well the lad doth
guess. At all events, 'twas he, Strokor, who told me of the plot. He saw
it in a dream."

"Then Edam must yet be in Vlama," said I, "if he were able to tell ye.
Canst bring him to me? I would know him."

And so it came about that, on the eve of that same day, Maka brought
Edam to my house. I remember it well; for 'twas the same day that the
emperor, in gratitude of my little service in the anteroom, had relieved
me from my post in the armory and made me captain of the palace guard. I
was thus become the youngest captain, also the biggest and strongest;
and, as will soon appear, by far the longest-headed.

I was in high good humor, and had decided to celebrate with a feast. So
when my two callers arrived, I sat them down before a meal such as cost
a tenth [Footnote: Since Mercury had no moon, its people never coined a
word to correspond with our "month," and for the same reason they never
had a week. Their time was reckoned only in days, years, and fractions
of the two.] of my year's salary.

I served not only the usual products of the field, variously prepared,
but as a special gift from the emperor's own stock, a piece of mulikka
meat, frozen, which had been found in the northland by some geologists a
few years aback. It had been kept in the palace icing-room all this
time, and was in prime condition. Maka and I enjoyed it overmuch, but
Edam would touch it not.

He was a slightly built lad, not at all the sturdy man that I am, but of
less than half the weight. His head, too, was unlike mine; his forehead
was wide as well as tall, and his eyes were mild as a slave's.

"Ye are very young to be a prophet," I said to him, after we were
filled, and the slaves had cleared away our litter. "Tell me: hast
foretold anything else that has come to pass?"

"Aye," he replied, not at all boldly, but what some call modestly. "I
prophesied the armistice which now stands between our empire and
Klow's."

"Is this true?" I demanded of Maka. The old man bowed his head gravely
and looked upon the young man with far more respect than I felt. He
added:

"Tell Strokor the dream thou hadst two nights ago, Edam. It were a right
strange thing, whether true or no."

The stripling shifted his weight on his stool, and moved the bowl
closer. Then he thrust his pipe deep into it, and let the liquid flow
slowly out his nostrils. [Footnote: A curious custom among the
Mercurians, who had no tobacco. There is no other way to explain some of
the carvings. Doubtless the liquid was sweet-smelling, and perhaps
slightly narcotic.]

"I saw this," he began, "immediately before rising, and after a very
light supper; so I know that it was a vision from Jon, and not of my own
making.

"I was standing upon the summit of a mountain, and gazing down upon a
very large, fertile valley. It was heavily wooded, dark green and
inviting. But what first drew my attention was a great number of animals
moving about IN THE AIR. They were passing strange affairs, some large,
some small, variously colored, and all covered with the same sort of
fur, quite unlike any hair I have ever seen."

"In the air?" I echoed, recovering from my astonishment. Then I laughed
mightily. "Man, ye must be crazy! There is no animal can live in the
air! Ye must mean in the water or on land."

"Nay," interposed the star-gazer. "Thou hast never studied the stars,
Strokor, or thou wouldst know that there be a number of them which,
through the enlarging tube, show themselves to be round worlds, like
unto our own.

"And it doth further appear that these other worlds also have air like
this we breathe, and that some have less, while others have even more.
From what Edam has told me," finished the old man, "I judge that his
vision took place on Jeos, [Footnote: The Mercurian word for earth.] a
world much larger than ours according to my calculations, and doubtless
having enough air to permit very light creatures to move about in it."

"Go on," said I to Edam, good-humoredly. "I be ever willing to believe
anything strange when my stomach is full."

The dreamer had taken no offense. "Then I bent my gaze closer, as I am
always able, in visions. And I saw that the greenery was most remarkably
dense, tangled and luxuriant to a degree not ever seen here. And moving
about in it was the most extraordinary collection of beings that I have
ever laid these eyes upon.

"There were some huge creatures, quite as tall as thy house, Strokor,
with legs as big around as that huge chest of thine. They had tails, as
had our ancient mulikka, save that these were terrific things, as long
and as big as the trunk of a large tree. I know not their names.
[Footnote: Probably the dinosaur.]

"And then, at the other extreme, was a tiny creature of the air, which
moved with a musical hum. It could have hid under thy finger-nail,
Strokor, yet it had a tiny sharp-pointed bill, with which it stung most
aggravatingly. And between these two there were any number of creatures
of varying size and shape.

"But nowhere was there a sign of a man. True, there was one hairy,
grotesque creature which hung by its hands and feet from the tree-tops,
very like thee in some way, Strokor; but its face and head were those of
a brainless beast, not of a man. Nowhere was a creature like me or thee.

"And the most curious thing was this: Although there were ten times as
many of these creatures, big and little, to the same space as on our
world, yet there was no great amount of strife. In truth, there is far
more combat and destruction among we men than among the beasts.

"And," he spoke most earnestly, as though he would not care to be
disbelieved, "I saw fathers fight to protect their young!"

I near fell from my stool in my amaze. Never in all my life had I heard
a thing so far from the fact. "What!" I shouted. "Ye sit there like a
sane man, and tell me ye saw fathers fight for their young?"

He nodded his head, still very gravely. I fell silent for want of words,
but Maka put in a thought. "It would appear, Strokor, that it be not so
much of an effort for beings to live, there on Jeos, as here. Perchance
'tis the greater amount of vegetation; at all accounts, the animals need
not prey upon one another so generally; and that, then, would explain
why some have energy enough to waste in the care of their young."

"I can understand," I said, very slowly. "I can understand why a mother
will fight for her babes; 'tis reasonable enough, no doubt. But as for
fathers doing the same--Edam, dost mean to say that ALL creatures on
Jeos do this?"

"Nay; only some. It may be that fewer than half of the varieties have
the custom. Howbeit, 'tis a beautiful one. When the vision ended I was
right loath to go."

"Faugh!" I spat upon the ground. "Such softness makes me ill! I be glad
I were born in a man's world, where I can take a man's chances. I want
no favoring. If I am strong enough to live, I live; if not, I die. What
more can I ask?"

"Aye, my lad!" said Maka approvingly. "This be a world for the strong.
There is no room here for others; there is scarce enough food for those
who, thanks to their strength, do survive." He slipped the gold band
from off his wrist, and held it up for Jon to see. "Here, Strokor, a
pledge! A pledge to--the survival of the fittest!"

"A neat, neat wording!" I roared, as I took the pledge with him. Then we
both stopped short. Edam had not joined us. "Edam, my lad," spake the
old man, "ye will take the pledge with us?"

The stripling's eyes were troubled. Well he knew that, once he refused
such an act, he were no longer welcome in my house, nor in Maka's. But
when he looked around it were bravely enough.

"Men, I have neither the strength of the one nor the brains of the other
of ye. I am but a watchmaker; I live because of my skill with the little
wheels.

"I have no quarrel with either of ye." He got to his feet, and started
to the door. "But I cannot take the pledge with ye.

"I have seen a wondrous thing, and I love it. And, though I know not
why--I feel that Jon has willed it for Jeos to see a new race of men, a
race even better than ours."

I leaped to my feet. "Better than ours! Mean ye to say, stripling, that
there can be a better man than Strokor?"

I full expected him to shrink from me in fear; I was able to crush him
with one blow. But he stood his ground; nay, stepped forward and laid a
hand easily upon my shoulder.

"Strokor--ye are more than a man; ye are two men in one. There is no
finer--I say it fair. And yet, I doubt not that there can be, and will
be, a better!"

And with that such a curious expression came into his face, such a glow
of some strange land of warmth, that I let my hand drop and suffered him
to depart in peace--such was my wonder.

Besides, any miserable lout could have destroyed the lad.

Maka sat deep in thought for a time, and when he did speak he made no
mention of the lad who had just quit us. Instead, he looked me over,
long and earnestly, and at the end he shook his head sorrowfully and
sighed:

"Thou art the sort of a son I would have had, Strokor, given the wits of
thy father to hold a woman like thy mother. And thou didst save my
life."

He mused a little longer, then roused himself and spake sharply: "Thou
art a vain man, Strokor!"

"Aye," I agreed, willingly enough. "And none has better cause than I!"

He would not acknowledge the quip. "Thou hast everything needful to
tickle thy vanity. Thou hast the envy of those who note thy strength,
the praise of them who love thy courage, and the respect of they who
value thy brains. All these thou hast--and yet ye have not that which is
best!"

I thought swiftly and turned on him with a frown: "Mean ye that I am not
handsome enough?"

"Nay, Strokor," quoth the star-gazer. "There be none handsomer in this
world, no matter what the standard of any other, such as Edam's Jeos.

"It is not that. It is, that thou hast no ambition."

I considered this deeply. At first thought it was not true; had I not
always made it a point to best my opponent? From my youth it had been
ever my custom to succeed where bigger bodies and older minds had
failed. Was not this ambition?

But before I disputed the point with Maka, I saw what he meant. I had no
FINAL ambition, no ultimate goal for which to strive. I had been content
from year to year to outdo each rival as he came before me; and now,
with mind and body alike in the pink of condition, I was come to the
place where none durst stand before me.
