gorgeous wonders of the landscape.

It was a staggering thought.  I could not but dwell upon it often as I
made my lonely way through this virgin world.  Then, quite suddenly,
one day I stepped out of the peace of manless primality into the
presence of man--and peace was gone.

It happened thus:

I had been following a ravine downward out of a chain of lofty hills
and had paused at its mouth to view the lovely little valley that lay
before me.  At one side was tangled wood, while straight ahead a river
wound peacefully along parallel to the cliffs in which the hills
terminated at the valley's edge.

Presently, as I stood enjoying the lovely scene, as insatiate for
Nature's wonders as if I had not looked upon similar landscapes
countless times, a sound of shouting broke from the direction of the
woods.  That the harsh, discordant notes rose from the throats of men I
could not doubt.

I slipped behind a large boulder near the mouth of the ravine and
waited.  I could hear the crashing of underbrush in the forest, and I
guessed that whoever came came quickly--pursued and pursuers, doubtless.

In a short time some hunted animal would break into view, and a moment
later a score of half-naked savages would come leaping after with
spears or club or great stone-knives.

I had seen the thing so many times during my life within Pellucidar
that I felt that I could anticipate to a nicety precisely what I was
about to witness.  I hoped that the hunters would prove friendly and be
able to direct me toward Sari.

Even as I was thinking these thoughts the quarry emerged from the
forest.  But it was no terrified four-footed beast.  Instead, what I
saw was an old man--a terrified old man!

Staggering feebly and hopelessly from what must have been some very
terrible fate, if one could judge from the horrified expressions he
continually cast behind him toward the wood, he came stumbling on in my
direction.

He had covered but a short distance from the forest when I beheld the
first of his pursuers--a Sagoth, one of those grim and terrible
gorilla-men who guard the mighty Mahars in their buried cities, faring
forth from time to time upon slave-raiding or punitive expeditions
against the human race of Pellucidar, of whom the dominant race of the
inner world think as we think of the bison or the wild sheep of our own
world.

Close behind the foremost Sagoth came others until a full dozen raced,
shouting after the terror-stricken old man.  They would be upon him
shortly, that was plain.

One of them was rapidly overhauling him, his back-thrown spear-arm
testifying to his purpose.

And then, quite with the suddenness of an unexpected blow, I realized a
past familiarity with the gait and carriage of the fugitive.

Simultaneously there swept over me the staggering fact that the old man
was--PERRY! That he was about to die before my very eyes with no hope
that I could reach him in time to avert the awful catastrophe--for to
me it meant a real catastrophe!

Perry was my best friend.

Dian, of course, I looked upon as more than friend.  She was my mate--a
part of me.

I had entirely forgotten the rifle in my hand and the revolvers at my
belt; one does not readily synchronize his thoughts with the stone age
and the twentieth century simultaneously.

Now from past habit I still thought in the stone age, and in my
thoughts of the stone age there were no thoughts of firearms.

The fellow was almost upon Perry when the feel of the gun in my hand
awoke me from the lethargy of terror that had gripped me.  From behind
my boulder I threw up the heavy express rifle--a mighty engine of
destruction that might bring down a cave bear or a mammoth at a single
shot--and let drive at the Sagoth's broad, hairy breast.

At the sound of the shot he stopped stock-still.  His spear dropped
from his hand.

Then he lunged forward upon his face.

The effect upon the others was little less remarkable.  Perry alone
could have possibly guessed the meaning of the loud report or explained
its connection with the sudden collapse of the Sagoth.  The other
gorilla-men halted for but an instant.  Then with renewed shrieks of
rage they sprang forward to finish Perry.

At the same time I stepped from behind my boulder, drawing one of my
revolvers that I might conserve the more precious ammunition of the
express rifle.  Quickly I fired again with the lesser weapon.

Then it was that all eyes were directed toward me.  Another Sagoth fell
to the bullet from the revolver; but it did not stop his companions.
They were out for revenge as well as blood now, and they meant to have
both.

As I ran forward toward Perry I fired four more shots, dropping three
of our antagonists.  Then at last the remaining seven wavered.  It was
too much for them, this roaring death that leaped, invisible, upon them
from a great distance.

As they hesitated I reached Perry's side.  I have never seen such an
expression upon any man's face as that upon Perry's when he recognized
me.  I have no words wherewith to describe it.  There was not time to
talk then--scarce for a greeting.  I thrust the full, loaded revolver
into his hand, fired the last shot in my own, and reloaded.  There were
but six Sagoths left then.

They started toward us once more, though I could see that they were
terrified probably as much by the noise of the guns as by their
effects.  They never reached us.  Half-way the three that remained
turned and fled, and we let them go.

The last we saw of them they were disappearing into the tangled
undergrowth of the forest.  And then Perry turned and threw his arms
about my neck and, burying his old face upon my shoulder, wept like a
child.



CHAPTER II

TRAVELING WITH TERROR

We made camp there beside the peaceful river.  There Perry told me all
that had befallen him since I had departed for the outer crust.

It seemed that Hooja had made it appear that I had intentionally left
Dian behind, and that I did not purpose ever returning to Pellucidar.
He told them that I was of another world and that I had tired of this
and of its inhabitants.

To Dian he had explained that I had a mate in the world to which I was
returning; that I had never intended taking Dian the Beautiful back
with me; and that she had seen the last of me.

Shortly afterward Dian had disappeared from the camp, nor had Perry
seen or heard aught of her since.

He had no conception of the time that had elapsed since I had departed,
but guessed that many years had dragged their slow way into the past.

Hooja, too, had disappeared very soon after Dian had left.  The
Sarians, under Ghak the Hairy One, and the Amozites under Dacor the
Strong One, Dian's brother, had fallen out over my supposed defection,
for Ghak would not believe that I had thus treacherously deceived and
deserted them.

The result had been that these two powerful tribes had fallen upon one
another with the new weapons that Perry and I had taught them to make
and to use.  Other tribes of the new federation took sides with the
original disputants or set up petty revolutions of their own.

The result was the total demolition of the work we had so well started.

Taking advantage of the tribal war, the Mahars had gathered their
Sagoths in force and fallen upon one tribe after another in rapid
succession, wreaking awful havoc among them and reducing them for the
most part to as pitiable a state of terror as that from which we had
raised them.

Alone of all the once-mighty federation the Sarians and the Amozites
with a few other tribes continued to maintain their defiance of the
Mahars; but these tribes were still divided among themselves, nor had
it seemed at all probable to Perry when he had last been among them
that any attempt at re-amalgamation would be made.

"And thus, your majesty," he concluded, "has faded back into the
oblivion of the Stone Age our wondrous dream and with it has gone the
First Empire of Pellucidar."

We both had to smile at the use of my royal title, yet I was indeed
still "Emperor of Pellucidar," and some day I meant to rebuild what the
vile act of the treacherous Hooja had torn down.

But first I would find my empress.  To me she was worth forty empires.

"Have you no clue as to the whereabouts of Dian?" I asked.

"None whatever," replied Perry.  "It was in search of her that I came
to the pretty pass in which you discovered me, and from which, David,
you saved me.

"I knew perfectly well that you had not intentionally deserted either
Dian or Pellucidar.  I guessed that in some way Hooja the Sly One was
at the bottom of the matter, and I determined to go to Amoz, where I
guessed that Dian might come to the protection of her brother, and do
my utmost to convince her, and through her Dacor the Strong One, that
we had all been victims of a treacherous plot to which you were no
party.

"I came to Amoz after a most trying and terrible journey, only to find
that Dian was not among her brother's people and that they knew naught
of her whereabouts.

"Dacor, I am sure, wanted to be fair and just, but so great were his
grief and anger over the disappearance of his sister that he could not
listen to reason, but kept repeating time and again that only your
return to Pellucidar could prove the honesty of your intentions.

"Then came a stranger from another tribe, sent I am sure at the
instigation of Hooja.  He so turned the Amozites against me that I was
forced to flee their country to escape assassination.

"In attempting to return to Sari I became lost, and then the Sagoths
discovered me.  For a long time I eluded them, hiding in caves and
wading in rivers to throw them off my trail.

"I lived on nuts and fruits and the edible roots that chance threw in
my way.

"I traveled on and on, in what directions I could not even guess; and
at last I could elude them no longer and the end came as I had long
foreseen that it would come, except that I had not foreseen that you
would be there to save me."

We rested in our camp until Perry had regained sufficient strength to
travel again.  We planned much, rebuilding all our shattered
air-castles; but above all we planned most to find Dian.

I could not believe that she was dead, yet where she might be in this
savage world, and under what frightful conditions she might be living,
I could not guess.

When Perry was rested we returned to the prospector, where he fitted
himself out fully like a civilized human being--under-clothing, socks,
shoes, khaki jacket and breeches and good, substantial puttees.

When I had come upon him he was clothed in rough sadak sandals, a
gee-string and a tunic fashioned from the shaggy hide of a thag.  Now
he wore real clothing again for the first time since the ape-folk had
stripped us of our apparel that long-gone day that had witnessed our
advent within Pellucidar.

With a bandoleer of cartridges across his shoulder, two six-shooters at
his hips, and a rifle in his hand he was a much rejuvenated Perry.

Indeed he was quite a different person altogether from the rather shaky
old man who had entered the prospector with me ten or eleven years
before, for the trial trip that had plunged us into such wondrous
adventures and into such a strange and hitherto undreamed-of-world.

Now he was straight and active.  His muscles, almost atrophied from
disuse in his former life, had filled out.

He was still an old man of course, but instead of appearing ten years
older than he really was, as he had when we left the outer world, he
now appeared about ten years younger.  The wild, free life of
Pellucidar had worked wonders for him.

Well, it must need have done so or killed him, for a man of Perry's
former physical condition could not long have survived the dangers and
rigors of the primitive life of the inner world.

Perry had been greatly interested in my map and in the "royal
observatory" at Greenwich.  By use of the pedometers we had retraced
our way to the prospector with ease and accuracy.

Now that we were ready to set out again we decided to follow a
different route on the chance that it might lead us into more familiar
territory.

I shall not weary you with a repetition of the countless adventures of
our long search.  Encounters with wild beasts of gigantic size were of
almost daily occurrence; but with our deadly express rifles we ran
comparatively little risk when one recalls that previously we had both
traversed this world of frightful dangers inadequately armed with
crude, primitive weapons and all but naked.

We ate and slept many times--so many that we lost count--and so I do
not know how long we roamed, though our map shows the distances and
directions quite accurately.  We must have covered a great many
thousand square miles of territory, and yet we had seen nothing in the
way of a familiar landmark, when from the heights of a mountain-range
we were crossing I descried far in the distance great masses of
billowing clouds.

Now clouds are practically unknown in the skies of Pellucidar.  The
moment that my eyes rested upon them my heart leaped.  I seized Perry's
arm and, pointing toward the horizonless distance, shouted:

"The Mountains of the Clouds!"

"They lie close to Phutra, and the country of our worst enemies, the
Mahars," Perry remonstrated.

"I know it," I replied, "but they give us a starting-point from which
to prosecute our search intelligently.  They are at least a familiar
landmark.

"They tell us that we are upon the right trail and not wandering far in
the wrong direction.

"Furthermore, close to the Mountains of the Clouds dwells a good
friend, Ja the Mezop.  You did not know him, but you know all that he
did for me and all that he will gladly do to aid me.

"At least he can direct us upon the right direction toward Sari."

"The Mountains of the Clouds constitute a mighty range," replied Perry.
"They must cover an enormous territory.  How are you to find your
friend in all the great country that is visible from their rugged
flanks?"

"Easily," I answered him, "for Ja gave me minute directions.  I recall
almost his exact words:

"'You need merely come to the foot of the highest peak of the Mountains
of the Clouds.  There you will find a river that flows into the Lural
Az.

"'Directly opposite the mouth of the river you will see three large
islands far out--so far that they are barely discernible.  The one to
the extreme left as you face them from the mouth of the river is
Anoroc, where I rule the tribe of Anoroc.'"

And so we hastened onward toward the great cloud-mass that was to be
our guide for several weary marches.  At last we came close to the
towering crags, Alp-like in their grandeur.

Rising nobly among its noble fellows, one stupendous peak reared its
giant head thousands of feet above the others.  It was he whom we
sought; but at its foot no river wound down toward any sea.

"It must rise from the opposite side," suggested Perry, casting a
rueful glance at the forbidding heights that barred our further
progress.  "We cannot endure the arctic cold of those high flung
passes, and to traverse the endless miles about this interminable range
might require a year or more.  The land we seek must lie upon the
