years and then disappear?"

"We are told that we shall live again."

"Yes, Maskull?"

"Perhaps in Muspel," he added thoughtfully.

"What kind of life will that be?"

"Surely we shall meet again. Love is too wonderful and mysterious a
thing to remain uncompleted."

She gave a slight shiver, and turned away from him. "This dream is
untrue. Love is completed here."

"How can that be, when sooner or later it is brutally interrupted by
Fate?"

"It is completed by anguish.... Oh, why must it always be enjoyment
for us? Can't we suffer--can't we go on suffering, forever and ever?
Maskull, until love crushes our spirit, finally and without remedy, we
don't begin to feel ourselves."

Maskull gazed at her with a troubled expression. "Can the memory of love
be worth more than its presence and reality?"

"You don't understand. Those pangs are more precious than all the rest
beside." She caught at him. "Oh, if you could only see inside my mind,
Maskull! You would see strange things.... I can't explain. It is all
confused, even to myself.... This love is quite different from what I
thought."

He sighed again. "Love is a strong drink. Perhaps it is too strong for
human beings. And I think that it overtures our reason in different
ways."

They remained sitting side by side, staring straight before them with
unseeing eyes.

"It doesn't matter," said Sullenbode at last, with a smile, getting up.
"Soon it will be ended, one way or another. Come, let us be off!"

Maskull too got up.

"Where's Corpang?" he asked listlessly.

They both looked across the ridge in the direction of Adage. At the
point where they stood it was nearly a mile wide. It sloped perceptibly
toward the southern edge, giving all the earth the appearance of a heavy
list. Toward the west the ground continued level for a thousand yards,
but then a high, sloping, grassy hill went right across the ridge from
side to side, like a vast billow on the verge of breaking. It shut out
all further view beyond. The whole crest of this hill, from one end to
the other, was crowned by a long row of enormous stone posts, shining
brightly in the moonlight against a background of dark sky. There were
about thirty in all, and they were placed at such regular intervals that
there was little doubt that they had been set there by human hands. Some
were perpendicular, but others dipped so much that an aspect of extreme
antiquity was given to the entire colonnade. Corpang was seen climbing
the hill, not far from the top.

"He wishes to arrive," said Maskull, watching the energetic ascent with
a rather cynical smile.

"The heavens won't open for Corpang," returned Sullenbode. "He need not
be in such a hurry.... What do these pillars seem like to you?"

"They might be the entrance to some mighty temple. Who can have planted
them there?"

She did not answer. They watched Corpang gain the summit of the hill,
and disappear through the line of posts.

Maskull turned again to Sullenbode. "Now we two are alone in a lonely
world."

She regarded him steadily. "Our last night on this earth must be a grand
one. I am ready to go on."

"I don't think you are fit to go on. It will be better to go down the
pass a little, and find shelter."

She half smiled. "We won't study our poor bodies tonight. I mean you to
go to Adage, Maskull."

"Then at all events let us rest first, for it must be a long, terrible
climb, and who knows what hardships we shall meet?"

She walked a step or two forward, half turned, and held out her hand to
him. "Come, Maskull!"

When they had covered half the distance that separated them from the
foot of the hill, Maskull heard the drum taps. They came from behind the
hill, and were loud, sharp, almost explosive. He glanced at Sullenbode,
but she appeared to hear nothing. A minute later the whole sky behind
and above the long chain of stone posts on the crest of the hill began
to be illuminated by a strange radiance. The moonlight in that quarter
faded; the posts stood out black on a background of fire. It was the
light of Muspel. As the moments passed, it grew more and more vivid,
peculiar, and awful. It was of no colour, and resembled nothing--it was
supernatural and indescribable. Maskull's spirit swelled. He stood fast,
with expanded nostrils and terrible eyes.

Sullenbode touched him lightly.

"What do you see, Maskull?"

"Muspel-light."

"I see nothing."

The light shot up, until Maskull scarcely knew where he stood. It
burned with a fiercer and stranger glare than ever before. He forgot the
existence of Sullenbode. The drum beats grew deafeningly loud. Each beat
was like a rip of startling thunder, crashing through the sky and making
the air tremble. Presently the crashes coalesced, and one continuous
roar of thunder rocked the world. But the rhythm persisted--the
four beats, with the third accented, still came pulsing through the
atmosphere, only now against a background of thunder, and not of
silence.

Maskull's heart beat wildly. His body was like a prison. He longed to
throw it off, to spring up and become incorporated with the sublime
universe which was beginning to unveil itself.

Sullenbode suddenly enfolded him in her arms, and kissed
him--passionately, again and again. He made no response; he was unaware
of what she was doing. She unclasped him and, with bent head and
streaming eyes, went noiselessly away. She started to go back toward the
Mornstab Pass.

A few minutes afterward the radiance began to fade. The thunder died
down. The moonlight reappeared, the stone posts and the hillside were
again bright. In a short time the supernatural light had entirely
vanished, but the drum taps still sounded faintly, a muffled rhythm,
from behind the hill. Maskull started violently, and stared around him
like a suddenly awakened sleeper.

He saw Sullenbode walking slowly away from him, a few hundred yards
off. At that sight, death entered his heart. He ran after her, calling
out.... She did not look around. When he had lessened the distance
between them by a half, he saw her suddenly stumble and fall. She did
not get up again, but lay motionless where she fell.

He flew toward her, and bent over her body. His worst fears were
realised. Life had departed.

Beneath its coating of mud, her face bore the vulgar, ghastly Crystalman
grin, but Maskull saw nothing of it. She had never appeared so beautiful
to him as at that moment.

He remained beside her for a long time, on his knees. He wept--but,
between his fits of weeping, he raised his head from time to time, and
listened to the distant drum beats.

An hour passed--two hours. Teargeld was now in the south-west. Maskull
lifted Sullenbode's dead body on to his shoulders, and started to walk
toward the Pass. He cared no more for Muspel. He intended to look for
water in which to wash the corpse of his beloved, and earth in which to
bury her.

When he had reached the boulder overlooking the landslip, on which they
had sat together, he lowered his burden, and, placing the dead girl
on the stone, seated himself beside her for a time, gazing over toward
Barey.

After that, he commenced his descent of the Mornstab Pass.



Chapter 20. BAREY

The day had already dawned, but it was not yet sunrise when Maskull
awoke from his miserable sleep. He sat up and yawned feebly. The air was
cool and sweet. Far away down the landslip a bird was singing; the song
consisted of only two notes, but it was so plaintive and heartbreaking
that he scarcely knew how to endure it.

The eastern sky was a delicate green, crossed by a long, thin band
of chocolate-coloured cloud near the horizon. The atmosphere was
blue-tinted, mysterious, and hazy. Neither Sarclash nor Adage was
visible.

The saddle of the Pass was five hundred feet above him; he had descended
that distance overnight. The landslip continued downward, like a huge
flying staircase, to the upper slopes of Barey, which lay perhaps
fifteen hundred feet beneath. The surface of the Pass was rough, and the
angle was excessively steep, though not precipitous. It was above a mile
across. On each side of it, east and west, the dark walls of the ridge
descended sheer. At the point where the pass sprang outward they were
two thousand feet from top to bottom, but as the ridge went upward, on
the one hand toward Adage, on the other toward Sarclash, they attained
almost unbelievable heights. Despite the great breadth and solidity of
the pass, Maskull felt as though he were suspended in midair.

The patch of broken, rich, brown soil observable not far away marked
Sullenbode's grave. He had interred her by the light of the moon, with a
long, flat stone for a spade. A little lower down, the white steam of a
hot spring was curling about in the twilight. From where he sat he was
unable to see the pool into which the spring ultimately flowed, but it
was in that pool that he had last night washed first of all the dead
girl's body, and then his own.

He got up, yawned again, stretched himself, and looked around him
dully. For a long time he eyed the grave. The half-darkness changed by
imperceptible degrees to full day; the sun was about to appear. The sky
was nearly cloudless. The whole wonderful extent of the mighty ridge
behind him began to emerge from the morning mist... there was a part
of Sarclash, and the ice-green crest of gigantic Adage itself, which he
could only take in by throwing his head right back.

He gazed at everything in weary apathy, like a lost soul. All his
desires were gone forever; he wished to go nowhere, and to do nothing.
He thought he would go to Barey.

He went to the warm pool, to wash the sleep out of his eyes. Sitting
beside it, watching the bubbles, was Krag.

Maskull thought that he was dreaming. The man was clothed in a skin
shirt and breeches. His face was stem, yellow, and ugly. He eyed Maskull
without smiling or getting up.

"Where in the devil's name have you come from, Krag?"

"The great point is, I am here."

"Where's Nightspore?"

"Not far away."

"It seems a hundred years since I saw you. Why did you two leave me in
such a damnable fashion?"

"You were strong enough to get through alone."

"So it turned out, but how were you to know?.... Anyway, you've timed it
well. It seems I am to die today."

Krag scowled. "You will die this morning."

"If I am to, I shall. But where have you heard it from?"

"You are ripe for it. You have run through the gamut. What else is there
to live for?"

"Nothing," said Maskull, uttering a short laugh. "I am quite ready.
I have failed in everything. I only wondered how you knew.... So now
you've come to rejoin me. Where are we going?"

"Through Barey."

"And what about Nightspore?"

Krag jumped to his feet with clumsy agility. "We won't wait for him.
He'll be there as soon as we shall."

"Where?"

"At our destination.... Come! The sun's rising."

As they started clambering down the pass side by side, Branchspell, huge
and white, leaped fiercely into the sky. All the delicacy of the dawn
vanished, and another vulgar day began. They passed some trees and
plants, the leaves of which were all curled up, as if in sleep.

Maskull pointed them out to his companion.

"How is it the sunshine doesn't open them?"

"Branchspell is a second night to them. Their day is Alppain."

"How long will it be before that sun rises?"

"Some time yet."

"Shall I live to see it, do you think?"

"Do you want to?"

"At one time I did, but now I'm indifferent."

"Keep in that humour, and you'll do well. Once for all, there's nothing
worth seeing on Tormance."

After a few minutes Maskull said, "Why did we come here, then?"

"To follow Surtur."

"True. But where is he?"

"Closer at hand than you think, perhaps."

"Do you know that he is regarded as a god here, Krag?... There is
supernatural fire, too, which I have been led to believe is somehow
connected with him.... Why do you keep up the mystery? Who and what is
Surtur?"

"Don't disturb yourself about that. You will never know."

"Do you know?"

"I know," snarled Krag.

"The devil here is called Krag," went on Maskull, peering into his face.

"As long as pleasure is worshiped, Krag will always be the devil."

"Here we are, talking face to face, two men together.... What am I to
believe of you?"

"Believe your senses. The real devil is Crystalman."

They continued descending the landslip. The sun's rays had grown
insufferably hot. In front of them, down below in the far distance,
Maskull saw water and land intermingled. It appeared that they were
travelling toward a lake district.

"What have you and Nightspore been doing during the last four days,
Krag? What happened to the torpedo?"

"You're just about on the same mental level as a man who sees a
brand-new palace, and asks what has become of the scaffolding."

"What palace have you been building, then?"

"We have not been idle," said Krag. "While you have been murdering and
lovemaking, we have had our work."

"And how have you been made acquainted with my actions?"

"Oh, you're an open book. Now you've got a mortal heart wound on account
of a woman you knew for six hours."

Maskull turned pale. "Sneer away, Krag! If you lived with a woman for
six hundred years and saw her die, that would never touch your leather
heart. You haven't even the feelings of an insect."

"Behold the child defending its toys!" said Krag, grinning faintly.

Maskull stopped short. "What do you want with me, and why did you bring
me here?"

"It's no use stopping, even for the sake of theatrical effect," said
Krag, pulling him into motion again. "The distance has got to be
covered, however often we pull up."

When he touched him, Maskull felt a terrible shooting pain through his
heart.

"I can't go on regarding you as a man, Krag. You're something more than
a man--whether good or evil, I can't say."

Krag looked yellow and formidable. He did not reply to Maskull's remark,
but after a pause said, "So you've been trying to find Surtur on your
own account, during the intervals between killing and fondling?"

"What was that drumming?" demanded Maskull.

"You needn't look so important. We know you had your ear to the keyhole.
But you could join the assembly, the music was not playing for you, my
friend."

Maskull smiled rather bitterly. "At all events, I listen through no more
keyholes. I have finished with life. I belong to nobody and nothing any
more, from this time forward."

"Brave Words, brave words! We shall see. Perhaps Crystalman will make
one more attempt on you. There is still time for one more."

"Now I don't understand you."

"You think you are thoroughly disillusioned, don't you? Well, that may
prove to be the last and strongest illusion of all."

The conversation ceased. They reached the foot of the landslip an hour
later. Branchspell was steadily mounting the cloudless sky. It was
approaching Sarclash, and it was an open question whether or not it
would clear its peak. The heat was sweltering. The long, massive,
saucer-shaped ridge behind them, with its terrific precipices, was
glowing with bright morning colours. Adage, towering up many thousands
of feet higher still, guarded the end of it like a lonely Colossus. In
front of them, starting from where they stood, was a cool and enchanting
wilderness of little lakes and forests. The water of the lakes was dark
green; the forests were asleep, waiting for the rising of Alppain.

"Are we now in Barey?" asked Maskull.

"Yes--and there is one of the natives."

There was an ugly glint in his eye as he spoke the words, but Maskull
did not see it.

A man was leaning in the shade against one of the first trees,
apparently waiting for them to come up. He was small, dark, and
beardless, and was still in early manhood. He was clothed in a dark
blue, loosely flowing robe, and wore a broad-brimmed slouch hat. His
face, which was not disfigured by any special organs, was pale, earnest,
and grave, yet somehow remarkably pleasing.

Before a word was spoken, he warmly grasped Maskull's hand, but even
while he was in the act of doing so he threw a queer frown at Krag. The
latter responded with a scowling grin.

When he opened his mouth to speak, his voice was a vibrating baritone,
but it was at the same time strangely womanish in its modulations and
variety of tone.

"I've been waiting for you here since sunrise," he said. "Welcome
to Barey, Maskull! Let's hope you'll forget your sorrows here, you
over-tested man."

Maskull stared at him, not without friendliness. "What made you expect
me, and how do you know my name?"

The stranger smiled, which made his face very handsome. "I'm Gangnet. I
know most things."

"Haven't you a greeting for me too--Gangnet?" asked Krag, thrusting his
