I shall be saved, I should like for once in my history to
experience this sense of divinity, before my entity ends in
stone."

"I will transfer to you my sense of prescience," replied the
spirit, "that you may foresee as prophets have.  In so doing, I
shall but anticipate, since you will yourselves in time obtain
this sense in a greater or less degree.  Is there any event in
the future you would like to see, in order that, when the vision
is fulfilled, it may tend to stablish your faith?"

"Since I am the oldest," replied the doctor, "and shall probably
die before my friends, reveal to us, I pray you, the manner of my
death and the events immediately following.  This may prove an
object-lesson to them, and will greatly interest me."

"Your death will be caused by blood-poisoning, brought on by an
accident," began the spirit.  "Some daybreak will find you weak,
after a troubled night, with your bodily resources at a low ebb.
Sunset will see you weaker, with your power of resistance almost
gone.  Midnight will find you weaker still, and but little
removed from the point of death.  A few hours later a kind hand
will close the lids of your half-shut eyes, which never again
will behold the light.  The coffin will inclose your body, and
the last earthly journey begin.  Now," the spirit continued, "you
shall all use my sight instead of your own."

The walls of the cave seemed to expand, till they resembled those
of a great cathedral, while the stalactites appeared to be
metamorphosed into Gothic columns.  They found themselves among a
large congregation that had come to attend the last sad rites,
while the great organ played Chopin's "Funeral March."  The high
vault and arches received the organ's tone, and a sombre light
pervaded the interior.  There was a slight flutter and a craning
of necks among those in the pews, as the procession began to
ascend the aisle.  While the slow step of the pallbearers and
those carrying the coffin sounded on the stone floor, the clear
voice of the clergyman that headed the procession sounded these
words through the cathedral:  "I know that my Redeemer liveth,
and that He shall stand at the latter day upon the earth."  As
the bier advanced, Bearwarden and Ayrault recognized themselves
among the pallbearers--the former with grey mustache and hair,
the latter considerably aged.  The hermetically sealed lead
coffin was inclosed in a wooden case, and the whole was draped
and covered with flowers.

"Oh, my faith!" cried Cortlandt, "I see my face within, yet it is
but a decomposing mass that I once described as I."

Then again did the minister's voice proclaim, "I am the
resurrection and the life, saith the Lord; he that believeth in
me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever liveth
and believeth in me shall never die."

The bearers gently set down their burden; the minister read the
ever-impressive chapter of St. Paul to the Corinthians; a bishop
solemnly and silently sprinkled earth on the coffin; and the
choir sang the 398th hymn, beginning with the words, "Hark, hark
my soul! angelic songs are swelling," which had always been
Cortlandt's favourite and the service was at an end.  The bearers
again shouldered all that was left of Henry Cortlandt, and his
relatives accompanied this to the cemetery.

Then came a sweeping change of scene.  A host of monuments and
gravestones reflected the sunlight, while a broad river ebbed and
flowed between high banks.  A sexton and a watchman stood by a
granite vault, the heavy door of which they had opened with a
large key.  Hard by were some gardeners and labourers, and also a
crowd of curiosity-seekers who had come to witness the last sad
rites.  Presently a funeral procession appeared.  The hearse
stopped near the open vault, over the door of which stood out the
name of CORTLANDT, and the accompanying minister said a short
prayer, while all present uncovered their heads.  After this the
coffin was borne within and set at rest upon a slab, among many
generations of Cortlandts.  In the hearts of the relatives and
friends was genuine sorrow, but the curiosity-seekers went their
way and gave little thought.  "To-morrow will be like to-day,"
they said, "and more great men will die."

Then came another change of scene, though it was comparatively
slight.  The sun slowly sank beyond the farther bank of the broad
river, and the moon and stars shone softly on the gravestones and
crosses.  Two gardeners smoked their short clay pipes on a bench
before the Cortlandt vault, and talked in a slow manner.

"He was a great man," said one, "and if his soul blooms like the
flowers on his grave, he must be in paradise, which we know is a
finer park than this."

"He was expert for the Government when the earth's axis was set
right," said the second gardener, "and he must have been a
scholar, for his calculations have all come true.  He was one of
the first three men to visit the other planets, while the
obituaries in the papers say his history will be read hereafter
like the books of Caesar.  After burying all these great people,
I sometimes wish I could do the same for myself, for the people I
bury seem to be remembered."  After this they relapsed into their
meditations, the silence being broken only by an occasional
murmur from the river's steady flow.

Hereupon the voyagers found they were once more in the cave.  The
fire had burned low, and the dawn was already in the east.
Cortlandt wiped his forehead, shivered, and looked extremely
pale.

"Thank Heaven," he cried, "we cannot ordinarily foresee our end;
for but few would attain their predestined ending could they see
it in advance.  May the veil not again be raised, lest I faint
before it!  I looked in vain for my soul," he continued, "but
could see it nowhere."

"The souls of those dying young," replied the spirit, "sometimes
wish to hover near their ashes as if regretting an unfinished
life, or the opportunities that have departed; but those dying
after middle age are usually glad to be free from their bodies,
and seldom think of them again."

"I shall append the lines now in my head to my history," said
Cortlandt, "that where it goes they may go also.  They can
scarcely fail to be instructive as the conclusions of a man who
has seen beyond his grave."  Whereupon be wrote a stanza in his
note-book, and closed it without showing his companions what he
had written.

"May they do all the good you hope, and much more!" replied the
spirit, "for the reward in the resurrection morning will vastly
exceed all your labours now.

"O, my friends," the spirit continued most earnestly, addressing
the three, "are you prepared for your death-beds?  When your eyes
glaze in their last sleep, and you lose that temporal world and
what you perhaps considered all, as in a haze, your dim vision
will then be displaced by the true creation that will be eternal.
Your unattained ambitions, your hopes, and your ideals will be
swallowed in the grave.  Your works will secure you a place in
history, and many will remember your names until, in time,
oblivion covers your memory as the grass conceals your tombs.
Are you prepared for the time when your eyes become blind, and
your trusted senses fail?  Your sorrowing friends will mourn, and
the flags of your clubs will fly at half-mast, but no earthly
thing can help you then.  In what condition will the resurrection
morning find you, when your sins of neglect and commission plead
for vengeance, as Abel's blood from the ground?  After that there
can be no change.  The classification, as I have already told
you, is now going on; it will then be finished."

"We are the most utterly wretched sinners!" cried Ayrault.  "Show
us how we can be saved."

"As an inhabitant of spirit-land, I will give you worldly
counsel," replied the bishop.  "During my earthly administration,
as I told you, people came from far to hear me preach.  This was
because I had eloquence and earnestness, both gifts of God.  But
I was a miserably weak sinner myself.  That which I would, I did
not, and that which I would not that I did; and I often prayed my
congregation to follow my sermons rather than my ways.  I seemed
to do my followers good, and Daniel thus commends my way in his
last chapter:  'They that turn many to righteousness shall shine
as the stars  forever and ever,' and the explanation is clear.
There is no surer way of learning than trying to teach.  In
teaching my several flocks I was also improved myself.  I was
sown in weakness, but was raised in power, strength being made
perfect in weakness.  Therefore improve your fellows, though
yourself you cannot raise.  The knowledge that you have sent many
souls to heaven, though you are yourself a castaway, will give
you unspeakable joy, and place you in heaven wherever you may be.
Yet remember this: none of us can win heaven; salvation is the
gift of God.  I have said as much now as you can remember.
Farewell.  Improve time while you can.  Fear God and keep His
commandments.  This is the whole duty of man."

So saying, the spirit vanished in a cloud that for a
time emitted light.

"I am not surprised," said Bearwarden, "that people took long
journeys to hear him.  I would do so myself."

"I have never had much fear of death," said Cortlandt, "but the
mere thought of it now makes my knees shake, and fills my heart
with dread.  I thought I saw the most hateful forms about my
coffin, and imagined that they might be the personification of
doubt, coldness, and my other shortcomings, which had come
perhaps from sympathy, in invisible form.  I was almost afraid to
ask the spirit for the explanation."

"I saw them also," replied Bearwarden, "but took them to be
swarms of microbes waiting to destroy your body, or perhaps
trying in vain to penetrate your hermetically sealed coffin."

Cortlandt seemed much upset, and spent the rest of the day in
writing out the facts and trying to assign a cause.  Towards
evening Bearwarden, who had recovered his spirits, prepared
supper, after which they sat in the entrance to the cave.



                           CHAPTER X.

                            AYRAULT.

As the, night became darker they caught sight of the earth again,
shining very faintly, and in his mind's eye Ayrault saw his
sweetheart, and the old, old repining that, since reason and love
began, has been in men's minds, came upon him and almost crushed
him.  Without saying anything to his companions, Ayrault left the
cave, and, passing through the grove in which the spirit had paid
them his second visit, went slowly to the top of the hill about
half a mile off, that he might the more easily gaze at the faint
star on which he could picture Sylvia.

"Ah!" he said to himself, on reaching the summit, "I will stay
here till the earth rises higher, and when it is far above me I
will gaze at it as at heaven."

Accordingly, he lay down with his head on a mound of sod, and
watched the familiar planet.

"We were born too soon," he soliloquized; "for had Sylvia and I
but lived in the spiritual age foretold by the bishop, we might
have held communion, while now our spirits, no matter how much in
love, are separated absolutely by a mere matter of distance.  It
is a mockery to see Sylvia's dwelling-place, and feel that she is
beyond my vision.  O that, in the absence of something better, my
poor imperfect eyes could be transformed into those of an eagle,
but with a million times the power! for though I know that with
these senses I shall see the resurrection, and hear the last
trump, that is but prospective, while now is the time I long for
sight."

On the plain he had left he saw his friends' camp-fire, while on
the other side of his elevation was a valley in which the insects
chirped sharply, and through which ran a stream.  Feeling a
desire for solitude and to be as far removed as possible, he
arose and descended towards the water.  Though the autumn, where
they found themselves, was well advanced, this night was warm,
and the rings formed a great arch above his head.  Near the
stream the frogs croaked happily, as if unmindful of the long
very long Saturnian winter; for though they were removed but
about ten degrees from the equator, the sun was so remote and the
axis of the planet so inclined that it was unlikely these
individual frogs would see another summer, though they might live
again, in a sense, in their descendants.  The insects also would
soon be frozen and stiff, and the tall, graceful lilies that
still clung to life would be withered and dead.  The trees, as if
weeping at the evanescence of the life around them, shed their
leaves at the faintest breeze.  These fluttered to the ground,
or, falling into the tranquil stream, were carried away by it,
and passed from sight.  Ayrault stood musing and regretting the
necessity of such general death.  "But," he thought, "I would
rather die than lose my love; for then I should have had the
taste of bliss without its fulfilment, and should be worse off
than dead.  Love gilds the commonplace, and deifies all it
touches.  Love survives the winter, and in my present frame of
mind I should prefer earth and cold with it to heaven and spring.
Oh, why is my soul so clogged by my body?"

A pillar of stone standing near him was suddenly shattered, and
the bishop stood where it had been.

 "Because," said the spirit, answering his thought, "it has not
yet power to be free."

"Can a man's soul not rise till his body is dead? asked Ayrault.

The spirit hesitated.

"Oh, tell me," pleaded Ayrault.  "If I could see the girl to whom
I am engaged, for but a moment, could be convinced that she loves
me still, my mind would be at rest.  Free my soul or spirit, or
whatever it is, from this body, that I may traverse intervening
space and be with her."

"You will discover the way for yourself in time," said the spirit.

"I know I shall at the last day, in the resurrection, when I am
no longer in the flesh.  Then I shall have no need of your aid;
for we, know that in the resurrection they neither marry nor are
given in marriage, but are like the angels of God in heaven.  It
is while I am mortal, and love as mortals do, that I wish to see
my promised bride.  A spirit may have other joys, and perhaps
higher; but you who have lived in the world and loved, show me
that which is now my heart's desire.  You have shown us the tomb
in which Cortlandt will lie buried; now help me to go to one who
is still alive."

"I pray that God will grant you this," said the spirit, "and make
me His instrument, for I see the depth of your distress."  Saying
which, he vanished, leaving no trace in his departure except that
the pillar of stone returned to its place.

With this rather vague hope, Ayrault set off to rejoin his
companions, for he felt the need of human sympathy.  Saturn's
rapid rotation had brought the earth almost to the zenith, the
little point shining with the unmistakably steady ray of a
planet.  Huge bats fluttered about him, and the great
cloud-masses swept across the sky, being part of Saturn's
ceaseless whirl.  He found he was in a hypnotic or spiritualistic
state, for it was not necessary for him to have his eyes open to
know where he was.  In passing one of the pools they had noticed,
he observed that the upper and previously invisible liquid had
the bright colour of gold, and about it rested a group of figures
enveloped in light.

"Why do you look so sad?" they asked.  "You are in that abode of
departed spirits known as paradise, and should be happy."

"I suppose I should be happy, were I here as you are, as the
reward of merit," he replied.  "But I am still in the flesh, and
as such am subject to its cares."

"You are about to have an experience," said another speaker.
"This day your doubts will be at rest, for before another sunset
you will know more of the woman you love."

The intensity of the spiritualistic influence here somewhat
weakened, for he partially lost sight of the luminous figures,
and could no longer hear what they said.  His heart was in his
mouth as he walked, and he felt like a man about to set out on
his honeymoon, or like a bride who knows not whether to laugh or
to cry.  An indescribable exhilaration was constantly present.

"I wonder," thought he, "if a caterpillar has these sensations
before becoming a butterfly?  Though I return to the rock from
which I sprang, I believe I shall be with Sylvia to-day."

Footprints formed in the soft ground all around him, and the air
was filled with spots of phosphorescent light that coincided with
the relative positions of the brains, hearts, and eyes of human
beings.  These surrounded and often preceded him, as though
leading him on, while the most heavenly anthems filled the air
and the vault of the sky.

"I believe," he thought, with bounding heart, "that I shall be
initiated into the mysteries of space this night."

At times he could hear even the words of the choruses ringing in
his ears, though at others he thought the effect was altogether
in his mind.

"Oh, for a proof," he prayed, "that no sane man can doubt!  My
faith is implicit in the bishop and the vision, and I feel that
in some way I shall return to earth ere the close of another day,
for I know I am awake, and that this is no dream."

A fire burned in the mouth of the cave, within which Bearwarden
and Cortlandt lay sleeping.  The specks of mica in the rocks
reflected its light, but in addition to this a diffused
