earths to a metallic form and found that it gave off a shower of sparks
when scratched. An alloy of cerium with 30 or 35 per cent. of iron
proved the best and was put on the market in the form of automatic
lighters. A big business was soon built up in Austria on the basis of
this obscure chemical element rescued from the dump-heap. The sale of
the cerite lighters in France threatened to upset the finances of the
republic, which derived large revenue from its monopoly of match-making,
so the French Government imposed a tax upon every man who carried one.
American tourists who bought these lighters in Germany used to be much
annoyed at being held up on the French frontier and compelled to take
out a license. During the war the cerium sparklers were much used in the
trenches for lighting cigarettes, but--as those who have seen "The
Better 'Ole" will know--they sometimes fail to strike fire. Auer-metal
or cerium-iron alloy was used in munitions to ignite hand grenades and
to blazon the flight of trailer shells. There are many other pyrophoric
(light-producing) alloys, including steel, which our ancestors used with
flint before matches and percussion caps were invented.

There are more than fifty metals known and not half of them have come
into common use, so there is still plenty of room for the expansion of
the science of metallurgy. If the reader has not forgotten his
arithmetic of permutations he can calculate how many different alloys
may be formed by varying the combinations and proportions of these
fifty. We have seen how quickly elements formerly known only to
chemists--and to some of them known only by name--have become
indispensable in our daily life. Any one of those still unutilized may
be found to have peculiar properties that fit it for filling a long
unfelt want in modern civilization.

Who, for instance, will find a use for gallium, the metal of France? It
was described in 1869 by Mendeleef in advance of its advent and has been
known in person since 1875, but has not yet been set to work. It is
such a remarkable metal that it must be good for something. If you saw
it in a museum case on a cold day you might take it to be a piece of
aluminum, but if the curator let you hold it in your hand--which he
won't--it would melt and run over the floor like mercury. The melting
point is 87 deg. Fahr. It might be used in thermometers for measuring
temperatures above the boiling point of mercury were it not for the
peculiar fact that gallium wets glass so it sticks to the side of the
tube instead of forming a clear convex curve on top like mercury.

Then there is columbium, the American metal. It is strange that an
element named after Columbia should prove so impractical. Columbium is a
metal closely resembling tantalum and tantalum found a use as electric
light filaments. A columbium lamp should appeal to our patriotism.

The so-called "rare elements" are really abundant enough considering the
earth's crust as a whole, though they are so thinly scattered that they
are usually overlooked and hard to extract. But whenever one of them is
found valuable it is soon found available. A systematic search generally
reveals it somewhere in sufficient quantity to be worked. Who, then,
will be the first to discover a use for indium, germanium, terbium,
thulium, lanthanum, neodymium, scandium, samarium and others as unknown
to us as tungsten was to our fathers?

As evidence of the statement that it does not matter how rare an element
may be it will come into common use if it is found to be commonly
useful, we may refer to radium. A good rich specimen of radium ore,
pitchblende, may contain as much, as one part in 4,000,000. Madame
Curie, the brilliant Polish Parisian, had to work for years before she
could prove to the world that such an element existed and for years
afterwards before she could get the metal out. Yet now we can all afford
a bit of radium to light up our watch dials in the dark. The amount
needed for this is infinitesimal. If it were more it would scorch our
skins, for radium is an element in eruption. The atom throws off
corpuscles at intervals as a Roman candle throws off blazing balls. Some
of these particles, the alpha rays, are atoms of another element,
helium, charged with positive electricity and are ejected with a
velocity of 18,000 miles a second. Some of them, the beta rays, are
negative electrons, only about one seven-thousandth the size of the
others, but are ejected with almost the speed of light, 186,000 miles a
second. If one of the alpha projectiles strikes a slice of zinc sulfide
it makes a splash of light big enough to be seen with a microscope, so
we can now follow the flight of a single atom. The luminous watch dials
consist of a coating of zinc sulfide under continual bombardment by the
radium projectiles. Sir William Crookes invented this radium light
apparatus and called it a "spinthariscope," which is Greek for
"spark-seer."

Evidently if radium is so wasteful of its substance it cannot last
forever nor could it have forever existed. The elements then ate not
necessarily eternal and immutable, as used to be supposed. They have a
natural length of life; they are born and die and propagate, at least
some of them do. Radium, for instance, is the offspring of ionium,
which is the great-great-grandson of uranium, the heaviest of known
elements. Putting this chemical genealogy into biblical language we
might say: Uranium lived 5,000,000,000 years and begot Uranium X1, which
lived 24.6 days and begot Uranium X2, which lived 69 seconds and begot
Uranium 2, which lived 2,000,000 years and begot Ionium, which lived
200,000 years and begot Radium, which lived 1850 years and begot Niton,
which lived 3.85 days and begot Radium A, which lived 3 minutes and
begot Radium B, which lived 26.8 minutes and begot Radium C, which lived
19.5 minutes and begot Radium D, which lived 12 years and begot Radium
E, which lived 5 days and begot Polonium, which lived 136 days and begot
Lead.

The figures I have given are the times when half the parent substance
has gone over into the next generation. It will be seen that the chemist
is even more liberal in his allowance of longevity than was Moses with
the patriarchs. It appears from the above that half of the radium in any
given specimen will be transformed in about 2000 years. Half of what is
left will disappear in the next 2000 years, half of that in the next
2000 and so on. The reader can figure out for himself when it will all
be gone. He will then have the answer to the old Eleatic conundrum of
when Achilles will overtake the tortoise. But we may say that after
100,000 years there would not be left any radium worth mentioning, or in
other words practically all the radium now in existence is younger than
the human race. The lead that is found in uranium and has presumably
descended from uranium, behaves like other lead but is lighter. Its
atomic weight is only 206, while ordinary lead weighs 207. It appears
then that the same chemical element may have different atomic weights
according to its ancestry, while on the other hand different chemical
elements may have the same atomic weight. This would have seemed
shocking heresy to the chemists of the last century, who prided
themselves on the immutability of the elements and did not take into
consideration their past life or heredity. The study of these
radioactive elements has led to a new atomic theory. I suppose most of
us in our youth used to imagine the atom as a little round hard ball,
but now it is conceived as a sort of solar system with an
electropositive nucleus acting as the sun and negative electrons
revolving around it like the planets. The number of free positive
electrons in the nucleus varies from one in hydrogen to 92 in uranium.
This leaves room for 92 possible elements and of these all but six are
more or less certainly known and definitely placed in the scheme. The
atom of uranium, weighing 238 times the atom of hydrogen, is the
heaviest known and therefore the ultimate limit of the elements, though
it is possible that elements may be found beyond it just as the planet
Neptune was discovered outside the orbit of Uranus. Considering the
position of uranium and its numerous progeny as mentioned above, it is
quite appropriate that this element should bear the name of the father
of all the gods.

In these radioactive elements we have come upon sources of energy such
as was never dreamed of in our philosophy. The most striking peculiarity
of radium is that it is always a little warmer than its surroundings, no
matter how warm these may be. Slowly, spontaneously and continuously,
it decomposes and we know no way of hastening or of checking it. Whether
it is cooled in liquefied air or heated to its melting point the change
goes on just the same. An ounce of radium salt will give out enough heat
in one hour to melt an ounce of ice and in the next hour will raise this
water to the boiling point, and so on again and again without cessation
for years, a fire without fuel, a realization of the philosopher's lamp
that the alchemists sought in vain. The total energy so emitted is
millions of times greater than that produced by any chemical combination
such as the union of oxygen and hydrogen to form water. From the heavy
white salt there is continually rising a faint fire-mist like the
will-o'-the-wisp over a swamp. This gas is known as the emanation or
niton, "the shining one." A pound of niton would give off energy at the
rate of 23,000 horsepower; fine stuff to run a steamer, one would think,
but we must remember that it does not last. By the sixth day the power
would have fallen off by half. Besides, no one would dare to serve as
engineer, for the radiation will rot away the flesh of a living man who
comes near it, causing gnawing ulcers or curing them. It will not only
break down the complex and delicate molecules of organic matter but will
attack the atom itself, changing, it is believed, one element into
another, again the fulfilment of a dream of the alchemists. And its
rays, unseen and unfelt by us, are yet strong enough to penetrate an
armorplate and photograph what is behind it.

But radium is not the most mysterious of the elements but the least so.
It is giving out the secret that the other elements have kept. It
suggests to us that all the other elements in proportion to their weight
have concealed within them similar stores of energy. Astronomers have
long dazzled our imaginations by calculating the horsepower of the
world, making us feel cheap in talking about our steam engines and
dynamos when a minutest fraction of the waste dynamic energy of the
solar system would make us all as rich as millionaires. But the heavenly
bodies are too big for us to utilize in this practical fashion.

And now the chemists have become as exasperating as the astronomers, for
they give us a glimpse of incalculable wealth in the meanest substance.
For wealth is measured by the available energy of the world, and if a
few ounces of anything would drive an engine or manufacture nitrogenous
fertilizer from the air all our troubles would be over. Kipling in his
sketch, "With the Night Mail," and Wells in his novel, "The World Set
Free," stretched their imaginations in trying to tell us what it would
mean to have command of this power, but they are a little hazy in their
descriptions of the machinery by which it is utilized. The atom is as
much beyond our reach as the moon. We cannot rob its vault of the
treasure.




READING REFERENCES


The foregoing pages will not have achieved their aim unless their
readers have become sufficiently interested in the developments of
industrial chemistry to desire to pursue the subject further in some of
its branches. Assuming such interest has been aroused, I am giving below
a few references to books and articles which may serve to set the reader
upon the right track for additional information. To follow the rapid
progress of applied science it is necessary to read continuously such
periodicals as the _Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry_
(New York), _Metallurgical and Chemical Engineering_ (New York),
_Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry_ (London), _Chemical
Abstracts_ (published by the American Chemical Society, Easton, Pa.),
and the various journals devoted to special trades. The reader may need
to be reminded that the United States Government publishes for free
distribution or at low price annual volumes or special reports dealing
with science and industry. Among these may be mentioned "Yearbook of the
Department of Agriculture"; "Mineral Resources of the United States,"
published by the United States Geological Survey in two annual volumes,
Vol. I on the metals and Vol. II on the non-metals; the "Annual Report
of the Smithsonian Institution," containing selected articles on pure
and applied science; the daily "Commerce Reports" and special bulletins
of Department of Commerce. Write for lists of publications of these
departments.

The following books on industrial chemistry in general are recommended
for reading and reference: "The Chemistry of Commerce" and "Some
Chemical Problems of To-Day" by Robert Kennedy Duncan (Harpers, N.Y.),
"Modern Chemistry and Its Wonders" by Martin (Van Nostrand), "Chemical
Discovery and Invention in the Twentieth Century" by Sir William A.
Tilden (Dutton, N.Y.), "Discoveries and Inventions of the Twentieth
Century" by Edward Cressy (Dutton), "Industrial Chemistry" by Allen
Rogers (Van Nostrand).

"Everyman's Chemistry" by Ellwood Hendrick (Harpers, Modern Science
Series) is written in a lively style and assumes no previous knowledge
of chemistry from the reader. The chapters on cellulose, gums, sugars
and oils are particularly interesting. "Chemistry of Familiar Things" by
S.S. Sadtler (Lippincott) is both comprehensive and comprehensible.

The following are intended for young readers but are not to be despised
by their elders who may wish to start in on an easy up-grade: "Chemistry
of Common Things" (Allyn & Bacon, Boston) is a popular high school
text-book but differing from most text-books in being readable and
attractive. Its descriptions of industrial processes are brief but
clear. The "Achievements of Chemical Science" by James C. Philip
(Macmillan) is a handy little book, easy reading for pupils.
"Introduction to the Study of Science" by W.P. Smith and E.G. Jewett
(Macmillan) touches upon chemical topics in a simple way.

On the history of commerce and the effect of inventions on society the
following titles may be suggested: "Outlines of Industrial History" by
E. Cressy (Macmillan); "The Origin of Invention," a study of primitive
industry, by O.T. Mason (Scribner); "The Romance of Commerce" by Gordon
Selbridge (Lane); "Industrial and Commercial Geography" or "Commerce and
Industry" by J. Russell Smith (Holt); "Handbook of Commercial Geography"
by G.G. Chisholm (Longmans).

The newer theories of chemistry and the constitution of the atom are
explained in "The Realities of Modern Science" by John Mills
(Macmillan), and "The Electron" by R.A. Millikan (University of Chicago
Press), but both require a knowledge of mathematics. The little book on
"Matter and Energy" by Frederick Soddy (Holt) is better adapted to the
general reader. The most recent text-book is the "Introduction to
General Chemistry" by H.N. McCoy and E.M. Terry. (Chicago, 1919.)


CHAPTER II

The reader who may be interested in following up this subject will find
references to all the literature in the summary by Helen R. Hosmer, of
the Research Laboratory of the General Electric Company, in the _Journal
of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry_, New York, for April, 1917.
Bucher's paper may be found in the same journal for March, and the issue
for September contains a full report of the action of U.S. Government
and a comparison of the various processes. Send fifteen cents to the
U.S. Department of Commerce (or to the nearest custom house) for
Bulletin No. 52, Special Agents Series on "Utilization of Atmospheric
Nitrogen" by T.H. Norton. The Smithsonian Institution of Washington has
issued a pamphlet on "Sources of Nitrogen Compounds in the United
States." In the 1913 report of the Smithsonian Institution there are two
fine articles on this subject: "The Manufacture of Nitrates from the
Atmosphere" and "The Distribution of Mankind," which discusses Sir
William Crookes' prediction of the exhaustion of wheat land. The D. Van
Nostrand Co., New York, publishes a monograph on "Fixation of
Atmospheric Nitrogen" by J. Knox, also "TNT and Other Nitrotoluenes" by
G.C. Smith. The American Cyanamid Company, New York, gives out some
attractive literature on their process.

"American Munitions 1917-1918," the report of Benedict Crowell, Director
of Munitions, to the Secretary of War, gives a fully illustrated
account of the manufacture of arms, explosives and toxic gases. Our war
experience in the "Oxidation of Ammonia" is told by C.L. Parsons in
_Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry_, June, 1919, and
various other articles on the government munition work appeared in the
same journal in the first half of 1919. "The Muscle Shoals Nitrate
Plant" in _Chemical and Metallurgical Engineering_, January, 1919.


CHAPTER III

The Department of Agriculture or your congressman will send you
literature on the production and use of fertilizers. From your state
agricultural experiment station you can procure information as to local
needs and products. Consult the articles on potash salts and phosphate
rock in the latest volume of "Mineral Resources of the United States,"
Part II Non-Metals (published free by the U.S. Geological Survey). Also
consult the latest Yearbook of the Department of Agriculture. For
self-instruction, problems and experiments get "Extension Course in
Soils," Bulletin No. 355, U.S. Dept. of Agric. A list of all government
publications on "Soil and Fertilizers" is sent free by Superintendent of
Documents, Washington. The _Journal of Industrial and Engineering
Chemistry_ for July, 1917, publishes an article by W.C. Ebaugh on
"Potash and a World Emergency," and various articles on American sources
of potash appeared in the same _Journal_ October, 1918, and February,
1918. Bulletin 102, Part 2, of the United States National Museum
contains an interpretation of the fertilizer situation in 1917 by J.E.
Poque. On new potash deposits in Alsace and elsewhere see _Scientific
American Supplement_, September 14, 1918.


CHAPTER IV

Send ten cents to the Department of Commerce, Washington, for "Dyestuffs
for American Textile and Other Industries," by Thomas H. Norton,
Special Agents' Series, No. 96. A more technical bulletin by the same
author is "Artificial Dyestuffs Used in the United States," Special
