some pleasant thought was passing. I saw the color dye her temples, I
saw the blue eyes turn, half frightened, to my own, I saw--and I knew
she had read my thoughts. Then we both rose, side by side, and she was
weeping softly, yet for my life I dared not speak. She turned away,
touching her eyes with a bit of lace, and I sprang to her side and
offered her my arm.

"'You cannot go back alone,' I said.

"She did not take my arm.

"'Do you hate me, Miss Wyeth?'

"'I am very tired,' she said; 'I must go home.'

"'You cannot go alone.'

"'I do not care to accept your escort.'

"'Then--you send me away?'

"'No,' she said, in a hard voice. 'You can come if you like.' So I
humbly attended her to the Hotel St. Antoine.




XXIV


"As we reached the Place Verte and turned into the court of the hotel,
the sound of the midnight bells swept over the city, and a horse-car
jingled slowly by on its last trip to the railroad station.

"We passed the fountain, bubbling and splashing in the moonlit court,
and, crossing the square, entered the southern wing of the hotel. At
the foot of the stairway she leaned for an instant against the
banisters.

"'I am afraid we have walked too fast,' I said.

"She turned to me coldly. 'No--conventionalities must be observed. You
were quite right in escaping as soon as possible.'

"'But,' I protested, 'I assure you--'

"She gave a little movement of impatience. 'Don't,' she said, 'you
tire me--conventionalities tire me. Be satisfied--nobody has seen
you.'

"'You are cruel,' I said, in a low voice--'what do you think I care
for conventionalities?'

"'You care everything--you care what people think, and you try to do
what they say is good form. You never did such an original thing in
your life as you have just done.'

"'You read my thoughts,' I exclaimed, bitterly. 'It is not fair--'

"'Fair or not, I know what you consider me--ill-bred, common, pleased
with any sort of attention. Oh! why should I waste one word--one
thought on you?'

"'Miss Wyeth--' I began, but she interrupted me.

"'Would you dare tell me what you think of me?--Would you dare tell me
what you think of my father?'

"I was silent. She turned and mounted two steps of the stairway, then
faced me again.

"'Do you think it was for my own pleasure that I permitted myself to
be left alone with you? Do you imagine that I am flattered by your
attention?--do you venture to think I ever could be? How dared you
think what you did think there on the sea-wall?'

"'I cannot help my thoughts!' I replied.

"'You turned on me like a tiger when you awoke from your trance. Do
you really suppose that you mewed? Are you not aware that my father
hypnotized you?'

"'No--I did not know it,' I said. The hot blood tingled in my
finger-tips, and I looked angrily at her.

"'Why do you imagine that I waste my time on you?' she said. 'Your
vanity has answered that question--now let your intelligence answer
it. I am a Pythagorean; I have been chosen to bring in a convert, and
you were the convert selected for me by the Mahatmas of the
Consolidated Trust Company. I have followed you from New York to
Antwerp, as I was bidden, but now my courage fails, and I shrink from
fulfilling my mission, knowing you to be the type of man you are. If I
could give it up--if I could only go away--never, never again to see
you! Ah, I fear they will not permit it!--until my mission is
accomplished. Why was I chosen--I, with a woman's heart and a woman's
pride. I--I hate you!'

"'I love you,' I said, slowly.

"She paled and looked away.

"'Answer me,' I said.

"Her wide, blue eyes turned back again, and I held them with mine. At
last she slowly drew a long-stemmed rose from the bunch at her belt,
turned, and mounted the shadowy staircase. For a moment I thought I
saw her pause on the landing above, but the moonlight was uncertain.
After waiting for a long time in vain, I moved away, and in going
raised my hand to my face, but I stopped short, and my heart stopped
too, for a moment. In my hand I held a long-stemmed rose.

"With my brain in a whirl I crept across the court and mounted the
stairs to my room. Hour after hour I walked the floor, slowly at
first, then more rapidly, but it brought no calm to the fierce tumult
of my thoughts, and at last I dropped into a chair before the empty
fireplace, burying my head in my hands.

"Uncertain, shocked, and deadly weary, I tried to think--I strove to
bring order out of the chaos in my brain, but I only sat staring at
the long-stemmed rose. Slowly I began to take a vague pleasure in its
heavy perfume, and once I crushed a leaf between my palms, and,
bending over, drank in the fragrance.

"Twice my lamp flickered and went out, and twice, treading softly, I
crossed the room to relight it. Twice I threw open the door, thinking
that I heard some sound without. How close the air was!--how heavy and
hot! And what was that strange, subtle odor which had insensibly
filled the room? It grew stronger and more penetrating, and I began
to dislike it, and to escape it I buried my nose in the half-opened
rose. Horror! The odor came from the rose--and the rose itself was no
longer a rose--not even a flower now--it was only a bunch of catnip;
and I dashed it to the floor and ground it under my heel.

"'Mountebank!' I cried, in a rage. My anger grew cold--and I shivered,
drawn perforce to the curtained window. Something was there, outside.
I could not hear it, for it made no sound, but I knew it was there,
watching me. What was it? The damp hair stirred on my head. I touched
the heavy curtains. Whatever was outside them sprang up, tore at the
window, and then rushed away.

"Feeling very shaky, I crept to the window, opened it, and leaned out.
The night was calm. I heard the fountain splashing in the moonlight
and the sea-winds soughing through the palms. Then I closed the window
and turned back into the room; and as I stood there a sudden breeze,
which could not have come from without, blew sharply in my face,
extinguishing the candle and sending the long curtains bellying out
into the room. The lamp on the table flashed and smoked and sputtered;
the room was littered with flying papers and catnip leaves. Then the
strange wind died away, and somewhere in the night a cat snarled.

"I turned desperately to my trunk and flung it open. Into it I threw
everything I owned, pell-mell, closed the lid, locked it, and, seizing
my mackintosh and travelling-bag, ran down the stairs, crossed the
court, and entered the night-office of the hotel. There I called up
the sleepy clerk, settled my reckoning, and sent a porter for a cab.

"'Now,' I said, 'what time does the next train leave?'

"'The next train for where?'

"'Anywhere!'

"The clerk locked the safe, and, carefully keeping the desk between
himself and me, motioned the office-boy to look at the time-tables.

"'Next train, 2.10. Brussels--Paris,' read the boy.

"At that moment the cab rattled up by the curbstone, and I sprang in
while the porter tossed my traps on top. Away we bumped over the stony
pavement, past street after street lighted dimly by tall gas-lamps,
and alley after alley brilliant with the glare of villanous all-night
cafe-concerts, and then, turning, we rumbled past the Circus and the
Eldorado, and at last stopped with a jolt before the Brussels station.

"I had not a moment to lose. 'Paris!' I cried--'first-class!' and,
pocketing the book of coupons, hurried across the platform to where
the Brussels train lay. A guard came running up, flung open the door
of a first-class carriage, slammed and locked it after I had jumped
in, and the long train glided from the arched station out into the
starlit morning.

"I was all alone in the compartment. The wretched lamp in the roof
flickered dimly, scarcely lighting the stuffy box. I could not see to
read my time-table, so I wrapped my legs in the travelling-rug and lay
back, staring out into the misty morning. Trees, walls,
telegraph-poles flashed past, and the cinders drove in showers against
the rattling windows. I slept at times, fitfully, and once, springing
up, peered sharply at the opposite seat, possessed with the idea that
somebody was there.

"When the train reached Brussels I was sound asleep, and the guard
awoke me with difficulty.

"'Breakfast, sir?' he asked.

"'Anything,' I sighed, and stepped out to the platform, rubbing my
legs and shivering. The other passengers were already breakfasting in
the station cafe, and I joined them and managed to swallow a cup of
coffee and a roll.

"The morning broke gray and cloudy, and I bundled myself into my
mackintosh for a tramp along the platform. Up and down I stamped,
puffing a cigar, and digging my hands deep in my pockets, while the
other passengers huddled into the warmer compartments of the train or
stood watching the luggage being lifted into the forward
mail-carriage. The wait was very long; the hands of the great clock
pointed to six, and still the train lay motionless along the platform.
I approached a guard and asked him whether anything was wrong.

"'Accident on the line,' he replied; 'monsieur had better go to his
compartment and try to sleep, for we may be delayed until noon.'

"I followed the guard's advice, and, crawling into my corner, wrapped
myself in the rug and lay back watching the rain-drops spattering
along the window-sill. At noon the train had not moved, and I lunched
in the compartment. At four o'clock in the afternoon the
station-master came hurrying along the platform, crying, 'Montez!
montez! messieurs, s'il vous plait'--and the train steamed out of the
station and whirled away through the flat, treeless Belgian plains. At
times I dozed, but the shaking of the car always awoke me, and I would
sit blinking out at the endless stretch of plain, until a sudden
flurry of rain blotted the landscape from my eyes. At last a long,
shrill whistle from the engine, a jolt, a series of bumps, and an
apparition of red trousers and bayonets warned me that we had arrived
at the French frontier. I turned out with the others, and opened my
valise for inspection, but the customs officials merely chalked it,
without examination, and I hurried back to my compartment amid the
shouting of guards and the clanging of station bells. Again I found
that I was alone in the compartment, so I smoked a cigarette, thanked
Heaven, and fell into a dreamless sleep.

"How long I slept I do not know, but when I awoke the train was
roaring through a tunnel. When again it flashed out into the open
country I peered through the grimy, rain-stained window and saw that
the storm had ceased and stars were twinkling in the sky. I stretched
my legs, yawned, pushed my travelling-cap back from my forehead, and,
stumbling to my feet, walked up and down the compartment until my
cramped muscles were relieved. Then I sat down again, and, lighting a
cigar, puffed great rings and clouds of fragrant smoke across the
aisle.

"The train was flying; the cars lurched and shook, and the windows
rattled accompaniment to the creaking panels. The smoke from my cigar
dimmed the lamp in the ceiling and hid the opposite seat from view.
How it curled and writhed in the corners, now eddying upward, now
floating across the aisle like a veil! I lounged back in my cushioned
seat, watching it with interest. What queer shapes it took! How thick
it was becoming!--how strangely luminous! Now it had filled the whole
compartment, puff after puff crowding upward, waving, wavering,
clouding the windows, and blotting the lamp from sight. It was most
interesting. I had never before smoked such a cigar. What an
extraordinary brand! I examined the end, flicking the ashes away. The
cigar was out. Fumbling for a match to relight it, my eyes fell on the
drifting smoke-curtain which swayed across the corner opposite. It
seemed almost tangible. How like a real curtain it hung, gray,
impenetrable! A man might hide behind it. Then an idea came into my
head, and it persisted until my uneasiness amounted to a vague terror.
I tried to fight it off--I strove to resist--but the conviction slowly
settled upon me that something was behind that smoke-veil--something
which had entered the compartment while I slept.

"'It can't be,' I muttered, my eyes fixed on the misty drapery; 'the
train has not stopped.'

"The car creaked and trembled. I sprang to my feet and swept my arm
through the veil of smoke. Then my hair rose on my head. For my hand
touched another hand, and my eyes had met two other eyes.

"I heard a voice in the gloom, low and sweet, calling me by name; I
saw the eyes again, tender and blue; soft fingers touched my own.

"'Are you afraid?' she said.

"My heart began to beat again, and my face warmed with returning
blood.

"'It is only I,' she said, gently.

"I seemed to hear my own voice speaking as if at a great distance,
'You here--alone?'

"'How cruel of you!' she faltered; 'I am not alone.' At the same
instant my eyes fell upon the professor, calmly seated by the farther
window. His hands were thrust into the folds of a corded and tasselled
dressing-gown, from beneath which peeped two enormous feet encased in
carpet slippers. Upon his head towered a yellow night-cap. He did not
pay the slightest attention to either me or his daughter, and, except
for the lighted cigar which he kept shifting between his lips, he
might have been taken for a wax dummy.

"Then I began to speak, feebly, hesitating like a child.

"'How did you come into this compartment? You--you do not possess
wings, I suppose? You could not have been here all the time. Will you
explain--explain to me? See, I ask you very humbly, for I do not
understand. This is the nineteenth century, and these things don't fit
in. I'm wearing a Dunlap hat--I've got a copy of the New York _Herald_
in my bag--President Roosevelt is alive, and everything is so very
unromantic in the world! Is this real magic? Perhaps I'm filled with
hallucinations. Perhaps I'm asleep and dreaming. Perhaps you are not
really here--nor I--nor anybody, nor anything!'

"The train plunged into a tunnel, and when again it dashed out from
the other end the cold wind blew furiously in my face from the farther
window. It was wide open; the professor was gone.

"'Papa has changed to another compartment,' she said, quietly. 'I
think perhaps you were beginning to bore him.'

"Her eyes met mine and she smiled.

"'Are you very much bewildered?'

"I looked at her in silence. She sat very quietly, her hands clasped
above her knee, her curly hair glittering to her girdle. A long robe,
almost silvery in the twilight, clung to her young figure; her bare
feet were thrust deep into a pair of shimmering Eastern slippers.

"'When you fled,' she sighed, 'I was asleep and there was no time to
lose. I barely had a moment to go to Bombay, to find papa, and return
in time to join you. This is an East-Indian costume.'

"Still I was silent.

"'Are you shocked?' she asked, simply.

"'No,' I replied, in a dull voice, 'I'm past that.'

"'You are very rude,' she said, with the tears starting to her eyes.

"'I do not mean to be. I only wish to go away--away somewhere and find
out what my name is.'

"'Your name is Harold Kensett.'

"'Are you sure?' I asked, eagerly.

"'Yes--what troubles you?'

"'Is everything plain to you? Are you a sort of prophet and
second-sight medium? Is nothing hidden from you?' I asked.
