foot long oblong of metal, one manipulating its side shields, the
other at the controls. As we arrived, the platform came sliding down
the narrow confines of the corridor, lurching, barely missing a door
projection. Up to the low vaulted ceiling, then down to the floor.

It sailed over our heads, rising over us as we ducked. Anita waved her
hand.

Grantline gasped, "By the infernal!"

I shouted, "Anita, stop!"

But they only waved at us, skimming down the length of the corridor,
seeming to avoid a smash a dozen times by the smallest margin of
chance, stopping miraculously at the further end, hanging poised in
mid-air, wheeling, coming back, undulating up and down.

Grantline clung to me. "By the gods of the airways!"

In spite of my astonished horror, I could not but share Grantline's
admiration. Three or four other men were watching. The girls were
amazingly skillful, no doubt of that. There was not a man among us who
could have handled that gravity platform indoors, not one who would
have had the brash temerity to try it.

The platform landed with the grace of a humming bird at our feet, the
girls dexterously balancing so that it came to rest swiftly, without
the least bump.

I confronted them. "Anita, what are you doing?"

She stood up, flushed and smiling. "Practicing."

"What for?"

Venza's roguish eyes twinkled at me. Her hands went to her slim hips
with a gesture of defiance.

She asked, "Are you speaking for yourself or the Commander?"

I ignored her. "What for?"

"Because we're good at it," Anita retorted. "Better than any of you
men. If you should need us, we're ready...."

"We won't!" I said shortly.

"But if you should...."

Venza put in, "If Snap and I hadn't come for you, you wouldn't be
here, Gregg Haljan. I didn't notice you were so horrified to see me
holding that shield up over you!"

It silenced me.

She added, "Commander, let us alone. We won't smash anything."

Grantline laughed. "I hope you won't!"

A warning call took us back to the front window. The brigands'
searchlight was again being used. It swept slowly along the length of
the cliff. Its circle went down the cliff steps to the valley floor,
and came sweeping up again. Then it went up to the observatory
platform at the summit above us, then over to the ore sheds.

We had no men outside, if that was what the brigands wanted to
determine. The searchbeam presently vanished. It was replaced
immediately by a zed-ray, which darted at once to our treasure sheds
and clung.

That stung Grantline into his first action. We flung our own zed-ray
down across the valley. It reached the brigand ship and the blurred
interior of the cabins.

"Try the searchbeam, Franck."

The zed-ray went off. We gazed down our searchlight which clung to the
dome of the distant enemy vessel. We could see movement there.

"The telescope," Grantline ordered.

The dynamos hummed. The telescope finder glowed and clarified. On the
deck of the ship we saw the brigands working with the assembling of
tiny ore carts. A deck landing port was open. The ore carts were being
carried out through a port lock and down a landing incline. And on the
rock outside, we saw several of the carts, tiny rail sections and the
section of an ore chute.

Miko was unloading his mining apparatus! He was making ready to come
up for the treasure!

The discovery, startling as it was, nevertheless, was far overshadowed
by an imperative danger alarm from our main building. Brigands were
outside on our ledge! Miko's searchbeam, sweeping the ledge a moment
before, had carefully avoided revealing them. It had been done just
for that purpose, no doubt--to make us feel sure the ledge was
unoccupied and thus to guard against our own light making the search.

But there was a brigand group close outside our walls! By the merest
chance the radiating glow from our searchray had shown the helmeted
figures scurrying for shelter.

Grantline leaped to his feet.

We rushed from the rear port exit which was nearest us. The giant
bloated figures had been seen running along the outside of the
connecting corridor, in this direction. But before we ever got there,
a new alarm came. A brigand was crouching at a front corner of the
main building!

His hydrogen heat torch had already opened a rift in the wall!




XXXV


"In with you!" ordered Grantline. "Get your helmets on! How many? Six.
Enough--get back there, Williams--you were last. The lock won't hold
any more."

I was one of the six who jammed into the manual exit lock. We went
through it; in a moment we were outside. It was less than three
minutes since the prowling brigand had been seen.

Grantline touched me just as we emerged. "Don't wait for orders? Get
him."

"That fellow with the torch--"

"Yes. I'm with you."

We went out with a rush. We had already discarded our shoe and belt
weights. I leaped, regardless of my companions.

The scurrying Martians had disappeared. Through my visor bull's-eye I
could see only the Earthlit rocky surface of the ledge. Beside me
stretched the dark wall of our building.

I bounded toward the front. The brigand with the torch had been at the
front corner. I could not see him from here; he had been crouching
just around the angle.

I had a tiny bullet projector, the best weapon for short range
outdoors. I was aware of Grantline close behind me.

It took only a few of my giant leaps. I handed at the corner,
recovered my balance and whirled around to the front.

The Martian was here, a giant misshapen lump as he crouched. His torch
was a little stab of blue in the deep shadow enveloping him. Intent
upon his work, he did not see me. Perhaps he thought his fellow men
had broken our exits by now.

I landed like a leopard upon his back and fired, my weapon muzzle
ramming him. His torch fell hissing with a silent rain of blue fire
upon the rocks.

As my grip upon him made audiphone contact, his agonized scream
rattled the diaphragms of my ear grids with horrible, deafening
intensity.

He lay writhing under me; then was still. His scream choked into
silence. His suit deflated within my encircling grip. He was dead: my
leaden, steel-tipped pellet had punctured the double surface of his
Erentz fabric; penetrated his chest.

Grantline had leaped, landing beside me. "Dead?"

"Yes."

I climbed from the inert body. The torch had hissed itself out.
Grantline swung to our building corner, and I leaned down with him to
examine it. The torch had fused and scarred the wall, burned almost
through. A pressure rift had opened. We could see it, a curving gash
in the metal wall-plate like a crack in a glass window pane.

I went cold. This was serious damage. The rarefied Erentz air would
seep out. It was leaking now: we could see the magnetic radiance of it
all up the length of the ten foot crack. The leak would change the
pressure of the Erentz system, constantly lower it, demanding steady
renewal. The Erentz motors would overheat; some might go bad from the
strain.

Grantline stood gripping me. "Damn bad."

"Yes. Can't we repair it, Johnny?"

"No. Would have to take that whole plaster section out, shut off the
Erentz plant and exhaust the interior air of all this bulkhead. Day's
job--maybe more."

And the crack would get worse, I knew. It would gradually spread and
widen. The Erentz circulation would fail. All our power would be
drained struggling to maintain it. This brigand who had unwittingly
committed suicide by his daring act had accomplished more than he had
perhaps realized. I could envisage our weapons, useless from the lack
of power. The air in our buildings turned fetid and frigid; ourselves
forced to the helmets. A rush out to abandon the camp and escape. The
building exploding, scattering into a litter on the ledge like a
child's broken toy. The treasure abandoned, with the brigands coming
up and loading it on their ship.

Our defeat. In a few hours now--or minutes. This crack could slowly
widen, or it could break suddenly at any time. Disaster, come now so
abruptly upon us at the very start of the brigand attack....

Grantline's voice in my audiphone broke my despairing thoughts.

"Bad. Come on, Gregg. Nothing to do here."

We were aware that our other four men had run along the building's
other side. They emerged now--with the running brigands in front of
them, rushing out toward the stairs on the ledge. Three giant Martian
figures in flight, with our four men chasing.

A brigand fell to the rocks by the brink of the ledge. The others
reached the descending staircase, tumbled down it with reckless leaps.

Our men turned back. Before we could join them, the enemy ship down in
the valley sent up a cautious searchbeam which located its returning
men. Then the beam swung up to the ledge, landing upon us.

We stood confused, blinded by the brilliant glare. Grantline stumbled
against me.

"Run, Gregg! They'll be firing at us."

We dashed away. Our companions joined us, rushing back for the port. I
saw it open, reinforcements coming out to help us--half a dozen
figures carrying a ten foot insulated shield. They could barely get it
through the port.

The Martian searchray vanished. Then almost instantly the electronic
ray came with its deadly stab. Missed us at first, as we ran for the
shield, carrying it back to the port, hiding behind it.

The ray stabbed once or twice more.

Whether Miko's instruments showed him how badly damaged our front wall
was, we never knew. But I think that he realized. His searchbeam clung
to it, and his zed-ray pried into our interiors.

The brigand ship was active now. We were desperate; we used our
telescope freely for observation. Miko's ore carts and mining
apparatus were unloaded on the rocks. The rail sections were being
carried a mile out, nearly to the center of the valley. A subsidiary
camp was being established there, only a mile from the base of our
cliff, but still far beyond reach of our weapons. We could see the
brigand lights down there.

Then the ore chute sections were brought over. We could see Miko's men
carrying some of the giant projectors, mounting them in the new
position. Power tanks and cables. Light flare catapults--small
mechanical cannons for throwing illuminating bombs.

The enemy searchlight constantly raked our vicinity. Occasionally the
giant electronic projector flung out its bolt as though warning us not
to dare leave our buildings.

Half an hour went by. Our situation was even worse than Miko could
know. The Erentz motors were running hot--our power draining, the
crack widening. When it would break, we could not tell; but the danger
was like a sword over us.

An anxious thirty minutes for us, this second interlude. Grantline
called a meeting of all our little force, with every man having his
say. Inactivity was no longer a feasible policy. We recklessly used
our power to search the sky. Our rescue ship might be up there; but we
could not see it with our now disabled instruments. No signals came.
We could not--or, at least, did not--receive them.

"They wouldn't signal," Grantline protested. "They'd know the
Martians would be more likely to get the signal than us. Of what use
to warn Miko?"

But he did not dare wait for a rescue ship that might or might not be
coming! Miko was playing the waiting game now--making ready for a
quick loading of the ore when we were forced to abandon our buildings.

The brigand ship suddenly moved its position! It rose up in a low flat
arc, came forward and settled in the center of the valley where the
carts and rail sections were piled, and the outside projectors newly
mounted on the rocks.

The brigands now began laying the rails from the ship toward the base
of our cliff. The chute would bring the ore down from the ledge, and
the carts would take it to the ship. The laying of the rails was done
under cover of occasional stabs from the electronic projector.

And then we discovered that Miko had made still another move. The
brigand rays, fired from the depth of the valley, could strike our
front building, but could not reach all our ledge. And from the ship's
newer and nearer position this disadvantage to us was intensified.
Then abruptly we realized that under cover of darkness bombs, an
electronic projector and searchray had been carried to the top of the
crater rim, diagonally across and only half a mile from us. Their
beams shot down, raking all our vicinity from this new angle.

I was on the little flying platform which sallied out as a test to
attack these isolated projectors. Snap and I, and one other volunteer,
went. He and I held the shield; Snap handled the controls.

Our exit port was on the lee side of the building from the hostile
searchbeam. We got out unobserved and sailed upward; but soon a light
from the ship caught us. And the projector bolts came up....

Our sortie only lasted a few minutes. To me, it was a confusion of
crossing beams, with the stars overhead, the swaying little platform
under me, and the shield tingling in my hands when the blasts struck
us. Moments of blurred terror....

The voice of the man beside me sounded in my ears: "Now, Haljan, give
them one!"

We were up over the peak of the rim with the hostile projectors under
us. I gauged our movement, and dropped an explosive powder bomb.

It missed. It flared with a puff on the rocks, twenty feet from where
the two projectors were mounted. I saw that two helmeted figures were
down there. They tried to swing their grids upward, but could not get
them vertical to reach us. The ship was firing at us, but it was far
away. And Grantline's searchbeam was going full power, clinging to the
ship to dazzle them.

Snap circled them. As we came back I dropped another bomb. Its silent
puff seemed littered with flying fragments of the two projectors and
the bodies of the men.

We swiftly flew back to our base.

It decided Grantline. For an hour past Snap and I had been urging our
plan to use the gravity platforms. To remain inactive was sure defeat
now. Even if our buildings did not explode--if we thought to huddle in
them, helmeted in the failing air--then Miko could readily ignore us
and proceed with his loading of the treasure under our helpless gaze.
He could do that now with safety--if we refused to accept the
challenge--for we could not fire through the windows and must go out
to meet this threat.
