a hundred kilovolts and not have it leak off?"

"You couldn't, unless it was a perfectly-insulated wig ... but it looks
as though she did, at that...." and Parleof paused in thought.

"Maybe Byuk would have an idea or two," and Jet uttered aloud a dozen or
so crackling syllables that sounded as though they could have been
ladylike profanity. Whatever they were, Byuk jumped, too, and tuned in
with the other three.

"Oh, it's quite easy, really," Therea said then. "Look." Her mass of
hair cascaded gracefully down around her neck and shoulders. "Look
again." Each hair stood fiercely out all by itself, exactly as before.
"All you young people will learn much more difficult and much more
important things before this meeting is over. I cannot tell you how glad
I am that so many of you are here."

        *           *           *

And so it went, all over the auditorium. Once cracked, the ice broke up
fast.

Fao and Delcamp worked hard; so did Belle and Garlock. Alsyne was a
potent force indeed--his abounding vitality and his tremendous smile
broke down barriers that logic could not affect. And Therea worked
near-miracles; did more than the other five combined. Her sympathy, her
empathy, her understanding and feeling, were as great as Lola's own; her
operative ability was as much greater than Lola's as Lola's was greater
than that of a bobby-soxed babysitter.

Thus, when half of the hour was gone, Garlock heaved a profound sigh of
relief. He wouldn't have half the trouble he had expected--it was not
going to be a riot. And when he called the meeting to order he was
pleasanter and friendlier than Belle had ever before seen him.

"While I am calling this meeting to order, it is only in the widest
possible sense that I am its presiding officer, for we have as yet no
organization by the delegated authority of which any man or any woman
has any right to preside. Yesterday I ruled by force; simply because I
am stronger than any one of you or any pair of you. Today, in the light
of the developments of the last hour, that rule is done; except,
perhaps, for one or two isolated and non-representative cases which may
develop today. By this time tomorrow, I hope that we will be forever
done with the law of claw and fang. For, as a much abler man has
said--'To the really mature mind, the concept of status is completely
invalid.'"

"_He's putting that as a direct quote, Alsyne, and it isn't._" Belle
lanced the thought.

"_He thinks it is_," Alsyne flashed back. "_That is the way his
mathematician's mind recorded it._"

"This meeting is informal, preliminary and exploratory. A meeting of
minds from which, we hope, a useful and workable organization can be
developed. Since you all know what we think it basically should be,
there is no need to repeat it.

"I must now say something that a few of you will construe as a threat.
You are all Prime Operators. Each pair of you is the highest development
of a planet, perhaps of a solar system. You can learn if you will. You
can cooperate if you will. Any couple here who refuses to learn, and
hence to cooperate, will be returned to its native planet and will have
no further contact with this group.

"I now turn this meeting over to our first moderators, Alsyne and Therea
of Thaker; the oldest and ablest Prime Operators of us all."

"Thank you, Garlock of Tellus. One correction, however, if you please. I
who speak am neither this man nor this woman standing here, but both. I
am the Prime Unit of Thaker. For brevity, and for the purposes of this
meeting only, I could be called simply 'Thaker.' Before calling for
general discussion I wish to call particular attention to two points,
neither of which has been sufficiently emphasized.

"First, the purpose of a Prime Operator is to serve, not to rule. Thus,
no Prime should be or will be 'boss' of anything, except possibly of his
own starship.

"Second, since we have no data we do not know what form the proposed
Galactic Service will assume. One thing, however, is sure. Whatever
power of enforcement or of punishment it may have will derive, not from
its Primes, but from the fact that it will be an arm of the Galactic
Council, which will be composed of Operators only. No Prime will be
eligible for membership."

        *           *           *

Thaker went on to explain how each pair could obtain instruction and
assistance in many projects, including starships. How each pair would,
when they were mature enough, be coached in the use of certain abilities
they did not as yet have. He suggested procedures and techniques to be
employed in the opening up of each pair's volume of space. He then asked
for questions and comments.

Semolo was the first. "If I'm a good little boy," he sneered, "and do
exactly as I'm told, and take over the region you tell me to and not the
one I want to, what assurance have I that some other Prime, just because
he's a year older than I am, won't come along and take it away from me?"

"Your question is meaningless," Thaker replied. "Since you will not
'take over,' or 'have,' or 'own,' any region, it cannot be 'taken away
from you.'"

"Then I will...." Semolo began.

"You will keep still!" came a clear, incisive thought, just as Garlock
was getting ready to intervene. Miss Mitala then switched from thought,
which everyone there could understand, and launched a ten-second blast
of furious speech. Semolo wilted and the girl went on in thought: "He'll
be good--or else."

A girl demanded recognition and got it. "Semolo's right. What's the use
of being Primes if we can't get any good out of it? We're the strongest
people of our respective worlds. I say we're bosses and should keep on
being bosses."

Garlock got ready to shut her up, then paused; holding his fire.

"Ah, yes, friend Garlock, you are maturing fast," came Thaker's thought
and, in answer to Garlock's surprise, it went on, "This situation will,
I think, be self-adjusting; just as will be those in the as yet
unexplored regions of space."

The girl kept on. "I, at least, am going to keep on bossing my own
planet, milking it just as I...."

Her companion had been trying to crack her shield. Failing in that, he
stepped in close and tapped her--solidly, but with carefully-measured
force--behind the ear. Before she could fall, he 'ported her back up
into their quarters. "This happens all the time," he explained to the
group at large. "Carry on."

Discussion went on, with less and less acrimony, all the rest of the
day. And the next day, and the next. Then, argument having reached the
point of diminishing returns, the three starships took the forty-six
couples home.

        *           *           *

The six Primes went into Evans' office, where the lawyer was deeply
engaged with Gerald Banks, the Galaxians' Public Relations Chief. Banks
was holding his head in both hands.

"Garlock, maybe _you_ can tell me," Banks demanded. "How much of this
stuff, if any, can I publish? And if so, _how_?"

"Nothing," Garlock said, flatly.

"What do you think, Thaker?" Belle asked. "You're smarter than we are."

"What Thaker thinks has no bearing," Garlock said.

Belle, Fao, and Delcamp all began to protest at once, but they were
silenced by Thaker himself.

"Garlock is right. My people are not your people; I know not at all how
your people think or what they will or will not believe. I go."

"That lets Deg and me out too; then, double-plus," Fao said with a grin,
"so we'll leave that baby on your laps. We go, too."

"Well, little Miss Weisenheimer," Garlock smiled quizzically at Belle,
"You grabbed the ball--what are you going to do with it?"

"Nothing, I guess...." Belle thought for a minute. "We couldn't stuff
any part of that down the throat of a simple-minded six-year-old. We
haven't really _got_ anything, anyway. Time enough, I think, when we
have six or seven hundred planets in each region, instead of only one
planet. Maybe we'll know something by then. Does that make sense?"

"It does to me," Garlock said, and the others agreed.

"That Thakern 'we go' business sounds rough at first, but it's
contagious. Fao and Deggi caught it, and I feel like I'm coming down
with it myself. How about you, Clee?"

"We go," Belle and Garlock said in unison, and vanished.

        *           *           *

Aboard the _Pleiades_, the next few days passed quietly enough. James
set up, in the starship's memory banks, a sequence to mass-produce
instruction tapes and blueprints. Garlock and Belle began systematically
to explore the Tellurian Region. Now, however, their technique was
different. If either Prime of any world was not enthusiastic about the
project--

"Very well. Think it over," they would say. "We will get in touch with
you again in about a year," and the starship would go on to the next
planet.

On Earth, however, things became less and less tranquil with every day
that passed. For, in deciding not to publish anything, Garlock had not
considered at all the basic function and the tremendous ability, power,
and scope of _The Press_. And Galaxian Hall had never before been closed
to the public; not for any hour of any day of any year of its existence.
A non-profit organization, dependent upon the public for its tremendous
income, the Galaxian Society had always courted that public in every
possible ethical way.

Thus, in the first hour of closure, a bored reporter came out, read the
smoothly-phrased notice, and lepped it in to the desk. It might be
worth, he thought, half an inch.

Later in the day, however, the world's most sensitive news-nose began to
itch. Did, or did not, this quiet, unannounced closing smell
ever-so-slightly of cheese? Wherefore, Benjamin Bundy, the newscaster
who had covered the starship's maiden flight, went out himself to look
the thing over. He found the whole field closed. Not only closed, but
Gunther-blocked impenetrably tight. He studied the announcement, his
sixth sense--the born newsman's sense for news--probing every word.

"Regret ... research ... of such extreme delicacy ... vibration ...
temperature control ... one one-hundredth of one degree Centigrade...."

He sought out his long-time acquaintance Banks; finding him in a
temporary office half a block away from the Hall. "What's the story,
Jerry?" he asked. "The _real_ story, I mean?"

"You know, as much about it as I do, Ben. Garlock and James don't waste
time trying to detail me on that kind of business, you know."

This should have satisfied any newshawk, but Bundy's nose still itched.
He mulled things over for a minute, then probed, finding that he could
read nothing except Banks' outermost, most superficial thoughts.

"Well ... maybe ... but...." Then Bundy plunged. "All you have to do,
Jerry, is tell me screens-half-down that your damn story is true."

"And that's the one thing I can't do," Banks admitted; and Bundy could
not detect that any part of his sheepishness was feigned. "You're just
too damned smart, Ben."

"Oh--one of _those_ things? So that's it?"

"Yup. I told Evans it might not work."

That should have satisfied the reporter, but it didn't. "Now it doesn't
smell just a trifle cheesy; it stinks like rotten fish. You won't go
screens down on that one, either."

"No comment."

"Oh, joy!" Bundy exulted. "So big that Gerald Banks, the top press-agent
of all time, actually doesn't _want_ publicity! The starship works--this
lack-of-control stuff is the bunk--from here to another star in nothing
flat--Garlock's back, and he's brought--what _have_ you got in there,
Jerry?"

"The only way I can tell you is in confidence, for Evans' release. I'd
like to, Ben, believe me, but I can't."

"Confidence, hell! Do you think we won't get it?"

"In that case, no comment." The interview ended and the siege began.

        *           *           *

Newshounds and detectives questioned and peered and probed. They dug
into morgues, tabulating and classifying. They recalled and taped and
sifted all the gossip they had heard. They got a picture of sorts, but
it was maddeningly confusing and incomplete. And, since it was certain
that inter-systemic matters were involved, they could not
extrapolate--any guess was far too apt to be wrong. Thus nothing went on
the air or appeared in print; and, although the surface remained calm,
all newsdom seethed to its depths.

Wherefore haggard Banks and harried Evans greeted Garlock with shouts of
joy when the four wanderers came back to spend the week end on Earth.

"I'll talk to 'em," Garlock decided, after the long story had been told.
"Have somebody get hold of Bundy and ask him to come out."

"Get _hold_ of him!" Banks snorted. "He's here. Twenty-four hours a day.
Eating sandwiches and cat-napping on chairs in the lobby. All you have
to do is unseal that door."

Garlock flung the door wide. Bundy rushed in, followed by a more-or-less
steady stream of some fifty other top-bracket newspeople, both men and
women.

"Well, Garlock, perhaps _you_ will give us some screens-down facts?"
Bundy asked, angrily.

"I'll give you _all_ the screens-down...."

"Clee!" "You're crazy!" "You can't!" "Don't!" Belle and all the
Operators protested at once.

        *           *           *

Ignoring the objections, Garlock cut his shield to half and gave the
whole group a true account of everything that had happened in the
galaxy. Then, while they were all too stunned to speak, a grin of
saturnine amusement spread over his dark, five-o'clock-shadowed face.

"You pestiferous gnats insisted on grabbing the ball," he sneered. "Now
let's see you run with it."

Bundy came out of his trance. "_What_ a story!" he yelled. "We'll
plaster it...."

"Yeah," Garlock said, dryly. "_What_ a story. Exactly."

"Oh." Bundy deflated suddenly. "You'll have to prove it--demonstrate
it--of course."

"Of course? You tickle me. Not only do I not have to prove it, I won't.
I won't even confirm it."

Bundy glared at Garlock, then whirled on Banks. "If you don't give me
