and twisted it from the Very Young Man's hand. A second more and they
came together again, and the Very Young Man felt his antagonist's
powerful arms around his body, bending him backwards.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Big Business Man stood beside the others at the river's edge,
watching the gigantic struggle, the outcome of which meant life or death
to them all. The grappling figures were ten times his own height before
he fairly realized the situation. At first he thought he should take
some of the drug also, and grow larger with them. Then he knew that he
could not overtake their growth in time to aid his friend. The Chemist
and the Doctor must evidently have reached the same conclusion, for
they, too, did nothing, only stood motionless, speechless, staring up at
the battling giants.

Loto, with his head buried upon his mother's shoulder, and her arms
holding him close, whimpered a little in terror. Only Aura, of all the
party, did not get upon her feet. She lay full length upon the ground, a
hand under her chin, staring steadily upwards. Her face was
expressionless, her eyes unblinking. But her lips moved a little, as
though she were breathing a silent prayer, and the fingers of her hand
against her face dug their nails into the flesh of her cheek.

Taller far than the tree-tops, the two giants stood facing each other.
Then the Very Young Man seized one of the trees, and with a mighty pull
tore it up by the roots and swung it through the air. Aura drew a quick
breath as in another instant they grappled and came crashing to the
ground, falling head and shoulders in the river with a splash that
drenched her with its spray. The Very Young Man was underneath, and she
seemed to meet the glance of his great eyes when he fell. The trees
growing on the river-bank snapped like rushes beneath the huge bodies of
the giants, as, still growing larger, they struggled back and forth. The
river, stirred into turmoil by the sweep of their great arms, rolled its
waves up over the mossy banks, driving the watchers back into the edge
of the woods, and even there covering them with its spray.

A moment more and the giants were on their feet again, standing ankle
deep, far out in the river. Up against the unbroken blackness of the
starless sky their huge forms towered. For a second they stood
motionless; then they came together again and Aura could see the Very
Young Man sink on his knees, his hand trailing in the water. Then in an
instant more he struggled up to his feet; and as his hand left the water
Aura saw that it clutched an enormous dripping rock. She held her
breath, watching the tremendous figures as they swayed, locked in each
other's arms. A single step sidewise and they were back nearly at the
river's bank; the water seethed white under their tread.

The Very Young Man's right arm hung limp behind him; the boulder in his
hand dangled a hundred feet or more in the air above the water. Slowly
the greater strength of his antagonist bent him backwards. Aura's heart
stood still as she saw Targo's fingers at the Very Young Man's throat.
Then, in a great arc, the Very Young Man swept the hand holding the rock
over his head, and brought it down full upon his enemy's skull. The
boulder fell into the river with a thundering splash. For a brief
instant the giant figures hung swaying; then the titanic hulk of Targo's
body came crashing down. It fell full across the river, quivered
convulsively and lay still.

And the river, backing up before it a moment, turned aside in its
course, and flung the muddy torrent of its water roaring down through
the forest.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

LOST IN SIZE


The Very Young Man stood ankle deep in the turgid little rivulet, a
tightness clutching at his chest, and with his head whirling. At his
feet his antagonist lay motionless. He stepped out of the water, putting
his foot into a tiny grove of trees that bent and crackled like twigs
under his tread. He wondered if he would faint; he knew he must not.
Away to the left he saw a line of tiny hills; beyond that a luminous
obscurity into which his sight could not penetrate; behind him there was
only darkness. He seemed to be standing in the midst of a great barren
waste, with just a little toy river and forest at his feet--a child's
plaything, set down in a man's great desert.

The Very Young Man suddenly thought of his friends. He stepped into the
middle of the river and out again on the other side. Then he bent down
with his face close to the ground, just above the tops of the tiny
little trees. He made the human figures out finally. Hardly larger than
ants they seemed, and he shuddered as he saw them. The end of his thumb
could have smashed them all, they were so small.

One of the figures seemed to be waving something, and the Very Young Man
thought he heard the squeak of its voice. He straightened upright,
standing rigid, afraid to move his feet. He wondered what he should do,
and in sudden fear felt for the vial of the diminishing drug. It was
still in place, in the pouch under his armpit. The Very Young Man
breathed a sigh of relief. He decided to take the drug and rejoin his
friends. Then as a sudden thought struck him he bent down to the ground
again, slowly, with infinite caution. The little figures were still
there; and now he thought they were not quite as tiny as before. He
watched them; slowly but unmistakably they were growing larger.

The Very Young Man carefully took a step backwards, and then sat down
heavily. The forest trees crackled under him. He pulled up his knees,
and rested his head upon them. The little rivulet diverted from its
course by the body of Targo, swept past through the woods almost at his
side. The noise it made mingled with the ringing in his head. His body
ached all over; he closed his eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

"He's all right now," the Doctor's voice said. "He'll be all right in a
moment."

The Very Young Man opened his eyes. He was lying upon the ground, with
Aura sitting beside him, and his friends--all his own size
again--standing over him.

He met Aura's tender, serious eyes, and smiled. "I'm all right," he
said. "What a foolish thing to faint."

Lylda stooped beside him, "You saved us all," she said. "There is
nothing we can say--to mean what it should. But you will always know how
we feel; how splendid you were."

To the praise they gave him the Very Young Man had no answer save a
smile of embarrassment. Aura said nothing, only met his smile with one
of her own, and with a tender glance that made his heart beat faster.

"I'm all right," he repeated after a moment of silence. "Let's get
started."

They sat down now beside the Very Young Man, and earnestly discussed the
best plan for getting out of the ring.

"You said you had calculated the best way," suggested the Doctor to the
Chemist.

"First of all," interrupted the Big Business Man. "Are we sure none of
these Oroids is going to follow us? For Heaven's sake let's have done
with these terrible struggles."

The Very Young Man remembered. "He stole one of the vials," he said,
pointing to Targo's body.

"He was probably alone," the Chemist reasoned. "If any others had been
with him they would have taken some of the drug also. Probably Targo
took one of the pills and then dropped the vial to the ground."

"My idea," pursued the Big Business Man, "is for us to get large just as
quickly and continuously as possible. Probably you're right about Targo,
but don't let's take any chances.

"I've been thinking," he continued, seeing that they agreed with him.
"You know this is a curious problem we have facing us. I've been
thinking about it a lot. It seemed a frightful long trip down here, but
in spite of that, I can't get it out of my mind that we're only a very
little distance under the surface of the ring."

"It's absolutely all in the viewpoint," the Chemist said with a smile.
"That's what I meant about having an easier method of getting out. The
distance depends absolutely on how you view it."

"How far would it be out if we didn't get any larger?" the Very Young
Man wanted to know.

"Based on the size of a normal Oroid adult, and using the terrestrial
standard of feet and inches as they would seem to us when Oroid size, I
should say the distance from Arite to the surface of the ring would be
about one hundred and fifty to a hundred and sixty thousand miles."

"Holy mackerel!" exclaimed the Very Young Man.

"Don't let's do much walking while we're small."

"You have the idea exactly," smiled the Chemist.

"Taking the other viewpoint," said the Doctor. "Just where do you figure
this Oroid universe is located in the ring?"

"It is contained within one of the atoms of gold," the Chemist answered.
"And that golden atom, I estimate, is located probably within one
one-hundredth of an inch, possibly even one one-thousandth of an inch
away from the circular indentation I made in the bottom of the scratch.
In actual distance I suppose Arite is possibly one-sixteenth of an inch
below the surface of the ring."

"Certainly makes a difference how you look at it," murmured the Very
Young Man in awe.

The Chemist went on. "It is obvious then, that although when coming down
the distance must be covered to some extent by physical movement--by
traveling geographically, so to speak--going back, that is not
altogether the case. Most of the distance may be covered by bodily
growth, rather than by a movement of the body from place to place."

"We might get lost," objected the Very Young Man. "Suppose we got
started in the wrong direction?"

"Coming in, that is a grave danger," answered the Chemist, "because then
distances are opening up and a single false step means many miles of
error later on. But going out, just the reverse is true; distances are
shortening. A mile in the wrong direction is corrected in an instant
later on. Not coming to a realization of that when I made the trip
before, led me to undertake many unnecessary hours of most arduous
climbing. There is only one condition imperative; the body growing must
have free space for its growth, or it will be crushed to death."

"Have you planned exactly how we are to get out?" asked the Big Business
Man.

"Yes, I have," the Chemist answered. "In the size we are now, which you
must remember is several thousand times Oroid height, it will be only a
short distance to a point where as we grow we can move gradually to the
centre of the circular pit. That huge inclined plane slides down out of
it, you remember. Once in the pit, with its walls closing in upon us, we
can at the proper moment get out of it about as I did before."

"Then we'll be in the valley of the scratch," exclaimed the Very Young
Man eagerly. "I'll certainly be glad to get back there again."

"Getting out of the valley we'll use the same methods," the Chemist
continued. "There we shall have to do some climbing, but not nearly so
much as I did."

The Very Young Man was thrilled at the prospect of so speedy a return to
his own world. "Let's get going," he suggested quickly. "It sounds a
cinch."

They started away in a few minutes more, leaving the body of Targo lying
where it had fallen across the river. In half an hour of walking they
located without difficulty the huge incline down which the Chemist had
fallen when first he came into the ring. Following along the bottom of
the incline they reached his landing place--a mass of small rocks and
pebbles of a different metallic-looking stone than the ground around
marking it plainly. These were the rocks and boulders that had been
brought down with him in his fall.

"From here," said the Chemist, as they came to a halt, "we can go up
into the valley by growth alone. It is several hours, but we need move
very little from this position."

"How about eating?" suggested the Very Young Man.

They sat down at the base of the incline and ate another meal--rather a
more lavish one this time, for the rest they had taken, and the prospect
of a shorter journey ahead of them than they had anticipated made the
Doctor less strict. Then, the meal over, they took the amount of the
drug the Chemist specified. He measured it carefully--more than ten of
the pills.

"We have a long wait," the Chemist said, when the first sickness from
this tremendous dose had left them.

The time passed quickly. They spoke seldom, for the extraordinary
rapidity with which the aspect of the landscape was changing, and the
remarkable sensations they experienced, absorbed all their attention.

In about two hours after taking the drug the curving, luminous line that
was the upper edge of the incline came into view, faint and blurred, but
still distinct against the blackness of the sky. The incline now was
noticeably steeper; each moment they saw its top coming down towards
them out of the heights above, and its surface smoothing out and
becoming more nearly perpendicular.

They were all standing up now. The ground beneath them seemed in rapid
motion, coming towards them from all directions, and dwindling away
beneath their feet. The incline too--now in form a vertical concave
wall--kept shoving itself forward, and they had to step backwards
continually to avoid its thrust.

Within another hour a similar concave wall appeared behind them which
they could follow with their eyes entirely around the circumference of
the great pit in which they now found themselves. The sides of this pit
soon became completely perpendicular--smooth and shining.

Another hour and the action of the drug was beginning to slacken--the
walls encircling them, although steadily closing in, no longer seemed to
move with such rapidity. The pit as they saw it now was perhaps a
thousand feet in diameter and twice as deep. Far overhead the blackness
of the sky was beginning to be tinged with a faint gray-blue.

At the Chemist's suggestion they walked over near the center of the
circular enclosure. Slowly its walls closed in about them. An hour more
and its diameter was scarcely fifty feet.

The Chemist called his companions around him.

"There is an obstacle here," he began, "that we can easily overcome; but
we must all understand just what we are to do. In perhaps half an hour
at the rate we are growing this enclosure will resemble a well twice as
deep, approximately, as it is broad. We cannot climb up its sides,
therefore we must wait until it is not more than six feet in depth in
order to be able to get out. At that time its diameter will be scarcely
three feet. There are nine of us here; you can realize there would not
be room for us all.

"What we must do is very simple. Since there is not room for us all at
once, we must get large from now on only one at a time."

"Quite so," said the Big Business Man in a perfectly matter-of-fact
tone.

"All of us but one will stop growing now; one will go on and get out of
the pit. He will immediately stop his growth so that he can wait for the
others and help them out. Each of us will follow the same method of
procedure."

The Chemist then went on to arrange the exact quantities of the drugs
they were each to take at specified times, so that at the end they would
all be nearly the same size again. When he had explained all this to
Oteo and Eena in their native language, they were ready to proceed with
the plan.

"Who's first?" asked the Very Young Man. "Let me go with Loto."

They selected the Chemist to go first, and all but him took a little of
the other drug and checked their growth. The pit at this time was hardly
more than fifteen feet across and about thirty feet deep.

The Chemist stood in the centre of the enclosure, while his friends
crowded over against its walls to make room for his growing body. It was
nearly half an hour before his head was above its top. He waited only a
moment more, then he sprang upwards, clambered out of the pit and
disappeared beyond the rim. In a few moments they saw his huge head and
shoulders hanging out over the side wall; his hand and arm reached down
towards them and they heard his great voice roaring.

"Come on--somebody else."

The Very Young Man went next, with Loto. Nothing unusual marked their
growth, and without difficulty, helped by the Chemist's hands reaching
down to them, they climbed out of the pit.

In an hour more the entire party was in the valley, standing beside the
little circular opening out of which they had come.

The Very Young Man found himself beside Aura, a little apart from the
others, who gathered to discuss their plan for growing out of the
valley.

"It isn't much of a trip, is it, Aura?" the Very Young Man said. "Do you
realize, we're nearly there?"

The girl looked around her curiously. The valley of the scratch appeared
to them now hardly more than a quarter of a mile in width. Aura stared
upwards between its narrow walls to where, several thousand feet above,
a narrow strip of gray-blue sky was visible.

"That sky--is that the sky of your world?" she exclaimed. "How pretty it
is!"

The Very Young Man laughed.

"No, Aura, that's not our sky. It's only the space in the room above the
ring. When we get the size we are going to be finally, our heads will be
right up in there. The real sky with its stars will be even then as far
above us as your sky at Arite was above you."

Aura breathed a long sigh. "It's too wonderful--really to understand,
isn't it?" she said.

The Very Young Man pulled her down on the ground beside him.

"The most wonderful part, Aura, is going to be having you up there." He
spoke gently; somehow whenever he thought of this fragile little
girl-woman up in his strange bustling world, he felt himself very big
and strong. He wanted to be her protector, and her teacher of all the
new and curious things she must learn.

The girl did not reply at once; she simply met his earnest gaze with her
frank answering smile of understanding.

The Chemist was calling to them.

"Oh, you Jack. We're about ready to start."

The Very Young Man got to his feet, holding down his hands to help Aura
up.

"You're going to make a fine woman, Aura, in this new world. You just
wait and see if you don't," he said as they rejoined the others.

The Chemist explained his plans to them. "This valley is several times
deeper than its breadth; you can see that. We cannot grow large enough
to jump out as we did out of the pit; we would be crushed by the walls
before we were sufficiently tall to leap out.

"But we're not going to do as I did, and climb all the way up. Instead
we will stay here at the bottom until we are as large as we can
conveniently get between the valley walls. Then we will stop growing and
climb up the side; it will only be a short distance then."

The Very Young Man nodded his comprehension. "Unless by that time the
walls are too smooth to climb up," he remarked.

"If we see them getting too smooth, we'll stop and begin climbing," the
Chemist agreed. "We're all ready, aren't we?" He began measuring out the
estimated quantities of the drug, handing it to each of them.

"Say, I'm terrible sorry," began the Very Young Man, apologetically
interrupting this procedure. "But you know if it wasn't for me, we'd all
starve to death."
