working plasmoid robots, built to their own specifications.

"What kind of specifications?" Trigger inquired.

Lyad hadn't learned in detail, but some of the robots appeared to have
demonstrated rather alarming possibilities. Those possibilities,
however, were precisely what intrigued the hierarchy most.

Mantelish smacked his lips thoughtfully and shook his head. "Not good!"
he said. "Not at all good! I'm beginning to think--" He paused a
moment. "Go on, Lyad."

The hierarchy was now giving renewed consideration to a curious request
the plasmoid had made almost as soon as Balmordan became capable of
understanding it. The request had been to find and destroy plasmoid
113-A.

The Ermetyne's amber eyes switched to Trigger. "Shall I?" she asked.

Trigger nodded.

And a specific human being. The Devagas already had established that
this human being must be Trigger Argee.

"_What?_" Mantelish's thick white eyebrows shot up. "113-A we can
understand--it is afraid of being in some way brought back under
control. But why Trigger?"

"Because," Lyad said carefully, "112 was aware that 113-A intended to
condition Trigger into being its interpreter."

Professor Mantelish's jaw dropped. He swung his head toward Trigger. "Is
that true?"

She nodded. "It's true, all right. We've been working on it, but we
haven't got too far along. Tell you later. Go ahead, Lyad."

The Devagas, naturally, hadn't acted on the king plasmoid's naive
suggestion. Whatever it feared was more than likely to be very useful to
them. Instead they made preparations to bring both 113-A and Trigger
Argee into their possession. They would then have a new, strong
bargaining point in their dealings with their dubious partner. But they
discovered promptly that neither Trigger nor 113-A were at all easy to
come by.

Balmordan now suggested a modification of tactics. The hierarchy had
seen to it that a number of interpreters were available for 112;
Balmordan in consequence had lost much of his early importance and was
anxious to regain it. His proposal was that all efforts should be
directed at obtaining 113-A. Once it was obtained, he himself would
volunteer to become its first interpreter. Trigger Argee, because of the
information she might reveal to others, should be destroyed--a far
simpler operation than attempting to take her alive.

This was agreed to; and Balmordan was authorized to carry out both
operations.

Mantelish had begun shaking his head again. "No!" he said suddenly and
loudly. He looked at Lyad, then at Trigger. "Trigger!" he said.

"Yes?" said Trigger.

"Take that deceitful woman to her cabin," Mantelish ordered. "Lock her
up. I have something to say to the Commissioner."

Trigger arose. "All right," she said. "Come on, Lyad."

The two of them left the lounge. Mantelish stood up and went over to the
Commissioner. He grasped the Commissioner's jacket lapels.

"Holati, old friend!" he began emotionally.

"What is it, old friend?" the Commissioner inquired.

"What I have to say," Mantelish rumbled, "will shock you. Profoundly."

"No!" exclaimed the Commissioner.

"Yes," said Mantelish. "That plasmoid 112--it has, of course, an almost
inestimable potential value to civilization."

"Of course," the Commissioner agreed.

"But it also," said Mantelish, "represents a quite intolerable threat to
civilization."

"Mantelish!" cried the Commissioner.

"It does. You don't comprehend these matters as I do. Holati, that
plasmoid must be destroyed! Secretly, if possible. And by us!"

"Mantelish!" gasped the Commissioner. "You can't be serious!"

"I am."

"Well," said Commissioner Tate, "sit down. I'm open to suggestions."
Space-armor drill hadn't been featured much in the Colonial School's
crowded curriculum. But the Commissioner broke out one of the ship's two
heavy-duty suits; and when Trigger wasn't at the controls, eating,
sleeping, or taking care of the ship's housekeeping with Lyad and
Mantelish, she drilled.

She wasn't at the controls too often. When she was, they had to surface
and proceed in normal space. But Lyad, not too surprisingly, turned out
to be a qualified subspace pilot. Even less surprisingly, she already
had made a careful study of the ship's controls. After a few hours of
instruction, she went on shift with the Commissioner along the less
rugged stretches. In this area, none of the stretches were smooth.

When not on duty, Lyad lay on her bunk and brooded.

Mantelish tried to be useful.

Repulsive might have been brooding too. He didn't make himself
noticeable.

Time passed. The stretches got rougher. The last ten hours, the
Commissioner didn't stir out of the control seat. Lyad had been locked
in her cabin again as the critical period approached. In normal space,
the substation should have been in clear detector range by now. Here,
the detectors gave occasional blurry, uncertain indications that
somewhere in the swirling energies about them might be something more
solidly material. It was like creeping through jungle thickets towards
the point where a dangerous quarry lurked.

They eased down on the coordinate points. They came sliding out between
two monstrous twisters. The detectors leaped to life.

"Ship!" said the Commissioner. He swore. "Frigate class," he said an
instant later. He turned his head toward Trigger. "Get Lyad! They're in
communication range. We'll let her communicate."

Trigger, heart hammering, ran to get Lyad. The Commissioner had the
short-range communicator on when they came hurrying back to the control
room together.

"That the Aurora?" he asked.

Lyad glanced at the outline in the detectors. "It is!" Her face went
white.

"Talk to 'em," he ordered. "Know their call number?"

"Of course," Lyad sat down at the communicator. Her hands shook for a
moment, then steadied. "What am I to say?"

"Just find out what's happened, to start with. Why they're still here.
Then we'll improvise. Get them to come to the screen if you can."

Lyad's fingers flew over the tabs. The communicator signaled contact.

Lyad said evenly, "Come in, Aurora! This is the Ermetyne."

There was a pause, a rather unaccountably long pause, Trigger thought.
Then a voice said, "Yes, First Lady?"

Lyad's eyes widened for an instant. "Come in on visual, Captain!" There
was the snap of command in the words.

Again a pause. Then suddenly the communicator was looking into the
Aurora's control room. A brown-bearded, rather lumpy-faced man in
uniform sat before the other screen. There were other uniformed men
behind him. Trigger heard the Ermetyne's breath suck in and turned to
watch Lyad's face.

"Why haven't you carried out your instructions, Captain?" The voice was
still even.

"There was a difficulty with the engines, First Lady."

Lyad nodded. "Very well. Stand by for new instructions."

She switched off the communicator. She twisted around toward the
Commissioner. "Get us out of here!" she said, chalk-faced. "_Fast!_
Those aren't my men."

Flame bellowed about them in subspace. The Commissioner's hand slapped a
button. The flame vanished and stars shone all around. The engines
hurled them forward. Twelve seconds later, they angled and dived again.
Subspace reappeared.

"Guess you were right!" the Commissioner said. He idled the engines and
scratched his chin. "But what were they?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Everything about it was wrong!" Lyad was saying presently, her face
still white. "Their faces, in particular, were deformed!" She looked at
Trigger. "You saw it?"

Trigger nodded. She suspected she was on the white-faced side herself.
"The captain," she said. "I didn't look at the others. It looked as if
his cheeks and forehead were pushed out of shape!"

There was a short silence. "Well," said the Commissioner, "seems like
that plasmoid has been doing some more experimenting. Question is, how
did it get to them?"

They didn't find any answers to that. Lyad insisted the Aurora had been
given specific orders to avoid the immediate vicinity of the substation.
Its only purpose there was to observe and report on anything that seemed
to be going on in the area. She couldn't imagine her crew disobeying the
orders.

"That mind-level control business," Trigger said finally. "Maybe _it_
found a way of going out to _them_."

She could see by their faces that the idea had occurred, and that they
didn't like it. Well, neither did she.

They pitched a few more ideas around. None of them seemed helpful.

"Unless we just want to hightail it," the Commissioner said finally,
"about the only thing we can do is go back and slug it out with the
frigate first. We can't risk snooping around the station while she's
there and likely to start pounding on our backs any second."

Mantelish looked startled. "Holati," he cautioned, "That's a warship!"

"Mantelish," the Commissioner said, a trifle coldly, "what you've been
riding in isn't a canoe." He glanced at Lyad. "I suppose you'd feel
happier if you weren't locked up in your cabin during the ruckus?"

Lyad gave him a strained smile. "Commissioner," she said, "You're so
right!"

"Then keep your seat," he said. "We'll start prowling."

They prowled. It took an hour to recontact the Aurora, presumably
because the Aurora was also prowling for them. Suddenly the detectors
came alive.

The ship's guns went off at once. Then subspace went careening crazily
past in the screens. Trigger looked at the screens for a few seconds,
gulped and started studying the floor.

Whatever the plasmoid had done to the frigate's crew, they appeared to
have lost none of their ability to give battle. It was a very brisk
affair. But neither had the onetime Squadron Commander Tate lost much of
his talent along those lines. The frigate had many more guns but no
better range. And he had the faster ship. Four minutes after the first
shots were exchanged, the Aurora blew up.

The ripped hunk of the Aurora's hull which the Commissioner presently
brought into the lock appeared to have had three approximately
quarter-inch holes driven at a slant through it, which subsequently had
been plugged again. The plugging material was plasmoid in character.

"There were two holes in another piece," the Commissioner said, very
thoughtfully. "If that's the average, she was punched in a few thousand
spots. Let's go have a better look."

He and Mantelish maneuvered the gravity crane carrying the holed slab of
steel-alloy into the ship's workshop. Lyad was locked back into her
cabin, and Trigger went on guard in the control room and looked out
wistfully at the stars of normal space.

Half an hour later, the two men came up the passage and joined her. They
appeared preoccupied.

"It's an unpleasant picture, Trigger girl," the Commissioner said.
"Those holes look sort of chewed through. Whatever did the chewing was
also apparently capable of sealing up the portion behind it as it went
along. What it did to the men when it got inside we don't know.
Mantelish feels we might compare it roughly to the effects of ordinary
germ invasion. It doesn't really matter. It fixed them."

"Mighty large germs!" Trigger said. "Why didn't their meteor reflectors
stop them?"

"If the ship was hove to and these things just drifted in gradually--"

"Oh, I see. That wouldn't activate the reflectors. Then, if we keep
moving ourselves--"

"That," said the Commissioner, "was what I had in mind."




28


Trigger couldn't keep from staring at the subspace station. It was
unbelievable.

One could still tell that the human construction gangs had put up a
standard type of armored station down there. A very big, very massive
one, but normally shaped, nearly spherical. One could tell it only by
the fact that at the gun pits the original material still showed
through. Everywhere else it had vanished under great black masses of
material which the plasmoids had added to the station's structure.

All over that black, lumpy, lavalike surface the plasmoids crawled,
walked, soared and wriggled. There were thousands of them, perhaps
hundreds of different types. It looked like a wet, black, rotten stump
swarming with life inside and out.

Neither she nor the two men had made much mention of its appearance. All
you could say was that it was horrible.

The plasmoids they could see ignored the ship. They also gave no
noticeable attention to the eight space flares the Commissioner had set
in a rough cube about the station. But for the first two hours after
their arrival, the ship's meteor reflectors remained active. An
occasional tap at first, then an almost continuous pecking, finally a
twenty-minute drumfire that filled the reflector screens with madly
dancing clouds of tiny sparks. Suddenly it ended. Either the king
plasmoid had exhausted its supply of that particular weapon or it
preferred to conserve what it had left.

"Might test their guns," the Commissioner muttered. He looked very
unhappy, Trigger thought.

He circled off, put on speed, came back and flicked the ship past the
station's flank. He drew bursts from two pits with a promptness which
confirmed what already had been almost a certainty--that the gun
installations operated automatically. They seemed remarkably feeble
weapons for a station of that size. The Devagas apparently had had sense
enough not to give the plasmoid every advantage.

The Commissioner plunked a test shot next into one of the black
protuberances. A small fiery crater appeared. It darkened quickly again.
Out of the biggest opening, down near what would have been the foot of
the stump if it had been a stump, something, long, red and wormlike
wriggled rapidly. It flowed up over the structure's surface to the
damaged point and thrust the tip of its front end into the crater. Black
material began to flow from the tip. The plasmoid moved its front end
back and forth across the damaged area. Others of the same kind came out
and joined it. The crater began to fill out.

They hauled away a little and surfaced. Normal space looked clean,
beautiful, homelike, calmly shining. None of them except Lyad had slept
for over twenty hours. "What do you think?" the Commissioner asked.

They discussed what they had seen in subdued voices. Nobody had a plan.
They agreed that one thing they could be sure of was that the Vishni
Fleet people and any other human beings who might have been on the
station when it was turned over to the king plasmoid were no longer
alive. Unless, of course, something had been done to them much more
drastic than had happened to the Aurora's crew. The ship had passed by
the biggest opening, like a low wide black mouth, close enough to make
out that it extended far back into the original station's interior. The
station was open and airless as Harvest Moon had been before the humans
got there.

"Some of those things down there," the Commissioner said, "had
attachments that would crack any suit wide open. A lot of them are big,
and a lot of them are fast. Once we were inside, we'd have no
maneuverability to speak of. If the termites didn't get to us before we
got inside. Suits won't do it here." He was a gambler, and a gambler
doesn't buck impossible odds.

"What could you do with the guns?" Trigger asked.

"Not too much. They're not meant to take down a fortress. Scratching
around on the surface with them would just mark the thing up. We can
widen that opening by quite a bit, and once it's widened, I can flip in
the bomb. But it would be just blind luck if we nailed the one we're
after that way. With a dozen bombs we could break up the station. But we
don't have them."

They nodded thoughtfully.

"The worst part of that," he went on, "is that it would be completely
obvious. The Council's right when it worries about fumbles here. Tranest
and the Devagas know the thing is in there. If the Federation can't
produce it, both those outfits have the Council over a barrel. Or we
could be setting the Hub up for fifty years of fighting among the member
worlds, sometime in the next few hours."
