and intestines, and convey it, after many circumvolutions, into the
great vein near the heart.

EMILY.

Pray what is chyle?

MRS. B.

It is the substance into which food is converted by digestion.

CAROLINE.

One set of the absorbent vessels, then, is employed in bringing away the
old materials that are no longer fit for use; whilst the other set is
busy in conveying into the blood the new materials that are to replace
them.

EMILY.

What a great variety of ingredients must enter into the composition of
the blood?

MRS. B.

You must observe that there is also a great variety of substances to be
secreted from it. We may compare the blood to a general receptacle or
storehouse for all kinds of commodities, which are afterwards fashioned,
arranged, and disposed of as circumstances require.

There is another set of absorbent vessels in females which is destined
to secrete milk for the nourishment of the young.

EMILY.

Pray is not milk very analogous in its composition to blood; for, since
the nursling derives its nourishment from that source only, it must
contain every principle which the animal system requires?

MRS. B.

Very true. Milk is found, by its analysis, to contain the principal
materials of animal matter, albumen, oil, and phosphat of lime; so that
the suckling has but little trouble to digest and assimilate this
nourishment. But we shall examine the composition of milk more fully
afterwards.

In many parts of the body numbers of small vessels are collected
together in little bundles called _glands_, from a Latin word meaning
acorn, on account of the resemblance which some of them bear in shape to
that fruit. The function of the glands is to _secrete_, or separate
certain matters from the blood.

The secretions are not only mechanical, but chemical separations from
the blood; for the substances thus formed, though contained in the
blood, are not ready combined in that fluid. The secretions are of two
kinds, those which form peculiar animal fluids, as bile, tears, saliva,
&c.; and those which produce the general materials of the animal system,
for the purpose of recruiting and nourishing the several organs of the
body; such as albumen, gelatine, and fibrine; the latter may be
distinguished by the name of _nutritive secretions_.

CAROLINE.

I am quite astonished to hear that all the secretions should be derived
from the blood.

EMILY.

I thought that the bile was produced by the liver?

MRS. B.

So it is; but the liver is nothing more than a very large gland, which
secretes the bile from the blood.

The last of the animal organs which we have mentioned are the _nerves_;
these are the vehicles of sensation, every other part of the body being,
of itself, totally insensible.

CAROLINE.

They must then be spread through every part of the frame, for we are
every where susceptible of feeling.

EMILY.

Excepting the nails and the hair.

MRS. B.

And those are almost the only parts in which nerves cannot be
discovered. The common source of all the nerves is the brain; thence
they descend, some of them through different holes of the skull, but the
greatest part through the back bone, and extend themselves by
innumerable ramifications throughout the whole body. They spread
themselves over the muscles, penetrate the glands, wind round the
vascular system, and even pierce into the interior of the bones. It is
most probably through them that the communication is carried on between
the mind and the other parts of the body; but in what manner they are
acted on by the mind, and made to re-act on the body, is still a
profound secret. Many hypotheses have been formed on this very obscure
subject, but they are all equally improbable, and it would be useless
for us to waste our time in conjectures on an enquiry, which, in all
probability, is beyond the reach of human capacity.

CAROLINE.

But you have not mentioned those particular nerves that form the senses
of hearing, seeing, smelling, and tasting?

MRS. B.

They are considered as being of the same nature as those which are
dispersed over every part of the body, and constitute the general sense
of feeling. The different sensations which they produce arise from their
peculiar situation and connection with the several organs of taste,
smell, and hearing.

EMILY.

But these senses appear totally different from that of feeling?

MRS. B.

They are all of them sensations, but variously modified according to the
nature of the different organs in which the nerves are situated. For, as
we have formerly observed, it is by contact only that the nerves are
affected. Thus odoriferous particles must strike upon the nerves of the
nose, in order to excite the sense of smelling; in the same manner that
taste is produced by the particular substance coming in contact with the
nerves of the palate. It is thus also that the sensation of sound is
produced by the concussion of the air striking against the auditory
nerve; and sight is the effect of the light falling upon the optic
nerve. These various senses, therefore, are affected only by the actual
contact of particles of matter, in the same manner as that of feeling.

The different organs of the animal body, though easily separated and
perfectly distinct, are loosely connected together by a kind of spongy
substance, in texture somewhat resembling net-work, called the cellular
membrane; and the whole is covered by the skin.

The _skin_, as well as the bark of vegetables, is formed of three coats.
The external one is called the _cuticle_ or _epidermis_; the second,
which is called the _mucous membrane_, is of a thin soft texture, and
consists of a mucous substance, which in negroes is black, and is the
cause of their skin appearing of that colour.

CAROLINE.

Is then the external skin of negroes white like ours?

MRS. B.

Yes; but as the cuticle is transparent, as well as porous, the blackness
of the mucous membrane is visible through it. The extremities of the
nerves are spread over this skin, so that the sensation of feeling is
transmitted through the cuticle. The internal covering of the muscles,
which is properly the skin, is the thickest, the toughest, and most
resisting of the whole; it is this membrane which is so essential in the
arts, by forming leather when combined with tannin.

The skin which covers the animal body, as well as those membranes that
form the coats of the vessels, consists almost exclusively of gelatine;
and is capable of being converted into glue, size, or jelly.

The cavities between the muscles and the skin are usually filled with
fat, which lodges in the cells of the membranous net before mentioned,
and gives to the external form (especially in the human figure) that
roundness, smoothness, and softness, so essential to beauty.

EMILY.

And the skin itself is, I think, a very ornamental part of the human
frame, both from the fineness of its texture, and the variety and
delicacy of its tints.

MRS. B.

This variety and harmonious graduation of colours, proceed, not so much
from the skin itself, as from the internal organs which transmit their
several colours through it, these being only softened and blended by the
colour of the skin, which is uniformly of a yellowish white.

Thus modified, the darkness of the veins appears of a pale blue colour,
and the floridness of the arteries is changed to a delicate pink. In the
most transparent parts, the skin exhibits the bloom of the rose, whilst
where it is more opake its own colour predominates; and at the joints,
where the bones are most prominent, their whiteness is often
discernible. In a word, every part of the human frame seems to
contribute to its external grace; and this not merely by producing a
pleasing variety of tints, but by a peculiar kind of beauty which
belongs to each individual part. Thus it is to the solidity and
arrangement of the bones that the human figure owes the grandeur of its
stature, and its firm and dignified deportment. The muscles delineate
the form, and stamp it with energy and grace; and the soft substance
which is spread over them smooths their ruggedness, and gives to the
contours the gentle undulations of the line of beauty. Every organ of
sense is a peculiar and separate ornament; and the skin, which polishes
the surface, and gives it that charm of colouring so inimitable by art,
finally conspires to render the whole the fairest work of the creation.

But now that we have seen in what manner the animal frame is formed, let
us observe how it provides for its support, and how the several organs,
which form so complete a whole, are nourished and maintained.

This will lead us to a more particular explanation of the internal
organs: here we shall not meet with so much apparent beauty, because
these parts were not intended by nature to be exhibited to view; but the
beauty of design, in the internal organisation of the animal frame, is,
if possible, still more remarkable than that of the external parts.

We shall defer this subject till our next interview.




CONVERSATION XXV.

ON ANIMALISATION, NUTRITION, AND RESPIRATION.


MRS. B.

We have now learnt of what materials the animal system is composed, and
have formed some idea of the nature of its organisation. In order to
complete the subject, it remains for us to examine in what manner it is
nourished and supported.

Vegetables, we have observed, obtain their nourishment from various
substances, either in their elementary state, or in a very simple state
of combination; as carbon, water, and salts, which they pump up from the
soil; and carbonic acid and oxygen, which they absorb from the
atmosphere.

Animals, on the contrary, feed on substances of the most complicated
kind; for they derive their sustenance, some from the animal creation,
others from the vegetable kingdom, and some from both.

CAROLINE.

And there is one species of animals, which, not satisfied with enjoying
either kind of food in its simple state, has invented the art of
combining them together in a thousand ways, and of rendering even the
mineral kingdom subservient to its refinements.

EMILY.

Nor is this all; for our delicacies are collected from the various
climates of the earth, so that the four quarters of the globe are often
obliged to contribute to the preparation of our simplest dishes.

CAROLINE.

But the very complicated substances which constitute the nourishment of
animals, do not, I suppose, enter into their system in their actual
state of combination?

MRS. B.

So far from it, that they not only undergo a new arrangement of their
parts, but a selection is made of such as are most proper for the
nourishment of the body, and those only enter into the system, and are
animalised.

EMILY.

And by what organs is this process performed?

MRS. B.

Chiefly by the stomach, which is the organ of digestion, and the prime
regulator of the animal frame.

_Digestion_ is the first step towards nutrition. It consists in reducing
into one homogeneous mass the various substances that are taken as
nourishment; it is performed by first chewing and mixing the solid
aliment with the saliva, which reduces it to a soft mass, in which state
it is conveyed into the stomach, where it is more completely dissolved
by the _gastric juice_.

This fluid (which is secreted into the stomach by appropriate glands) is
so powerful a solvent that scarcely any substances will resist its
action.

EMILY.

The coats of the stomach, however, cannot be attacked by it, otherwise
we should be in danger of having them destroyed when the stomach was
empty.

MRS. B.

They are probably not subject to its action; as long, at least, as life
continues. But it appears, that when the gastric juice has no foreign
substance to act upon, it is capable of occasioning a degree of
irritation in the coats of the stomach, which produces the sensation of
hunger. The gastric juice, together with the heat and muscular action of
the stomach, converts the aliment into an uniform pulpy mass called
chyme. This passes into the intestines, where it meets with the bile and
some other fluids, by the agency of which, and by the operation of other
causes hitherto unknown, the chyme is changed into chyle, a much thinner
substance, somewhat resembling milk, which is pumped by immense numbers
of small absorbent vessels spread over the internal surface of the
intestines. These, after many circumvolutions, gradually meet and unite
into large branches, till they at length collect the chyle into one
vessel, which pours its contents into the great vein near the heart, by
which means the food, thus prepared, enters into the circulation.

CAROLINE.

But I do not yet clearly understand how the blood, thus formed,
nourishes the body and supplies all the secretions?

MRS. B.

Before this can be explained to you, you must first allow me to complete
the formation of the blood. The chyle may, indeed, be considered as
forming the chief ingredient of blood; but this fluid is not perfect
until it has passed through the lungs, and undergone (together with the
blood that has already circulated) certain necessary changes that are
effected by RESPIRATION.

CAROLINE.

I am very glad that you are going to explain the nature of respiration:
I have often longed to understand it, for though we talk incessantly of
_breathing_, I never knew precisely what purpose it answered.

MRS. B.

It is indeed one of the most interesting processes imaginable; but, in
order to understand this function well, it will be necessary to enter
into some previous explanations. Tell me, Emily, --what do you
understand by respiration?

EMILY.

Respiration, I conceive, consists simply in alternately _inspiring_ air
into the lungs, and _expiring_ it from them.

MRS. B.

Your answer will do very well as a general definition. But, in order to
form a tolerably clear notion of the various phenomena of respiration,
there are many circumstances to be taken into consideration.

In the first place, there are two things to be distinguished in
respiration, the _mechanical_ and the _chemical_ part of the process.

The mechanism of breathing depends on the alternate expansions and
contractions of the chest, in which the lungs are contained. When the
chest dilates, the cavity is enlarged, and the air rushes in at the
mouth, to fill up the vacuum formed by this dilatation; when it
contracts, the cavity is diminished, and the air forced out again.

CAROLINE.

I thought that it was the lungs that contracted and expanded in
breathing?

MRS. B.

They do likewise; but their action is only the consequence of that of
the chest. The lungs, together with the heart and largest blood vessels,
in a manner fill up the cavity of the chest; they could not, therefore,
dilate if the chest did not previously expand; and, on the other hand,
when the chest contracts, it compresses the lungs and forces the air out
of them.

CAROLINE.

The lungs, then, are like bellows, and the chest is the power that works
them.

MRS. B.

Precisely so. Here is a curious little figure (PLATE XV. Fig. 5.), that
will assist me in explaining the mechanism of breathing.

CAROLINE.

What a droll figure! a little head fixed upon a glass bell, with a
bladder tied over the bottom of it!

MRS. B.

You must observe that there is another bladder within the glass, the
neck of which communicates with the mouth of the figure--this represents
the lungs contained within the chest; the other bladder, which you see
is tied loose, represents a muscular membrane, called the _diaphragm_,
which separates the chest from the lower part of the body. By the chest,
therefore, I mean that large cavity in the upper part of the body
contained within the ribs, the neck, and the diaphragm; this membrane is
muscular, and capable of contraction and dilatation. The contraction may
be imitated by drawing the bladder tight over the bottom of the
receiver, when the air in the bladder, which represents the lungs, will
be forced out through the mouth of the figure--

EMILY.

See, Caroline, how it blows the flame of the candle in breathing!

MRS. B.

By letting the bladder loose again, we imitate the dilatation of the
diaphragm, and the cavity of the chest being enlarged, the lungs expand,
and the air rushes in to fill them.

EMILY.

This figure, I think, gives a very clear idea of the process of
breathing.

MRS. B.

It illustrates tolerably well the action of the lungs and diaphragm; but
those are not the only powers that are concerned in enlarging or
diminishing the cavity of the chest; the ribs are also possessed of a
muscular motion for the same purpose; they are alternately drawn in,
edgeways, to assist the contraction, and stretched out, like the hoops
of a barrel, to contribute to the dilatation of the chest.

EMILY.

I always supposed that the elevation and depression of the ribs were the
consequence, not the cause of breathing.

MRS. B.

It is exactly the reverse. The muscular action of the diaphragm,
together with that of the ribs, are the _causes_ of the contraction and
expansion of the chest; and the air rushing into, and being expelled
from the lungs, are only _consequences_ of those actions.

CAROLINE.

I confess that I thought the act of breathing began by opening the mouth
for the air to rush in, and that it was the air alone, which, by
alternately rushing in and out, occasioned the dilatations and
contractions of the lungs and chest.

MRS. B.

Try the experiment of merely opening your mouth; the air will not rush
in, till by an interior muscular action you produce a vacuum--yes, just
so, your diaphragm is now dilated, and the ribs expanded. But you will
not be able to keep them long in that state. Your lungs and chest are
already resuming their former state, and expelling the air with which
they had just been filled. This mechanism goes on more or less rapidly,
but, in general, a person at rest and in health will breathe between
fifteen and twenty-five times in a minute.

We may now proceed to the chemical effects of respiration; but, for this
purpose, it is necessary that you should previously have some notion of
the _circulation_ of the blood. Tell me, Caroline, what do you
understand by the circulation of the blood?

CAROLINE.

I am delighted that you come to that subject, for it is one that has
long excited my curiosity. But I cannot conceive how it is connected
with respiration. The idea I have of the circulation is, that the blood
runs from the heart through the veins all over the body, and back again
to the heart.

MRS. B.

I could hardly have expected a better definition from you; it is,
however, not quite correct, for you do not distinguish the _arteries_
from the _veins_, which, as we have already observed, are two distinct
sets of vessels, each having its own peculiar functions. The arteries
convey the blood from the heart to the extremities of the body; and the
veins bring it back into the heart.

This sketch will give you an idea of the manner in which some of the
principal veins and arteries of the human body branch out of the heart,
which may be considered as a common centre to both sets of vessels. The
heart is a kind of strong elastic bag, or muscular cavity, which
possesses a power of dilating and contracting itself, for the purposes
of alternately receiving and expelling the blood, in order to carry on
the process of circulation.

EMILY.

Why are the arteries in this drawing painted red, and the veins purple?

MRS. B.

It is to point out the difference of the colour of the blood in these
two sets of vessels.

CAROLINE.

But if it is the same blood that flows from the arteries into the veins,
how can its colour be changed?

MRS. B.

This change arises from various circumstances. In the first place,
during its passage through the arteries, the blood undergoes a
considerable alteration, some of its constituent parts being gradually
separated from it for the purpose of nourishing the body, and of
supplying the various secretions. The consequence of this is, that the
florid arterial colour of the blood changes by degrees to a deep purple,
which is its constant colour in the veins. On the other hand, the blood
is recruited during its return through the veins by the fresh chyle, or
imperfect blood, which has been produced by food; and it receives also
lymph from the absorbent vessels, as we have before mentioned. In
consequence of these several changes, the blood returns to the heart in
a state very different from that in which it left it. It is loaded with
a greater proportion of hydrogen and carbon, and is no longer fit for
the nourishment of the body, or other purposes of circulation.

EMILY.

And in this state does it mix in the heart with the pure florid blood
that runs into the arteries?

MRS. B.

No. The heart is divided into two cavities or compartitions, called the
_right_ and _left ventricles_. The left ventricle is the receptacle for
the pure arterial blood previous to its circulation; whilst the venous,
or impure blood, which returns to the heart after having circulated, is
received into the right ventricle, previous to its purification, which I
shall presently explain.

CAROLINE.

For my part, I always thought that the same blood circulated again and
again through the body, without undergoing any change.

MRS. B.

Yet you must have supposed that the blood circulated for some purpose?

CAROLINE.

I knew that it was indispensable to life; but had no idea of its real
functions.

MRS. B.

But now that you understand that the blood conveys nourishment to every
part of the body, and supplies the various secretions, you must be
sensible that it cannot constantly answer these objects without being
proportionally renovated and purified.

CAROLINE.

But does not the chyle answer this purpose?

MRS. B.

Only in part. It renovates the nutritive principles of the blood, but
does not relieve it from the superabundance of water and carbon with
which it is encumbered.

EMILY.

How, then, is this effected?

MRS. B.

By RESPIRATION. This is one of the grand mysteries which modern
chemistry has disclosed. When the venous blood enters the right
ventricle of the heart, it contracts by its muscular power, and throws
the blood through a large vessel into the lungs, which are contiguous,
and through which it circulates by millions of small ramifications. Here
it comes in contact with the air which we breathe. The action of the air
on the blood in the lungs is, indeed, concealed, from our immediate
observation; but we are able to form a tolerably accurate judgment of it
from the changes which it effects not only in the blood, but also on the
air expired.

The air, after passing through the lungs, is found to contain all the
nitrogen inspired, but to have lost part of its oxygen, and to have
acquired a portion of watery vapour and of carbonic acid gas. Hence it
is inferred, that when the air comes in contact with the venous blood in
the lungs, the oxygen attracts from it the superabundant quantity of
carbon with which it has impregnated itself during the circulation, and
converts it into carbonic acid. This gaseous acid, together with the
redundant moisture from the lungs*, being then expired, the blood is
restored to its former purity, that is, to the state of arterial blood,
and is thus again enabled to perform its various functions.

    [Footnote *: The quantity of moisture discharged by the lungs in
    24 hours, may be computed at eight or nine ounces.]

CAROLINE.

This is truly wonderful! Of all that we have yet learned, I do not
recollect any thing that has appeared to me so curious and interesting.
I almost believe that I should like to study anatomy now, though I have
hitherto had so disgusting an idea of it. Pray, to whom are we indebted
for these beautiful discoveries?

MRS. B.

Priestley and Crawford, in this country, and Lavoisier, in France, are
the principal inventors of the theory of respiration. Of late years the
subject has been farther illustrated and simplified by the accurate
experiments of Messrs. Allen and Pepys. But the still more important and
more admirable discovery of the circulation of the blood was made long
before by our immortal countryman Harvey.

EMILY.

Indeed I never heard any thing that delighted me so much as this theory
of respiration. But I hope, Mrs. B., that you will enter a little more
into particulars before you dismiss so interesting a subject. We left
the blood in the lungs to undergo the salutary change: but how does it
thence spread to all the parts of the body?

MRS. B.

After circulating through the lungs, the blood is collected into four
large vessels, by which it is conveyed into the left ventricle of the
heart, whence it is propelled to all the different parts of the body by
a large artery, which gradually ramifies into millions of small arteries
through the whole frame. From the extremities of these little
ramifications the blood is transmitted to the veins, which bring it back
to the heart and lungs, to go round again and again in the manner we
have just described. You see, therefore, that the blood actually
undergoes two circulations; the one, through the lungs, by which it is
converted into pure arterial blood; the other, or general circulation,
by which nourishment is conveyed to every part of the body; and these
are both equally indispensable to the support of animal life.

EMILY.

But whence proceeds the carbon with which the blood is impregnated when
it comes into the lungs?

MRS. B.

Carbon exists in a greater proportion in blood than in organised animal
matter. The blood, therefore, after supplying its various secretions,
becomes loaded with an excess of carbon, which is carried off by
respiration; and the formation of new chyle from the food affords a
constant supply of carbonaceous matter.

CAROLINE.

I wonder what quantity of carbon may be expelled from the blood by
respiration in the course of 24 hours?

MRS. B.

It appears by the experiments of Messrs. Allen and Pepys that about
40,000 cubic inches of carbonic acid gas are emitted from the lungs of a
healthy person, daily; which is equivalent to _eleven ounces_ of solid
carbon every 24 hours.

EMILY.

What an immense quantity! And pray how much of carbonic acid gas do we
expel from our lungs at each expiration?

MRS. B.

The quantity of air which we take into our lungs at each inspiration, is
about 40 cubic inches, which contain a little less than 10 cubic inches
of oxygen; and of those 10 inches, one-eighth is converted into carbonic
acid gas on passing once through the lungs*, a change which is
sufficient to prevent air which has only been breathed once from
suffering a taper to burn in it.

    [Footnote *: The bulk of carbonic acid gas formed by respiration,
    is exactly the same as that of the oxygen gas which disappears.]

CAROLINE.

Pray, how does the air come in contact with the blood in the lungs?

MRS. B.

I cannot answer this question without entering into an explanation of
the nature and structure of the lungs. You recollect that the venous
blood, on being expelled from the right ventricle, enters the lungs to
go through what we may call the lesser circulation; the large trunk or
vessel that conveys it branches out, at its entrance into the lungs,
into an infinite number of very fine ramifications. The windpipe, which
conveys the air from the mouth into the lungs, likewise spreads out into
a corresponding number of air vessels, which follow the same course as
the blood vessels, forming millions of very minute air-cells. These two
sets of vessels are so interwoven as to form a sort of net-work,
connected into a kind of spongy mass, in which every particle of blood
must necessarily come in contact with a particle of air.

CAROLINE.

But since the blood and the air are contained in different vessels, how
can they come into contact?

MRS. B.

They act on each other through the membrane which forms the coats of
these vessels; for although this membrane prevents the blood and the air
from mixing together in the lungs, yet it is no impediment to their
chemical action on each other.

EMILY.

Are the lungs composed entirely of blood vessels and air vessels?

MRS. B.

I believe they are, with the addition only of nerves and of a small
quantity of the cellular substance before mentioned, which connects the
whole into an uniform mass.

EMILY.

Pray, why are the lungs always spoken of in the plural number? Are there
more than one?

MRS. B.

Yes; for though they form but one organ, they really consist of two
compartments called lobes, which are enclosed in separate membranes or
bags, each occupying one side of the chest, and being in close contact
with each other, but without communicating together. This is a beautiful
provision of nature, in consequence of which, if one of the lobes be
wounded, the other performs the whole process of respiration till the
first is healed.

The blood, thus completed, by the process of respiration, forms the most
complex of all animal compounds, since it contains not only the numerous
materials necessary to form the various secretions, as saliva, tears,
&c. but likewise all those that are required to nourish the several
parts of the body, as the muscles, bones, nerves, glands, &c.

EMILY.

