interest in dealing with them.

But this miracle and all the talk about it made him uneasy. The frenzy
in the Christian faces around him might be turned, he thought, in any
direction. It must be the same frenzy that had driven generations of
crusaders to hurl themselves against the Dar al-Islam.

Fra Tomasso was at the very center of the furor. It was he who had sent
word from Bolsena that in his judgment the miracle was indeed authentic.
Might this new preoccupation distract him from his efforts to prevent
the alliance?

And there was something else, something that revived a terror buried
deep in Daoud's soul. Jesus, the crucified God of the Christians,
stirred in this miracle. As a boy growing up among Muslims, Daoud had
renounced belief in the crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus. Now he
felt again his father's ghostly hand on his shoulder, and the hairs
lifted on the back of his neck.

"Look at the sick people and the cripples lining the road," said
Lorenzo. "I would not have thought there could be that many infirm
people in Orvieto." He and Daoud stood side by side, at a spot where the
road between Bolsena and Orvieto passed through a wide valley, their
horses tethered in a nearby grove of poplar trees. They had moved back a
few paces from the edge of the road to make room for a dozen men and
women on stretchers, wrapped in blankets, who had been carried here by
Franciscan friars from their hospital.

All around Lorenzo and Daoud stood Cardinal Ugolini's men-at-arms,
servants, and maids. Ugolini's entire household was here except for the
few of highest rank who would march with the cardinal, who marched
behind the pope.

Fearing that Scipio would go uncared for, Lorenzo had brought him along,
holding him on a thick leather leash. The gray boarhound paced nervously
and growled from time to time.

In the meadow across the road the pope's servants had erected a pavilion
without walls--just a roof of silk, gold and white, the papal colors,
coming to three points held up by a dozen or more stout poles. There
Pope Urban would say mass after receiving the sanctified cloth.

Daoud glanced down the road to where Sophia stood. They had agreed that
in public it would be best for them to appear far apart from each other.
She was dressed as any well-to-do Italian woman might be, her hair
covered with a round, flat linen cap bound under her chin, a
midnight-blue chemise with long, tight sleeves, and a sleeveless gown of
light blue silk over it. Beside Sophia stood a slighter figure in gray
veil and gown. They had their heads close together, talking.

"Who is that with Sophia?" Daoud asked Lorenzo.

"Oh, Rachel, I think." Lorenzo studiously examined Scipio's head for
fleas.

"She appears in public with Rachel?" Daoud said angrily.

Lorenzo shrugged. "No one knows who Rachel is." He slapped Scipio's
rump. "Sit."

"I did not like Sophia visiting Rachel," Daoud said. "Even less do I
like their being seen together in public."

Trumpets shrilled and drums sounded as the hymn came to an end. Daoud
looked toward Orvieto. The road that wound down past the gray-yellow
folds of tufa was filled with people.

At the head of the procession walked the pope in gold and white, and the
cardinals of the Sacred College in bright red. The middle of the long
line was bright with the purples of archbishops and bishops and the
variegated raiment of the nobility. The rear was dark with the grays and
browns of common folk.

From this distance Daoud could not see Pope Urban's face, but there was
no mistaking the beehive-shaped mitre with its glittering triple crown.

Lucky for the pope the weather was cold, thought Daoud. Wearing those
heavy vestments on a hot day would surely kill the old man. That today
he chose to go on foot showed how much this miracle meant to him.

Daoud turned and looked to the west. The marchers from Bolsena were
close, and people were falling to their knees all over the meadow.

_I will have to kneel, too, and seem to worship their idols. Forgive me,
God._

Daoud saw Sophia and Rachel drop to their knees.

_Surely they think as little of this as I do._

Coming toward Daoud from the west was a great banner that offended his
every religious feeling. Painted on the red cloth were the head and
shoulders of a bearded man, Jesus the Messiah, with huge, staring eyes.
On his head was a plaited wreath of thorns, and behind it a disk of
gold. From the nail holes that pierced his upraised palms fell painted
drops of blood.

An idol, such as the Koran forbade and the Prophet had come into this
world to destroy.

And then he thought of the great crucifix that hung in the chapel of
Chateau Langmuir outside Ascalon, and his mother taking him by the hand
to pray before it.

"Because _He_ lived and died here," he remembered her sweet voice
saying, "that is why we are here in this Holy Land."

He felt momentarily dizzy. They, his mother and father and all these
people here, thought that the bearded man, with the wounds of
crucifixion in his hands, was God. And he had believed it once, too.

No, God was One. He could not be a Father who reigned in heaven and a
Son who came down to earth. God was glorious and all-powerful; He could
not be crucified. God was the Creator; He could not be part of His
creation.

And yet--the cold hand still lay upon his shoulder. A gentle hand, but
it frightened him.

All around Daoud the infidels were throwing themselves on their knees,
even on their faces, in the road before the advancing banner. A man in a
black robe was walking before the banner bearer. Despite his long gray
beard there was something about his staring eyes and wide, downturned
mouth that reminded Daoud of a fish.

The bearded priest, Father Kyril, was holding up by its corners a white
square of linen. That, thought Daoud, must be the altar cloth on which
the drops of blood had fallen from the wafer of bread. As he walked he
slowly, solemnly, turned from side to side to allow people on both sides
of the road to see the cloth.

"_Kneel_, David, for God's sake!" Lorenzo ground out beside him.

His curiosity had made him forget himself. He dropped to his knees,
feeling dry grass prick his skin through his silk hose. Lorenzo knelt
beside him, gripping the dog's collar. The sick and crippled people
lying beside the road were wailing and holding up their arms in
supplication.

Again Daoud asked God's forgiveness for his seeming idolatry.

Father Kyril and the altar cloth were only a dozen paces away, and now
Daoud could see the brown bloodstains on the white cloth. Amazingly they
appeared to form the profile of a bearded man.

As a cold wind against his spine, he felt his long-buried fear of the
wrath of the Christian God.

The big hound, right beside him, let out a thunderous bark. Daoud
started with surprise. His heart pounded in his chest.

Scipio barked and barked, so loudly Daoud put his hands over his ears.
Father Kyril took a step backward. People who had been venerating the
bloodstained cloth turned with angry shouts. The hands of the
men-at-arms escorting Father Kyril twitched, groping for the weapons
they were not carrying.

"Scipio!" Lorenzo gave the hound a sharp slap on the side of the head.
The dog kept up its barking. Father Kyril had stopped walking and looked
frightened. He clutched the stained cloth to his breast. At a word from
him, Daoud thought, the crowd would tear to pieces the dog, Lorenzo, and
perhaps Daoud himself.

Lorenzo grabbed Scipio's muzzle with both hands, forcing it shut. Scipio
kept up a growling through his teeth. Lorenzo growled back, "Be still!"
He wrestled the dog down until the lean gray head was pressed into the
grass.

"Barking is the only way he knows to greet the Savior," said Lorenzo
with an ingratiating grin, looking up at the people glaring at him.

"There could be a devil in that dog," a brown-robed friar said
ominously. But Scipio relaxed under Lorenzo's hands, and those around
Daoud and Lorenzo turned back to the procession.

Daoud was furious. Lorenzo's damned dog had been like a stone in his
shoe ever since they set out from Lucera. Lorenzo was a valuable man,
but he insisted on attaching others to him who caused endless trouble.
Like the dog. Like Rachel.

A scream rose above the music, so shrill Daoud put his hands over his
ears again.

"My God! I can see!" A woman was standing, clasping her hands together
and flinging them wide again and again. One of the Franciscans threw his
arms around her, whether to rejoice with her or restrain her, Daoud
could not tell. But she pushed him away and went stumbling after Father
Kyril. From the way her hands pawed the air, Daoud suspected she could
not see very well, but she shouted with joy all the same.

She joined a crowd of people, many of them waving walking sticks and
crutches, others with bloodstained bandages trailing from their hands.
One man, Daoud saw to his horror, was missing a foot and was limping
along in the dirt road, without the aid of crutch or cane, on one whole
leg and one stump bound with a dirty cloth that ended at the ankle. His
face was red, sweat-slick, and blindly ecstatic.

Behind the rejoicing invalids walked rows of clergymen from Bolsena.
Daoud recognized a familiar figure in the foreground, Fra Tomasso
d'Aquino, his cheeks crimson with cold and exertion, his black mantle
blowing in the wind. He had spent the last two weeks, Daoud knew, in
Bolsena investigating the miracle and overseeing preparations for the
altar cloth to be brought to Pope Urban.

What did he think now, Daoud ached to know. Would he still work as hard
to defeat the Tartar alliance? Did this miracle mean Daoud had gained
ground or lost ground?

A sudden silence fell over the meadow. Pope Urban, with trembling hands
upraised, approached Father Kyril, whose back was to Daoud.

Father Kyril went down on his knees before the pope, holding up the
white cloth over his head like a banner. Then the pope also knelt,
somewhat shakily, with the assistance of two young priests in white
surplices and black cassocks. Urban reached up for the cloth and pulled
it down to his face and kissed it.

_He is seeing that cloth for the first time, and yet he seems to have no
doubt that he is looking at the blood of his God that died._

Daoud felt a chill that was colder than the December air.

       *       *       *       *       *

Daoud pushed his way to the edge of the open pavilion, where the pope,
assisted by Father Kyril and Fra Tomasso, was saying high mass. A band
of musicians blew on hautboys and clarions, sawed at vielles, stroked
harps, and thumped on drums.

The white cloth with its strange rust-colored stain was stretched on a
gilded frame above the altar. Daoud felt uneasy whenever he looked at
it. Just when it seemed he had found the key to wrecking the union of
Tartars and crusaders--a miracle. What did it portend?

Memory showed him his mother and father celebrating Easter, standing
hand in hand before the altar at Chateau Langmuir, receiving Holy
Communion--the Sacred Host--from their chaplain. When he was old enough,
his mother had told him he, too, would be allowed to take Jesus into his
heart by swallowing the Communion wafer. What a strange belief! But at
the time it had seemed beautiful.

_I bear witness that God is One, that Muhammad is the Messenger of
God...._

He glanced around the pavilion, and saw many faces he had come to know
in the last few months. There was Cardinal de Verceuil with his big nose
and small mouth. There was Ugolini, the size of a child, dressed up as a
cardinal, blinking rapidly, looking rather bored. In the front row of
standing worshipers were John and Philip, the Tartars, in silk robes.
Beside them, Friar Mathieu, the Franciscan, cleverest of Daoud's
opponents. Daoud gauged him to be a genuinely holy man, if an infidel
could be called holy.

And next to him was the pale young face of the Count de Gobignon.

As Daoud looked at him, de Gobignon looked back, and his eyes widened
slightly.

_One day, Count, you will die by my hand._

The mass began, and even though there must have been five thousand
people in the valley, there was complete silence. The quiet was eerie.
At a Muslim religious celebration this large, the crowd would be
chanting in unison, there would be music, dervishes singing and dancing;
impromptu sermons would be delivered in various parts of the crowd by
mullahs or by ordinary men moved to speak. Here all was focused on the
center.

Pope Urban rose to speak. He had removed his mitre to say mass. His
white hair, his long beard, and his trailing mustache seemed much more
sparse than they had been when Daoud had first seen the pope, last
summer. His face was as pale as his hair, and his hands trembled.

A few months ago Daoud had heard Urban's voice rise robustly from the
center of his body. Today his voice was high and thin and seemed to come
from his throat. He told the story of the miracle of Bolsena, and
explained that Father Kyril was a priest from Bohemia who had developed
doubts about whether Christ was really present in each and every
consecrated Communion wafer. Could a small piece of bread really become
the body of Jesus when a priest said a few words over it?

_Where is the illness?_ Daoud's Sufi-trained eye told him it was deep
within Pope Urban; it had sunk its claws into his chest.

_I do not think this pope has long to live._

Ugolini had told Daoud that Urban wanted desperately, before he himself
died, to strike a death blow against the Hohenstaufen family. He wanted
Count Charles d'Anjou, brother of the King of France, to wrest the crown
of Sicily from Manfred, but King Louis had thus far forbidden his
brother to make war on Manfred.

King Louis wanted a different war, a joint war of Christians and Tartars
against Islam. Thus far, the pope had withheld his approval of any
Christian monarch's allying himself with the Tartars.

As Urban heard the approaching wings of the Angel of Death, might he be
more inclined to grant Louis what he wanted?

The crowd was no longer silent. Daoud heard waves of murmuring run
through it as people relayed the pope's words to those who were too far
away to hear him. He noticed now the hawklike profile of the Contessa di
Monaldeschi. She was seated in a chair in front of the worshipers on the
side of the pavilion opposite Daoud. A plump young boy in red velvet
stood beside her.

Seeing her, Daoud looked for Marco di Filippeschi. He could not be sure,
but the back of a dark head on this side of the pavilion looked like
that of the Filippeschi chieftain. Those organizing this ceremony would,
of course, be careful to separate the leaders of the two feuding
families.

Pope Urban continued: Father Kyril, realizing that he was doomed to
eternal damnation if he did not overcome his doubts, had set out on a
pilgrimage to Rome. But Rome had fallen on evil days, its streets turned
into battlefields by the Ghibellini followers of the vile Hohenstaufens,
and Father Kyril found no peace there. He decided to ask the prayers of
the pope himself at Orvieto. That decision was rewarded before he even
reached here. Two months ago, while saying mass at Bolsena, on his way
to Orvieto, and praying that his doubts be resolved, Father Kyril raised
the Sacred Host over his head after the Consecration, and hundreds of
witnesses saw drops of blood fall from it to the cloth spread on the
altar.

And now--Pope Urban gestured to the cloth spread above the altar--we can
behold with our own eyes the blood of Christ Himself and see this
proof--which, having faith, we should not need to see--that Jesus lives
in the Blessed Sacrament.

"We propose to offer triple thanks to God for His generosity in granting
us this miracle," said Pope Urban. "First, let the day on which Father
Kyril saw the Host bleed be celebrated henceforward as the feast of the
Body of Christ, Corpus Christi. Let this be proclaimed throughout
Christendom.

"Second, to house and display this most sacred relic, the blood of Our
Savior Himself, let a great and beautiful new cathedral be built here at
Orvieto, which will forever be the center for the veneration of the body
of Christ."

Daoud sighed inwardly at the thought of still another great building
dedicated to idolatry.

Yet the chapel at Chateau Langmuir had been such a lovely and quiet
place.

As the pontiff's words were repeated, the murmuring grew louder.
Someone near Daoud said, "But the miracle happened in Bolsena." Someone
else hushed the person who protested.

_I should not wonder if these cities went to war with each other over
such a relic_, thought Daoud.

"Finally," said Pope Urban, oblivious of the discontent his previous
proclamation had caused among the citizens of Bolsena, "we command that
all priests of Holy Church shall read a special office on the feast of
Corpus Christi of each year, commemorating this miracle. God has willed
that there should be dwelling with us here at Orvieto the most gifted
scholar and writer of this age, Fra Tomasso d'Aquino."

Daoud saw that Fra Tomasso's face was almost as bright a red as a
cardinal's hat.

"And we charge our beloved and most gloriously gifted son, Fra Tomasso,
with the duty of writing this office."

D'Aquino rose heavily from a bench on the right side of the altar.
Puffing, sweating despite the chill of the day, he bowed to the pope
with hands clasped before him.

_A great honor, that must be_, Daoud thought. Fra Tomasso was silent for
the moment, but he would write words that would be repeated by thousands
of priests all over the world as long as Christians celebrated this
feast. D'Aquino was more than ever indebted to the pope. If the pope
were to want d'Aquino's help in persuading the French to go to war
against Manfred, he would collect that debt.

Looking at Fra Tomasso as he sat listening to Pope Urban talk on about
his plans for the feast, for the cathedral, for the office, Daoud saw a
glow on those rounded features that made him uneasy. Daoud had felt that
with Cardinal Ugolini and Fra Tomasso stirring up opposition to the
alliance throughout Christendom, he had but to wait for the plan to die
of old age.

He could no longer be sure of that. Fra Tomasso's opposition to the
alliance had a fragile basis at best, and this miracle might have
shattered it.

The blood of the Messiah had power to change the course of events. Daoud
felt himself trembling.




XL


Daoud's hands were cold and his heart was racing. He had been waiting
all morning for Ugolini to come back from the Dominican convent.

He sat at Ugolini's worktable, trying to read. He had found an old book
in Arabic in Ugolini's library, the _Aphorisms_ of ibn Zaina, a book
Saadi had often praised. At another time he would have devoured it, but
his mind refused to follow the words. Sending Ugolini to Fra Tomasso was
his final effort to learn what had gone wrong and to see what might be
saved.

What would Fra Tomasso say to Ugolini? At least Ugolini could be trusted
not to make things worse, as de Verceuil had for their opponents.

This was the Christian month of February, and the chill that pervaded
Daoud's body came from the air around him as well as from his troubled
spirit. The small wood fire that burned on the hearth beside the table
did little to dispel the cold in the room.

In the two months that followed the coming of the bloodstained altar
cloth to Orvieto, Tomasso d'Aquino had gradually, but completely,
reversed himself. According to a Dominican in Ugolini's pay, the
philosopher had sent new letters to the European kings confessing that
his opposition to an alliance between Christians and Tartars had been an
error. At least three Italian cardinals had told Ugolini that Fra
Tomasso had come to them personally with the same message. Cardinal
Gratiano Marchetti whispered that Pope Urban, who did not expect to live
through the winter, had promised the stout friar a voice in the election
of the next pope. Where Urban had been neutral toward the alliance,
perhaps even opposed, something now caused him to favor it. Just as the
tumbling of a single grain of sand could bring a whole dune crashing
down to bury a caravan, so those drops of blood at Bolsena had been the
start of an avalanche of reversals.

Daoud awaited Ugolini's coming, and the message he bore, as a man
accused of a capital crime awaits the verdict of his judge.

And if it was true that Fra Tomasso had irrevocably turned against them?
Daoud must begin all over again with a new plan to stop the alliance.

The fire gave off the sour odor of strange substances Ugolini had
previously burned on the hearth. Daoud pushed himself out of the
cardinal's chair and went to get a breath of fresh air. He opened the
casement window and saw Ugolini's sedan chair, borne by four servants,
turning in toward the door of the mansion.

The cardinal's chair passed the shop across the street, where rows of
large and small pots, brightly painted with floral designs, were laid
out on a large blanket. The potter and his wife, bundled up in heavy
cloaks, were calling out for the cardinal's blessing. Daoud saw a tiny
hand emerge from the curtains of the sedan chair, closed against the
February cold. The hand shaped the sign of the cross in the air as the
shopkeepers fell to their knees.

Daoud wondered whether the potter and his wife felt they had an unlucky
spot to offer their wares. That was where, last August, de Verceuil's
archers had shot down two men in the crowd when the Tartars were
entering the city. And it was in front of that shop, shuttered then for
the night, that Alain de Pirenne's body had been found. Had the
shopkeeper or his wife seen anything, and were they keeping silent only
out of fear? Months had gone by, but the podesta, d'Ucello, was still
investigating the killing, questioning and requestioning everyone who
might know something about it.

Daoud paced the room anxiously until Ugolini came in, throwing his
fur-trimmed cape and his wide-brimmed red hat to a servant. He sat down
in the chair Daoud had been using. Daoud closed the door.

As a man dying of thirst begs for water, Daoud prayed for good news.

But Ugolini's pale face, haggard eyes, and downturned mouth told a
different tale. Daoud's heart plunged into despair.

"Has he turned against us?" He hated the note of pleading he heard in
his voice.

Ugolini went to his worktable, sighed, and sat down heavily. His eyes
seemed to be crossed, staring down his pointed nose at the painted skull
that grinned back at him. His restless fingers found the dioptra lying
on the table, and he started to roll the brass tube in his hand.

"I used every argument I could think of," he said. "I even repeated back
to him the arguments he used in the letters and sermons he wrote against
the Tartars."

"Arguing with Fra Tomasso is like trying wrestle a djinn," Daoud said.
"I admire your courage in even trying."

Ugolini raised a finger. "I thought I was getting somewhere with him. He
kept trying to change the subject. He kept asking me, if the earth moves
while the sun stands still--he seems to be convinced that is what
happens--then what path does the earth follow? I told him that the
Greeks"--he stopped and stared at Daoud--"Oh, never mind the Greeks. The
point is, he was mocking me."

"Mocking you?"

"Yes, talking about the heavenly bodies. He was referring to that scroll
you gave me to present to him, that work of Aristotle. What a waste,
giving that to him. What would I not give to have it myself."

"Why did he keep changing the subject? Did he never tell you where he
stands on the alliance?"

Ugolini closed his eyes and nodded. "Yes, finally. He said he made a
grave mistake opposing the alliance. He said that if Christians do not
seize this chance, the Tartars may be converted to the religion of
Mohammed, as those in Russia already have been, which would be the worst
of all possible disasters." He opened his eyes and looked at Daoud. "We
have lost him."

"Is there nothing we can do to change his mind?"

"I truly believe it is hopeless."

Hearing those words, Daoud felt drained. He sagged against the wall of
Ugolini's cabinet, wanting to sit on the floor but unable to do so
because then he could not see the cardinal.

"It is Urban who has done this to us," said Ugolini. "He must have
decided that supporting the alliance is the only way he can get French
help against King Manfred. He tempted Fra Tomasso with something far
more valuable to him than an old scroll. He offered him greater glory
and power in the Church."

The Angel of Death, thought Daoud, had done it. Feeling himself mortally
ill, the pope had realized he could no longer bargain with the King of
France on an equal basis. He would have to offer Louis what he wanted,
permission to ally himself with the Tartars.

"Will the pope now support the alliance openly?" If Daoud chose to
fight, he thought, he would have to strike hard and fast. He would have
to strike at the Tartars.

Despite the downward turn of his fortunes, Daoud felt a strange
lightness of heart as he considered the prospect. He had tried every
other way of preventing Tartars and Christians from forming an
alliance--persuasion, bribery, the spreading of lies.

Now he could turn to the way he was best at. War.

"Urban will not come out for the alliance at once," said Ugolini.
"Before Bolsena, Fra Tomasso and my Italian colleagues in the Sacred
College stirred up so much feeling against the Tartars that Urban would
lose support all over Europe if he were to call now for a pact between
Christians and Tartars. So he must move slowly, with Fra Tomasso now
working with him, winning approval for the alliance."

"What if the French sent an army to him now?" Daoud asked.

Ugolini laughed. "Do you think King Louis of France can sow dragon's
teeth and have an army spring up in his fields overnight? He would have
to summon the great barons of France. They would have to decide whether
they support his cause, then assemble the lesser barons and knights.
Supplies must be gathered, money found to pay the knights and
men-at-arms. It can take years to raise an army big enough to wage a
war."

_The Mamelukes would be ready to ride in a day._

_How had the crusaders managed to make any inroads at all in the Dar
al-Islam?_

"If the pope is not ready to declare for the alliance, there is time,"
said Daoud. "Nothing is settled yet."

"Time for what? What will you do now?"

He pushed himself away from the wall, went to a mullioned window, and
pulled open one of the casements. To the northwest a tower of orange
brick with square battlements looked arrogantly down upon the huddled
masses of peaked red roofs. From the tower fluttered the orange and
green banner of the Monaldeschi. There the Tartars were.

He turned from the window and moved slowly toward Ugolini's table.

"I am sorry," he said as gently as he could. "This is not ended."

Ugolini had been playing with the dioptra. He dropped it with a clank.

"What do you mean?" Fear made his voice shrill and quavering.

"I mean, I must attack the Palazzo Monaldeschi."

"Attack the Monaldeschi!" It was almost a scream.

Daoud spread his hands. "I have no choice."

Ugolini sprang to his feet. "Pazzia! You are mad!"

_It is you who are almost mad, with terror_, Daoud thought. He was going
to have trouble with Ugolini, no question.

Aloud he said only, "We will discuss it. You can help us plan. Pardon
me, Your Eminence, while I send for Lorenzo."

       *       *       *       *       *

"It will have to be late at night, of course," said Lorenzo. "And I
would think a Friday evening would be best, when the men-at-arms will be
off their guard and many of them out carousing. But it finally depends
on when Marco di Filippeschi says his family's men can be ready. They
need to buy weapons."

Daoud and Lorenzo stood by the cardinal's table while Ugolini paced with
many short steps between the windows and the hearth. He muttered to
himself, and his hands trembled as he ran them through his tufts of
white hair.

"What of our men?" said Daoud.

"We have over two hundred now, scattered throughout the city," said
Lorenzo.

_If I could be in the palazzo before the fighting begins ..._

Ugolini stopped his pacing and faced them. "You talk like moonstruck
men! You would unleash a civil war right here in Orvieto?"

"Not us, Your Eminence," said Lorenzo. "Have not these two families been
fighting for generations?"

"What is your objection?" said Daoud gently.

Ugolini fixed them with a ferocious glare. "For six months, half a year,
I have lain awake imagining arrest, disgrace, torture, execution.
Through miracles you have managed to carry out your plans without being
caught. Now you want to launch still wilder plans--incredible, fantastic
things. I have had enough. God has kept me alive this long. I will not
tempt Him further."

"My dear Cardinal," Daoud said, "once the Tartars are dead, this will
all be over. I will go back to Egypt. Lorenzo and Sophia will return to
Manfred's kingdom. You will have nothing further to fear."

"You could have tried to kill the Tartars at any time since they came
here," said Ugolini. "Why now?"

"I needed to create as much ill will as possible between Christians and
Tartars," said Daoud. "If I had killed the Tartars at once, I could not
have had them discredit themselves out of their own mouths. Fra Tomasso
and your colleagues among the Italian cardinals could not have stirred
up so much fear and hatred toward them. Now, though, I have done all I
can along those lines, and Fra Tomasso is already undoing what together
we have accomplished."

"And why involve the Monaldeschi and the Filippeschi?" Ugolini pressed
him.

"To make it seem that the Tartars have been killed by feuding Italians.
Then Hulagu Khan will think again about whether he wants such people as
his allies."

Ugolini shook his head. "I do not have to tell you, of all people, what
war is like. And I think Messer Lorenzo, by the way he carries himself,
has known battle more than once. You both know that chance rules every
moment in war."

"True," said Daoud.

And if chance decided against them? For a moment he saw Sophia naked,
being torn apart by the torturers' pincers. He almost shuddered, and had
to hold himself rigid.

"I take it you intend to be part of this attack on the Monaldeschi,"
Ugolini went on.

"I do," said Daoud.

Ugolini threw up his hands as if Daoud had already proved his case for
him. "Well then, what if someone recognizes you attacking the palace?"

"I will not openly lead. I will enter the palace and kill the Tartars."

"So," said Ugolini. "You will not just be somewhere in the street
outside the Palazzo Monaldeschi. You will be _in the palace_. In the
midst of all your enemies. Alone. Attempting to assassinate the Tartars.
Tell me, does that sound like the plan of a reasonable, cautious man to
you?"

Daoud thought it sounded as if he were, to put it as Ugolini had,
tempting God. But Ugolini did not understand that Daoud had not only the
skills of Mameluke, but had also received the secret training of the
Hashishiyya fighters, the fedawi, whose powers many in the lands of
Islam thought magical.

"I will be masked. I will be dressed in garments that will make it
almost impossible to see me. I will not expose myself. I will move in
darkness. I have been trained to find my way in darkness as surely as if
it were sunlight."

Ugolini shook his head. "Understand me. I would not go on arguing with
you like this did I not feel I am arguing for my life. And Tilia's, and
the lives of those who depend on you. You must admit that you might be
captured or killed. My house guest, found trying to murder the Tartar
ambassadors."

Daoud spread his hands. "You would then denounce me. You say you never
knew what a demon you had taken into your home."

Ugolini laughed loudly and bitterly. "Are our opponents fools? Do you
really think they would believe me, even for a moment? After perhaps
hundreds of people have been killed, after a civil war in Orvieto,
anyone who is even suspect will die. The Monaldeschi, the French, the
Church authorities, all will take their revenge. Surely you understand
that."

Daoud's heart grew cold as he looked along the road Ugolini was
describing and saw defeat, massacre, the hideous deaths of his comrades,
and beyond that iron waves of crusaders and endless columns of Tartar
horsemen sweeping over the Dar al-Islam. And he could not look into
Ugolini's eyes and declare that all would turn out well.

But what would happen if he did nothing? He looked down that path and
saw the same masses of crusaders and Tartars, saw the burning mosques,
the emptied cities, the heaps of corpses. He saw the Gray Mosque in El
Kahira ruined, his teacher Saadi hacked to pieces by crusader swords.

Then he heard words Saadi had spoken: _We are God's instruments, by
which He brings about that which He wills. The fool does nothing and
leaves the outcome to God. The ordinary man acts and prays that God will
grant a good result. The wise man acts and leaves the outcome to God._

He would act.

He turned to Lorenzo, standing near him by the cardinal's table.

"Your life is at stake in this. What do you think?"

Lorenzo's face was as grave as Daoud had ever seen it. "If the
Filippeschi attack the Palazzo Monaldeschi, they will be driven off. But
with more than five hundred men attacking the palace, it will be
impossible for the French to guard the Tartars adequately. If you get
in, kill them, and get out safely, I think we can hide our part in the
fighting. If you are caught or killed, I think it is as the cardinal
says. We are all doomed."

"Exactly!" cried Ugolini from where he stood behind his table. "Then why
risk it?"

"Because we must," Lorenzo said to him. "If we do not stop the alliance
by force, the pope will strike a bargain with the King of France. There
will be a French army marching against my King Manfred, and after that
crusaders and Tartars will fall upon Messer David's people."

Ugolini uttered a deep groan and sank into his chair.

Relief swept over Daoud. He had already decided to make the attempt on
the Palazzo Monaldeschi even if Lorenzo opposed it, but to have Lorenzo
side with him gave him more confidence that he could carry it off.

Lorenzo turned those somber eyes to him again. "It all depends on you. I
am gambling that you can do it."

Daoud felt a powerful warmth toward the Sicilian. There were times when
he had wished Lorenzo were not with him, times when he distrusted him.
The foolishness of involving them with Rachel and her husband. The fact
that Lorenzo was a Jew who had abandoned his religion. Even his dog was
a nuisance. But at this moment to have Lorenzo's support made him feel
as strong and confident as if the Mameluke orta he commanded had
suddenly appeared in Orvieto.

He grinned at Lorenzo. "You proved how good a gambler you are by losing
to de Verceuil."

Lorenzo chuckled. "What must we do first?"

Daoud said, "Arrange for me to meet secretly with Marco di Filippeschi.
And send word to King Manfred that the pope and the French are about to
reach agreement on the Tartar alliance, and when they do the French will
come pouring into Italy. Tell him now is the time for his Ghibellino
allies in the north to march on Orvieto."

Lorenzo nodded. "I will send one of my men to Lucera." He shook his
head. "My God, how I wish I could go myself!"

"Once the Tartars are dead," Daoud said, "we will all go home. Now, find
Sordello and send him to my room."

As Daoud left Ugolini's cabinet, he glanced back to see the little
cardinal slumped over the table, knotting his fingers in his fuzzy white
hair. He would have to spend more time with him, to build up his
courage.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sophia was standing in the hallway when Daoud emerged from his room that
night, on his way to meet with the Filippeschi chieftain. He was not
