Full speed ahead. A rapid mental calculation--an educated guess,
rather--and he set the automatic control. Turning around to start for
the stern compartment, he saw that Ora had recovered from her swoon
and now stood swaying weakly in the passageway.

"Ora!" he exclaimed delightedly. He rushed to her side and supported
her in a tender embrace.

"Rapaju?" she questioned with horror in her eyes.

"Won't bother you for a while, dear. But your father--Mado?"

"He gassed them. They'll recover." The brave girl had regained her
composure.

"Good! But, come! Time's short." He half carried her to the rear,
berating himself the while for his inability to pay her closer
attention. With arms still around her he placed her at one of the
stern ports.

"What is it, Carr?" She sensed his excitement.

"The fleet--see! We'll destroy them."

The spherical vessels were close behind, huddled together in mass
formation and following the _Nomad_ blindly.

"How, Carr?"

"Lead them into it. Wait tall you see! There's a--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Nomad_ lurched, and changed direction. Cold fear clutched at his
throat. That devil of a guard! Why hadn't he killed him? He dashed
through the passage, Ora at his heels.

Sure enough, the crippled guard had dragged himself to the controls;
was manipulating the energy director as he had seen Mado do. They were
heading directly for the terrible monster of the heavens!

No need now to peer through the telescope. The thing was visible to
the naked eye. No power could save them! Carr hurled himself at the
guard and tore at the hairy paw which gripped the lever. The throbbing
of strange energies filled the air of the room, and Carr's brain
pulsed with the maddening rhythm. The red discharge appeared at the
projections of the control panels. He forgot the fleet of the Llotta,
forgot the menace to his own world. Only Ora mattered now, and he had
not the power to save her!

As in a daze he knew he was wrenching mightily at the body of the
powerful minion of Rapaju. His fingers encountered heated metal--one
of the ray-pistols. He felt the intense vibration of the weapon as its
charge was released. But he still lived. The beast who held it had
missed! Dimly he was conscious of the screams of Ora; of the yielding
of the creature who fought him. An animal cry registered on his
consciousness and he shook the suddenly limp Llotta from him. He knew
somehow that his last enemy was gone.

A quick glance showed him that Ora was still on her feet, braced
against the wall. The red veil was before his eyes. He grasped the
controls, and fought desperately to keep his strength and senses. A
streamer of horrid whiteness swung across his vision; slithered
clammily over the glass of one of the forward ports. They were into
the thing! It was the end! He groaned aloud as he fumbled with the
mechanisms and strove to formulate a plan of escape.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fleet, he knew, was just behind. An enormous mass. The repulsive
energy astern would be terrific. He turned it full on. The whiteness
obscured his vision. Then it was gone once more. A single streamer
waved before him and encompassed them. The movement of these members
must be inconceivably rapid, else they'd be invisible at the speed the
_Nomad_ was traveling. Full speed ahead. The repulsion full on in the
direction of the center of the mass as well as astern. The framework
of the _Nomad_ creaked protestingly from the terrific forces that tore
at her vitals.

Then suddenly they were released. The _Nomad_ was shooting off into
space. The resultant of those combined forces had done the trick. Only
the edge of that devil-fish of space, had they touched. Free--they
were free of the monster! The red veil lifted. He rushed to Ora's
side. She was kneeling at one of the floor ports, breathing heavily
but unharmed.

Below them they saw the swiftly receding mass: the fleet of the Llotta
diving headlong, drawn inexorably into the rapacious embrace of the
vile creature of the heavens. An instant the awful whiteness of the
thing closed in greedily about the many spheres of the fleet;
swallowed them from sight and contorted madly and with seeming glee
over the triumph. Then, in a burst of blinding incandescence, it was
gone. The monster, the fleet--everything--blasted into nothingness.
The fuel storage compartments of the vessels of Ganymede had exploded!
The heavens were rid of the inexplicable growing menace; the inner
planets were saved from a terrible invasion. And the _Nomad_ was safe.
Ora, Detis, Mado--all were safe!

At his side Ora was trembling. Gently he raised her to her feet, and
took her into his arms.


CHAPTER X

_Vagabonds All_

Together they cared for Detis and Mado; made them comfortable in their
bunks until the time when the effects of the gas would wear off.
Lucky it was that Rapaju had used the gas pistol rather than the ray.
Perhaps it had been a mistake. Or perhaps he had needed the scientific
knowledge of Detis, the familiarity with the inner planets that was
Mado's. At any rate, they had no delusions regarding his designs on
Ora or his hatred of Carr. By his own passions had the commander of
the fleet been led to the error that cost him his life and made
possible the destruction of his fleet.

Carr was torn by conflicting emotions. The delectable little Europan
was most disturbing. He'd never had much use for the other sex--on
Earth. Too dominating, most of them. And always thrown at his head by
designing parents for his money. But Ora was different! Her very
nearness set his pulses racing. And he knew that she cared for him as
he did for her. Those moments in the control cabin after the
explosion! But something had come over him since he cut loose from the
old life. Wanderlust--that was it. He'd never go back. Neither would
he be content to settle down to a domestic life in Pala-dar. Wanted to
be up and going somewhere.

"Oh, Carr, Carr!" Ora's voice called to him. "Mado is awake. He wants
you."

Good old Mado! Why couldn't they just continue on their way as they
had started out? Roaming the universe in search of other adventures!
But the silvery tinkle of Ora's laughter reached his ears. She was
irresistible! He forgot his doubts as he hurried to his friend's
cabin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mado was staring at the Europan maiden with a ludicrous expression of
astonishment--gawping, Carr called it. And Ora was laughing at him.

"Your friend," she gurgled, "doesn't believe he's alive, or that I am,
or you. Tell him we are."

Carr grinned. Mado did look funny at that. "Hello, old sock," he said,
"had a bad dream?"

"Did I? Oh boy!" Mado rocked to and fro, his head in his hands. Then
he displayed sudden intense interest. "Rapaju?" he asked. "His
guards--the fleet--what's happened?"

"Ah ha! Now you know you're alive!" Carr laughed. "But the others are
dead and gone. The fleet's gone to smash--and how!"

"But Carr. How did you do it? Tell me!"

Mado threw off his covers and clapped his friend on the back, a
resounding thump that brought a gasp from Ora.

"Your Sargasso Sea did it. And it's a thing of the past, too. Wait
till I tell you about it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Ora tripped from the room as Carr sat on the edge of the bunk to spin
his yarn.

"But man alive!" Mado exclaimed when the story was finished. "Don't
you know you've done a miraculous thing? I'd never have had the nerve.
That damn creature out there had more than four times its former
attracting energy. That's what made it impossible for the fleet to get
away. And you--you lucky devil--you just doped it out right. The fleet
of the Llotta gave you a tremendous push from astern when you used the
repulsive energy. If they hadn't been there with their enormous mass
to react against we'd all have been mincemeat now along with the
Llotta. You Terrestrials sure can think fast! Me, now--Lord, if it had
been me, I'd have thought of it after my spirit had departed to its
reward--or punishment. Glory be! It's the greatest thing I ever heard
of."

"Rats! You'd have done the same as I did. Probably would have missed
it a mile instead of nearly getting caught as I did. A good thing the
fleet's gone, though. Mars and Terra--Venus, too--they'll never know
how close it was for them. Wouldn't have sense enough to appreciate
it, anyway."

"They would if they ever got a taste of what the Llotta planned. But
what's wrong with you Carr? You act sore. Want to go home?"

"Me? Don't be like that. No--I'd like to carry on as we planned.
There's Saturn, Uranus and Neptune yet; Planet 9; a flock of
satellites and asteroids. Oh, dammit!"

Mado looked his amazement. "Well, what's to prevent it?" he demanded.
"The _Nomad's_ still here, and so are we. I'm just as anxious to keep
going as you are. Why not?"

But Carr did not reply. Why not, indeed? He strode from the cabin and
into the control room. The _Nomad_ was drifting in space, subject only
to natural forces that swung it in a vast orbit around the sun. He
started the generators and drove the vessel from her temporary orbit
with rapid acceleration. Out--out into the jeweled blackness of the
heavens. There was Jupiter out there, a bright orb that came suddenly
very near when he centered it on the cross-hairs of the telescope.

The excited voices of Ora and Detis came to his ears. The booming
speech of Mado. Why couldn't he be sensible and companionable as they
were? But a perverse demon kept him at the controls. They'd think him
a grouch. Well, maybe he was! But the vastness of the universe
beckoned. New worlds to explore; mysteries to be solved; a life of
countless new experiences! Anyone'd think he was the owner of the
_Nomad_, the way he planned for the future.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were in the control cabin now--Mado and Detis and Ora. A moment
he hesitated, eyes glued to the telescope. Then, with a petulant
gesture, he reached for the automatic control; locked it. Shouldn't be
this way. They'd think him an awful cad. And they'd be right! He
whirled to face them.

Detis was smiling. Mado gazed owlishly solemn. Ora clung to the arm of
her father, and her long lashes hid the blue eyes that had played such
havoc with the emotions of the Terrestrial.

"Carr," said Detis, gently, "we must thank you. You saved our lives,
you know."

"Aw, forget it. Saved my own, too, didn't I? By a lucky break."

"It wasn't luck, Carr." Detis was gripping his hand now. "It was sheer
grit and brains. You had them both. If you hadn't used them we'd all
be corpses--or disintegrated--excepting Ora, perhaps. And you know the
fate that awaited her. Instead, we are alive and well. The fleet is
gone. Rapaju's body and that of his guard drift nameless in space
where you disposed of them through the air-lock of the _Nomad_. The
inner planets need fear no future invasion, for the resources of
Ganymede have been expended in the one huge enterprise that has
failed. All through your quick wit and bravery. No, it wasn't luck."

"Nonsense, Detis." Carr returned the pressure of the scientist's hand,
smiling sheepishly. He pushed him away after a moment. He didn't want
their gratitude or praise. Didn't know what he wanted. Ora still
avoided meeting his gaze. "Nonsense," he repeated. "And now, please
leave me. You, Detis. Mado, too. I'd like to be alone for a
while--with Ora. Mind?"

Mado's owlish look broadened to a knowing grin as he backed into the
passageway. Detis collided with the huge Martian in his eagerness to
be out of the room. They were alone and Carr was on his feet. Nothing
mattered now--excepting Ora. Suddenly she was in his arms, the
fragrance of her hair in his nostrils.

       *       *       *       *       *

Star gazing, the two of them. It was ridiculous! But the wonders of
the universe held a new beauty now for Carr. The distant suns had
taken on added brilliance. Still they beckoned.

"Carr," the girl whispered, after a time, "where are we going?"

"To Europa. Your home."

"To--to stay?"

"No." Carr was suddenly confident; determined. "We'll stop there to
break the news. Then we'll be wedded, you and I, according to the
custom of your people. Our honeymoon--years of it--will be spent in
the _Nomad_, roving the universe. Mado'll agree, I know. Wanderers of
the heavens we'll be, Ora. But we'll have each other; and when
we've--you've--had enough of it, I'll be ready to settle down.
Anywhere you say. Are you game?"

"Oh, Carr! How did you guess? It's just as we'd planned. Father and
Mado and I. Didn't think I'd go, did you, you stupid old dear?"

"Why--why Ora." Carr was stammering now. He'd thought he was being
masterful--making the plans himself. But she'd beat him to it, the
adorable little minx! "I was a bit afraid," he admitted; "and I still
can't believe that it's actually true. You're sure you want to?"

"Positive. Why Carr, I've always been a vagabond at heart. And now
that I've found you we'll just be vagabonds together. Father and Mado
will leave us very much to each other. Their scientific leanings, you
know. And--oh--it'll just be wonderful!"

"It's you that'll make it wonderful, sweetheart."

Carr drew her close. The stars shone still more brightly and beckoned
anew. Vagabonds, all of them! Like the gypsies of old, but with vastly
more territory to roam. The humdrum routine of his old life seemed
very far behind. He wondered what Courtney Davis would say if he could
see him now. Wordless happiness had come to him, and he let his
thoughts wander out into the limitless expanse of the heavens. Star
gazing still--just he and Ora.




Reader's Corner

[Illustration: ]


_From a Science Fiction "Fiend"_

     Dear Editor:

     I agree with you about the reprinting of old stories,
     because you would only force older Science Fiction readers
     to read the same stuff that they have read before. Any
     Science Fiction fiend like myself will surely have the
     reprinted story in his collection of magazines.

     The size of your magazine is perfect, but your paper is not
     very good. As for me, I don't care about your paper because
     your stories are so very good that the paper doesn't matter.

     My favorite story, and one of the best stories that I have
     ever read so far, is "Murder Madness." It has a very
     original idea and holds your interest from the very start.

     I am also for a more often publication of your magazine;
     about twice a month--Rupert Jones, New York, N. Y.


_Valuable Suggestions_

     Dear Editor:

     The July issue of Astounding Stories is one of the best
     issues you have so far published.

     Arthur J. Burks sure is a master at writing Science Fiction
     tales. The first installment of "Earth, the Marauder" was
     swell. Harl Vincent is another very good author. His
     novelette, "The Terror of Air-Level Six," was a close
     second. "The Forgotten Planet," by S. P. Wright, "Beyond the
     Heaviside Layer," by S. P. Meek and "From an Amber Block,"
     by Tom Curry were all good stories.

     The cover illustration was the best yet. I hope that the
