than that which has prevailed for the other planets. But too much
stress should not be placed upon this conclusion. So long as the manner
in which the planets came into being continues an open question,
conclusions about their time of birth must remain of doubtful validity.

233. TIDAL FRICTION BETWEEN EARTH AND MOON.--An important addition to
theories of development within the solar system has been worked out by
Prof. G. H. Darwin, who, starting with certain very simple assumptions
as to the present condition of things in earth and moon, derives from
these, by a strict process of mathematical reasoning, far-reaching
conclusions of great interest and importance. The key to these
conclusions lies in recognition of the fact that through the influence
of the tides (§ 42) there is now in progress and has been in progress
for a very long time, a gradual transfer of motion (moment of momentum)
from the earth to the moon. The earth's motion of rotation is being
slowly destroyed by the friction of the tides, as the motion of a
bicycle is destroyed by the friction of a brake, and, in consequence of
this slowing down, the moon is pushed farther and farther away from the
earth, so that it now moves in a larger orbit than it had some millions
of years ago.

Fig. 24 has been used to illustrate the action of the moon in raising
tides upon the earth, but in accordance with the third law of motion
(§ 36) this action must be accompanied by an equal and contrary reaction
whose nature may readily be seen from the same figure. The moon moves
about its orbit from west to east and the earth rotates about its axis
in the same direction, as shown by the curved arrow in the figure. The
tidal wave, _I_, therefore points a little _in advance_ of the moon's
position in its orbit and by its attraction must tend to pull the moon
ahead in its orbital motion a little faster than it would move if the
whole substance of the earth were placed inside the sphere represented
by the broken circle in the figure. It is true that the tidal wave at
_I´´_ pulls back and tends to neutralize the effect of the wave at _I_,
but on the whole the tidal wave nearer the moon has the stronger
influence, and the moon on the whole moves a very little faster, and by
virtue of this added impetus draws continually a little farther away
from the earth than it would if there were no tides.

234. CONSEQUENCES OF TIDAL FRICTION UPON THE EARTH.--This process of
moving the moon away from the earth is a cumulative one, going on
century after century, and with reference to it the moon's orbit must be
described not as a circle or ellipse, or any other curve which returns
into itself, but as a spiral, like the balance spring of a watch, each
of whose coils is a little larger than the preceding one, although this
excess is, to be sure, very small, because the tides themselves are
small and the tidal influence feeble when compared with the whole
attraction of the earth for the moon. But, given time enough, even this
small force may accomplish great results, and something like 100,000,000
years of past opportunity would have sufficed for the tidal forces to
move the moon from close proximity with the earth out to its present
position.

For millions of years to come, if moon and earth endure so long, the
distance between them must go on increasing, although at an ever slower
rate, since the farther away the moon goes the smaller will be the tides
and the slower the working out of their results. On the other hand, when
the moon was nearer the earth than now, tidal influences must have been
greater and their effects more rapidly produced than at the present
time, particularly if, as seems probable, at some past epoch the earth
was hot and plastic like Jupiter and Saturn. Then, instead of tides in
the water of the sea, such as we now have, the whole substance of the
earth would respond to the moon's attraction in _bodily tides_ of
semi-fluid matter not only higher, but with greater internal friction of
their molecules one upon another, and correspondingly greater effect in
checking the earth's rotation.

But, whether the tide be a bodily one or confined to the waters of the
sea, so long as the moon causes it to flow there will be a certain
amount of friction which will affect the earth much as a brake affects a
revolving wheel, slowing down its motion, and producing thus a longer
day as well as a longer month on account of the moon's increased
distance. Slowing down the earth's rotation is the direct action of the
moon upon the earth. Pushing the moon away is the form in which the
earth's equal and contrary reaction manifests itself.

235. CONSEQUENCES OF TIDAL FRICTION UPON THE MOON.--When the moon was
plastic the earth must have raised in it a bodily tide manifold greater
than the lunar tides upon the earth, and, as we have seen in Chapter IX,
this tide has long since worn out the greater part of the moon's
rotation and brought our satellite to the condition in which it presents
always the same face toward the earth.

These two processes, slowing down the rotation and pushing away the
disturbing body, are inseparable--one requires the other; and it is
worth noting in this connection that when for any reason the tide ceases
to flow, and the tidal wave takes up a permanent position, as it has in
the moon (§ 99), its work is ended, for when there is no motion of the
wave there can be no friction to further reduce the rate of rotation of
the one body, and no reaction to that friction to push away the other.
But this permanent and stationary tidal wave in the moon, or elsewhere,
means that the satellite presents always the same face toward its
planet, moving once about its orbit in the time required for one
revolution upon its axis, and the tide raised by the moon upon the earth
tends to produce here the result long since achieved in our satellite,
to make our day and month of equal length, and to make the earth turn
always the same side toward the moon. But the moon's tidal force is
small compared with that of the earth, and has a vastly greater momentum
to overcome, so that its work upon the earth is not yet complete.
According to Thomson and Tait, the moon must be pushed off another
hundred thousand miles, and the day lengthened out by tidal influence to
seven of our present weeks before the day and the lunar month are made
of equal length, and the moon thereby permanently hidden from one
hemisphere of the earth.

236. THE EARTH-MOON SYSTEM.--Retracing into the past the course of
development of the earth and moon, it is possible to reach back by means
of the mathematical theory of tidal friction to a time at which these
bodies were much nearer to each other than now, but it has not been
found possible to trace out the mode of their separation from one body
into two, as is supposed in the nebular theory. In the earliest part of
their history accessible to mathematical analysis they are distinct
bodies at some considerable distance from each other, with the earth
rotating about an axis more nearly perpendicular to the moon's orbit and
to the ecliptic than is now the case. Starting from such a condition,
the lunar tides, according to Darwin, have been instrumental in tipping
the earth's rotation axis into its present oblique position, and in
determining the eccentricity of the moon's orbit and its position with
respect to the ecliptic as well as the present length of day and month.

337. TIDAL FRICTION UPON THE PLANETS.--The satellites of the outer
planets are equally subject to influences of this kind, and there
appears to be independent evidence that some of them, at least, turn
always the same face toward their respective planets, indicating that
the work of tidal friction has here been accomplished. We saw in Chapter
XI that it is at present an open question whether the inner planets,
Venus and Mercury, do not always turn the same face toward the sun,
their day and year being of equal length. In addition to the direct
observational evidence upon this point, Schiaparelli has sought to show
by an appeal to tidal theory that such is probably the case, at least
for Mercury, since the tidal forces which tend to bring about this
result in that planet are about as great as the forces which have
certainly produced it in the case of the moon and Saturn's satellite,
Japetus. The same line of reasoning would show that every satellite in
the solar system, save possibly the newly discovered ninth satellite of
Saturn, must, as a consequence of tidal friction, turn always the same
face toward its planet.

238. THE SOLAR TIDE.--The sun also raises tides in the earth, and their
influence must be similar in character to that of the lunar tides,
checking the rotation of the earth and thrusting earth and sun apart,
although quantitatively these effects are small compared with those of
the moon. They must, however, continue so long as the solar tide lasts,
possibly until the day and year are made of equal length--i. e., they
may continue long after the lunar tidal influence has ceased to push
earth and moon apart. Should this be the case, a curious inverse effect
will be produced. The day being then longer than the month, the moon
will again raise a tide in the earth which will run around it _from west
to east_, opposite to the course of the present tide, thus tending to
accelerate the earth's rotation, and by its reaction to bring the moon
back toward the earth again, and ultimately to fall upon it.

We may note that an effect of this kind must be in progress now between
Mars and its inner satellite, Phobos, whose time of orbital revolution
is only one third of a Martian day. It seems probable that this
satellite is in the last stages of its existence as an independent body,
and must ultimately fall into Mars.

239. ROCHE'S LIMIT.--In looking forward to such a catastrophe, however,
due regard must be paid to a dynamical principle of a different
character. The moon can never be precipitated upon the earth entire,
since before it reaches us it will have been torn asunder by the excess
of the earth's attraction for the near side of its satellite over that
which it exerts upon the far side. As the result of Roche's mathematical
analysis we are able to assign a limiting distance between any planet
and its satellite within which the satellite, if it turns always the
same face toward the planet, can not come without being broken into
fragments. If we represent the radius of the planet by _r_, and the
quotient obtained by dividing the density of the planet by the density
of the satellite by _q_, then

    Roche's limit = 2.44 × r × q^{1/3}.

Thus in the case of earth and moon we find from the densities given in
§ 95, _q_ = 1.65, and with _r_ = 3,963 miles we obtain 11,400 miles as
the nearest approach which the moon could make to the earth without
being broken up by the difference of the earth's attractions for its
opposite sides.

We must observe, however, that Roche's limit takes no account of
molecular forces, the adhesion of one molecule to another, by virtue of
which a stick or stone resists fracture, but is concerned only with the
gravitative forces by which the molecules are attracted toward the
moon's center and toward the earth. Within a stone or rock of moderate
size these gravitative forces are insignificant, and cohesion is the
chief factor in preserving its integrity, but in a large body like the
moon, the case is just reversed, cohesion plays a small part and
gravitation a large one in holding the body together. We may conclude,
therefore, that at a proper distance these forces are capable of
breaking up the moon, or any other large body, into fragments of a size
such that molecular cohesion instead of gravitation is the chief agent
in preserving them from further disintegration.

240. SATURN'S RINGS.--Saturn's rings are of peculiar interest in this
connection. The outer edge of the ring system lies just inside of
Roche's limit for this planet, and we have already seen that the rings
are composed of small fragments independent of each other. Whatever may
have been the process by which the nine satellites of Saturn came into
existence, we have in Roche's limit the explanation why the material of
the ring was not worked up into satellites; the forces exerted by Saturn
would tear into pieces any considerable satellite thus formed and
equally would prevent the formation of one from raw material.

Saturn's rings present the only case within the solar system where
matter is known to be revolving about a planet at a distance less than
Roche's limit, and it is an interesting question whether these rings can
remain as a permanent part of the planet's system or are only a
temporary feature. The drawings of Saturn made two centuries ago agree
among themselves in representing the rings as larger than they now
appear, and there is some reason to suppose that as a consequence of
mutual disturbances--collisions--their momentum is being slowly wasted
so that ultimately they must be precipitated into the planet. But the
direct evidence of such a progress that can be drawn from present data
is too scanty to justify positive conclusions in the matter. On the
other hand, Nolan suggests that in the outer parts of the ring small
satellites might be formed whose tidal influence upon Saturn would
suffice to push them away from the ring beyond Roche's limit, and that
the very small inner satellites of Saturn may have been thus formed at
the expense of the ring.

The inner satellite of Mars is very close to Roche's limit for that
planet, and, as we have seen above, must be approaching still nearer to
the danger line.

241. THE MOON'S DEVELOPMENT.--The fine series of photographs of the moon
obtained within the last few years at Paris, have been used by the
astronomers of that observatory for a minute study of the lunar
formations, much as geologists study the surface of the earth to
determine something about the manner in which it was formed. Their
conclusions are, in general, that at some past time the moon was a hot
and fluid body which, as it cooled and condensed, formed a solid crust
whose further shrinkage compressed the liquid nucleus and led to a long
series of fractures in the crust and outbursts of liquid matter, whose
latest and feeblest stages produced the lunar craters, while traces of
the earlier ones, connected with a general settling of the crust,
although nearly obliterated, are still preserved in certain large but
vague features of the lunar topography, such as the distribution of the
seas, etc. They find also in certain markings of the surface what they
consider convincing evidence of the existence in past times of a lunar
atmosphere. But this seems doubtful, since the force of gravity at the
moon's surface is so small that an atmosphere similar to that of the
earth, even though placed upon the moon, could not permanently endure,
but would be lost by the gradual escape of its molecules into the
surrounding space.

The molecules of a gas are quite independent one of another, and are in
a state of ceaseless agitation, each one darting to and fro, colliding
with its neighbors or with whatever else opposes its forward motion, and
traveling with velocities which, on the average, amount to a good many
hundreds of feet per second, although in the case of any individual
molecule they may be much less or much greater than the average value,
an occasional molecule having possibly a velocity several times as great
as the average. In the upper regions of our own atmosphere, if one of
these swiftly moving particles of oxygen or nitrogen were headed away
from the earth with a velocity of seven miles per second, the whole
attractive power of the earth would be insufficient to check its motion,
and it would therefore, unless stopped by some collision, escape from
the earth and return no more. But, since this velocity of seven miles
per second is more than thirty times as great as the average velocity of
the molecules of air, it must be very seldom indeed that one is found to
move so swiftly, and the loss of the earth's atmosphere by leakage of
this sort is insignificant. But upon the moon, or any other body where
the force of gravity is small, conditions are quite different, and in
our satellite a velocity of little more than one mile per second would
suffice to carry a molecule away from the outer limits of its
atmosphere. This velocity, only five times the average, would be
frequently attained, particularly in former times when the moon's
temperature was high, for then the average velocity of all the molecules
would be considerably increased, and the amount of leakage might become,
and probably would become, a serious matter, steadily depleting the
moon's atmosphere and leading finally to its present state of
exhaustion. It is possible that the moon may at one time have had an
atmosphere, but if so it could have been only a temporary possession,
and the same line of reasoning may be applied to the asteroids and to
most of the satellites of the solar system, and also, though in less
degree, to the smaller planets, Mercury and Mars.

242. STELLAR DEVELOPMENT.--We have already considered in this chapter
the line of development followed by one star, the sun, and treating this
as a typical case, it is commonly believed that the life history of a
star, in so far as it lies within our reach, begins with a condition in
which its matter is widely diffused, and presumably at a low
temperature. Contracting in bulk under the influence of its own
gravitative forces, the star's temperature rises to a maximum, and then
falls off in later stages until the body ceases to shine and passes over
to the list of dark stars whose existence can only be detected in
exceptional cases, such as are noted in Chapter XIII. The most
systematic development of this idea is due to Lockyer, who looks upon
all the celestial bodies--sun, moon and planets, stars, nebulæ, and
comets--as being only collections of meteoric matter in different stages
of development, and who has sought by means of their spectra to classify
these bodies and to determine their stage of advancement. While the
fundamental ideas involved in this "meteoritic hypothesis" are not
seriously controverted, the detailed application of its principles is
open to more question, and for the most part those astronomers who hold
that in the present state of knowledge stellar spectra furnish a key to
a star's age or degree of advancement do not venture beyond broad
general statements.

[Illustration: FIG. 151.--Types of stellar spectra substantially
according to SECCHI.]

243. STELLAR SPECTRA.--Thus the types of stellar spectra shown in Fig.
151 are supposed to illustrate successive stages in the development of
an average star. Type I corresponds to the period in which its
temperature is near the maximum; Type II belongs to a later stage in
which the temperature has commenced to fall; and Type III to the period
immediately preceding extinction.

While human life, or even the duration of the human race, is too short
to permit a single star to be followed through all the stages of its
career, an adequate picture of that development might be obtained by
examining many stars, each at a different stage of progress, and,
following this idea, numerous subdivisions of the types of stellar
spectra shown in Fig. 151 have been proposed in order to represent with
more detail the process of stellar growth and decay; but for the most
part these subdivisions and their interpretation are accepted by
astronomers with much reserve.

It is significant that there are comparatively few stars with spectra of
Type III, for this is what we should expect to find if the development
of a star through the last stages of its visible career occupied but a
small fraction of its total life. From the same point of view the great
number of stars with spectra of the first type would point to a long
duration of this stage of life. The period in which the sun belongs,
represented by Type II, probably has a duration intermediate between the
others. Since most of the variable stars, save those of the Algol class,
have spectra of the third type, we conclude that variability, with its
associated ruddy color and great atmospheric absorption of light, is a
sign of old age and approaching extinction. The Algol or eclipse
variables, on the other hand, having spectra of the first type, are
comparatively young stars, and, as we shall see a little later, the
shortness of their light periods in some measure confirms this
conclusion drawn from their spectra.

We have noted in § 196 that the sun's near neighbors are prevailingly
stars with spectra of the second type, while the Milky Way is mainly
composed of first-type stars, and from this we may now conclude that in
our particular part of the entire celestial space the stars are, as a
rule, somewhat further developed than is the case elsewhere.

244. DOUBLE STARS.--The double stars present special problems of
development growing out of the effects of tidal friction, which must
operate in them much as it does between earth and moon, tending steadily
to increase the distance between the components of such a star. So, too,
in such a system as is shown in Fig. 132, gravity must tend to make each
component of the double star shrink to smaller dimensions, and this
shrinkage must result in faster rotation and increased tidal friction,
which in turn must push the components apart, so that in view of the
small density and close proximity of those particular stars we may
fairly regard a star like [b] Lyræ as in the early stages of its
career and destined with increasing age to lose its variability of
light, since the eclipses which now take place must cease with
increasing distance between the components unless the orbit is turned
exactly edgewise toward the earth. Close proximity and the resulting
shortness of periodic time in a double star seem, therefore, to be
evidence of its youth, and since this shortness of periodic time is
characteristic of both Algol variables and spectroscopic binaries as a
class, we may set them down as being, upon the whole, stars in the early
stages of their career. On the other hand, it is generally true that the
larger the orbit, and the greater the periodic time in the orbit, the
farther is the star advanced in its development.

In his theory of tidal friction, Darwin has pointed out that whenever
the periodic time in the orbit is more than twice as long as the time
required for rotation about the axis, the effect of the tides is to
increase the eccentricity of the orbit, and, following this indication,
See has urged that with increasing distance between the components of a
double star their orbits about the common center of gravity must grow
more and more eccentric, so that we have in the shape of such orbits a
new index of stellar development; the more eccentric the orbit, the
farther advanced are the stars. It is important to note in this
connection that among the double stars whose orbits have been computed
there seems to run a general rule--the larger the orbit the greater is
its eccentricity--a relation which must hold true if tidal friction
operates as above supposed, and which, being found to hold true,
confirms in some degree the criteria of stellar age which are furnished
by the theory of tidal friction.

245. NEBULÆ.--The nebular hypothesis of Laplace has inclined astronomers
to look upon nebulæ in general as material destined to be worked up into
stars, but which is now in a very crude and undeveloped stage. Their
great bulk and small density seem also to indicate that gravitation has
not yet produced in them results at all comparable with what we see in
sun and stars. But even among nebulæ there are to be found very
different stages of development. The irregular nebula, shapeless and
void like that of Orion; the spiral, ring, and planetary nebulæ and the
star cluster, clearly differ in amount of progress toward their final
goal. But it is by no means sure that these several types are different
stages in one line of development; for example, the primitive nebula
which grows into a spiral may never become a ring or planetary nebula,
and _vice versa_. So too there is no reason to suppose that a star
cluster will ever break up into isolated stars such as those whose
relation to each other is shown in Fig. 122.

246. CLASSIFICATION.--Considering the heavenly bodies with respect to
their stage of development, and arranging them in due order, we should
probably find lowest down in the scale of progress the irregular nebulæ
