the geotropic bending of the upper part, hardly interferes with the growth
of the whole radicle.

In the same box with the 15 control specimens, the rapid geotropic bending
and growth of which have just been described, there were six radicles,
about .6 inch in length, extended horizontally, from which the tips had
been cut off in a transverse direction for a length of barely 1 mm. These
radicles were examined after 9 h. and again after 24 h. 40 m., and they all
remained horizontal. They had not become nearly so tortuous as those above
described which had been cauterised. The radicles with their tips cut off
had grown in the 24 h. 40 m. as much, judging by the eye, as the cauterised
specimens.

Zea mays.--The tips of several radicles, extended horizontally in damp air,
were dried with blotting-paper and then touched in the first trial during 2
or 3 seconds with dry caustic; but this was too long a contact, for the
tips were blackened for a length of rather above 1 mm. They showed no signs
of geotropism after an interval of 9 h., and were then thrown away. In a
second trial the tips of three radicles were touched for a shorter time,
and were blackened for a length of from 0.5 to 0.75 mm.: they all remained
horizontal for 4 h., but after 8 h. 30 m. one of them, in which the
blackened tip was only 0.5 mm. in length, was inclined at 21o beneath the
horizon. Six control radicles all became slightly geotropic in 4 h., and
strongly so after 8 h. 30 m., with the chief seat of curvature generally
between 6 or 7 mm. from the apex. In the cauterised specimens, the terminal
growing part, 10 mm. in length, increased during
[page 540]
the 8 h. 30 m. to a mean length of 13 mm.; and in the controls to 14.3 mm.

In a third trial the tips of five radicles (exposed to a temp. of 70o -
71o) were touched with the caustic only once and very slightly; they were
afterwards examined under the microscope, and the part which was in any way
discoloured was on an average .76 mm. in length. After 4 h. 10 m. none were
bent; after 5 h. 45 m., and again after 23 h. 30 m., they still remained
horizontal, excepting one which was now inclined 20o beneath the horizon.
The terminal part, 10 mm. in length, had increased greatly in length during
the 23 h. 30 m., viz., to an average of 26 mm. Four control radicles became
slightly geotropic after the 4 h. 10 m., and plainly so after the 5 h. 45
m. Their mean length after the 23 h. 30 m. had increased from 10 mm. to 31
mm. Therefore a slight cauterisation of the tip checks slightly the growth
of the whole radicle, and manifestly stops the bending of that part which
ought to bend most under the influence of geotropism, and which still
continues to increase greatly in length.]

Concluding Remarks.--Abundant evidence has now been given, showing that
with various plants the tip of the radicle is alone sensitive to
geotropism; and that when thus excited, it causes the adjoining parts to
bend. The exact length of the sensitive part seems to be somewhat variable,
depending in part on the age of the radicle; but the destruction of a
length of from less than 1 to 1.5 mm. (about 1/20th of an inch), in the
several species observed, generally sufficed to prevent any part of the
radicle from bending within 24 h., or even for a longer period. The fact of
the tip alone being sensitive is so remarkable a fact, that we will here
give a brief summary of the foregoing experiments. The tips were cut off 29
horizontally extended radicles of Vicia faba, and with a few exceptions
they did not become geotropic in 22 or 23 h., whilst unmutilated radicles
were always bowed downwards in 8 or 9 h. It should be borne in mind that
the mere act of cutting
[page 541]
off the tip of a horizontally extended radicle does not prevent the
adjoining parts from bending, if the tip has been previously exposed for an
hour or two to the influence of geotropism. The tip after amputation is
sometimes completely regenerated in three days; and it is possible that it
may be able to transmit an impulse to the adjoining parts before its
complete regeneration. The tips of six radicles of Cucurbita ovifera were
amputated like those of Vicia faba; and these radicles showed no signs of
geotropism in 24 h.; whereas the control specimens were slightly affected
in 5 h., and strongly in 9 h.

With plants belonging to six genera, the tips of the radicles were touched
transversely with dry caustic; and the injury thus caused rarely extended
for a greater length than 1 mm., and sometimes to a less distance, as
judged by even the faintest discoloration. We thought that this would be a
better method of destroying the vegetative point than cutting it off; for
we knew, from many previous experiments and from some given in the present
chapter, that a touch with caustic on one side of the apex, far from
preventing the adjoining part from bending, caused it to bend. In all the
following cases, radicles with uncauterised tips were observed at the same
time and under similar circumstances, and they became, in almost every
instance, plainly bowed downwards in one-half or one-third of the time
during which the cauterised specimens were observed. With Vicia faba 19
radicles were cauterised; 12 remained horizontal during 23-24 h.; 6 became
slightly and 1 strongly geotropic. Eight of these radicles were afterwards
reversed, and again touched with caustic, and none of them became geotropic
in 24 h., whilst the reversed control specimens became strongly bowed
downwards within this time.
[page 542]
With Pisum sativum, five radicles had their tips touched with caustic, and
after 32 h. four were still horizontal. The control specimens were slightly
geotropic in 7 h. 20 m., and strongly so in 24 h. The tips of 9 other
radicles of this plant were touched only on the lower side, and 6 of them
remained horizontal for 24 h., or were upturned in opposition to
geotropism; 2 were slightly, and 1 plainly geotropic. With Phaseolus
multiflorus, 15 radicles were cauterised, and 8 remained horizontal for 24
h.; whereas all the controls were plainly geotropic in 8 h. 30 m. Of 5
cauterised radicles of Gossypium herbaceum, 4 remained horizontal for 23 h.
and 1 became slightly geotropic; 6 control radicles were distinctly
geotropic in 7 h. 45 m. Five radicles of Cucurbita ovifera remained
horizontal in peat-earth during 25 h., and 9 remained so in damp air during
8 ½ h.; whilst the controls became slightly geotropic in 4 h. 10 m. The
tips of 10 radicals of this plant were touched on their lower sides, and 6
of them remained horizontal or were upturned after 19 h., 1 being slightly
and 3 strongly geotropic.

Lastly, the tips of several radicles of Vicia faba and Phaseolus
multiflorus were thickly coated with grease for a length of 3 mm. This
matter, which is highly injurious to most plants, did not kill or stop the
growth of the tips, and only slightly lessened the rate of growth of the
whole radicle; but it generally delayed a little the geotropic bending of
the upper part.

The several foregoing cases would tell us nothing, if the tip itself was
the part which became most bent; but we know that it is a part distant from
the tip by some millimeters which grows quickest, and which, under the
influence of geotropism, bends most. We have no reason to suppose that this
part is injured by the death or injury of the tip; and it is certain
[page 543]
that after the tip has been destroyed this part goes on growing at such a
rate, that its length was often doubled in a day. We have also seen that
the destruction of the tip does not prevent the adjoining part from
bending, if this part has already received some influence from the tip. As
with horizontally extended radicles, of which the tip has been cut off or
destroyed, the part which ought to bend most remains motionless for many
hours or days, although exposed at right angles to the full influence of
geotropism, we must conclude that the tip alone is sensitive to this power,
and transmits some influence or stimulus to the adjoining parts, causing
them to bend. We have direct evidence of such transmission; for when a
radicle was left extended horizontally for an hour or an hour and a half,
by which time the supposed influence will have travelled a little distance
from the tip, and the tip was then cut off, the radicle afterwards became
bent, although placed perpendicularly. The terminal portions of several
radicles thus treated continued for some time to grow in the direction of
their newly-acquired curvature; for as they were destitute of tips, they
were no longer acted on by geotropism. But after three or four days when
new vegetative points were formed, the radicles were again acted on by
geotropism, and now they curved themselves perpendicularly downwards. To
see anything of the above kind in the animal kingdom, we should have to
suppose than an animal whilst lying down determined to rise up in some
particular direction; and that after its head had been cut off, an impulse
continued to travel very slowly along the nerves to the proper muscles; so
that after several hours the headless animal rose up in the predetermined
direction.

As the tip of the radicle has been found to be the
[page 544]
part which is sensitive to geotropism in the members of such distinct
families as the Leguminosae, Malvaceae, Cucurbitaceae and Gramineae, we may
infer that this character is common to the roots of most seedling plants.
Whilst a root is penetrating the ground, the tip must travel first; and we
can see the advantage of its being sensitive to geotropism, as it has to
determine the course of the whole root. Whenever the tip is deflected by
any subterranean obstacle, it will also be an advantage that a considerable
length of the root should be able to bend, more especially as the tip
itself grows slowly and bends but little, so that the proper downward
course may be soon recovered. But it appears at first sight immaterial
whether this were effected by the whole growing part being sensitive to
geotropism, or by an influence transmitted exclusively from the tip. We
should, however, remember that it is the tip which is sensitive to the
contact of hard objects, causing the radicle to bend away from them, thus
guiding it along the lines of least resistance in the soil. It is again the
tip which is alone sensitive, at least in some cases, to moisture, causing
the radicle to bend towards its source. These two kinds of sensitiveness
conquer for a time the sensitiveness to geotropism, which, however,
ultimately prevails. Therefore, the three kinds of sensitiveness must often
come into antagonism; first one prevailing, and then another; and it would
be an advantage, perhaps a necessity, for the interweighing and reconciling
of these three kinds of sensitiveness, that they should be all localised in
the same group of cells which have to transmit the command to the adjoining
parts of the radicle, causing it to bend to or from the source of
irritation.

Finally, the fact of the tip alone being sensitive to
[page 545]
the attraction of gravity has an important bearing on the theory of
geotropism. Authors seem generally to look at the bending of a radicle
towards the centre of the earth, as the direct result of gravitation, which
is believed to modify the growth of the upper or lower surfaces, in such a
manner as to induce curvature in the proper direction. But we now know that
it is the tip alone which is acted on, and that this part transmits some
influence to the adjoining parts, causing them to curve downwards. Gravity
does not appear to act in a more direct manner on a radicle, than it does
on any lowly organised animal, which moves away when it feels some weight
or pressure.
[page 546]


CHAPTER XII.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING REMARKS.

Nature of the circumnutating movement--History of a germinating seed--The
radicle first protrudes and circumnutates--Its tip highly sensitive--
Emergence of the hypocotyl or of the epicotyl from the ground under the
form of an arch - Its circumnutation and that of the cotyledons--The
seedling throws up a leaf-bearing stem--The circumnutation of all the parts
or organs--Modified circumnutation--Epinasty and hyponasty--Movements of
climbing plants--Nyctitropic movements--Movements excited by light and
gravitation--Localised sensitiveness--Resemblance between the movements of
plants and animals--The tip of the radicle acts like a brain.

IT may be useful to the reader if we briefly sum up the chief conclusions,
which, as far as we can judge, have been fairly well established by the
observations given in this volume. All the parts or organs in every plant
whilst they continue to grow, and some parts which are provided with
pulvini after they have ceased to grow, are continually circumnutating.
This movement commences even before the young seedling has broken through
the ground. The nature of the movement and its causes, as far as
ascertained, have been briefly described in the Introduction. Why every
part of a plant whilst it is growing, and in some cases after growth has
ceased, should have its cells rendered more turgescent and its cell-walls
more extensile first on one side and then on another, thus inducing
circumnutation is not known. It would appear as if the changes in the cells
required periods of rest.
[page 547]

In some cases, as with the hypocotyls of Brassica, the leaves of Dionaea
and the joints of the Gramineae, the circumnutating movement when viewed
under the microscope is seen to consist of innumerable small oscillations.
The part under observation suddenly jerks forwards for a length of .002 to
.001 of an inch, and then slowly retreats for a part of this distance;
after a few seconds it again jerks forwards, but with many intermissions.
The retreating movement apparently is due to the elasticity of the
resisting tissues. How far this oscillatory movement is general we do not
know, as not many circumnutating plants were observed by us under the
microscope; but no such movement could be detected in the case of Drosera
with a 2-inch object-glass which we used. The phenomenon is a remarkable
one. The whole hypocotyl of a cabbage or the whole leaf of a Dionaea could
not jerk forwards unless a very large number of cells on one side were
simultaneously affected. Are we to suppose that these cells steadily become
more and more turgescent on one side, until the part suddenly yields and
bends, inducing what may be called a microscopically minute earthquake in
the plant; or do the cells on one side suddenly become turgescent in an
intermittent manner; each forward movement thus caused being opposed by the
elasticity of the tissues?

Circumnutation is of paramount importance in the life of every plant; for
it is through its modification that many highly beneficial or necessary
movements have been acquired. When light strikes one side of a plant, or
light changes into darkness, or when gravitation acts on a displaced part,
the plant is enabled in some unknown manner to increase the always varying
turgescence of the cells on one side; so that the ordinary circumnutating
movement is
[page 548]
modified, and the part bends either to or from the exciting cause; or it
may occupy a new position, as in the so-called sleep of leaves. The
influence which modifies circumnutation may be transmitted from one part to
another. Innate or constitutional changes, independently of any external
agency, often modify the circumnutating movements at particular periods of
the life of the plant. As circumnutation is universally present, we can
understand how it is that movements of the same kind have been developed in
the most distinct members of the vegetable series. But it must not be
supposed that all the movements of plants arise from modified
circumnutation; for, as we shall presently see, there is reason to believe
that this is not the case.

Having made these few preliminary remarks, we will in imagination take a
germinating seed, and consider the part which the various movements play in
the life-history of the plant. The first change is the protrusion of the
radicle, which begins at once to circumnutate. This movement is immediately
modified by the attraction of gravity and rendered geotropic. The radicle,
therefore, supposing the seed to be lying on the surface, quickly bends
downwards, following a more or less spiral course, as was seen on the
smoked glass-plates. Sensitiveness to gravitation resides in the tip; and
it is the tip which transmits some influence to the adjoining parts,
causing them to bend. As soon as the tip, protected by the root-cap,
reaches the ground, it penetrates the surface, if this be soft or friable;
and the act of penetration is apparently aided by the rocking or
circumnutating movement of the whole end of the radicle. If the surface is
compact, and cannot easily be penetrated, then
[page 549]
the seed itself, unless it be a heavy one, is displaced or lifted up by the
continued growth and elongation of the radicle. But in a state of nature
seeds often get covered with earth or other matter, or fall into crevices,
etc., and thus a point of resistance is afforded, and the tip can more
easily penetrate the ground. But even with seeds lying loose on the surface
there is another aid: a multitude of excessively fine hairs are emitted
from the upper part of the radicle, and these attach themselves firmly to
stones or other objects lying on the surface, and can do so even to glass;
and thus the upper part is held down whilst the tip presses against and
penetrates the ground. The attachment of the root-hairs is effected by the
liquefaction of the outer surface of the cellulose walls, and by the
subsequent setting hard of the liquefied matter. This curious process
probably takes place, not for the sake of the attachment of the radicles to
superficial objects, but in order that the hairs may be brought into the
closest contact with the particles in the soil, by which means they can
absorb the layer of water surrounding them, together with any dissolved
matter.

After the tip has penetrated the ground to a little depth, the increasing
thickness of the radicle, together with the root-hairs, hold it securely in
its place; and now the force exerted by the longitudinal growth of the
radicle drives the tip deeper into the ground. This force, combined with
that due to transverse growth, gives to the radicle the power of a wedge.
Even a growing root of moderate size, such as that of a seedling bean, can
displace a weight of some pounds. It is not probable that the tip when
buried in compact earth can actually circumnutate and thus aid its downward
passage, but the circumnutating movement will facilitate the tip entering
any lateral
[page 550]
or oblique fissure in the earth, or a burrow made by an earth-worm or
larva; and it is certain that roots often run down the old burrows of
worms. The tip, however, in endeavouring to circumnutate, will continually
press against the earth on all sides, and this can hardly fail to be of the
highest importance to the plant; for we have seen that when little bits of
card-like paper and of very thin paper were cemented on opposite sides of
the tip, the whole growing part of the radicle was excited to bend away
from the side bearing the card or more resisting substance, towards the
side bearing the thin paper. We may therefore feel almost sure that when
the tip encounters a stone or other obstacle in the ground, or even earth
more compact on one side than the other, the root will bend away as much as
it can from the obstacle or the more resisting earth, and will thus follow
with unerring skill a line of least resistance.

The tip is more sensitive to prolonged contact with an object than to
gravitation when this acts obliquely on the radicle, and sometimes even
when it acts in the most favourable direction at right angles to the
radicle. The tip was excited by an attached bead of shellac weighing less
than 1/200th of a grain (0.33 mg.); it is therefore more sensitive than the
most delicate tendril, namely, that of Passiflora gracilis, which was
barely acted on by a bit of wire weighing 1/50th of a grain. But this
degree of sensitiveness is as nothing compared with that of the glands of
Drosera, for these are excited by particles weighing only 1/78740 of a
grain. The sensitiveness of the tip cannot be accounted for by its being
covered by a thinner layer of tissue than the other parts, for it is
protected by the relatively thick root-cap. It is remarkable that although
the radicle bends away, when one side of the tip is slightly touched
[page 551]
with caustic, yet if the side be much cauterised the injury is too great,
and the power of transmitting some influence to the adjoining parts causing
them to bend, is lost. Other analogous cases are known to occur.

After a radicle has been deflected by some obstacle, geotropism directs the
tip again to grow perpendicularly downwards; but geotropism is a feeble
power, and here, as Sachs has shown, another interesting adaptive movement
comes into play; for radicles at a distance of a few millimeters from the
tip are sensitive to prolonged contact in such a manner that they bend
towards the touching object, instead of from it as occurs when an object
touches one side of the tip. Moreover, the curvature thus caused is abrupt;
the pressed part alone bending. Even slight pressure suffices, such as a
bit of card cemented to one side. therefore a radicle, as it passes over
the edge of any obstacle in the ground, will through the action of
geotropism press against it; and this pressure will cause the radicle to
endeavour to bend abruptly over the edge. It will thus recover as quickly
as possible its normal downward course.

Radicles are also sensitive to air which contains more moisture on one side
than the other, and they bend towards its source. It is therefore probable
that they are in like manner sensitive to dampness in the soil. It was
ascertained in several cases that this sensitiveness resides in the tip,
which transmits an influence causing the adjoining upper part to bend in
opposition to geotropism towards the moist object. We may therefore infer
that roots will be deflected from their downward course towards any source
of moisture in the soil.

Again, most or all radicles are slightly sensitive to light, and according
to Wiesner, generally bend a little
[page 552]
from it. Whether this can be of any service to them is very doubtful, but
with seeds germinating on the surface it will slightly aid geotropism in
directing the radicles to the ground.* We ascertained in one instance that
such sensitiveness resided in the tip, and caused the adjoining parts to
bend from the light. The sub-aërial roots observed by Wiesner were all
apheliotropic, and this, no doubt, is of use in bringing them into contact
with trunks of trees or surfaces of rock, as is their habit.

We thus see that with seedling plants the tip of the radicle is endowed
with diverse kinds of sensitiveness; and that the tip directs the adjoining
growing parts to bend to or from the exciting cause, according to the needs
of the plant. The sides of the radicle are also sensitive to contact, but
in a widely different manner. Gravitation, though a less powerful cause of
movement than the other above specified stimuli, is ever present; so that
it ultimately prevails and determines the downward growth of the root.

The primary radicle emits secondary ones which project sub-horizontally;
and these were observed in one case to circumnutate. Their tips are also
sensitive to contact, and they are thus excited to bend away from any
touching object; so that they resemble in these respects, as far as they
were observed, the primary radicles. If displaced they resume, as Sachs has
shown, their original sub-horizontal position; and this apparently is due
to diageotropism. The secondary radicles emit tertiary ones, but these, in
the case of the bean, are not affected by gravitation; consequently they
protrude in all directions. Thus the general

* Dr. Karl Richter, who has especially attended to this subject ('K. Akad.
der Wissenschaften in Wien,' 1879, p. 149), states that apheliotropism does
not aid radicles in penetrating the ground.
[page 553]

arrangement of the three orders of roots is excellently adapted for
searching the whole soil for nutriment.

Sachs has shown that if the tip of the primary radicle is cut off (and the
tip will occasionally be gnawed off with seedlings in a state of nature)
one of the secondary radicles grows perpendicularly downwards, in a manner
which is analogous to the upward growth of a lateral shoot after the
amputation of the leading shoot. We have seen with radicles of the bean
that if the primary radicle is merely compressed instead of being cut off,
so that an excess of sap is directed into the secondary radicles, their
natural condition is disturbed and they grow downwards. Other analogous
facts have been given. As anything which disturbs the constitution is apt
to lead to reversion, that is, to the resumption of a former character, it
appears probable that when secondary radicles grow downwards or lateral
shoots upwards, they revert to the primary manner of growth proper to
radicles and shoots.

With dicotyledonous seeds, after the protrusion of the radicle, the
hypocotyl breaks through the seed-coats; but if the cotyledons are
hypogean, it is the epicotyl which breaks forth. These organs are at first
invariably arched, with the upper part bent back parallel to the lower; and
they retain this form until they have risen above the ground. In some
cases, however, it is the petioles of the cotyledons or of the first true
leaves which break through the seed-coats as well as the ground, before any
part of the stem protrudes; and then the petioles are almost invariably
arched. We have met with only one exception, and that only a partial one,
namely, with the petioles of the two first leaves of Acanthus candelabrum.
With Delphinium nudicaule the petioles of the two cotyledons are com-
[page 554]
pletely confluent, and they break through the ground as an arch; afterwards
the petioles of the successively formed early leaves are arched, and they
are thus enabled to break through the base of the confluent petioles of the
cotyledons. In the case of Megarrhiza, it is the plumule which breaks as an
arch through the tube formed by the confluence of the cotyledon-petioles.
With mature plants, the flower-stems and the leaves of some few species,
and the rachis of several ferns, as they emerge separately from the ground,
are likewise arched.
The fact of so many different organs in plants of many kinds breaking
through the ground under the form of an arch, shows that this must be in
some manner highly important to them. According to Haberlandt, the tender
growing apex is thus saved from abrasion, and this is probably the true
explanation. But as both legs of the arch grow, their power of breaking
through the ground will be much increased as long as the tip remains within
the seed-coats and has a point of support. In the case of monocotyledons
the plumule or cotyledon is rarely arched, as far as we have seen; but this
is the case with the leaf-like cotyledon of the onion; and the crown of the
arch is here strengthened by a special protuberance. In the Gramineae the
summit of the straight, sheath-like cotyledon is developed into a hard
sharp crest, which evidently serves for breaking through the earth. With
dicotyledons the arching of the epicotyl or hypocotyl often appears as if
it merely resulted from the manner in which the parts are packed within the
seed; but it is doubtful whether this is the whole of the truth in any
case, and it certainly was not so in several cases, in which the arching
was seen to commence after the parts had wholly
[page 555]
escaped from the seed-coats. As the arching occurred in whatever position
the seeds were placed, it is no doubt due to temporarily increased growth
of the nature of epinasty or hyponasty along one side of the part.

As this habit of the hypocotyl to arch itself appears to be universal, it
is probably of very ancient origin. It is therefore not surprising that it
should be inherited, at least to some extent, by plants having hypogean
cotyledons, in which the hypocotyl is only slightly developed and never
protrudes above the ground, and in which the arching is of course now quite
useless. This tendency explains, as we have seen, the curvature of the
hypocotyl (and the consequent movement of the radicle) which was first
observed by Sachs, and which we have often had to refer to as Sachs'
curvature.

The several foregoing arched organs are continually circumnutating, or
endeavouring to circumnutate, even before they break through the ground. As
soon as any part of the arch protrudes from the seed-coats it is acted upon
by apogeotropism, and both the legs bend upwards as quickly as the
surrounding earth will permit, until the arch stands vertically. By
continued growth it then forcibly breaks through the ground; but as it is
continually striving to circumnutate this will aid its emergence in some
slight degree, for we know that a circumnutating hypocotyl can push away
damp sand on all sides. As soon as the faintest ray of light reaches a
seedling, heliotropism will guide it through any crack in the soil, or
through an entangled mass of overlying vegetation; for apogeotropism by
itself can direct the seedling only blindly upwards. Hence probably it is
that sensitiveness to light resides in the tip of the cotyledons of the
Gramineae, and in
[page 556]
the upper part of the hypocotyls of at least some plants.

As the arch grows upwards the cotyledons are dragged out of the ground. The
seed-coats are either left behind buried, or are retained for a time still
enclosing the cotyledons. These are afterwards cast off merely by the
swelling of the cotyledons. But with most of the Cucurbitaceae there is a
curious special contrivance for bursting the seed-coats whilst beneath the
ground, namely, a peg at the base of the hypocotyl, projecting at right
angles, which holds down the lower half of the seed-coats, whilst the
growth of the arched part of the hypocotyl lifts up the upper half, and
thus splits them in twain. A somewhat analogous structure occurs in Mimosa
pudica and some other plants. Before the cotyledons are fully expanded and
have diverged, the hypocotyl generally straightens itself by increased
growth along the concave side, thus reversing the process which caused the
arching. Ultimately not a trace of the former curvature is left, except in
the case of the leaf-like cotyledons of the onion.

The cotyledons can now assume the function of leaves, and decompose
carbonic acid; they also yield up to other parts of the plant the nutriment
which they often contain. When they contain a large stock of nutriment they
generally remain buried beneath the ground, owing to the small development
of the hypocotyl; and thus they have a better chance of escaping
destruction by animals. From unknown causes, nutriment is sometimes stored
in the hypocotyl or in the radicle, and then one of the cotyledons or both
become rudimentary, of which several instances have been given. It is
probable that the extraordinary manner of germination of Megarrhiza
Californica,
[page 557]
Ipomoea leptophylla and pandurata, and of Quercus virens, is connected with
the burying of the tuber-like roots, which at an early age are stocked with
nutriment; for in these plants it is the petioles of the cotyledons which
first protrude from the seeds, and they are then merely tipped with a
minute radicle and hypocotyl. These petioles bend down geotropically like a
root and penetrate the ground, so that the true root, which afterwards
becomes greatly enlarged, is buried at some little depth beneath the
surface. Gradations of structure are always interesting, and Asa Gray
informs us that with Ipomoea Jalappa, which likewise forms huge tubers, the
hypocotyl is still of considerable length, and the petioles of the
cotyledons are only moderately elongated. But in addition to the advantage
gained by the concealment of the nutritious matter stored within the
tubers, the plumule, at least in the case of Megarrhiza, is protected from
the frosts of winter by being buried.

With many dicotyledonous seedlings, as has lately been described by De
Vries, the contraction of the parenchyma of the upper part of the radicle
drags the hypocotyl downwards into the earth; sometimes (it is said) until
even the cotyledons are buried. The hypocotyl itself of some species
contracts in a like manner. It is believed that this burying process serves
to protect the seedlings against the frosts of winter.

Our imaginary seedling is now mature as a seedling, for its hypocotyl is
straight and its cotyledons are fully expanded. In this state the upper
part of the hypocotyl and the cotyledons continue for some time to
circumnutate, generally to a wide extent relatively to the size of the
parts, and at a rapid rate. But seedlings profit by this power of movement
only when it is modified, especially by the action of light and
[page 558]
gravitation; for they are thus enabled to move more rapidly and to a
greater extent than can most mature plants. Seedlings are subjected to a
severe struggle for life, and it appears to be highly important to them
that they should adapt themselves as quickly and as perfectly as possible
to their conditions. Hence also it is that they are so extremely sensitive
to light and gravitation. The cotyledons of some few species are sensitive
to a touch; but it is probable that this is only an indirect result of the
foregoing kinds of sensitiveness, for there is no reason to believe that
they profit by moving when touched.

Our seedling now throws up a stem bearing leaves, and often branches, all
of which whilst young are continually circumnutating. If we look, for
instance, at a great acacia tree, we may feel assured that every one of the
innumerable growing shoots is constantly describing small ellipses; as is
each petiole, sub-petiole, and leaflet. The latter, as well as ordinary
leaves, generally move up and down in nearly the same vertical plane, so
that they describe very narrow ellipses. The flower-peduncles are likewise
continually circumnutating. If we could look beneath the ground, and our
eyes had the power of a microscope, we should see the tip of each rootlet
endeavouring to sweep small ellipses or circles, as far as the pressure of
the surrounding earth permitted. All this astonishing amount of movement
has been going on year after year since the time when, as a seedling, the
tree first emerged from the ground.

Stems are sometimes developed into long runners or stolons. These
circumnutate in a conspicuous manner, and are thus aided in passing between
and over surrounding obstacles. But whether the circumnutating movement has
been increased for this special purpose is doubtful.
[page 559]

We have now to consider circumnutation in a modified form, as the source of
several great classes of movement. The modification may be determined by
innate causes, or by external agencies. Under the first head we see leaves
which, when first unfolded, stand in a vertical position, and gradually
bend downwards as they grow older. We see flower-peduncles bending down
after the flower has withered, and others rising up; or again, stems with
their tips at first bowed downwards, so as to be hooked, afterwards
straightening themselves; and many other such cases. These changes of
position, which are due to epinasty or hyponasty, occur at certain periods
of the life of the plant, and are independent of any external agency. They
are effected not by a continuous upward or downward movement, but by a
succession of small ellipses, or by zigzag lines,--that is, by a
circumnutating movement which is preponderant in some one direction.

Again, climbing plants whilst young circumnutate in the ordinary manner,
but as soon as the stem has grown to a certain height, which is different
for different species, it elongates rapidly, and now the amplitude of the
circumnutating movement is immensely increased, evidently to favour the
stem catching hold of a support. The stem also circumnutates rather more
equally to all sides than in the case of non-climbing plants. This is
conspicuously the case with those tendrils which consist of modified
leaves, as these sweep wide circles; whilst ordinary leaves usually
circumnutate nearly in the same vertical plane. Flower-peduncles when
converted into tendrils have their circumnutating movement in like manner
greatly increased.

We now come to our second group of circumnu-
[page 560]
tating movements--those modified through external agencies. The so-called
sleep or nyctitropic movements of leaves are determined by the daily
alternations of light and darkness. It is not the darkness which excites
them to move, but the difference in the amount of light which they receive
during the day and night; for with several species, if the leaves have not
been brightly illuminated during the day, they do not sleep at night. They
inherit, however, some tendency to move at the proper periods,
independently of any change in the amount of light. The movements are in
some cases extraordinarily complex, but as a full summary has been given in
the chapter devoted to this subject, we will here say but little on this
head. Leaves and cotyledons assume their nocturnal position by two means,
by the aid of pulvini and without such aid. In the former case the movement
continues as long as the leaf or cotyledon remains in full health; whilst
in the latter case it continues only whilst the part is growing. Cotyledons
appear to sleep in a larger proportional number of species than do leaves.
In some species, the leaves sleep and not the cotyledons; in others, the
cotyledons and not the leaves; or both may sleep, and yet assume widely
different positions at night.

Although the nyctitropic movements of leaves and cotyledons are wonderfully
diversified, and sometimes differ much in the species of the same genus,
yet the blade is always placed in such a position at night, that its upper
surface is exposed as little as possible to full radiation. We cannot doubt
that this is the object gained by these movements; and it has been proved
that leaves exposed to a clear sky, with their blades compelled to remain
horizontal, suffered much more from the cold than others which were allowed
to assume
[page 561]
their proper vertical position. Some curious facts have been given under
this head, showing that horizontally extended leaves suffered more at
night, when the air, which is not cooled by radiation, was prevented from
freely circulating beneath their lower surfaces; and so it was, when the
leaves were allowed to go to sleep on branches which had been rendered
motionless. In some species the petioles rise up greatly at night, and the
pinnae close together. The whole plant is thus rendered more compact, and a
much smaller surface is exposed to radiation.

That the various nyctitropic movements of leaves result from modified
circumnutation has, we think, been clearly shown. In the simplest cases a
leaf describes a single large ellipse during the 24 h.; and the movement is
so arranged that the blade stands vertically during the night, and
reassumes its former position on the following morning. The course pursued
differs from ordinary circumnutation only in its greater amplitude, and in
its greater rapidity late in the evening and early on the following
morning. Unless this movement is admitted to be one of circumnutation, such
leaves do not circumnutate at all, and this would be a monstrous anomaly.
In other cases, leaves and cotyledons describe several vertical ellipses
during the 24 h.; and in the evening one of them is increased greatly in
amplitude until the blade stands vertically either upwards or downwards. In
this position it continues to circumnutate until the following morning,
when it reassumes its former position. These movements, when a pulvinus is
present, are often complicated by the rotation of the leaf or leaflet; and
such rotation on a small scale occurs during ordinary circumnutation. The
many diagrams showing the movements of sleeping and non-sleeping leaves and
coty-
[page 562]
ledons should be compared, and it will be seen that they are essentially
alike. Ordinary circumnutation is converted into a nyctitropic movement,
firstly by an increase in its amplitude, but not to so great a degree as in
the case of climbing plants, and secondly by its being rendered periodic in
relation to the alternations of day and night. But there is frequently a
distinct trace of periodicity in the circumnutating movements of
non-sleeping leaves and cotyledons. The fact that nyctitropic movements
occur in species distributed in many families throughout the whole vascular
series, is intelligible, if they result from the modification of the
universally present movement of circumnutation; otherwise the fact is
inexplicable.

In the seventh chapter we have given the case of a Porlieria, the leaflets
of which remained closed all day, as if asleep, when the plant was kept
dry, apparently for the sake of checking evaporation. Something of the same
