
On the Absorption of certain Fluids by the Quadrifid and Bifid
processes.--These experiments were tried to ascertain whether certain
fluids, which seemed adapted for the purpose, would produce the same
effects on the processes as the absorption of decayed animal matter.
Such experiments are, however, troublesome; for it is not sufficient
merely to place a branch in the fluid, as the valve shuts so closely
that the fluid apparently does not enter soon, if at all. Even when
bristles were pushed into the orifices, they were in several cases
wrapped so closely round by the thin flexible edge of the valve that
the fluid was apparently excluded; so that the experiments tried in
this manner are doubtful and not worth giving. The best plan would have
been to puncture the bladders, but I did not think of this till too
late, excepting in a few cases. In all such trials, however, it cannot
be ascertained positively that the bladder, though translucent, does
not contain some minute animal in the last stage of decay. Therefore
most of my experiments were made by cutting bladders longitudinally
into two; the quadrifids were examined with No. 8 of Hartnack, then
irrigated, whilst under the covering glass, with a few drops of the
fluid under trial, kept in a damp chamber, and re-examined after stated
intervals of time with the same power as before.

[Four bladders were first tried as a control experiment, in the manner
just described, in a solution of one part of gum arabic to 218 of
water, and two bladders in a solution of one part of sugar to 437 of
water; and in neither case was any [page 414] change perceptible in the
quadrifids or bifids after 21 hrs. Four bladders were then treated in
the same manner with a solution of one part of nitrate of ammonia to
437 of water, and re-examined after 21 hrs. In two of these the
quadrifids now appeared full of very finely granular matter, and their
protoplasmic lining or primordial utricle was a little shrunk. In the
third bladder, the quadrifids included distinctly visible granules, and
the primordial utricle was a little shrunk after only 8 hrs. In the
fourth bladder the primordial utricle in most of the processes was here
and there thickened into little, irregular, yellowish specks; and from
the gradations which could be traced in this and other cases, these
specks appear to give rise to the larger free granules contained within
some of the processes. Other bladders, which, as far as could be
judged, had never caught any prey, were punctured and left in the same
solution for 17 hrs.; and their quadrifids now contained very fine
granular matter.

A bladder was bisected, examined, and irrigated with a solution of one
part of carbonate of ammonia to 437 of water. After 8 hrs. 30 m. the
quadrifids contained a good many granules, and the primordial utricle
was somewhat shrunk; after 23 hrs. the quadrifids and bifids contained
many spheres of hyaline matter, and in one arm twenty-four such spheres
of moderate size were counted. Two bisected bladders, which had been
previously left for 21 hrs. in the solution of gum (one part to 218 of
water) without being affected, were irrigated with the solution of
carbonate of ammonia; and both had their quadrifids modified in nearly
the same manner as just described,--one after only 9 hrs., and the
other after 24 hrs. Two bladders which appeared never to have caught
any prey were punctured and placed in the solution; the quadrifids of
one were examined after 17 hrs., and found slightly opaque; the
quadrifids of the other, examined after 45 hrs., had their primordial
utricles more or less shrunk with thickened yellowish specks, like
those due to the action of nitrate of ammonia.  Several uninjured
bladders were left in the same solution, as well as a weaker solution
of one part to 1750 of water, or 1 gr. to 4 oz.; and after two days the
quadrifids were more or less opaque, with their contents finely
granular; but whether the solution had entered by the orifice, or had
been absorbed from the outside, I know not.

Two bisected bladders were irrigated with a solution of one part of
urea to 218 of water; but when this solution was employed, I forgot
that it had been kept for some days in a warm room, and had therefore
probably generated ammonia; anyhow [page 415] the quadrifids were
affected after 21 hrs. as if a solution of carbonate of ammonia had
been used; for the primordial utricle was thickened in specks, which
seemed to graduate into separate granules. Three bisected bladders were
also irrigated with a fresh solution of urea of the same strength;
their quadrifids after 21 hrs. were much less affected than in the
former case; nevertheless, the primordial utricle in some of the arms
was a little shrunk, and in others was divided into two almost
symmetrical sacks.

Three bisected bladders, after being examined, were irrigated with a
putrid and very offensive infusion of raw meat. After 23 hrs. the
quadrifids and bifids in all three specimens abounded with minute,
hyaline, spherical masses; and some of their primordial utricles were a
little shrunk. Three bisected bladders were also irrigated with a fresh
infusion of raw meat; and to my surprise the quadrifids in one of them
appeared, after 23 hrs., finely granular, with their primordial
utricles somewhat shrunk and marked with thickened yellowish specks; so
that they had been acted on in the same manner as by the putrid
infusion or by the salts of ammonia. In the second bladder some of the
quadrifids were similarly acted on, though to a very slight degree;
whilst the third bladder was not at all affected.]

From these experiments it is clear that the quadrifid and bifid
processes have the power of absorbing carbonate and nitrate of ammonia,
and matter of some kind from a putrid infusion of meat. Salts of
ammonia were selected for trial, as they are known to be rapidly
generated by the decay of animal matter in the presence of air and
water, and would therefore be generated within the bladders containing
captured prey. The effect produced on the processes by these salts and
by a putrid infusion of raw meat differs from that produced by the
decay of the naturally captured animals only in the aggregated masses
of protoplasm being in the latter case of larger size; but it is
probable that the fine granules and small hyaline spheres produced by
the solutions would coalesce into larger masses, with time enough
allowed.  [page 416] We have seen with Drosera that the first effect of
a weak solution of carbonate of ammonia on the cell-contents is the
production of the finest granules, which afterwards aggregate into
larger, more or less rounded, masses; and that the granules in the
layer of protoplasm which flows round the walls ultimately coalesce
with these masses. Changes of this nature are, however, far more rapid
in Drosera than in Utricularia. Since the bladders have no power of
digesting albumen, cartilage, or roast meat, I was surprised that
matter was absorbed, at least in one case, from a fresh infusion of raw
meat. I was also surprised, from what we shall presently see with
respect to the glands round the orifice, that a fresh solution of urea
produced only a moderate effect on the quadrifids.

As the quadrifids are developed from papillae which at first closely
resemble those on the outside of the bladders and on the surfaces of
the leaves, I may here state that the two hemispherical cells with
which these latter papillae are crowned, and which in their natural
state are perfectly transparent, likewise absorb carbonate and nitrate
of ammonia; for, after an immersion of 23 hrs. in solutions of one part
of both these salts to 437 of water, their primordial utricles were a
little shrunk and of a pale brown tint, and sometimes finely granular.
The same result followed from the immersion of a whole branch for
nearly three days in a solution of one part of the carbonate to 1750 of
water. The grains of chlorophyll, also, in the cells of the leaves on
this branch became in many places aggregated into little green masses,
which were often connected together by the finest threads.

On the Absorption of certain Fluids by the Glands on the Valve and
Collar.--The glands round the orifices of bladders which are still
young, or which have been [page 417] long kept in moderately pure
water, are colourless; and their primordial utricles are only slightly
or hardly at all granular. But in the greater number of plants in a
state of nature--and we must remember that they generally grow in very
foul water--and with plants kept in an aquarium in foul water, most of
the glands were of a pale brownish tint; their primordial utricles were
more or less shrunk, sometimes ruptured, with their contents often
coarsely granular or aggregated into little masses. That this state of
the glands is due to their having absorbed matter from the surrounding
water, I cannot doubt; for, as we shall immediately see, nearly the
same results follow from their immersion for a few hours in various
solutions.  Nor is it probable that this absorption is useless, seeing
that it is almost universal with plants growing in a state of nature,
excepting when the water is remarkably pure.

The pedicels of the glands which are situated close to the slit-like
orifice, both those on the valve and on the collar, are short; whereas
the pedicels of the more distant glands are much elongated and project
inwards. The glands are thus well placed so to be washed by any fluid
coming out of the bladder through the orifice. The valve fits so
closely, judging from the result of immersing uninjured bladders in
various solutions, that it is doubtful whether any putrid fluid
habitually passes outwards. But we must remember that a bladder
generally captures several animals; and that each time a fresh animal
enters, a puff of foul water must pass out and bathe the glands.
Moreover, I have repeatedly found that, by gently pressing bladders
which contained air, minute bubbles were driven out through the
orifice; and if a bladder is laid on blotting paper and gently pressed,
water oozes out.  [page 418] In this latter case, as soon as the
pressure is relaxed, air is drawn in, and the bladder recovers its
proper form. If it is now placed under water and again gently pressed,
minute bubbles issue from the orifice and nowhere else, showing that
the walls of the bladder have not been ruptured. I mention this because
Cohn quotes a statement by Treviranus, that air cannot be forced out of
a bladder without rupturing it. We may therefore conclude that whenever
air is secreted within a bladder already full of water, some water will
be slowly driven out through the orifice. Hence I can hardly doubt that
the numerous glands crowded round the orifice are adapted to absorb
matter from the putrid water, which will occasionally escape from
bladders including decayed animals.

[In order to test this conclusion, I experimented with various
solutions on the glands. As in the case of the quadrifids, salts of
ammonia were tried, since these are generated by the final decay of
animal matter under water. Unfortunately the glands cannot be carefully
examined whilst attached to the bladders in their entire state. Their
summits, therefore, including the valve, collar, and antennae, were
sliced off, and the condition of the glands observed; they were then
irrigated, whilst beneath a covering glass, with the solutions, and
after a time re-examined with the same power as before, namely No. 8 of
Hartnack. The following experiments were thus made.

As a control experiment solutions of one part of white sugar and of one
part of gum to 218 of water were first used, to see whether these
produced any change in the glands. It was also necessary to observe
whether the glands were affected by the summits of the bladders having
been cut off. The summits of four were thus tried; one being examined
after 2 hrs. 30 m., and the other three after 23 hrs.; but there was no
marked change in the glands of any of them.

Two summits bearing quite colourless glands were irrigated with a
solution of carbonate of ammonia of the same strength (viz. one part to
218 of water) , and in 5 m. the primordial utricles of most of the
glands were somewhat contracted; they were also thickened in specks or
patches, and had assumed a pale [page 419] brown tint. When looked at
again after 1 hr. 30 m., most of them presented a somewhat different
appearance. A third specimen was treated with a weaker solution of one
part of the carbonate to 437 of water, and after 1 hr. the glands were
pale brown and contained numerous granules.

Four summits were irrigated with a solution of one part of nitrate of
ammonia to 437 of water. One was examined after 15 m., and the glands
seemed affected; after 1 hr. 10 m. there was a greater change, and the
primordial utricles in most of them were somewhat shrunk, and included
many granules. In the second specimen, the primordial utricles were
considerably shrunk and brownish after 2 hrs. Similar effects were
observed in the two other specimens, but these were not examined until
21 hrs. had elapsed. The nuclei of many of the glands apparently had
increased in size. Five bladders on a branch, which had been kept for a
long time in moderately pure water, were cut off and examined, and
their glands found very little modified. The remainder of this branch
was placed in the solution of the nitrate, and after 21 hrs. two
bladders were examined, and all their glands were brownish, with their
primordial utricles somewhat shrunk and finely granular.

The summit of another bladder, the glands of which were in a
beautifully clear condition, was irrigated with a few drops of a mixed
solution of nitrate and phosphate of ammonia, each of one part to 437
of water. After 2 hrs. some few of the glands were brownish. After 8
hrs.  almost all the oblong glands were brown and much more opaque than
they were before; their primordial utricles were somewhat shrunk and
contained a little aggregated granular matter.  The spherical glands
were still white, but their utricles were broken up into three or four
small hyaline spheres, with an irregularly contracted mass in the
middle of the basal part.  These smaller spheres changed their forms in
the course of a few hours and some of them disappeared. By the next
morning, after 23 hrs. 30 m., they had all disappeared, and the glands
were brown; their utricles now formed a globular shrunken mass in the
middle. The utricles of the oblong glands had shrunk very little, but
their contents were somewhat aggregated. Lastly, the summit of a
bladder which had been previously irrigated for 21 hrs.  with a
solution of one part of sugar to 218 of water without being affected,
was treated with the above mixed solution; and after 8 hrs. 30 m. all
the glands became brown, with their primordial utricles slightly
shrunk.

Four summits were irrigated with a putrid infusion of raw [page 420]
meat. No change in the glands was observable for some hours, but after
24 hrs. most of them had become brownish, and more opaque and granular
than they were before. In these specimens, as in those irrigated with
the salts of ammonia, the nuclei seemed to have increased both in size
and solidity, but they were not measured. Five summits were also
irrigated with a fresh infusion of raw meat; three of these were not at
all affected in 24 hrs., but the glands of the other two had perhaps
become more granular. One of the specimens which was not affected was
then irrigated with the mixed solution of the nitrate and phosphate of
ammonia, and after only 25 m. the glands contained from four or five to
a dozen granules. After six additional hours their primordial utricles
were greatly shrunk.

The summit of a bladder was examined, and all the glands found
colourless, with their primordial utricles not at all shrunk; yet many
of the oblong glands contained granules just resolvable with No. 8 of
Hartnack. It was then irrigated with a few drops of a solution of one
part of urea to 218 of water. After 2 hrs. 25 m. the spherical glands
were still colourless; whilst the oblong and two-armed ones were of a
brownish tint, and their primordial utricles much shrunk, some
containing distinctly visible granules. After 9 hrs. some of the
spherical glands were brownish, and the oblong glands were still more
changed, but they contained fewer separate granules; their nuclei, on
the other hand, appeared larger, as if they had absorbed the granules.
After 23 hrs. all the glands were brown, their primordial utricles
greatly shrunk, and in many cases ruptured.

A bladder was now experimented on, which was already somewhat affected
by the surrounding water; for the spherical glands, though colourless,
had their primordial utricles slightly shrunk; and the oblong glands
were brownish, with their utricles much, but irregularly, shrunk. The
summit was treated with the solution of urea, but was little affected
by it in 9 hrs.; nevertheless, after 23 hrs. the spherical glands were
brown, with their utricles more shrunk; several of the other glands
were still browner, with their utricles contracted into irregular
little masses.

Two other summits, with their glands colourless and their utricles not
shrunk, were treated with the same solution of urea. After 5 hrs. many
of the glands presented a shade of brown, with their utricles slightly
shrunk. After 20 hrs. 40 m. some few of them were quite brown, and
contained [page 421] irregularly aggregated masses; others were still
colourless, though their utricles were shrunk; but the greater number
were not much affected. This was a good instance of how unequally the
glands on the same bladder are sometimes affected, as likewise often
occurs with plants growing in foul water. Two other summits were
treated with a solution which had been kept during several days in a
warm room, and their glands were not at all affected when examined
after 21 hrs.

A weaker solution of one part of urea to 437 of water was next tried on
six summits, all carefully examined before being irrigated. The first
was re-examined after 8 hrs. 30 m., and the glands, including the
spherical ones, were brown; many of the oblong glands having their
primordial utricles much shrunk and including granules. The second
summit, before being irrigated, had been somewhat affected by the
surrounding water, for the spherical glands were not quite uniform in
appearance; and a few of the oblong ones were brown, with their
utricles shrunk. Of the oblong glands, those which were before
colourless, became brown in 3 hrs. 12 m. after irrigation, with their
utricles slightly shrunk. The spherical glands did not become brown,
but their contents seemed changed in appearance, and after 23 hrs.
still more changed and granular. Most of the oblong glands were now
dark brown, but their utricles were not greatly shrunk. The four other
specimens were examined after 3 hrs. 30 m., after 4 hrs., and 9 hrs.; a
brief account of their condition will be sufficient. The spherical
glands were not brown, but some of them were finely granular. Many of
the oblong glands were brown, and these, as well as others which still
remained colourless, had their utricles more or less shrunk, some of
them including small aggregated masses of matter.]

Summary of the Observations on Absorption.--From the facts now given
there can be no doubt that the variously shaped glands on the valve and
round the collar have the power of absorbing matter from weak solutions
of certain salts of ammonia and urea, and from a putrid infusion of raw
meat. Prof. Cohn believes that they secrete slimy matter; but I was not
able to perceive any trace of such action, excepting that, after
immersion in alcohol, extremely fine lines could sometimes be seen
radiating from their [page 422] surfaces. The glands are variously
affected by absorption; they often become of a brown colour; sometimes
they contain very fine granules, or moderately sized grains, or
irregularly aggregated little masses; sometimes the nuclei appear to
have increased in size; the primordial utricles are generally more or
less shrunk and sometimes ruptured. Exactly the same changes may be
observed in the glands of plants growing and flourishing in foul
water.  The spherical glands are generally affected rather differently
from the oblong and two-armed ones. The former do not so commonly
become brown, and are acted on more slowly. We may therefore infer that
they differ somewhat in their natural functions.

It is remarkable how unequally the glands on the bladders on the same
branch, and even the glands of the same kind on the same bladder, are
affected by the foul water in which the plants have grown, and by the
solutions which were employed. In the former case I presume that this
is due either to little currents bringing matter to some glands and not
to others, or to unknown differences in their constitution. When the
glands on the same bladder are differently affected by a solution, we
may suspect that some of them had previously absorbed a small amount of
matter from the water. However this may be, we have seen that the
glands on the same leaf of Drosera are sometimes very unequally
affected, more especially when exposed to certain vapours.

If glands which have already become brown, with their primordial
utricles shrunk, are irrigated with one of the effective solutions,
they are not acted on, or only slightly and slowly. If, however, a
gland contains merely a few coarse granules, this does not prevent a
solution from acting. I have never seen [page 423] any appearance
making it probable that glands which have been strongly affected by
absorbing matter of any kind are capable of recovering their pristine,
colourless, and homogeneous condition, and of regaining the power of
absorbing.

From the nature of the solutions which were tried, I presume that
nitrogen is absorbed by the glands; but the modified, brownish, more or
less shrunk, and aggregated contents of the oblong glands were never
seen by me or by my son to undergo those spontaneous changes of form
characteristic of protoplasm. On the other hand, the contents of the
larger spherical glands often separated into small hyaline globules or
irregularly shaped masses, which changed their forms very slowly and
ultimately coalesced, forming a central shrunken mass.  Whatever may be
the nature of the contents of the several kinds of glands, after they
have been acted on by foul water or by one of the nitrogenous
solutions, it is probable that the matter thus generated is of service
to the plant, and is ultimately transferred to other parts.

The glands apparently absorb more quickly than do the quadrifid and
bifid processes; and on the view above maintained, namely that they
absorb matter from putrid water occasionally emitted from the bladders,
they ought to act more quickly than the processes; as these latter
remain in permanent contact with captured and decaying animals.

Finally, the conclusion to which we are led by the foregoing
experiments and observations is that the bladders have no power of
digesting animal matter, though it appears that the quadrifids are
somewhat affected by a fresh infusion of raw meat. It is certain that
the processes within the bladders, and the glands outside, absorb
matter from salts of [page 424] ammonia, from a putrid infusion of raw
meat, and from urea. The glands apparently are acted on more strongly
by a solution of urea, and less strongly by an infusion of raw meat,
than are the processes. The case of urea is particularly interesting,
because we have seen that it produces no effect on Drosera, the leaves
of which are adapted to digest fresh animal matter.  But the most
important fact of all is, that in the present and following species the
quadrifid and bifid processes of bladders containing decayed animals
generally include little masses of spontaneously moving protoplasm;
whilst such masses are never seen in perfectly clean bladders.

Development of the Bladders.--My son and I spent much time over this
subject with small success. Our observations apply to the present
species and to Utricularia vulgaris, but were made chiefly on the
latter, as the bladders are twice as large as those of Utricularia
neglecta.  In the early part of autumn the stems terminate in large
buds, which fall off and lie dormant during the winter at the bottom.
The young leaves forming these buds bear bladders in various stages of
early development. When the bladders of Utricularia vulgaris are about
1/100 inch (.254 mm.) in diameter (or 1/200 in the case of Utricularia
neglecta), they are circular in outline, with a narrow, almost closed,
transverse orifice, leading into a hollow filled with water; but the
bladders are hollow when much under 1/100 of an inch in diameter.  The
orifices face inwards or towards the axis of the plant. At this early
age the bladders are flattened in the plane in which the orifice lies,
and therefore at right angles to that of the mature bladders. They are
covered exteriorly with papillae of different sizes, many of which have
an elliptical outline. A bundle of vessels, formed of [page 425] simple
elongated cells, runs up the short footstalk, and divides at the base
of the bladder. One branch extends up the middle of the dorsal surface,
and the other up the middle of the ventral surface. In full-grown
bladders the ventral bundle divides close beneath the collar, and the
two branches run on each side to near where the corners of the valve
unite with the collar; but these branches could not be seen in very
young bladders.

FIG. 23.  (Utricularia vulgaris.) Longitudinal section through a young
bladder, 1/100 of an inch in length, with the orifice too widely open.

The accompanying figure (fig. 23) shows a section, which happened to be
strictly medial, through the footstalk and between the nascent antennae
of a bladder of Utricularia vulgaris, 1/100 inch in diameter. The
specimen was soft, and the young valve became separated from the collar
to a greater degree than is natural, and is thus represented. We here
clearly see that the valve and collar are infolded prolongations of the
walls of the bladder. Even at this early age, glands could be detected
on the valve. The state of the quadrifid processes will presently be
described. The antennae at this period consist of minute cellular
projections (not shown in the above figure, as they do not lie in the
medial plane), which soon bear incipient bristles. In five instances
the young antennae were not of quite equal length; and this fact is
intelligible if I am right in believing that they represent two
divisions of the leaf, rising from the end of the bladder; for, with
the true leaves, whilst very young, the divisions are never, as far as
I have seen, strictly opposite; they [page 426] must therefore be
developed one after the other, and so it would be with the two
antennae.

At a much earlier age, when the half formed bladders are only 1/300
inch (.0846 mm.) in diameter or a little more, they present a totally
different appearance. One is represented on the left side of the
accompanying drawing (fig. 24). The young leaves

FIG. 24.  (Utricularia vulgaris.) Young leaf from a winter bud, showing
on the left side a bladder in its earliest stage of development.

at this age have broad flattened segments, with their future divisions
represented by prominences, one of which is shown on the right side.
Now, in a large number of specimens examined by my son, the young
bladders appeared as if formed by the oblique folding over of the apex
and of one margin with a prominence, against the opposite margin. The
circular hollow between the infolded apex and infolded prominence
apparently contracts into the narrow orifice, wherein the valve and
collar will be developed; the bladder itself being formed by the
confluence of the opposed [page 427] margins of the rest of the leaf.
But strong objections may be urged against this view, for we must in
this case suppose that the valve and collar are developed
asymmetrically from the sides of the apex and prominence. Moreover, the
bundles of vascular tissue have to be formed in lines quite
irrespective of the original form of the leaf. Until gradations can be
shown to exist between this the earliest state and a young yet perfect
bladder, the case must be left doubtful.

As the quadrifid and bifid processes offer one of the greatest
peculiarities in the genus, I carefully observed their development in
Utricularia neglecta. In bladders about 1/100 of an inch in diameter,
the inner surface is studded with papillae, rising from small cells at
the junctions of the larger ones. These papillae consist of a delicate
conical protuberance, which narrows into a very short footstalk,
surmounted by two minute cells. They thus occupy the same relative
position, and closely resemble, except in being smaller and rather more
prominent, the papillae on the outside of the bladders, and on the
surfaces of the leaves. The two terminal cells of the papillae first
become much elongated in a line parallel to the inner surface of the
bladder. Next, each is divided by a longitudinal partition. Soon the
two half-cells thus formed separate from one another; and we now have
four cells or an incipient quadrifid process. As there is not space for
the two new cells to increase in breadth in their original plane, the
one slides partly under the other. Their manner of growth now changes,
and their outer sides, instead of their apices, continue to grow. The
two lower cells, which have slid partly beneath the two upper ones,
form the longer and more upright pair of processes; whilst the two
upper cells form the shorter [page 428] and more horizontal pair; the
four together forming a perfect quadrifid. A trace of the primary
division between the two cells on the summits of the papillae can still
be seen between the bases of the longer processes. The development of
the quadrifids is very liable to be arrested. I have seen a bladder
1/50 of an inch in length including only primordial papillae; and
another bladder, about half its full size, with the quadrifids in an
early stage of development.

As far as I could make out, the bifid processes are developed in the
same manner as the quadrifids, excepting that the two primary terminal
cells never become divided, and only increase in length. The glands on
the valve and collar appear at so early an age that I could not trace
their development; but we may reasonably suspect that they are
developed from papillae like those on the outside of the bladder, but
with their terminal cells not divided into two. The two segments
forming the pedicels of the glands probably answer to the conical
protuberance and short footstalk of the quadrifid and bifid processes.
I am strengthened in the belief that the glands are developed from
papillae like those on the outside of the bladders, from the fact that
in Utricularia amethystina the glands extend along the whole ventral
surface of the bladder close to the footstalk.

                    [UTRICULARIA VULGARIS.

Living plants from Yorkshire were sent me by Dr. Hooker. This species
differs from the last in the stems and leaves being thicker or coarser;
their divisions form a more acute angle with one another; the notches
on the leaves bear three or four short bristles instead of one; and the
bladders are twice as large, or about 1/5 of an inch (5.08 mm.) in
diameter. In all essential respects the bladders resemble those of
Utricularia neglecta, but the sides of the peristome are perhaps a
little more [page 429] prominent, and always bear, as far as I have
seen, seven or eight long multicellular bristles.  There are eleven
long bristles on each antenna, the terminal pair being included. Five
bladders, containing prey of some kind, were examined. The first
included five Cypris; a large copepod and a Diaptomus; the second,
four Cypris; the third, a single rather large crustacean; the fourth,
six crustaceans; and the fifth, ten. My son examined the quadrifid
processes in a bladder containing the remains of two crustaceans, and
found some of them full of spherical or irregularly shaped masses of
matter, which were observed to move and to coalesce. These masses
therefore consisted of protoplasm.

                      UTRICULARIA MINOR.

FIG. 25.  (Utricularia minor.) Quadrifid process, greatly enlarged.

This rare species was sent me in a living state from Cheshire, through
the kindness of Mr.  John Price. The leaves and bladders are much
smaller than those of Utricularia neglecta. The leaves bear fewer and
shorter bristles, and the bladders are more globular. The antennae,
instead of projecting in front of the bladders, are curled under the
valve, and are armed with twelve or fourteen extremely long
multicellular bristles, generally arranged in pairs. These, with seven
or eight long bristles on both sides of the peristome, form a sort of
net over the valve, which would tend to prevent all animals, excepting
very small ones, entering the bladder. The valve and collar have the
same essential structure as in the two previous species; but the glands
are not quite so numerous; the oblong ones are rather more elongated,
whilst the two-armed ones are rather less elongated. The four bristles
which project obliquely from the lower edge of the valve are short.
Their shortness, compared with those on the valves of the foregoing
species, is intelligible if my view is correct that they serve to
prevent too large animals forcing an entrance through the valve, thus
injuring it; for the valve is already protected to a certain extent by
the incurved antennae, together with the lateral bristles. The bifid
