decidedly sceptical. Paul grew eloquent in maintaining its truth and
reasonableness, and, indeed, that it was the only intelligible theory of
immortality that was possible. The idea that the same soul successively
animated infancy, childhood, youth, manhood, and maturity, was, he
argued, but a modification of the curious East Indian dream of
metempsychosis, according to which every soul is supposed to inhabit in
turn innumerable bodies.

"You almost persuade me," said Mrs. Slater, at last. "But I never heard
of the spirit of anybody's past self appearing to them. If there are such
spirits, why have they never manifested themselves? Nobody every heard of
the spirit of one's past self appearing at a spiritualist seance, for
instance."

"There is one evidence among others," replied Paul. "that spiritualism is
a fraud. The mediums merely follow the vulgar superstition in the kind of
spirits that they claim to produce."

"Very likely you are right," said Mrs. Slater. "In fact, I presume you
are quite right. And yet, if I really believed as you do, do you know
what I would do? I would go to some of the spirit mediums over in New
York, of whom the papers are giving such wonderful accounts, and let them
try to materialize for me the spirit of my youth. Probably they couldn't
do it, but possibly they might; and a mighty little sight, Mr. De Riemer,
is more convincing than all the belief in the world. If I could see the
spirit of my youth face to face, I should believe that it had a separate
existence from my own. Otherwise, I don't believe I ever could."

"But the mediums are a set of humbugs!" exclaimed Paul; and then he
added, "I beg your pardon. Perhaps you are a spiritualist?"

"You need not beg my pardon," said Mrs. Slater, good-humouredly. "I am
not a spiritualist beyond thinking--and that is only lately--that there
may possibly be something in it, after all. Perhaps there may be, for
example, one part of truth to a hundred parts of fraud. I really don't
believe there is more. Now, as you think the mediums humbugs, and I am
sure most of them are, their failure to accomplish anything would not
shake your faith in your theory, and you would only have lost an evening
and the fee you paid the medium. On the other hand, there is a bare
possibility--mind you, I think it is no more than that--a bare
possibility, say the smallest possible chance, but a chance--that you
would see--her," and Mrs. Slater glanced at the portrait.

Paul turned pale.

Miss Ludington, with much agitation, exclaimed, "If I thought there was
any possibility of that, do you suppose, Sarah, that I would consider
time or money?"

"I don't suppose you would," replied Mrs. Slater. "You would not need to;
but the money is something which I should have to consider, if it were my
case. The best materializing mediums charge pretty well. Mrs. Legrand,
who I believe is considered the leading light just now, charges fifty
dollars for a private seance. Now, fifty dollars, I suppose, does not
seem a large sum to you, but it would be a great deal for a poor woman
like me to spend. And yet if I believed this wonderful thing that you
believe, and I thought there was one chance in a million that this woman
could demonstrate it to me by the assurance of sight, I would live on
crusts from the gutter till I had earned the money to go to her."

Paul rose from his chair, and, after walking across the floor once or
twice, stood leaning his arm on the mantelpiece. He cleared his throat,
and said:

"Have you ever seen this Mrs. Legrand yourself? I mean, have you ever
been present at one of her seances?"

"Not on my own account," replied Mrs. Slater. "It was a mere accident my
chancing to know anything about her. I have a friend, a Mrs. Rhinehart,
who has recently lost her husband, and she got in a way of going to this
Mrs. Legrand's seances to see him, and once she took me with her."

Miss Ludington and Paul waited a moment, and then, perceiving that she
was not going to say anything more, exclaimed in the same breath, "Did
you see anything?"

"We saw the figure of a fine-looking man," replied Mrs. Slater. "We could
distinguish his features and expression very plainly, and he seemed to
recognize my friend. She said that it was her husband. Of course I know
nothing about that. I had never seen him alive. It may all have been a
humbug, as I was prepared to believe it; but I assure you it was a
curious business, and I haven't got over the impression which it made on
me, yet. I'm not given to believing in things that claim to be
supernatural, but I will admit that what I saw that night was very
strange. Humbug or no humbug, what she saw seemed to comfort my poor
friend more than all the religions or philosophies ever revealed or
invented could have done. You see, these are so vague, even when we try
to believe them, and that was so plain."

A silence followed Mrs. Slater's words, during which she sat with an
absent expression of countenance and a faraway look, as if recalling in
fancy the scene which she had described. Miss Ludington's hands trembled
as they lay together in her lap, and she was regarding the picture of the
girl over the fireplace with a fixed and intense gaze, apparently
oblivious of all else.

Paul broke the silence. "I am going to see this woman," he said, quietly.
"You need not think of going with me, aunty, unless you care to. I will
go alone."

"Do you think I shall let you go alone?" replied Miss Ludington, in a
voice which she steadied with difficulty. "Am I not as much concerned as
you are, Paul?"

"Where does this Mrs. Legrand live?" Paul asked Mrs. Slater.

"I really can't tell you that, Mr. De Riemer," she said. "It was sometime
ago that I attended the seance I spoke of, and all I recall is that it
was somewhere in the lower part of the city, on the east side of the
Broadway, if I am not mistaken."

"Perhaps you could ascertain her address from the friend of whom you
spoke, if it would not be too much trouble?" suggested Miss Ludington.

"I might do that," assented Mrs. Slater. "If she still goes to the
seances she would know it. But these mediums don't generally stay long in
one place, and it is quite possible that this Mrs. Legrand may not be in
the city now, But if I can get her address for you I will. And now, my
dear, as I am rather tired after our walk about the village, and probably
you are too, will I go to my room."




CHAPTER V.



Mrs. Slater went away the next morning. On the following day but one Miss
Ludington received a letter from her. She told her friend how glad she
was that she had not postponed her visit to her, for if she had set it
for a single day later she could not have made it at all. When she
returned home she found that her husband had received an offer of a
lucrative business position in Cincinnati, contingent on his immediate
removal there.

They had been in a whirl of packing ever since, and were to take that
night's train for Cincinnati, and whether they ever again came East to
live was very doubtful. In a postscript, written crosswise, she said:

"I have been in such a rush ever since I came home that I declare I had
clean forgotten till this moment about my promise to hunt up Mrs.
Legrand's address for you. Very likely you have also forgotten by this
time our talk about her, and if so it will not matter. But it vexes me to
fail in a promise, and, if possible, I will snatch a moment before we
leave to send a note to the friend I spoke of, and ask her to look the
woman up for you."

Instead of being disappointed, Miss Ludington was, on the whole, relieved
to get this letter, and inclined to hope that Mrs. Slater had failed to
find the time to write her friend. In that case this extraordinary
project of visiting a spiritualist medium would quietly fall through,
which was the best thing that could happen.

The fact is, after sleeping on it, she had seen clearly that such a
proceeding for a person of her position and antecedents would not only be
preposterous, but almost disreputable. She was astonished at herself to
think that her feelings could have been so wrought upon as to cause her
seriously to contemplate such a step. All her life she had held the
conviction, which she supposed to be shared by all persons of culture and
respectability, that spiritualism was a low and immoral superstition,
invariably implying fraud in its professors, and folly in its dupes:
something, in fact, quite below the notice of persons of intelligence or
good taste. As for the idea that this medium could show her the spirit of
her former self, or any other real spirit, it was simply imbecile to
entertain it for a moment.

If, however, Miss Ludington was relieved by Mrs. Slater's letter, Paul
was keenly disappointed. His prejudice against spiritualism was by no
means so deeply rooted as hers. In a general way he had always believed
mediums to be frauds, and their shows mere shams, but he had been ready
to allow with Mrs. Slater, that, mixed up in all this fraud, there might
be a very little truth.

His mind admitted a bare possibility that this Mrs. Legrand might be able
to show him the living face and form of his spirit-love. That possibility
once admitted had completely dominated his imagination, and it made
little difference whether it was one chance in a thousand or one in a
million. He was like the victim of the lottery mania, whose absorption in
contemplating the possibility of drawing the prize renders him quite
oblivious of the nine hundred and ninety-nine blank tickets.

Previous to Mrs. Slater's visit he had been quite content in his devotion
to an ideal mistress, for the reason that any nearer approach to her had
not occurred to him as a possibility. But now the suggestion that he
might see her face to face had so inflamed his imagination that it was
out of the question for him to regain his former serenity. He resolved
that, in case they should fail to hear from Mrs. Slater's friend, he
would set about finding Mrs. Legrand himself, or, failing that, would go
to some other medium. There would be no solace for the fever that had now
got into his blood, until experiment should justify his daring hope, or
prove it baseless.

However, the third day after Mrs. Slater's letter there came one from her
friend, Mrs. Rhinehart. She said that she had received a note from Mrs.
Slater, who had suddenly been called to Cincinnati, telling that Miss
Ludington desired the address of Mrs. Legrand, with a view to securing a
private seance. She could have sent the address at once, as she had it;
but Mrs. Legrand was so overrun with business that an application to her
by letter, especially from a stranger like Miss Ludington, might not have
any result. And so Mrs. Rhinehart, who had been only too happy to oblige
any friend of Mrs. Slater's, had called personally upon Mrs. Legrand to
arrange for the seance. The medium had told her at first that she was
full of previous engagements for a month ahead, and that it would be
impossible to give Miss Ludington a seance. When, however, Mrs. Rhinehart
told her that Miss Ludington's purpose in asking for the seance was to
test the question whether our past selves have immortal souls distinct
from our present selves, Mrs. Legrand became greatly interested, and at
once said that she would cancel a previous appointment, and give Miss
Ludington a seance the following evening, at her parlours, No. -- East
Tenth Street, at nine o'clock. Mrs. Legrand had said that while she had
never heard a belief in the immortality of past selves avowed, there had
not been lacking in her relations with the spirit-world some mysterious
experiences that seemed to confirm it. She should, therefore, look
forward to the issue of the experiment the following evening with nearly
as much confidence, and quite as much interest, as Miss Ludington
herself. Mrs. Rhinehart hoped that the following evening would be
convenient for Miss Ludington. She had assumed the responsibility of
making the engagement positive, as she might have failed in securing a
seance altogether had she waited to communicate with Miss Ludington.
Hoping that "the conditions would be favourable," she remained, &c. &c.

When Miss Ludington had read this letter to Paul, she intimated, though
rather faintly, that it was still not too late to withdraw from the
enterprise; they could send Mrs. Legrand her fee, say that it was not
convenient for them to come on the evening fixed, and so let the matter
drop. Paul stared at her in astonishment, and said that, if she did not
feel like going, he would go alone, as he had at first proposed. Upon
this Miss Ludington once more declared that they would go together, and
said nothing further about sacrificing the appointment.

The fact is she did not really wish to sacrifice it. She was experiencing
a revulsion of feeling; Mrs. Rhinehart's letter had affected her almost
as strongly as Mrs. Slater's talk. The fact that Mrs. Legrand had at once
seen the reasonableness and probability of the belief in the immortality
of past selves made it difficult for Miss Ludington to think of her as a
mere vulgar impostor. The vague hint of the medium's as to strange
experiences with the spirit world, confirmatory of this belief, appealed
to her imagination in a powerful manner. Of what description might the
mysterious monitions be, which, coming to this woman in the dim
between-world where she groped, had prepared her to accept as true, on
its first statement, a belief that to others seemed so hard to credit?
What clutchings of spirit fingers in the dark! What moanings of souls
whom no one recognised!

The confidence which Mrs. Legrand had expressed that the seance would
prove a success affected Miss Ludington very powerfully. It impressed her
as the judgment of an expert; it compelled her to recognize not only as
possible, but even as probable, that, on the evening of the following
day, she should behold the beautiful girl whom once, so many years
before, she had called herself; for so at best would words express this
wonder.

With a trembling ecstasy, which in vain she tried to reason down, she
began to prepare herself for the presence of one fresh from the face of
God and the awful precincts of eternity.

As for Paul, there was no conflict of feeling with prejudice in his case;
he gave himself wholly up to a delirious expectation. How would his
immortal mistress look? How would she move? What would be her
stature--what her bearing? How would she gaze upon him? If not with love
he should die at her feet. If with love how should he bear it?

Mrs. Rhinehart's letter had been received in the morning, and during the
rest of the day Miss Ludington and Paul seemed quite to forget each other
in their absorption in the thoughts suggested by the approaching event.
They sat abstracted and silent at table, and, on rising, went each their
own way. In the exalted state of their imaginations the enterprise they
had in hand would not bear talking over.

When she retired to bed Miss Ludington found that sleep was out of the
question. About two o'clock in the morning she heard Paul leave his room
and go downstairs. Putting on dressing-gown and slippers she softly
followed him. There was a light in the sitting-room and the door was
ajar. Stepping noiselessly to it she looked in.

Paul was standing before, the fireplace, leaning on the mantelpiece, and
looking up into the eyes of the girl above, smiling and talking softly to
her, Miss Ludington entered the room and laid her hand gently on his arm.
Her appearance did not seem to startle him in the least. "Paul, my dear
boy!" she said, "you had better go to bed."

"It's no use," he said; "I can't sleep, and I had to come down here and
look at her. Think, just think, aunty, that to-morrow we shall see her."

The young fellow's nervous excitement culminated in a burst of ecstatic
tears, and soon afterwards Miss Ludington induced him to go to bed.

How much more he loved the girl than even she did! She was filled with
dread as she thought of the effect which a disappointment of the hope he
had given himself up to might produce. And what folly, after all, it was
to expect anything but disappointment!

The spectacle of Paul's fatuous confidence had taken hers away.




CHAPTER VI



As the drive over to East Tenth Street was a long one, the carriage had
been ordered at seven o'clock, and soon after tea, of which neither Miss
Ludington nor Paul had been able to take a mouthful, they set out.

"I am afraid we are doing something very wrong and foolish," said Miss
Ludington, feebly, as the carriage rolled down the village street.

During the drive of nearly two hours not another word was said.

The carriage at length drew up before the house in Tenth Street. It stood
in a brick block, and there was no sign of the business pursued within,
except a small white card on the door bearing the words, "Mrs. Legrand.
Materializing, Business, and Test Medium. Clairvoyant."

An old-looking little girl of ten or twelve years of age opened the door.
The child's big black eyes, and long snaky locks falling about a pale
face, gave her an elfish look quite in keeping with the character of the
house. She at once ushered the callers into the front parlour, where a
lady and gentleman were sitting, who proved to be Mrs. Legrand and her
manager and man of business, Dr. Hull.

The latter was a tall person, of highly respectable and even imposing
appearance, to which a high forehead, a pair of gold-bowed spectacles,
and a long white beard considerably added. He looked like a scholar, and
his speech was that of a man of education.

Mrs. Legrand was a large woman, with black hair sprinkled with grey and
worn short like a man's. She had a swarthy complexion, and her eyes were
surrounded by noticeably large dark rings, giving an appearance of
wretched ill-health. Her manner was extremely languid, as of a person
suffering from nervous exhaustion. She kept her eyes half shut, and spoke
as if with an effort.

"Did Mrs. Rhinehart tell you," she said to Miss Ludington, "of the
interest which I feel in your theory, that the souls of our past selves
exist in spirit-land? If my seance to-night realizes your expectations,
spirit science will have taken a great step forward."

"My conviction will remain the same whatever the result may be to night,"
said Miss Ludington.

"I am glad to hear you say so," replied Mrs. Legrand languidly; "but I
feel that we shall be successful, and my intuitions rarely deceive me."

A trembling came over Paul at these words.

There was a little more general conversation, and the silence which
followed was interrupted by Dr. Hull.

"I suppose there is no reason why the seance should not proceed, Mrs.
Legrand?"

"I know of none," assented that lady in lifeless tones. "Please show our
friends the cabinet."

Dr. Hull rose. "It is usual," he said, "for those who attend our seances
to be asked to satisfy themselves that deception is impossible by an
examination of the apartment which Mrs. Legrand occupies during her
trance, and from which the materialized spirit appears. Will you kindly
step this way?"

The room in which they sat was a long apartment, divided by double
sliding-doors into a front and back parlour, the former of which had been
the scene of the preceding conversation.

Dr. Hull now conducted the two visitors into the back parlour, which
proved to be of similar size and appearance to the front parlour, except
that it contained no furniture whatever. There was only one window in the
back parlour, and this was firmly closed by inside blinds.

It was also uncurtained, and in plain view from the front parlour.
Besides the connection with the front parlour, there was but one door in
the back parlour. This opened into a small apartment, about six feet by
five, which had been taken out of the right-hand rear corner of the back
parlour, and was separated from it by a partition reaching to the
ceiling. This was the cabinet. It had neither window nor door, except the
one into the back parlour. A sofa was its only article of furniture, and
this was of wicker-work, so that nothing could be concealed beneath it.

"Mrs. Legrand lies upon this sofa while in a state of trance, during
which the spirit is materialized, and appears to us," explained Dr. Hull.

A rug lay on the floor of the cabinet, the walls were of hard-finished
white plaster, quite bare, and the ceiling, like that of the parlours,
was plain white, without ornament.

There seemed no possibility of introducing any person into the cabinet or
the back parlour without the knowledge of those in the front parlour. But
Dr. Hull insisted upon making assurance doubly sure by pounding upon the
walls and pulling up the rug in the cabinet, to prove that no sliding
panel or trap-door trick was possible. There was something calculated to
make an unbeliever very uneasy in the quiet confidence of these people,
and the business-like way in which they went to work to make it
impossible to account for any phenomenon that might appear, on any other
but a supernatural theory. No doubt whatever now remained in the mind of
Miss Ludington or Paul that the wonderful mystery which they had hardly
dared to dream of was about to be enacted before them. They followed Dr.
Hull on his tour of inspection as if they were in a dream, mechanically
observing what he pointed out, but replying at random to his remarks,
and, indeed, barely aware of what they were doing. The sense of the
unspeakably awful and tender scene so soon to pass before their eyes
absorbed every susceptibility of their minds.

Nor indeed would this detective work have had any interest for them in
any case. They would have been willing to concede the medium all the
machinery she desired. There was no danger that they could be deceived as
to the reality of the face and form that for so many years had been
enshrined in their memories.

There might be as many side entrances to the cabinet as desired, but she
whom they looked for could come only from the spirit-land.

The front parlour, too, having been investigated, to show the
impossibility of any person's being concealed there, Dr. Hull proceeded
to close and lock the hall-door, that being the only exit connecting this
suite of rooms with the rest of the house. Having placed a heavy chair
against the locked door for further security, he gave the key to Paul.

Mrs. Legrand now rose, and without a word to any one passed through the
back parlour and disappeared in the cabinet.

As she did so a wild desire to fly from the room and the house came over
Miss Ludington. Not that she did not long inexpressibly to see the vision
that was drawing near, whose beautiful feet might even now be on the
threshold, but the sense of its awfulness overcame her. She felt that she
was not fit, not ready, for it now. If she could only have more time to
prepare herself, and then could come again. But it was too late to draw
back.

Dr. Hull had arranged three chairs across the broad doorway between the
back and front parlours, and facing the former. He asked Miss Ludington
to occupy the middle chair, and, trembling in every limb, she did so.
Paul took the chair by her side, the other being apparently for Dr. Hull.

The elfish little girl, whom they called Alta, and who appeared to be the
daughter of Mrs. Legrand, meanwhile took her place at a piano standing in
the front parlour.

All being now ready, Dr. Hull proceeded to turn the gas in the two
parlours very low. The jets in both rooms were controlled by a stop-cock
in the wall by the side of the doorway between them. There were two jets
in the back parlour, fastened to the wall dividing it from the front
parlour, one on each side of the door, so as to throw light on any figure
coming out of the cabinet. The light they diffused, after being turned
down; was enough to render forms and faces sufficiently visible for the
recognition of acquaintances, though a close study of features would have
been difficult.

It now appeared that the glass shades of the jets in the back parlour
were of a bluish tint, which lent a peculiarly weird effect to the
illumination.

Dr. Hull now took the remaining chair by Miss Ludington's side, and a
perfect silence of some moments ensued, during which she could perfectly
hear the beating of Paul's heart. Then Alta began, with a wonderfully
soft touch, to play a succession of low, dreamy chords, rather than any
set composition--music that thrilled the listeners with vague suggestions
of the unfathomable mystery and unutterable sadness of human life. She
played on and on. It seemed to two of the hearers that she played for
hours, although it was probably but a few minutes.

At last the music flowed slower, trickled, fell in drops, and ceased.

They had a sensation of being breathed upon by a faint, cool draught of
air, and then appeared in the door-way of the cabinet the figure of a
beautiful girl, which, after standing still a moment, glided forth, by an
imperceptible motion, into the room.

The light, which had before seemed so faint, now proved sufficient to
bring out every line of her face and form. Or was it that the figure
itself was luminous by some light from within?

Paul heard Miss Ludington gasp; but if he had known that she was dying he
could not have taken his eyes from the apparition.

For it was Ida who stood before him; no counterfeit of the painter now,
but radiant with life.

Her costume was exactly that of her picture, white, with a low bodice;
but how utterly had the artist failed to reproduce the ravishing contours
of her young form, the enchanting sweetness of her expression. The golden
hair fell in luxuriant tresses about the face and down the dazzling
shoulders. The lips were parted in a pleased smile as, with a gliding
motion, she approached the rapt watchers.

Her eyes rested on Miss Ludington with a look full of recognition and a
tenderness that seemed beyond the power of mortal eyes to express.

