submergence of Mount Everest, but at that time it had not yet assumed
its full splendor.

At first, no doubt, there was considerable dissolved matter in the
water, but gradually this settled, and the sea became bluer and
bluer--not the deep indigo of the old ocean, but a much lighter and more
brilliant hue--and here, over the site of New York, the waters were of a
bright, luminous sapphire, that dazzled the eye.

Cosmo declared that the change of the sea-color was undoubtedly due to
some quality in the nebula from whose condensation the water had been
produced, but neither his own analyses, nor those of the chemists aboard
the Ark, were able to detect the subtle element to whose presence the
peculiar tint was due.

But whatever it may have been, it imparted to the ocean an ethereal,
imponderous look, which was sometimes startling. There were moments when
they almost expected to see it expand back into the nebulous form and
fly away.




CHAPTER XXV

NEW YORK IN HER OCEAN TOMB


During the long voyage from the sunken Himalayas to still deeper sunken
New York, De Beauxchamps, with his fellow-countrymen and the skilled
mechanics assigned by Cosmo Versal to aid them, had finished the
construction of the huge diving-bell. No one not in the secret had the
slightest idea of what had been done, owing to the remote situation of
the deck on which the construction was carried out.

Now, while a thousand pairs of eyes were interrogating the smooth
surface of the sea, and striving to penetrate its cerulean depths, a
great surprise was sprung upon the passengers. The rear gangway of the
lowest deck was cleared, a heavy crane-like beam was set projecting over
the water, and men began to rig a flexible cable, which had been
specially prepared for the purpose of lowering the bell into the depths,
and of raising it again when the adventurers should wish to return to
the surface. Everybody's attention was immediately attracted to these
strange preparations, and the utmost curiosity was aroused. A chorus of
wondering exclamations broke out when a metallic globe, twenty feet in
diameter, and polished until it shone like a giant thermometer bulb, was
rolled out and carefully attached to the cable by means of a strong ring
set in one side of the bell. The excitement of the passengers would soon
have become uncontrollable if Cosmo had not at this point summoned the
entire ship's company into the great saloon. As soon as all were
assembled he mounted his dais and began to speak.

"My fellow-citizens of the old world, which has perished, and of the
new, which is to take its place," he said, "we owe to the genius of M.
De Beauxchamps an apparatus which is about to enable us to inspect, by
an actual visit, the remains of the vast metropolis, which we saw in all
its majesty and beauty but so few months ago, and which now lies forever
silent at the bottom of this universal ocean.

"If it were practicable I should wish to afford to every one of you a
farewell glimpse of that mighty city, to which the hearts of so many
here are bound, but you can readily understand that that would be
impossible. Only six persons can go in this exploring bell, and they
have been chosen; but a faithful account will be brought back to you of
all that they see and learn. The adventuring company will consist of M.
De Beauxchamps, M. Pujol, his first assistant, Mr. Amos Blank, King
Richard, Professor Abel Able, and myself. Captain Arms has ascertained
the location of the center of Manhattan Island, over which we are now
floating. The quietness of the sea, the absence of any apparent current,
and the serenity of the heavens are favoring circumstances, which may be
relied upon to enable Captain Arms to keep the Ark constantly poised
almost precisely over our point of descent. It is not possible to
predict the exact duration of our absence in the depths, but it will
not, in any case, exceed about twenty hours.

"Once arrived at the bottom, nearly six miles down, we shall attach the
cable to some secure anchorage, by means of a radio-control, operated
from within the bell, and then, with the bell free, we shall make
explorations, as extensive as possible. The radio-control of which I
have spoken governs also the attachment of the cable to the bell. This
appliance has been prepared and tested with such care that we have no
doubt of its entire efficiency. I mention these things in order to
remove from your minds any fear as to the success of our enterprise.

"The bell being once detached, we shall be able to move it from point to
point by means of a pair of small propellers, which you will perceive on
the outside of the bell, and which are also controlled from within.
These will be used to increase our speed of descent. From a calculation
of the density of the sea-water at the depth to which we shall descend,
we estimate that the bell with its contents will press upon the bottom
with a gravitational force of only five pounds, so that it will move
with very slight effort, and may even, when in motion, float like a
fish.

"For the purposes of observation we have provided, on four sides of the
bell, a series of circular windows, with glass of immense thickness and
strength, but of extraordinary transparency. Through these windows we
shall be able to see in almost all directions. It was our intention to
provide wireless telephone apparatus with which we might have kept you
informed of all our doings and discoveries, but unfortunately we have
found it impracticable to utilize our control for that purpose. We
shall, however, be able to send and receive signals as long as we are
connected with the cable.

"I should add that the construction of the bell, although suggested by
M. De Beauxchamps immediately after our departure from Mount Everest,
has been carried on in secret simply because we did not wish to subject
you to the immense disappointment which you would certainly have
experienced if this brilliant conception of our gifted friend, after
being once made known to you, had proved to be a failure. Our
preparations have all been made, and within an hour we shall begin the
descent."

It is quite impossible to describe the excitement of the passengers
while they listened to this extraordinary communication. When Cosmo
Versal had finished speaking he stood for some minutes looking at his
audience with a triumphant smile. First a murmur of excited voices
arose, and then somebody proposed three cheers, which were given and
repeated until the levium dome rang with the reverberations. Nobody knew
exactly why he was cheering, but the infectious enthusiasm carried
everything before it. Then the crowd began to ask questions, addressed
not to Cosmo but to one another. The wildest suggestions were made. One
woman who had left some treasured heirlooms in a Fifth Avenue mansion
demanded of her husband that he should commission Cosmo Versal to
recover them.

"I'm sure they're there," she insisted. "They were locked in the safe."

"But, don't you see," protested the poor man, "he can't get outside of
that bell to get 'em."

"I don't see _why_ he can't, if he should really try. I think it's too
mean! They were my grandmother's jewels."

"But, my dear, how could he get out?"

"Well, _how does he get in?_ What's his radio-control good for; won't
that help him? What is he going down there for if he can't do a little
thing like that, to oblige?"

She pouted at her husband because he persistently refused to present her
request to Cosmo, and declared that she would do it herself, then, for
she must have those jewels, now that they were so near.

But Cosmo was saved from this, and other equally unreasonable demands,
by a warning from De Beauxchamps that all was ready, and that no time
should be lost. Then everybody hastened out on the decks to watch the
departure of the adventurers. Many thoughtfully shook their heads,
predicting that they would never be seen again. As soon as this feeling
began to prevail the enthusiasm quickly evaporated, and efforts were
made to dissuade Cosmo and De Beauxchamps from making the attempt. But
they were deaf to all remonstrance, and pushing out of the chattering
crowd, Cosmo ordered the gangway about the bell to be cleared of all
bystanders. The opposition heated his blood a little, and he began to
bear himself with an air which recalled his aspect when he quelled and
punished the mutiny. This was enough to silence instantly every objector
to his proceedings. Henceforth they kept their thoughts to themselves,
although some muttered, under their breath such epithets as "fool" and
"harebrain."

In about half an hour after Cosmo's speech the bell, with its hardy
explorers safely inclosed within, was lowered away, and a minute later
hundreds were craning their necks over the rails to watch the shining
globe engulf itself swiftly in the sapphire depths. It was about nine
o'clock in the morning when the descent was begun, and for a long time,
so remarkable was the transparency of the water, they could see the bell
sinking, and becoming smaller until it resembled a blue pearl. Sometimes
a metallic flash shot from its polished sides like a gleam of violet
lightning. But at length it passed from view, swallowed up in the
tremendous watery chasm.

We turn now to trace the adventures of the bell and its inmates as they
entered the awful twilight of the ocean, and, sinking deeper, passed
gradually into a profundity which the sun's most powerful rays were
unable to penetrate. Fortunately every one of the adventurers left a
description of his experiences and sensations, so that there is no lack
of authentic information to guide us.

The windows, as Cosmo had said, were so arranged that they afforded
views on all sides. These views were, of course, restricted by the
combined effects of the smallness of the windows and their great
thickness; the inmates were somewhat like prisoners looking out of round
ports cut through massive walls, but the range of view was much widened
when they placed themselves close to the glasses, because the latter
were in the form of truncated cones with the base outward.

Glancing through the ports on the upper side of the bell Cosmo and his
companions could perceive the huge form of the Ark, hanging like a cloud
above them, but rapidly receding, while from the side ports they saw
great shafts of azure sunlight, thrown into wonderful undulations by the
disturbance of the water. These soon became fainter and gradually
disappeared, but before the gloom of the depths settled about them they
were thrilled by the spectacle of sharks and other huge fishes nosing
about the outer side of the transparent cones, and sometimes opening
their jaws as if trying to seize them. Most of the cone-shaped windows
had flat surfaces, but a few were of spherical outline both without and
within, and the radius of curvature had been so calculated that these
particular windows served as huge magnifying lenses for an eye placed at
a given distance. Once or twice a marine monster happened to place
himself in the field of one of these magnifying windows, startling the
observers almost out of their senses with his frightful appearance.

There were also four windows reserved for projecting a searchlight into
the outer darkness. The inner side of the bell corresponded in curvature
with the outer, so that the adventurers had no flat flooring on any side
to stand upon, but this caused little inconvenience, since the walls
were abundantly provided with hand and foot holds, enabling the inmates
to maintain themselves in almost any position they could wish.

After a while they passed below the range of daylight, and then they
turned on the searchlight. The storage batteries which supplied energy
for the searchlight and the propellers served also to operate an
apparatus for clearing the air of carbonic acid, and De Beauxchamps had
carefully calculated the limit of time that the air could be kept in a
breathable condition. This did not exceed forty-eight hours--but as we
have seen they had no intention of remaining under water longer than
twenty hours at the utmost.

When the bell entered the night of the sea-depths they passed into an
apparently lifeless zone, where the searchlight, projected now on one
side and now on another, revealed no more of the living forms which they
had encountered above, but showed only a desert of solid transparent
water. Here, amid this awful isolation, they experienced for the first
time a feeling of dread and terror. An overpowering sense of loneliness
and helplessness came over them, and only the stout heart of Cosmo
Versal, and his reassuring words, kept the others from making the signal
which would have caused the bell to be hastily drawn back to the Ark.

"M. De Beauxchamps," said Cosmo, breaking the impressive silence, "to
what depth have we now descended?"

"A thousand fathoms," replied the Frenchman, consulting his automatic
register.

"Good! We have been only thirty minutes in reaching this depth. We shall
sink more slowly as we get deeper, but I think we can count upon
reaching the bottom in not more than four hours from the moment of our
departure. It will require only two hours for them to draw us back again
with the powerful engines of the Ark, especially when aided by our
propellers. This will leave fourteen hours for our explorations, if we
stay out the limit that we have fixed."

There was such an air of confidence in Cosmo's manner and words that
this simple statement did much to enhearten the others.

"The absence of life in this part of the sea," Cosmo continued
cheerfully, "does not surprise me. It has long been known that the life
of the ocean is confined to regions near the surface and the bottom. We
shall certainly find plenty of wonderful creatures below."

When they knew that they must be near the bottom they turned the light
downward, and every available window was occupied by an eager watcher.
Presently a cry of "Look! Look there!" broke from several voices at
once.

The searchlight, penetrating far through the clear water beneath the
bell, fell in a circle round a most remarkable object--tall, gaunt, and
spectral, with huge black ribs.

"Why, it's the Metropolitan tower, still standing!" cried Amos Blank.
"Who would have believed it possible?"

"No doubt there was some lucky circumstance about its anchorage,"
returned Cosmo. "Although it was built so long ago, it was made
immensely strong, and well braced, and as the water did not undermine it
at the start, it has been favored by the very density of that which now
surrounds it, and which tends to buoy it up and hold it steady. But you
observe that it has been stripped of the covering of stone."

"Would it not be well to utilize it for anchoring the cable?" asked De
Beauxchamps.

"We could have nothing better," said Cosmo.

De Beauxchamps immediately called to the Ark, and directed the movements
of those in charge of the drum of the cable so nicely that the descent
ceased at the exact moment when the bell came to rest upon a group of
beams at the top of the tower. The radio-control, which is so familiar
in its thousand applications to-day, was then a new thing, having been
invented only a year or so before the deluge, and De Beauxchamps's form
of the apparatus was crude. The underlying principle, however, was the
same as that now employed--transmission through a metallic wall of
impulses capable of being turned into mechanic energy. With its aid they
had no difficulty in detaching the cable from the bell, but it required
some careful maneuvering to secure a satisfactory attachment to the
beams of the tower. At last, however, this was effected, and immediately
they set out for their exploration of drowned New York.

They began with the skeleton tower itself, which had only once or twice
been exceeded in height by the famous structures of the era of
skyscrapers. In some places they found the granite skin yet _in situ_,
but almost everywhere it had been stripped off, probably by the
tremendous waves which swept over it as the flood attained its first
thousand feet of elevation. They saw no living forms, except a few
curiously shaped phosphorescent creatures of no great size, which
scurried away out of the beam of the search-light. They saw no trace of
the millions of their fellow-beings who had been swallowed up in this
vast grave, and for this all secretly gave thanks. The soil of Madison
Square had evidently been washed away, for no signs of the trees which
had once shaded it were seen, and a reddish ooze had begun to collect
upon the exposed rocks. All around were the shattered ruins of other
great buildings, some, like the Metropolitan tower, yet retaining their
steel skeletons, others tumbled down, and lying half-buried in the ooze.

Finding nothing of great interest in this neighborhood they turned the
course of the bell northward, passing everywhere over interminable
ruins, and as soon as they began to skirt the ridge of Morningside
Heights the huge form of the cathedral of St. John fell within the
circle of projected light. It was unroofed, and some of the walls had
fallen, but some of the immense arches yet retained their upright
position. Here, for the first time, they encountered the real giants of
the submarine depths. De Beauxchamps, who had seen some of these
creatures during his visit to Paris in the _Jules Verne_, declared that
nothing which he had seen there was so terrifying as what they now
beheld. One creature, which seemed to be the unresisted master of this
kingdom of phosphorescent life, appears to have exceeded in strangeness
the utmost descriptive powers of all those who looked upon it, for their
written accounts are filled with ejaculations, and are more or less
inconsistent with one another. The reader gathers from them, however,
the general impression that it made upon their astonished minds.

The creatures were of a livid hue, and had the form of a globe, as large
as the bell itself, with a valvular opening on one side which was
evidently a mouth, surrounded with a circle of eyelike disks, projecting
shafts of self-evolved light into the water. They moved about with
surprising ease, rising and sinking at will, sometimes rolling along the
curve of an arch, emitting flashes of green fire, and occasionally
darting across the intervening spaces in pursuit of their prey, which
consisted of smaller prosphorescent animals that fled in the utmost
consternation. When the adventurers in the bell saw one of the globular
monsters seize its victim they were filled with horror. It had driven
its prey into a corner of the wrecked choir, and suddenly it flattened
itself like a rubber bulb pressed against the wall, completely covering
the creature that was to be devoured, although the effect of its
struggles could be perceived; and then, to the amazement of the
onlookers, the living globe slowly turned itself inside out, engulfing
the victim in the process.

"Great heavens," exclaimed Professor Abel Able, "it is a gigantic
_hydroid polyps!_ That is precisely the way in which those little
creatures swallow their prey; outside becomes inside, what was the
surface of the body is turned into the lining of the digestive cavity,
and every time they take a meal the process of introversion is repeated.
This monster is nothing but a huge self-sustaining maw!"

"_Tres bien_," exclaimed De Beauxchamps, with a slight laugh, "and he
finds himself in New York, quite _chez soi_."

Nobody appeared to notice the sarcasm, and, in any case they would
quickly have forgotten it, for no sooner had the tragic spectacle which
they had witnessed been finished than they suddenly found the bell
surrounded by a crowd of the globe-shaped creatures, jostling one
another, and flattening themselves against its metallic walls. They
pushed the bell about, rolling themselves all over it, and apparently
finding nothing terrifying in the searchlight, which was hardly brighter
than the phosphorescent gleams which shot from their own luminescent
organs. One of them got one of its luminous disks exactly in the field
of a magnifying window, and King Richard, who happened to have his eye
in the focus, started back with a cry of alarm.

"I cannot describe what I saw," the king wrote in his notebook. "It was
