
"Damn you both," he whimpered; "where do I come in?"

"Put him out," said Katrina, with a glance of disdain at the cowering
man.

"I will go," snarled Holknecht, and he wrenched from my grasp and darted
toward the door. I followed, but he was fairly running down the passage
and pursuit was too undignified a thing to consider.

"You should have paid him," said Katrina, "for delivering my message."

"I have paid him," I replied. "I paid him very well."

"I wonder if he thought," she laughed, "that I would pay any attention
to a man of his petty rank. Why, I snubbed him unmercifully years ago
when the other Armstadt had the audacity to introduce me."

"Of course," I replied, "he does not understand."

And now, as I resumed my seat, I began puzzling my brain as to how I
could get away without giving offence to the second member of my pair of
blackmailers. But a little later I managed it, as it has been managed
for centuries, by looking suddenly at my watch and recalling a forgotten
appointment.

"You will come again?" purred Katrina.

"Of course," I said, "I must come again, for you are very charming, but
I am afraid it will not be for some time as I have very important duties
and just at present my leisure is exceedingly limited."

And so I made my escape, and hastened home. After debating the question
pro and con I typed a note to Holknecht in which I assured him that I
had not the least interest in Katrina. "Perhaps," I wrote, "when she has
tired a bit of the necklace, she would appreciate something else. But it
would not be wise to hurry this; but if you will call around in a month
or so, I think I can arrange for you to get her something and present it
yourself, as I do not care to see her again."



CHAPTER XIV

THE BLACK SPOT IS ERASED FROM THE MAP OF THE WORLD AND
THERE IS DANCING IN THE SUNLIGHT ON THE ROOF OF BERLIN


~1~

The relative ease with which I had so long passed for the real Karl
Armstadt had lulled me into a feeling of security. But now that my
disguise had been penetrated, my old fears were renewed. True, the
weigher's records had seemingly cleared me, but I knew that Grauble had
seen the weak spot in the German logic of the stupid official, who had
so lightly dismissed Katrina's accusations. Moreover, I fancied that
Grauble had guessed the full truth and connected this uncertainty of my
identity with the seditious tenor of the suggestions I had made to him.
Even though he might be willing to discuss rebellious plans with a
German, could I count on him to consider the treasonable urging coming
from a man of another and an enemy race?

So fearing either to confess to him my identity or to proceed without
confessing, I postponed doing anything. The sailing date of his fifth
trip to the Arctic was fast approaching; if I was ever to board a vessel
leaving Berlin I would need von Kufner's permission. Marguerite reported
the growing cordiality of the Admiral. Although I realized that his
infatuation for her was becoming rather serious, with the confidence of
an accepted lover, I never imagined that he could really come between
Marguerite and myself.

But one evening when I went to call upon Marguerite she was "not at
home." I repeated the call with the same result. When I called her up by
telephone, her secretary bluntly told me that the Princess Marguerite
did not care to speak to me. I hastened to write an impassioned note,
pleading to see her at once, for the days were passing and there was now
but a week before Grauble's vessel was due to depart.

In desperation I waited two more days, and still no word came. My
letters of pleading, like my calls and telephone efforts, were
still ignored.

Then a messenger came bearing a note from Admiral von Kufner, asking me
to call upon him at once.

"I have been considering," began von Kufner, when I entered his office,
"the request you made of me some time ago to be permitted to go in
person to make a survey of the ore deposits. At first I opposed this, as
the trip is dangerous, but more recently I have reconsidered the
importance of it. As others are now fully able to continue your work
here, I can quite conceive that your risking the trip to the mines in
person would be a very courageous and noble sacrifice. So I have taken
the matter up with His Majesty."

With mocking politeness von Kufner now handed me a document bearing the
imperial seal.

I held it with a trembling hand as I glanced over the fateful words that
commissioned me to go at once to the Arctic.

My smouldering jealousy of the oily von Kufner now flamed into
expression. "You have done this thing from personal motives," I cried.
"You have revoked your previous decision because you want me out of your
way. You know I will be gone for six months at least. You hope in your
cowardly heart that I will never come back."

Von Kufner's lips curled. "You see fit," he answered, "to impugn my
motives in suggesting that the order be issued, although it is the
granting of your own request. But the commission you hold in your hand
bears the Imperial signature, and the Emperor of the Germans never
revokes his orders."

"Very well," I said, controlling my rage, "I will go."

~2~

Upon leaving the Admiral's office my first thought was to go at once to
Marguerite. Whatever might be the nature of her quarrel with me I was
now sure that von Kufner was at the bottom of it, and that it was in
some way connected with this sudden determination of his to send me to
the Arctic, hoping that I would never return.

But before I had gone far I began to consider other matters. I was
commissioned to leave Berlin by submarine and that too by the vessel in
command of Captain Grauble, whom I knew to be nursing rebellion and
mutiny in his heart. If deliverance from Berlin was ever to come, it had
come now. To refuse to embrace it would mean to lose for ever this
fortunate chance to escape from this sunless Babylon.

I would therefore go first to Grauble and determine without delay if he
could be relied on to make the attempt to reach the outer world. Once I
knew that, I could go then to Marguerite with an invitation for her to
join me in flight--if such a thing were humanly possible.

But recalling the men who had done so much to fill me with hope and
faith in the righteousness of my mission, I again changed my plan and
sought out Dr. Zimmern and Col. Hellar and arranged for them to meet me
that evening at Grauble's quarters.

At the hour appointed I, who had first arrived at the apartment, sat
waiting for the arrival of Zimmern. When he came, to my surprise and
bewildered joy he was not alone, for Marguerite was with him.

She greeted me with distress and penitence in her eyes and I exulted in
the belief that whatever her quarrel with me might be it meant no
irretrievable loss of her devotion and love.

We sat about the room, a very solemn conclave, for I had already
informed Grauble of my commission to go to the Arctic, and he had sensed
at once the revolutionary nature of the meeting. I now gave him a brief
statement of the faith of the older men, who from the fulness of their
lives had reached the belief that the true patriotism for their race was
to be expressed in an effort to regain for the Germans the citizenship
of the world.

The young Captain gravely nodded. "I have not lived so long," he said,
"but my life has been bitter and full of fear. I am not out of sympathy
with your argument, but before we go further," and he turned to
Marguerite, "may I not ask why a Princess of the House of Hohenzollern
is included in such a meeting as this?"

I turned expectantly to Zimmern, who now gave Grauble an account of the
tragedy and romance of Marguerite's life.

"Very well," said Grauble; "she has earned her place with us; now that I
understand her part, let us proceed."

For some hours Hellar and Zimmern explained their reasons for believing
the life of the isolated German race was evil and defended their faith
in the hope of salvation through an appeal to the mercy and justice of
the World State.

"Of all this I am easily convinced," said Grauble, "for it is but a
logically thought-out conclusion of the feeling I have nourished in my
blind rebellion. I am ready to go with Herr von Armstadt and surrender
my vessel to the enemy; but the practical question is, will our risk
avail anything? What hope can we have that we will even be able to
deliver the message you wish to send? How are we to know that we will
not immediately be killed?"

The hour had come. "I will answer that question," I said, and there was
a tenseness in my tone that caused my hearers to look at me with eager,
questioning eyes.

"Barring," I said, "the possibility of destruction before I can gain
opportunity to speak to some one in authority, there is nothing to fear
in the way of our ungracious reception in the outer world--" As I paused
and looked about me I saw Marguerite's eyes shining with the same
worshipful wonder as when I had visioned for her the sunlight and the
storms of the world outside Berlin--"because I am of that world. I speak
their language. I know their people. I never saw the inside of Berlin
until I was brought here from the potash mines of Stassfurt, wearing the
clothes and carrying the identification papers of one Karl Armstadt who
was killed by gas bombs which I myself had ordered dropped into
those mines."

At these startling statements the older men could only gasp in
incredulous astonishment, but Captain Grauble nodded wisely--"I half
expected as much," he said.

I turned to Marguerite. Her eyes were swimming in a mist of tears.

"Then your visions were real memories," she cried,--"and not miracles. I
knew you had seen other worlds, but I thought it was in some spirit
life." She reached out a trembling hand toward me and then shrinkingly
drew it back. "But you are not Karl Armstadt," she stammered, as she
realized that I was a nameless stranger.

"No," I said, going to her and placing a reassuring arm about her
shoulder, "I am not Karl Armstadt. My name is Lyman de Forrest. I am an
American, a chemical engineer from the city of Chicago, and if Captain
Grauble does not alter his purpose, I am going back there and will take
you with me."

Zimmern and Hellar were listening in consternation. "How is it," asked
Hellar, "that you speak German?"

By way of answer I addressed him in English and in French, while he and
Zimmern glanced at each other as do men who see a miracle and strive to
hold their reason while their senses contradict their logic.

I now sketched the story of my life and adventures with a fulness of
convincing detail. One incident only I omitted and that was of the near
discovery of my identity by Armstadt's former mistress. Of that I did
not speak for I felt that Marguerite, at least in the presence of the
others, would not relish that part of the story. Nor did I wish to worry
them with the fear that was still upon me that I had not seen the last
of that affair.

After answering many questions and satisfying all doubts as to the truth
of my story, I again turned the conversation to the practical problem of
the escape from Berlin. "You can now see," I declared, "that I deserve
no credit for genius or courage. I am merely a prisoner in an enemy city
where my life is in constant danger. If any one of you should speak the
word, I would be promptly disposed of as a spy. But if you are sincere
in your desire to send a message to my Government, I am here to take
that message."

"It almost makes one believe that there is a God," cried Hellar, "and
that he has sent us a deliverer."

"As for me," spoke up Captain Grauble, "I shall deliver your messenger
into the hands of his friends, and trust that he can persuade them to
deal graciously with me and my men. I should have made this break for
liberty before had I not believed it would be fleeing from one death
to another."

"Then you will surely leave us," said Zimmern. "It is more than we have
wished and prayed for, but," he added, turning a compassionate glance
toward Marguerite, "it will be hard for her."

"But she is going with us," I affirmed. "I will not leave her behind. As
for you and Col Hellar, I shall see you again when Berlin is free. But
the risks are great and the time may be long, and if Marguerite will go
I will take her with me as a pledge that I shall not prove false in my
mission for you, her people."

I read Marguerite's answer in the joy of her eyes, as I heard Col.
Hellar say: "That would be fine, if it were possible."

But Zimmern shook his head. "No," he said, as if commanding. "Marguerite
must not go now even if it were possible. You may come back for her if
you succeed in your mission, but we cannot lose her now; she must not go
now,--" and his voice trembled with deep emotion. At his words of
authority concerning the girl I loved I felt a resurge of the old
suspicion and jealousy.

"I am sorry," spoke up Captain Grauble, "but your desire to take the
Princess Marguerite with you is one that I fear cannot be realized. I
would be perfectly willing for her to go if we could once get her
aboard, but the approach of the submarine docks are very elaborately
guarded. To smuggle a man aboard without a proper permit would be
exceedingly difficult, but to get a woman to the vessel is quite
impossible."

"I suppose that it cannot be," I said, for I saw the futility of arguing
the matter further at the time, especially as Zimmern was opposed to it.

The night was now far spent and but four days remained in which to
complete my preparations for departure. In this labour Zimmern and
Hellar could be of no service and I therefore took my leave of them,
lest I should not see them again. "Within a year at most," I said, "we
may meet again, for Berlin will be open to the world. Once the passage
is revealed and the protium traffic stopped, the food stores cannot last
longer. When these facts are realized by His Majesty and the Advisory
Council, let us hope they will see the futility of resisting. The
knowledge that Germany possesses will increase the world's food supply
far more than her population will add to the consumptive demands, hence if
reason and sanity prevail on both sides there will be no excuse for war
and suffering."

~3~

And so I took my leave of the two men from whose noble souls I had
achieved my aspirations to bring the century-old siege of Berlin to a
sane and peaceful end without the needless waste of life that all the
world outside had always believed would be an inevitable part of the
capitulation of the armoured city.

I now walked with Marguerite through the deserted tree-lined avenues of
the Royal Level.

"And why, dear," I asked, "have you refused to see me these five days
past?"

"Oh, Karl," she cried, "you must forgive me, for nothing matters now--I
have been crazed with jealousy. I was so hurt that I could see no one,
for I could only fight it out alone."

"And what do you mean?" I questioned. "Jealous? And of whom could you be
jealous, since there is no other woman in this unhappy city for whom I
have ever cared?"

"Yes, I believe that. I haven't doubted that you loved me with a nobler
love than the others, but you told me there were no others, and I
believed you. So it was hard, so very hard. The Doctor--I saw Dr.
Zimmern this morning and poured out my heart to him--insisted that I
should accept the fact that until marriage all men were like that, and
it could not be helped. But I never asked you, Karl, about other women;
you yourself volunteered to tell me there were no others, and what you
told me was not true. I must forgive you, for now I may lose you, but
why does a man ever need to lie to a woman? I somehow feel that love
means truth--"

"But," I insisted, "it was the truth. I bear no personal relation to any
other woman."
