
The Outer Region's proclamations panicked the
central government.

On the one hand, Earth ethicists argued, were the
rights of the inhabitants of the space colonies. As
members of distant societies they had modified
their bodies, their environment and their cultures,
therefore, they had a right to seek their own
destiny unfettered by well-intentioned, but
obviously impotent laws that originated on Earth.
The advocates of this philosophy emphasized
the Outer Region's right to their own physical,
technological and cultural development. As unique
civilizations, evolving at an unprecedented rapid
pace, they were already radically different from
the humankind that had remained on distant Earth.

On the other hand, claimed others, the system-wide
scarcity of natural sources vital to the survival
of the species was a shared crisis. The crisis
could be solved, if at all, only through the most
concerted application of humankind's intellectual
and collective genius. In one context, they were
indeed unique civilizations: robust, sophisticated
and divergent, nevertheless, instinctively taking
nourishment from a common fealty to humankind's
ultimate destiny among the stars. Humankind
would be far stronger and effective together,
they argued, than it would be, divided within a
common species.

The debate raged across the System. The separatists
won.

Earth's General Assembly acceded to the demands
for self-determination. The new status of the outer
and inner regions was confirmed in The Treaties on
the Separation of Jurisdictions for the Planets and
Satellites of the Inner Region and the Independent
Nations of the Outer Region.

The outer periphery of the Asteroid Belt became the
boundary. The United Planetary System was dissolved
and reconstituted as the United Inner Planetary
System (UIPS). The natural and artificial colonies
that orbited the planets and satellites of the
Outer Region, or the central sun, retained their
original identities (Ganymede, Titan, Callisto,
etc.), and Pluto added "Planet" to its name to
distinguish itself from planetary satellites. The
former colonies beyond the Belt formed a loose
federation: Independent Nations of the Outer Region
(INOR).

The United Inner Planetary System insisted that
Planet Pluto and its contiguous space remain within
the UIPS Slingshot Special Zone of Operations until
the Extractor and the Collector were both safely
away from Pluto's jurisdiction, as judged by the
UIPS. The Plutonian government refused. The other
INOR nations, immersed in their own problems,
were indifferent. The issue was left to the UIPS
and Planet Pluto to resolve.

The UIPS continued, without prior consultation with
INOR and Planet Pluto, to construct and operate
Slingshot logistics sites and facilities on Pluto's
surface, in contiguous space, and within and along
the Planet Pluto orbit. The UIPS, interpreting
traditions and treaties that had evolved from
Earth's ancient Laws of the Seas and Space,
exercised and defended free and unencumbered
travel and passage by its citizens and vessels in
deep space and throughout the INOR jurisdictions.

The UIPS took steps to ensure the security of
Slingshot construction and logistics support sites
and space-ways.

 ##

The Slingshot Advance Cadre arrived in the
Neptune-Pluto orbit-crossing sectors toward the end
of the Interplanetary Era, before the breakup of the
old United Planetary System. Colonizing Pluto and
constructing space kits that would be transformed
into surface habitat and supply depots began
centuries earlier when Planet Pluto was barely past
aphelion but within economical range of deep space
transports. The cadre's vessels carried and towed
communications gear, specialized construction rigs,
platforms and infrastructure kits which had been
fabricated or assembled in the industrial tank
towns above Luna, Venus and Mars, and by
cooperating governments of satellites in the
outer region.

The Cadre's primary mission was to establish a
base of operations on Pluto. The program called
for the planet to support a colony of fifty thousand
specialists and construction workers -- and their
families -- for the assembly, construction and
testing phases, plus ten thousand transients and
temporary residents. The latter would comprise
'rest and relaxation' visitors, liaison and special
missions staff from a nearby logistics depot and
the construction sites, and agricultural and food
processing workers from Planet Pluto's moon
Charon. Also expected were cargo handlers and ship's
personnel from transports entering and departing
Pluto from-and-to points throughout the system.

About eighty percent of Pluto's permanent adult
population would work on the two terminals.
The specialized professions for the initial phase
ranged from scientists and engineers to artisans,
skilled and semi-skilled workers in all of the
disciplines and industrial skills required to
construct and operate a complex station in space
and service and maintain a permanent habitat and
population on Pluto's surface.

Children would be born on Pluto, natural or cloned.
They, as well as the general population, would
be cared for and supported by a host of
administrative, health care, educational,
recreational, life support and community services.

The Cadre's mission was in phases. The first
task of the initial phase was to land on Pluto's
surface, seek out stable surfaces or create them
by fusing subsurface strata to sufficient depth
for support of massive structures.

Gravity enhancement surface panels and their
energy sources would be installed wherever enclosed
communities or special purpose structures were to
be constructed. A detachment of the Cadre would
land on Charon, Planet Pluto's moonlet, and fuse
and seal sections of the moonlet's surface and
subsurface same as on Pluto.

On the solidified, stabilized surfaces of Pluto and
Charon the Cadre would erect a tank town dome. The
dome would have a ten-kilometer radius on Planet
Pluto and a one-kilometer radius on Charon.

Construction would proceed concurrently on surface
and subsurface utility and life support facilities
essential to human habitation. When enclosed areas
were shirtsleeve ready for occupancy, the Cadre
would erect essential life support, residential and
recreational facilities. These would be followed by
technical, communications and transport networks
for Slingshot scientists, industrial technicians,
and staff, followed by enclosed living areas for
the remainder of the general populace that would
train and do the work during the subsequent phases.

The tanktown on Planet Pluto would be named
Coldfield; its counterpart on Charon would be
Lamplight.

An On-site Project Management Team (OPMT) directed
the Advance Cadre. The OPMT formed the nucleus of
upper level managers, scientists and engineers, and
other experts charged with organizing and guiding
the functional task groups. The functional staffs
would bring into being the on-site technical and
administrative support facilities, install and
operate its equipment, and govern the communities
within which the populace worked and resided.

The OPMT was organized into three groups: Group
One: Planet Pluto; Group Two: Charon, and Group
Three: Logistics Depot. Each Group had its mission:


 Group One (Planet Pluto) Mission

Five kilometers from Coldfield, construct and
operate a simplified fusion-based energy generating
and power transmission system to provide sufficient
output to support all anticipated power and network
requirements of the planet;

Beneath and adjacent the Coldfield dome, construct,
organize and operate encapsulated surface and
subsurface laboratories, manufacturing and overhaul
plants, space and surface transport and traffic
routes and controls, surface roadways, utility
and communications systems, landing and mooring
facilities, energy hubs for gravity enhancement
grids, and other essential utilities and facilities;

Establish and administer institutions for law
enforcement, public health, education and other
community affairs.


 Group Two (Charon) Mission

Convert Lamplight into a food-growing and
processing plant capable of feeding the entire
Plutonian permanent and transit populations, and
on-site personnel at the Logistics Depot and the
Terminals Construction Site. Encapsulate Lamplight
in an impermeable radiation-resistant plastic
membrane and introduce and maintain constant
temperature and air-moisture and other
agriculture-supportive atmosphere and environment
that meets prevailing deep space colony or equal
standards;

Constructively use Charon's and Pluto's water ice
and substances generated as waste and by-products
of human habitation throughout the Pluto and near
space sectors. Conduct research and develop drip,
hydroponics and other agricultural systems, protein
synthesis and manufacture, and ship to Coldfield,
the Slingshot work site and the Logistics Depot
high-quality foodstuffs suitable for storage and
consumption. Charon operations are to be fully
automated and robotically maintained.

In support of the Charon agricultural mission,
Planet Pluto, the Slingshot Logistics Depot, the
Terminals' construction site, and ships moored
or in transit within the Special Zone constitute
an integrated ecological entity. All organics and all
mineral and chemical plant growth stimulants, such
as discarded or excess food and fluids, bio-waste,
usable industrial and community waste, and cadavers
are committed to processing as fertilizers or
for specialized application to the creation of
foodstuffs. Organic waste and cadaver parts
unsuitable for constructive purposes (fertilizer)
on Charon will be fully sterilized and reduced as
close as practicable to zero residue.


 Group Three (Logistics Depot) Mission

Construct a space station to specification above
Coldfield and designate it 'Slingshot Logistics
Depot'. Arrange for the depot to serve for central
receiving, warehousing and shipping center for
materiel committed to the Slingshot Terminals,
and for processing materiel through all active
Planet Pluto surface and sub-surface technical
and servicing facilities;

Provide the Depot with facilities and train its
personnel for emergency backup in manufacturing
and servicing capabilities redundant to those on
the planet;

Create a highest level technical capability to
synthesize materials, and manufacture, fabricate,
test and calibrate those precision parts, tools and
accessories which are best made in the micro-gravity
and pollution-free conditions of deep space and/or
safely distant from Pluto's and Charon's surfaces
and their gravitational influences;

Augment the Depot's security with a gated force
field that fully encapsulates and protects the
Depot and all vessels engaged in loading and
off-loading personnel and materiel; patrols
contiguous space and keeps the Logistics Depot
and UIPS citizens and property self-sufficient and
safe from disease, harassment and harm;

Install on the Logistics Depot and at the Terminals
Construction Sites independent communications,
cargo, living organism teleport centers, each
capable of receiving and dispatching authorized
cargoes, passengers, dispatches and communications
via conventional, spunnel, and specified
non-conventional channels.

 ##

The Terminals Construction Site is the focal point
of UIPS operations. The Construction Site's mission
is to research, design, fabricate, test, assemble
and, ultimately, launch, position at destinations
and operate, monitor and maintain the Slingshot
Extractor and Collector terminals en route and
at their destinations.

 ##

The planning did not anticipate the dissolution
of the United Planetary System, the creation of
independent and estranged Regions in their place,
and a hostile government on Pluto.

Military forces had been non-existent for more than
fifteen hundred years when the colonies of the Outer
Region seceded from the United Planetary System.
Weapons of mass destruction had had no purpose
since the birth of the first World Federation in
the fourth century of the Interplanetary Era.

In place of an organized military, the succeeding
World Federation had created an Interplanetary
Constabulary to protect lives and property,
investigate crimes, control traffic, and maintain
general order. Their charter extended to all
planets, satellites, colonies, outposts, stations,
and all places throughout the void into which
humankind had ventured.

The mission of the Constabulary remained unchanged
during political reorganizations within the first
World Federation and its successors. Its agents
ranged the Solar System, and performed their duties
quietly and efficiently. Few dared challenge their
authority. When challenges did occur, they were
not for long.

War, and the effects of war on people and things
were forgotten.

It was inconceivable, in those times, that the
region beyond the Asteroids would become
politically and culturally alienated from the
unified community that humankind had created to
guide them into the future. History, the citizens
of the world concluded, had demonstrated the
impotence of the ancient, long-discarded array
of adversarial nation-states and come-by-chance
leaders to govern an intellectually advanced
species.

No one expected a return to the old, long-discarded
ways.

When separation of the Inner and Outer Regions
became inevitable, scholars in both Regions
explored the possible and the probable
relationships that might develop under the new
order. The studies predicted that politically
independent nation-states would create multilateral
alignments and conflicting societies, lifestyles and
philosophies.

They took into account evolving technological
and industrial capabilities, prevailing energy and
declining reserves of industrial metals, minerals,
and other usable substances and related them to the
Solar System's demographic trends and resources
predictions. When the United Planetary System
dissolved, the successor UIPS felt it had no choice
but to continue the Slingshot program.

The conclusions of humankind's most distinguished
scientists and philosophers suggested that two
independent orders in space would bring with them
a heightened likelihood of social and technological
dislocations and disruptions. There would be
interregional and, within INOR, international
competition that would increase the rate of
depletion in resources. There would be a multitude
of disputes, often intentionally misinterpreted,
to resolve territorial and jurisdictional differences
that were already caught up in and molded by the
dynamics of orbiting planets, and their satellites
and connecting space-ways.

The effects on Slingshot could be catastrophic.
Its security was paramount. Immediately following
separation of the two Regions the President of
the new UIPS directed the creation of a powerful
Military Space Force.

The UIPS searched the ancient archives of Earth's
military history and designed weapons of defense
and offense. Ships of war and their supporting
systems were brought back into being, and spunnel
gateways expanded to accommodate them. A militant
phoenix rose from its ancient ashes.

The Military Space Force was charged
with patrolling the space-ways beyond the
Asteroids to protect UIPS vital interests. Their
responsibilities included protecting the lives of
UIPS citizens and private and government property
throughout INOR wherever they happened to be, in
space or on the surfaces of planets and satellites.

The role and intent of the UIPS military was
explained to all INOR governments. "The Military
Space Force," proclaimed the President of the UIPS,
"would remain until INOR's member Nations were
sufficiently stabilized to participate in ensuring
peaceful coexistence and passage along space-ways
and at moorings throughout the Outer Region, and
separately and collectively agree to participate in
and support the Slingshot Program."

INOR, as a Federation, interpreted the formation of
the UIPS Military Space Force and the President's
proclamation on its role as contemptuous of their
social and political maturity. The outcome was
predictable.

Local INOR Defense Forces were hastily organized
and equipped. Dozens of ships of war were built and
many space transports were converted into armed
vessels. Each INOR government, using self-defense
as justification, established controlled corridors
extending hundreds of thousands of kilometers
into its contiguous space, often far beyond their
legitimate jurisdictions. Passengers and crews of
foreign space transports, passenger liners, and
utility and pleasure craft, whatever their points
of foreign origin or destination, required visas,
local pilots, and armed escorts upon arrivals and
departures. Suspicions festered on all sides.

It was an era of international and interregional
political tensions and harassment, and military,
technological and industrial sabotage and
espionage. The history of Earth's ancients had
returned to haunt the solar community.

The rate of depletion in the Solar Community's
reserves of vital but nonrenewable substances
rose rapidly.





 Appendix


 Principles of Governance Among Nations in Space

An article by the Associate General Counsel for the
Smithsonian Institution reported in THE FUTURIST,
page 60, May-June 1990 (Common Era) that the
Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space
Museum had speculated on a Declaration of First
Principles for the Governance of Outer Space
Societies. The project's participants represented
a broad array of disciplines and interests,
including engineering, biomedicine, law, economics,
psychology, bioethics, and philosophy. Rather than
attempting to frame an actual constitution for
space societies, which normally would be reserved
for sovereign governments. The document would
be a reference for interested government entities
