She knew that men came not thus with honourable intent.  Yet she
did not cry aloud to alarm the near-by guardsmen, nor did she flee
to the safety of the palace.

Why?

I can see her shrug her shapely shoulders in reply as she voices
the age-old, universal answer of the woman:  Because!

Scarce had the flier touched the ground when four men leaped from
its deck.  They ran forward toward the girl.

Still she made no sign of alarm, standing as though hypnotized.
Or could it have been as one who awaited a welcome visitor?

Not until they were quite close to her did she move.  Then the
nearer moon, rising above the surrounding foliage, touched their
faces, lighting all with the brilliancy of her silver rays.

Thuvia of Ptarth saw only strangers--warriors in the harness of
Dusar.  Now she took fright, but too late!

Before she could voice but a single cry, rough hands seized her.
A heavy silken scarf was wound about her head.  She was lifted
in strong arms and borne to the deck of the flier.  There was the
sudden whirl of propellers, the rushing of air against her body,
and, from far beneath the shouting and the challenge from the guard.

Racing toward the south another flier sped toward Helium.  In its
cabin a tall red man bent over the soft sole of an upturned sandal.
With delicate instruments he measured the faint imprint of a small
object which appeared there.  Upon a pad beside him was the outline
of a key, and here he noted the results of his measurements.

A smile played upon his lips as he completed his task and turned
to one who waited at the opposite side of the table.

"The man is a genius," he remarked.

"Only a genius could have evolved such a lock as this is designed
to spring.  Here, take the sketch, Larok, and give all thine own
genius full and unfettered freedom in reproducing it in metal."

The warrior-artificer bowed.  "Man builds naught," he said, "that
man may not destroy."  Then he left the cabin with the sketch.

As dawn broke upon the lofty towers which mark the twin cities
of Helium--the scarlet tower of one and the yellow tower of its
sister--a flier floated lazily out of the north.

Upon its bow was emblazoned the signia of a lesser noble of a
far city of the empire of Helium.  Its leisurely approach and the
evident confidence with which it moved across the city aroused no
suspicion in the minds of the sleepy guard.  Their round of duty
nearly done, they had little thought beyond the coming of those
who were to relieve them.

Peace reigned throughout Helium.  Stagnant, emasculating peace.
Helium had no enemies.  There was naught to fear.

Without haste the nearest air patrol swung sluggishly about and
approached the stranger.  At easy speaking distance the officer
upon her deck hailed the incoming craft.

The cheery "Kaor!" and the plausible explanation that the owner had
come from distant parts for a few days of pleasure in gay Helium
sufficed.  The air-patrol boat sheered off, passing again upon its
way.  The stranger continued toward a public landing-stage, where
she dropped into the ways and came to rest.

At about the same time a warrior entered her cabin.

"It is done, Vas Kor," he said, handing a small metal key to the
tall noble who had just risen from his sleeping silks and furs.

"Good!" exclaimed the latter.  "You must have worked upon it all
during the night, Larok."

The warrior nodded.

"Now fetch me the Heliumetic metal you wrought some days since,"
commanded Vas Kor.

This done, the warrior assisted his master to replace the handsome
jewelled metal of his harness with the plainer ornaments of an
ordinary fighting man of Helium, and with the insignia of the same
house that appeared upon the bow of the flier.

Vas Kor breakfasted on board.  Then he emerged upon the aerial dock,
entered an elevator, and was borne quickly to the street below,
where he was soon engulfed by the early morning throng of workers
hastening to their daily duties.

Among them his warrior trappings were no more remarkable than is
a pair of trousers upon Broadway.  All Martian men are warriors,
save those physically unable to bear arms.  The tradesman and
his clerk clank with their martial trappings as they pursue their
vocations.  The schoolboy, coming into the world, as he does, almost
adult from the snowy shell that has encompassed his development
for five long years, knows so little of life without a sword at
his hip that he would feel the same discomfiture at going abroad
unarmed that an Earth boy would experience in walking the streets
knicker-bockerless.

Vas Kor's destination lay in Greater Helium, which lies some
seventy-five miles across the level plain from Lesser Helium.  He
had landed at the latter city because the air patrol is less
suspicious and alert than that above the larger metropolis where
lies the palace of the jeddak.

As he moved with the throng in the parklike canyon of the thoroughfare
the life of an awakening Martian city was in evidence about him.
Houses, raised high upon their slender metal columns for the night
were dropping gently toward the ground.  Among the flowers upon the
scarlet sward which lies about the buildings children were already
playing, and comely women laughing and chatting with their neighbours
as they culled gorgeous blossoms for the vases within doors.

The pleasant "kaor" of the Barsoomian greeting fell continually
upon the ears of the stranger as friends and neighbours took up
the duties of a new day.

The district in which he had landed was residential--a district of
merchants of the more prosperous sort.  Everywhere were evidences
of luxury and wealth.  Slaves appeared upon every housetop with
gorgeous silks and costly furs, laying them in the sun for airing.
Jewel-encrusted women lolled even thus early upon the carven
balconies before their sleeping apartments.  Later in the day they
would repair to the roofs when the slaves had arranged couches and
pitched silken canopies to shade them from the sun.

Strains of inspiring music broke pleasantly from open windows,
for the Martians have solved the problem of attuning the nerves
pleasantly to the sudden transition from sleep to waking that proves
so difficult a thing for most Earth folk.

Above him raced the long, light passenger fliers, plying, each in
its proper plane, between the numerous landing-stages for internal
passenger traffic.  Landing-stages that tower high into the heavens
are for the great international passenger liners.  Freighters have
other landing-stages at various lower levels, to within a couple
of hundred feet of the ground; nor dare any flier rise or drop from
one plane to another except in certain restricted districts where
horizontal traffic is forbidden.

Along the close-cropped sward which paves the avenue ground fliers
were moving in continuous lines in opposite directions.  For the
greater part they skimmed along the surface of the sward, soaring
gracefully into the air at times to pass over a slower-going driver
ahead, or at intersections, where the north and south traffic has
the right of way and the east and west must rise above it.

From private hangars upon many a roof top fliers were darting into
the line of traffic.  Gay farewells and parting admonitions mingled
with the whirring of motors and the subdued noises of the city.

Yet with all the swift movement and the countless thousands rushing
hither and thither, the predominant suggestion was that of luxurious
ease and soft noiselessness.

Martians dislike harsh, discordant clamour.  The only loud noises
they can abide are the martial sounds of war, the clash of arms,
the collision of two mighty dreadnoughts of the air.  To them there
is no sweeter music than this.

At the intersection of two broad avenues Vas Kor descended from the
street level to one of the great pneumatic stations of the city.
Here he paid before a little wicket the fare to his destination
with a couple of the dull, oval coins of Helium.

Beyond the gatekeeper he came to a slowly moving line of what to
Earthly eyes would have appeared to be conical-nosed, eight-foot
projectiles for some giant gun.  In slow procession the things
moved in single file along a grooved track.  A half dozen attendants
assisted passengers to enter, or directed these carriers to their
proper destination.

Vas Kor approached one that was empty.  Upon its nose was a dial
and a pointer.  He set the pointer for a certain station in Greater
Helium, raised the arched lid of the thing, stepped in and lay down
upon the upholstered bottom.  An attendant closed the lid, which
locked with a little click, and the carrier continued its slow way.

Presently it switched itself automatically to another track, to
enter, a moment later, one of the series of dark-mouthed tubes.

The instant that its entire length was within the black aperture
it sprang forward with the speed of a rifle ball.  There was an
instant of whizzing--a soft, though sudden, stop, and slowly the
carrier emerged upon another platform, another attendant raised
the lid and Vas Kor stepped out at the station beneath the centre
of Greater Helium, seventy-five miles from the point at which he
had embarked.

Here he sought the street level, stepping immediately into a waiting
ground flier.  He spoke no word to the slave sitting in the driver's
seat.  It was evident that he had been expected, and that the fellow
had received his instructions before his coming.

Scarcely had Vas Kor taken his seat when the flier went quickly
into the fast-moving procession, turning presently from the broad
and crowded avenue into a less congested street.  Presently it left
the thronged district behind to enter a section of small shops,
where it stopped before the entrance to one which bore the sign of
a dealer in foreign silks.

Vas Kor entered the low-ceiling room.  A man at the far end
motioned him toward an inner apartment, giving no further sign of
recognition until he had passed in after the caller and closed the
door.

Then he faced his visitor, saluting deferentially.

"Most noble--" he commenced, but Vas Kor silenced him with a gesture.

"No formalities," he said.  "We must forget that I am aught other
than your slave.  If all has been as carefully carried out as it
has been planned, we have no time to waste.  Instead we should be
upon our way to the slave market.  Are you ready?"

The merchant nodded, and, turning to a great chest, produced
the unemblazoned trappings of a slave.  These Vas Kor immediately
donned.  Then the two passed from the shop through a rear door,
traversed a winding alley to an avenue beyond, where they entered
a flier which awaited them.

Five minutes later the merchant was leading his slave to the public
market, where a great concourse of people filled the great open
space in the centre of which stood the slave block.

The crowds were enormous to-day, for Carthoris, Prince of Helium,
was to be the principal bidder.

One by one the masters mounted the rostrum beside the slave block
upon which stood their chattels.  Briefly and clearly each recounted
the virtues of his particular offering.

When all were done, the major-domo of the Prince of Helium recalled
to the block such as had favourably impressed him.  For such he
had made a fair offer.

There was little haggling as to price, and none at all when Vas
Kor was placed upon the block.  His merchant-master accepted the
first offer that was made for him, and thus a Dusarian noble entered
the household of Carthoris.




CHAPTER III

TREACHERY


The day following the coming of Vas Kor to the palace of the Prince
of Helium great excitement reigned throughout the twin cities,
reaching its climax in the palace of Carthoris.  Word had come of
the abduction of Thuvia of Ptarth from her father's court, and with
it the veiled hint that the Prince of Helium might be suspected
of considerable knowledge of the act and the whereabouts of the
princess.

In the council chamber of John Carter, Warlord of Mars, was Tardos
Mors, Jeddak of Helium; Mors Kajak, his son, Jed of Lesser Helium;
Carthoris, and a score of the great nobles of the empire.

"There must be no war between Ptarth and Helium, my son," said John
Carter.  "That you are innocent of the charge that has been placed
against you by insinuation, we well know; but Thuvan Dihn must know
it well, too.

"There is but one who may convince him, and that one be you.  You
must hasten at once to the court of Ptarth, and by your presence
there as well as by your words assure him that his suspicions are
groundless.  Bear with you the authority of the Warlord of Barsoom,
and of the Jeddak of Helium to offer every resource of the allied
powers to assist Thuvan Dihn to recover his daughter and punish
her abductors, whomsoever they may be.

"Go!  I know that I do not need to urge upon you the necessity for
haste."

Carthoris left the council chamber, and hastened to his palace.

Here slaves were busy in a moment setting things to rights for the
departure of their master.  Several worked about the swift flier
that would bear the Prince of Helium rapidly toward Ptarth.

At last all was done.  But two armed slaves remained on guard.
The setting sun hung low above the horizon.  In a moment darkness
would envelop all.

One of the guardsmen, a giant of a fellow across whose right cheek
there ran a thin scar from temple to mouth, approached his companion.
His gaze was directed beyond and above his comrade.  When he had
come quite close he spoke.

"What strange craft is that?" he asked.

The other turned about quickly to gaze heavenward.  Scarce was his
back turned toward the giant than the short-sword of the latter
was plunged beneath his left shoulder blade, straight through his
heart.

Voiceless, the soldier sank in his tracks--stone dead.  Quickly
the murderer dragged the corpse into the black shadows within the
hangar.  Then he returned to the flier.

Drawing a cunningly wrought key from his pocket-pouch, he removed
the cover of the right-hand dial of the controlling destination
compass.  For a moment he studied the construction of the mechanism
beneath.  Then he returned the dial to its place, set the pointer,
and removed it again to note the resultant change in the position
of the parts affected by the act.

A smile crossed his lips.  With a pair of cutters he snipped off
the projection which extended through the dial from the external
pointer--now the latter might be moved to any point upon the dial
without affecting the mechanism below.  In other words, the eastern
hemisphere dial was useless.

Now he turned his attention to the western dial.  This he set upon
a certain point.  Afterward he removed the cover of this dial also,
and with keen tool cut the steel finger from the under side of the
pointer.

As quickly as possible he replaced the second dial cover, and resumed
his place on guard.  To all intents and purposes the compass was
as efficient as before; but, as a matter of fact, the moving of the
pointers upon the dials resulted now in no corresponding shift of
the mechanism beneath--and the device was set, immovably, upon a
destination of the slave's own choosing.
