tiny opponent.

From every point of the compass, from above and below, the enemy gunners
directed streams of shells against the dodging vessel. The noise was
more than deafening, it was one continuous, shattering explosion, and
the Earth-men were surrounded by such a blaze of fire from the exploding
shells that they could not see the enemy vessels. Seaton sought to dodge
the shells by a long dive toward one side, only to find that dozens of
new opponents had been launched against them--the deadly
airplane-torpedoes of Osnome. Steered by wireless and carrying no crews,
they were simply winged bombs carrying thousands of pounds of terrific
electrical explosive--enough to kill the men inside the vessel by the
concussion of the explosion, even should the arenak armor be strong
enough to withstand the blow. Though much faster than the Osnomian
vessels, they were slow beside the Skylark, and Seaton could have dodged
a few of them with ease. As he dodged, however, they followed
relentlessly, and in spite of those which were blown up by the gunners,
their number constantly increased until Seaton thought of the repellers.

"'Nobody Holme' is right!" he exclaimed, as he threw on the power
actuating the copper bands which encircled the hull in all directions.
Instantly the torpedoes were hurled backward, exploding as the force
struck them, and even the shells were ineffective, exploding harmlessly,
as they encountered the zone of force. The noise of the awful
detonations lessened markedly.

"Why the silence, I wonder?" asked Seaton, while the futile shells of
the enemy continued to waste their force some hundreds of feet distant
from their goal, and while Crane and DuQuesne were methodically
destroying the huge vessels as fast as they could aim and fire. At every
report one of the monster warships disappeared--its shattered fragments
and the bodies of its crew hurtling to the ground. His voice could not
be heard in even the lessened tumult, but he continued:

"It must be that our repellers have set up a partial vacuum by repelling
even the air!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly the shelling ceased and the Skylark was enveloped by a blinding
glare from hundreds of great reflectors; an intense, searching,
bluish-violet light that burned the flesh and seared through eyelids and
eyeballs into the very brain.

"Ultra-violet!" yelled Seaton at the first glimpse of the light, as he
threw on the power. "Shut your eyes! Turn your heads down!"

Out in space, far beyond reach of the deadly rays, the men held a short
conference, then donned heavy leather-and-canvas suits, which they
smeared liberally with thick red paint, and replaced the plain glasses
of their helmets with heavy lenses of deep ruby glass.

"This'll stop any ultra-violet ray ever produced," exulted Seaton, as he
again threw the vessel into the Mardonalian fleet. A score of the great
vessels met their fate before the Skylark was located, and, although the
terrible rays were again focused upon the intruder in all their
intensity, the carnage continued.

In a few minutes, however, the men heard, or rather felt, a low, intense
vibration, like a silent wave of sound--a vibration which smote upon the
eardrums as no possible sound could smite, a vibration which racked the
joints and tortured the nerves as though the whole body were
disintegrating. So sudden and terrible was the effect that Seaton
uttered an involuntary yelp of surprise and pain as he once more fled
into the safety of space.

"What the devil was that?" demanded DuQuesne. "Was it infra-sound? I
didn't suppose such waves could be produced."

"Infra-sound is right. They produce most anything here," replied Seaton,
and Crane added:

"Well, about three fur suits apiece, with cotton in our ears, ought to
kill any wave propagated through air."

The fur suits were donned forthwith, Seaton whispering in Crane's ear:

"I've found out something else, too. The repellers repel even the air.
I'm going to shoot enough juice through them to set up a perfect vacuum
outside. That'll kill those air-waves."

Scarcely were they back within range of the fleet when DuQuesne,
reaching for his gun to fire the first shot, leaped backward with a
yell.

"Beat it!"

Once more at a safe distance, DuQuesne explained.

"It's lucky I'm so used to handling hot stuff that from force of habit I
never make close contact with anything at the first touch. That gun
carried thousands of volts, with lots of amperage behind them, and if I
had had a good hold on it I couldn't have let go. We'll block that game
quick enough, though. Thick, dry gloves covered with rubber are all that
is necessary. It's a good thing for all of us that you have those fancy
condensite handles on your levers, Seaton."

"That was how they got Dunark, undoubtedly," said Crane, as he sent a
brief message to the girls, assuring them that all was well, as he had
been doing at every respite. "But why were we not overcome at the same
time?"

"They must have had the current tuned to iridium, and had to experiment
until they found the right wave for steel," Seaton explained.

"I should think our bar would have exploded, with all that current. They
must have hit the copper range, too?"

Seaton frowned in thought before he answered.

"Maybe because it's induced current, and not a steady battery impulse.
Anyway, it didn't. Let's go!"

"Just a minute," put in Crane. "What are they going to do next, Dick?"

"Search me. I'm not used to my new Osnomian mind yet. I recognize things
all right after they happen, but I can't seem to figure ahead--it's like
a dimly-remembered something that flashes up as soon as mentioned. I get
too many and too new ideas at once. I know, though, that the Osnomians
have defenses against all these things except this last stunt of the
charged guns. That must be the new one that Mardonale stole from Kondal.
The defenses are, however, purely Osnomian in character and material. As
we haven't got the stuff to set them up as the Osnomians do, we'll have
to do it our own way. We may be able to dope out the next one, though.
Let's see, what have they given us so far?"

"We've got to hand it to them," responded DuQuesne, admiringly. "They're
giving us the whole range of wave-lengths, one at a time. They've given
us light, both ultra-violet and visible, sound, infra-sound, and
electricity--I don't know what's left unless they give us a new kind of
X-rays, or Hertzian, or infra-red heat waves, or...."

"That's it, heat!" exclaimed Seaton. "They produce heat by means of
powerful wave-generators and by setting up heavy induced currents in the
armor. They can melt arenak that way."

"Do you suppose we can handle the heat with our refrigerators?" asked
Crane.

"Probably. We have a lot of power, and the new arenak cylinders of our
compressors will stand anything. The only trouble will be in cooling the
condensers. We'll run as long as we have any water in our tanks, then go
dive into the ocean to cool off. We'll try it a whirl, anyway."

       *       *       *       *       *

Soon the Skylark was again dealing out death and destruction in the
thick of the enemy vessels, who again turned from the devastation of the
helpless city to destroy this troublesome antagonist. But in spite of
the utmost efforts of light-waves, sound-waves, and high-tension
electricity, the space-car continued to take its terrible toll. As
Seaton had foretold, the armor of the Skylark began to grow hot, and he
turned on the full power of the refrigerating system. In spite of the
cooling apparatus, however, the outer walls finally began to glow redly,
and, although the interior was comfortably cool, the ends of the
rifle-barrels, which were set flush with the surface of the revolving
arenak globes which held them, softened, rendering the guns useless. The
copper repellers melted and dripped off in flaming balls of molten
metal, so that shells once more began to crash against the armor.
DuQuesne, with no thought of quitting apparent in voice or manner, said
calmly:

"Well, it looks as though they had us stopped for a few minutes. Let's
go back into space and dope out something else."

Seaton, thinking intensely, saw a vast fleet of enemy reinforcements
approaching, and at the same time received a wireless call directed to
Dunark. It was from the grand fleet of Kondal, hastening from the
bordering ocean to the defense of the city. Using Dunark's private code,
Seaton told the Karbix, who was in charge of the fleet, that the enemy
had a new invention which would wipe them out utterly without a chance
to fight, and that he and his vessel were in control of the situation;
and ordered him to see that no Kondalian ship came within battle range
of a Mardonalian. He then turned to Crane and DuQuesne, his face grim
and his fighting jaw set.

"I've got it doped right now. Give the Lark speed enough and she's some
bullet herself. We've got four feet of arenak, they've got only an inch,
and arenak doesn't even begin to soften until far above a blinding white
temperature. Strap yourselves in solid, for it's going to be a rough
party from now on."

They buckled their belts firmly, and Seaton, holding the bar toward
their nearest antagonist, applied twenty notches of power. The Skylark
darted forward and crashed completely through the great airship. Torn
wide open by the forty-foot projectile, its engines wrecked and its
helicopter-screws and propellers completely disabled, the helpless hulk
plunged through two miles of empty air, a mass of wreckage.

[Illustration: The Skylark darted forward and crashed completely through
the great airship.... She was an embodied thunderbolt; a huge,
irresistible, indestructible projectile, directed by a keen brain
inside....]

Darting hither and thither, the space-car tore through vessel after
vessel of the Mardonalian fleet. She was an embodied thunderbolt; a
huge, irresistible, indestructible projectile, directed by a keen brain
inside it--the brain of Richard Seaton, roused to his highest fighting
pitch and fighting for everything that man holds dear. Tortured by the
terrible silent waves, which, now that the protecting vacuum had been
destroyed, were only partially stopped by the fur suits; shaken and
battered by the terrific impacts and the even greater shocks occurring
every second as the direction of the vessel was changed; made sick and
dizzy by the nauseating swings and lurches as the Skylark spun about the
central chamber; Seaton's wonderful physique and his nerves of steel
stood him in good stead in this, the supreme battle of his life, as with
teeth tight-locked and eyes gray and hard as the fracture of high-carbon
steel, he urged the Skylark on to greater and greater efforts.

Though it was impossible for the eye to follow the flight of the
space-car, the mechanical sighting devices of the Mardonalian vessels
kept her in as perfect focus as though she were stationary, and the
great generators continued to hurl into her the full power of their
death-dealing waves. The enemy guns were still spitting forth their
streams of high-explosive shells, but unlike the waves, the shells moved
so slowly compared to their target that only a few found their mark, and
many of the vessels fell to the ground, riddled by the shells of their
sister-ships.

       *       *       *       *       *

With anxious eyes Seaton watched the hull of his animated cannon-ball
change in color. From dull red it became cherry, and as the cherry red
gave place to bright red heat, Seaton threw even more power into the bar
as he muttered through his set teeth:

"Well, Seaton, old top, you've got to cut out this loafing on the job
and get busy!"

In spite of his utmost exertions and in spite of the powerful ammonia
plant, now exerting its full capacity, but sadly handicapped by the fact
that its cooling-water was now boiling, Seaton saw the arenak shell
continue to heat. The bright red was succeeded by orange, which slowly
changed, first to yellow, then to light yellow, and finally to a
dazzling white; through which, with the aid of his heavy red lenses, he
could still see the enemy ships. After a time he noted that the color
had gone down to yellow and he thrilled with exultation, knowing that he
had so reduced the numbers of the enemy fleet that their wave-generators
could no longer overcome his refrigerators. After a few minutes more of
the awful carnage there remained only a small fraction of the proud
fleet which, thousands strong, had invaded Kondal--a remnant that sought
safety in flight. But even in flight, they still fought with all their
weapons, and the streams of bombs dropped from their keel-batteries upon
the country beneath marked the path of their retreat with a wide swath
of destruction. Half inclined to let the few remaining vessels escape,
Seaton's mind changed instantly as he saw the bombs spreading
devastation upon the countryside, and not until the last of the
Mardonalian vessels had been destroyed did he drop the Skylark into the
area of ruins which had once been the palace grounds, beside the Kondal,
which was still lying as it had fallen.

After several attempts to steady their whirling senses, the three men
finally were able to walk, and, opening a door, they leaped out through
the opening in the still glowing wall. Seaton's first act was to
wireless the news to Dorothy, who replied that they were coming as fast
as they could. The men then removed their helmets, revealing faces pale
and drawn, and turned to the helpless space-car.

"There's no way of getting into this thing from the outside...." Seaton
began, when he saw that the Kofedix and his party were beginning to
revive. Soon Dunark opened the door and stumbled out.

"I have to thank you for more than my life this time," he said, his
voice shaken by uncontrollable emotion as he grasped the hands of all
three men. "Though unable to move, I was conscious and saw all that
happened--you kept them so busy that they didn't have a chance to give
us enough to kill us outright. You have saved the lives of millions of
our nation and have saved Kondal itself from annihilation."

"Oh, it's not that bad," answered Seaton, uncomfortably. "Both nations
have been invaded before."

"Yes--once when we developed the ultra-violet ray, once when Mardonale
perfected the machine for producing the silent sound-wave, and again
when we harnessed the heat-wave. But this would have been the most
complete disaster in history. The other inventions were not so deadly as
was this one, and there were terrible battles, from which the victors
emerged so crippled that they could not completely exterminate the
vanquished, who were able to re-establish themselves in the course of
time. If it had not been for you, this would have been the end, as not a
Kondalian soldier could move--any person touching iridium was helpless
and would have been killed."

He ceased speaking and saluted as the Karfedix and his party rounded a
heap of boulders. Dorothy and Margaret screamed in unison as they saw
the haggard faces of their husbands, and saw their suits, dripping with
a thick substance which they knew to be red, in spite of its
purplish-black color. Seaton dodged nimbly as Dorothy sought to take him
in her arms, and tore off his suit.

"Nothing but red paint to stop their light-rays," he reassured her as he
lifted her clear from the ground in a soul-satisfying embrace. Out of
the corner of his eye he saw the Kondalians staring in open-mouthed
amazement at the Skylark. Wheeling swiftly, he laughed as he saw a
gigantic ball of frost and snow! Again donning his fur suit, he shut off
the refrigerators and returned to his party, where the Karfedix gave him
thanks in measured terms. As he fell silent, Dunark added:

"Thanks to you, the Mardonalian forces, instead of wiping us out, are
themselves destroyed, while only a handful of our vessels have been
lost, since the grand fleet could not arrive until the battle was over,
and since the vessels that would have thrown themselves away were saved
by your orders, which I heard. Thanks to you, we are not even crippled,
though our capital is destroyed and the lives of some unfortunates, who
could not reach the pits in time, have probably been lost.

"Thanks to you," he continued in a ringing voice, "and to the salt and
the new source of power you have given us, Mardonale shall now be
destroyed utterly!"

After sending out ships to relieve the suffering of the few wounded and
the many homeless, Dunark summoned a corps of mechanics, who banded on
new repellers and repaired the fused barrels of the machine-guns, all
that was necessary to restore the Skylark to perfect condition.

       *       *       *       *       *

Facing the party from Earth, the Karfedix stood in the ruins of his
magnificent palace. Back of him were the nobles of Kondal, and still
further back, in order of rank, stood a multitude of people.

"Is it permitted, oh noble Karfedo, that I reward your captive for his
share in the victory?" he asked.

"It is," acquiesced Seaton and Crane, and Roban stepped up to DuQuesne
and placed in his hand a weighty leather bag. He then fastened about his
left wrist the Order of Kondal, the highest order of the nation.

He then clasped about Crane's wrist a heavily-jeweled,
peculiarly-ornamented disk wrought of a deep ruby-red metal, supported
by a heavy bracelet of the same material, the most precious metal of
Osnome. At sight of the disk the nobles saluted and Seaton barely
concealed a start of surprise, for it bore the royal emblem and
delegated to its bearer power second only to that of the Karfedix
himself.

"I bestow upon you this symbol, Karfedix Crane, in recognition of what
you have this day done for Kondal. Wherever you may be upon Kondalian
Osnome, which from this day henceforth shall be all Osnome, you have
power as my personal representative, as my eldest son."

He drew forth a second bracelet, similar to the first except that it
bore seven disks, each differently designed, which he snapped upon
Seaton's wrist as the nobles knelt and the people back of them threw
themselves upon their faces.
