taking them out directly they show signs of getting dull.  By a weak
current I mean one of about five amperes per square foot.

The deposit is said to be denser if the solution be heated as
directed;  but the bath will gild, though not quite so freely when
cold.

To gild iron or steel directly, dilute the bath as above recommended
some five or six times, add about 1 per cent of potassium cyanide, and
gild with a very weak current (say two or three amperes per square
foot) in the cold.  Frequent scratch-brushing will be found requisite
to secure proper adherence.

It is generally recommended to gild brass or German silver in
solutions which are rather weak, but in the small practice which
occurs in the laboratory a solution prepared as suggested does
perfectly for everything except iron or steel.  The scratch-brushing
should be done over a large photographic developing dish to avoid loss
of gold.  It is a good plan to rinse the articles after leaving the
bath in a limited quantity of distilled water, which is afterwards
placed in a "residue" bottle, and then to scratch-brush them by hand
over the dish to catch fine gold.  When any loose dust is removed the
articles may be scratched in the lathe without appreciable further
loss.

Silver-gilt articles tend to get discoloured by use, but this
discoloration can be removed by soap and water.  After long use a gold
cyanide bath tends to alter greatly in composition, In general, the
bath tends to grow weaker, from the fact that there is a strong
temptation to gild as many articles at once as possible.

It is therefore a good plan to keep a rough profit and loss account of
the gold in order to find the quantity in solution.  Fifty dwts.  per
gallon (or 78 grms. per 4.5 litres) is recommended.  A gallon of
solution of this strength is worth about eleven pounds sterling in
gold and cyanide, and a serviceable anode will be worth about 10
pounds.  (Fine gold is worth nominally four pounds four shillings and
eleven pence ha'penny per oz.) Gold may be easily obtained containing
less impurity than one part in ten thousand.

Sec. 137.  Plating with Copper.

Copper may be deposited from almost any of its salts in reguline form,
the sulphate and nitrate being most usually employed.  In the
laboratory a nearly saturated solution of sulphate of copper with 1 or
2 per cent of sulphuric acid will answer most purposes.  A current
density of, at most, fifteen amperes per square foot may be used,
either for obtaining solid deposits for constructional purposes or for
calibrating current measuring instruments by electrolysis.  A copper
anode is of course employed.

When coppering with a view to obtaining thick deposits it is a good
plan to place the electrodes several inches apart, and, if possible,
to keep the liquid stirred, as there is a considerable tendency on the
part of copper deposits to grow out into mossy masses wherever the
current density exceeds the limit mentioned.  As the masses grow
towards the anode the defect naturally tends to increase of itself,
hence the necessity for care.  The phenomenon is particularly marked
at the edges and corners of the cathode.

If the deposit becomes markedly irregular, the best plan is to stop
the process and file the face of the deposit down to approximate
smoothness.  In coppering it is of the utmost importance that the
cathode be clean and free from grease; it must never be touched (by
the finger, for instance) from the time it is scratch-brushed till it
is immersed in the plating bath.  Any grease or oxidation tends to
prevent the copper deposit adhering properly.

A copper deposit oxidises very easily when exposed to the air.
Consequently if the surface be required free from oxide, as, for
instance, when it is to be silvered or gilt, it must be quickly washed
when withdrawn from the coppering bath, scratch-brushed, and
transferred immediately to the silvering or gilding bath.

If the surface is to be dried, as in electrolysis calibrations, it
must be rinsed quickly with boiling water and pressed between sheets
of filter paper.  Another method which has been recommended is to
rinse the copper in--water slightly acidulated with sulphuric acid
(which prevents oxidation), then in distilled water, and to dry by
blotting paper and in front of a fire, taking care not to make the
plate too hot.  The wash water is sufficiently acidulated by the
addition of two or three drops of acid per litre.  So far as I know,
the method of washing in acidulated water was first proposed by Mr. T.
Gray.

Sec. 138.  Coppering Aluminium.

A good adherent deposit of copper on aluminium used to be considered a
desideratum in the days when it afforded the only means of soldering
the latter.  Many receipts have been published from time to time, and
I have tried, I think, most of them.  On no occasion, however, till
this year (1896), have I succeeded in obtaining a deposit which would
not strip after it was tinned and soldered, though it is not difficult
to get apparently adherent deposits so long as they are not operated
upon by the soldering iron.  The best of the many solutions which have
been proposed in years gone by is very dilute cupric nitrate with
about 5 per cent of free nitric acid.

The problem of electroplating aluminium which I have indicated as
awaiting a solution has at last found one.  In the Archives des
Sciences physiques et naturelles de Geneve for December 1895 (vol.
xxxiv.  p.  563) there is a paper by M. Margot on the subject, which
discloses a perfectly successful method of plating aluminium with
copper.  The paper itself deals in an interesting way with the theory
of the matter--however, the result is as follows.

(1) The aluminium articles are boiled for a few minutes in a strong
solution of ordinary washing soda.  The aluminium surface is thus
corroded somewhat, and rendered favourable to the deposit of an
adherent film of copper.  After removal from the soda solution the
aluminium is well washed and brushed in running water.

(2) The articles are dipped for thirty seconds or so in a hot 5 per
cent solution of pure hydrochloric acid.

(3) After dipping in the hydrochloric acid, the work is instantly
plunged into clean water for about one second, so as to remove nearly,
but not quite, all of the aluminium chloride.

(4) The work is transferred to a cold dilute (say 5 per cent) solution
of cupric sulphate slightly acidulated with sulphuric acid.  The
degree of acidulation does not appear to be very important, but about
one-tenth per cent of strong acid does well.

If the preliminary processes have been properly carried out the
aluminium will become coated with copper, and the process is
accompanied by the disengagement of gas.  It appears to be a rule that
if gas is not given off, the film of copper deposited is non-adherent.
The work must be left in the copper sulphate solution till it has
received a uniform coating of copper.

(5) When this is the case the work is removed--well washed so as to
get rid of the rest of the aluminium chloride, and then electroplated
by the battery in the ordinary copper sulphate bath.

If the operation (4) does not appear to give a uniform coat, or if gas
is not evolved from every part of the aluminium surface, I find that
operations (2) and (3) may be repeated without danger, provided that
the dip in the hydrochloric acid is shortened to two or three
seconds.

The copper layer obtained by Margot's method is perfectly
adherent--even when used as a base for ordinary solder--though in
this case it can be stripped if sufficient force is applied.

Since the solder recommended by M. Margot for aluminium contains zinc,
it does not run well when used to unite aluminium to copper, brass,
iron, etc.  In this case, therefore, I have found the most
advantageous method of soldering to be by way of a preliminary
copper-plating.

The success of M. Margot's method depends in my experience on
obtaining just the proper amount of aluminium chloride in contact with
the aluminium when the latter is immersed in the copper sulphate
solution.

Sec. 139.  The process of copper-plating from sulphate or nitrate may,
according to Mr. Swan (Journal of the Royal Institution, 1892, p.
630), be considerably accelerated by the addition of a trace of
gelatine to the solution.  As success appears to depend upon hitting
the exact percentage amount of the gelatine, which must in any case be
but a fraction of one per cent, and as Mr. Swan refrains from stating
what the amount is, I am unable to give more precise instructions.  A
few experiments made on the subject failed, doubtless through the
gelatine content not having been rightly adjusted.  Mr. Swan claims to
be able to get a hard deposit of copper with a current density of 1000
amperes per square foot, but seems to recommend about one-tenth of
that amount for general use.

The solution employed is a mixture of nitrate of copper and ammonium
chloride--proportions not stated.  Electrolytic copper, as generally
prepared, is very pure, but this is a mere accident depending on the
impurities which, as a rule, have to be got rid of.  Electrolysis
seems to have no effect in purifying from arsenic, for instance.

Roughly speaking, about 11 grms.  of copper are deposited per ampere
hour from cupric salt solutions.  When the current density is too high
the anode suffers by oxidation, and this introduces a large and very
variable resistance into the circuit.

Sec. 140.  Alkaline Coppering Solution

Coppering Base Metals. It is often desirable to coat lead, zinc,
pewter, iron, etc, with a firm and uniform layer of copper
preparatory to gilding or silvering.  If copper or brass articles are
soldered with soft solder it is found that the solder does not become
silvered or gilt along with the rest of the material, but remains
uncoated and of an ugly dark colour.  This defect is got over by
giving a preliminary coating of copper.

This is done in an alkaline solution, generally containing cyanogen
and ammonia.  The following method has succeeded remarkably well with
me.  The receipt was taken originally from Gore's Electro-metallurgy,
p.  208.  A solution is made of 50 grms.  of potassium cyanide
(ordinary commercial, say, 75 per cent) and 30 grms.  of sodium
bisulphite in I.5 litres of water.  Thirty-five grammes of cupric
acetate are dissolved in a litre of water, and 20 cubic centimetres of
the strongest liquid ammonia are added.  The precipitate formed must
be more or less dissolved to a strong blue solution.  The cyanide and
bisulphite solution is then added with warming till the blue colour is
destroyed.  This usually requires the exact amount of cyanide and
bisulphite mentioned, but I have not found it essential to entirely
destroy the colour.

The solution contains cuprocyanide of sodium and ammonium (?), which
is not very soluble, and this salt tends to be deposited in granular
crystalline masses on standing.  However, at a temperature of 50 deg. C.
the above receipt gives an excellent coppering liquid, which will coat
zinc with a fine reguline deposit.  Brass or copper partly smeared
with solder will receive a deposit of copper on the latter as well as
on the former, and, moreover, a deposit which appears to be perfectly
uniform.

In using the bath the anode tends, as a rule, to become incrusted, and
this rapidly increases the resistance of the cell, so that the current
falls off quickly.  The articles should be scratch-brushed and plated
for about two minutes with a current density of about ten amperes per
square foot.

As soon as the deposit begins to look red the articles are to be
removed and rebrushed, after which the process may be continued.
About five minutes' plating will give a copper deposit quite thick
enough after scratch-brushing to allow of a very even gilding or
silvering.

Aluminium appears to be fairly coated, but, as usual, the copper
strips after soldering.  Iron receives an excellent and adherent coat.

I do not think that the formation of a crust upon the anode can be
entirely prevented.  According to Gore, its formation is due to the
solution being too poor in copper, but I have added a solution of the
acetate of copper and ammonium till the colour was bright blue without
in any way reducing the incrustation.  If the solutions become
violently blue it is perhaps as well to add a little more cyanide and
bisulphite, but I have not found such an addition necessary.  The
process is one of the easiest and most satisfactory in
electro-metallurgy.

Sec. 141.  Nickel-plating.

An examination of several American samples of nickel-plated goods has
disclosed that the coating of nickel is, as a rule, exceedingly thin.
This is what one would expect from laboratory repetition of the
processes employed.

Commercial practice in the matter of the composition of nickelling
solutions appears to vary a good deal.  Thin coatings of nickel may be
readily given in a solution of the double sulphate of nickel and
ammonia, which does rather better if slightly alkaline.  Deposits from
this solution, however, become gray if of any thickness, and,
moreover, are-apt to flake off the work.  The following solution has
given very good results with me.  It is mentioned, together with
others, in the Electrical Review, 7th June 1895.

The ingredients are:-

Nickel sulphate            5 parts

Ammonia sufficient to neutralise the nickel salt.

Ammonium tartrate        3.75 parts

Tannin                0.025 parts

Water                    100 parts

The nickel sulphate and ammonia are dissolved in half the water, the
ammonium tartrate in the other half with the tannin.  The solutions
are mixed and filtered at about 40 deg. C.  This solution works well at
ordinary temperatures, or slightly warm, with a current density of ten
amperes per square foot.  In an experiment made for the purpose I
found that plating may go on for an hour in this solution before the
deposit begins to show signs of flaking off.  The deposit is of a fine
white colour.

The resistance of the bath is rather high and rather variable,
consequently it is as well to have a current indicator in circuit, and
it may well happen that five or six volts will be found requisite to
get the current up to the value stated.  For nickelling small objects
of brass, such as binding screws, etc, it is very necessary to be
careful as to the state of polish and uniformity of their surfaces
before placing them in the plating bath.  A polished surface will
appear when coated as a polished surface, and a mat surface as a mat
surface;  moreover, any local irregularity, such as a speck of a
foreign metal, will give rise to an ugly spot in the nickelling bath.
For this reason it is often advisable to commence with a coat of
copper laid on in an alkaline solution and scratch-brushed to absolute
uniformity.

An examination of the work will, however, disclose whether such a
course is desirable or not;  it is not done in American practice, at
all events for small brass objects.  These are cleaned in alkali and
in boiling cyanide, which does not render a polished surface mat, as
weak acid is apt to do, and are then coated with a current density of
about ten amperes per square foot.

In spite of what is to be found in books as to the ease with which
nickel deposits may be polished, I find that the mat surface obtained
by plating on an imperfectly polished cathode of iron is by no means
easily polished either by fine emery, tripoli, or rouge.
Consequently, as in the case of brass, if a polished surface is
desired, it must be first prepared on the unplated cathode.  In this
case, even if the deposit appears dull, but not gray, it may be easily
polished by tripoli and water, using a cork as the polisher.
Scratch-brushing with brass wire, however, though possibly not with
German silver wire, brightens the deposit, but discolours it.  When
the deposit becomes gray I have not succeeded in polishing it
satisfactorily.

Soldered brass or iron may be satisfactorily coated with nickel by
giving it a preliminary coating of copper in the cyanide bath.  On the
whole, I recommend in general that iron be first coated with copper in
the alkaline bath, scratch-brushed, and then nickel-plated, and this
whether the iron appears to be uniform or not.  Much smoother,
thicker, and stronger coats of nickel are obtained upon the
copper-plated surface than on the iron one, and the coating does not
become discoloured (?  by iron rust) in the same way that a coating on
bare iron does.  The copper surface may be plated for at least an hour
at a density of ten amperes per square foot without scaling.

Scales or circles divided on brass may be greatly improved in
durability by nickel--plating.  For this purpose the brass must be
highly polished and divided before it is nickelled.

The plating should be continued for a few minutes only, when a very
bright but thin coat of nickel will be deposited;  it then only
remains to wash and dry the work, and this must be done at once.  If
the nickel is deposited before the scale or circle is engraved, very
fine and legible divisions are obtained, but there is a risk that
flakes of nickel may become detached here and there in the process of
engraving.

142.  Miscellaneous Notes on Electroplating.

Occasionally it is desirable to make a metallic mould or other object
of complex shape.  The quickest way to do this is to carve the object
out of hard paraffin, and then copy it by electrotyping.  Electrotype
moulds can be made in many ways.  The easiest way perhaps is to take a
casting in plaster of Paris, or by means of pressure in warm
gutta-percha.

In cases where the mould will not draw, recourse must be had to the
devices of iron-founders, i.e.  the plaster cast must be made in
suitable pieces, and these afterwards fitted together.  This process
can occasionally be replaced by another in which the moulding material
is a mixture of treacle and glue.  The glue is soaked in cold water
till it is completely soft.  The superfluous water thrown away,
one-fourth part by volume of thick treacle is added, and the mixture
is melted on the water bath;  during which process stirring has to be
resorted to, to produce a uniform mixture.

