find the square dead and wasted.

Once more I urged her to turn the compound directly upon the Grass.
"What if it isnt perfected? What harm can it do? Maybe it's advanced
enough to halt the Grass even if it doesnt kill it."

She stabbed at her chest with the toothpick. "Isnt it horrible to live
in a world of intellectual sucklings? How can I explain what's going on?
I have a basic compound in the same sense ... in the same sense, let us
say, that I know iodine to be a poison. Yes, that will do. If I wish to
kill a man--some millionaire--and administer too little, far from acting
as a poison it will be positively beneficial. This is a miserably
oversimplified analogy--perhaps you will understand it."

I was extremely dissatisfied, knowing as I did the rapidly worsening
situation. The Grass was in the Iberian Peninsula, in Provence,
Burgundy, Lorraine, Champagne and Holland. The people were restive, no
longer appeased by the tentative promise of redemption through Miss
Francis' efforts. The BBC named a date for the first attack upon the
Grass, contradicted itself, said sensible men would understand these
matters couldnt be pinned down to hours and minutes. There were riots at
Clydeside and in South Wales and I feared the looting of my warehouses
in view of the terrible scarcity of food.

It wasnt only the immediate situation which was bad, but the longrange
one. Oil reserves in the United Kingdom were practically exhausted. So
were non-native metals. Vital machinery needed immediate replacement. As
soon as Miss Francis was ready to go into action the strain upon our
obsolescent technology and hungerweakened manpower would be crippling.

The general mood was not lightened by the clergy, professionally
gloating over approaching doom, nor by the speculations of the
scientists, who were now predicting an insect and aquatic world. Man,
they said, could not adapt himself to the Grass--this was proved to the
hilt by the tragedy of the Russian armies in the Last War--but insects
had, fishes didnt need to, and birds, especially those who nested above
the snowline, might possibly be able to. Undoubtedly these orders could
in time produce a creature equal if not superior to _Homo sapiens_ and
the march of progress stood a chance to continue after an hiatus of a
few million years or so.

The combination of these airy and abstract speculations with their
slowness to produce something tangible to help us at this crisis first
angered and then profoundly depressed me. I could only look upon the
whole conglomeration--scientists, politicians, common man and all--as
thoroughly irresponsible. I remembered how I had applied myself
diligently, toiling, planning, imagining, to reach my present position
and how a fraction of that effort, if it had been exerted by these
people, could stop the Grass overnight.

In this frameofmind my thoughts occupied themselves more and more with
the idea I had uttered during my illness. To write a history of the
Grass would at least afford me an escape from the daily irritation of
concerning myself exclusively with the incompetents and blunderers. Not
being the type of person to undertake anything I was not prepared to
finish, I thought it might be advisable to keep a journal, first to get
myself in the mood for the larger work and later to have a daytoday
account of momentous events as seen by someone uniquely connected with
the Grass.


_95._ _July 14_: Lunch at Chequers with the PM. Very gloomy. Says Miss F
may have to be nationalized. Feeble joke by undersecretary about
nationalization of women proving unsuccessful during the Bolshevik
revolution. Ignoring this assured the PM we would get a more definite
date from her during the week. Privately agreed her dilatoriness
unpardonable. I shall speak to F tomorrow.

Home by 5. Gardeners slovenly; signs of neglect everywhere. Called in S
and gave him a good goingover; said he was doing the best he could.
Sighed for the good old days--Tony Preblesham would never have shuffled
like that. Shall I have to get a new steward--and would he be any
improvement?

Very bored after dinner. Almost decided to start the book. Scribbled a
few paragraphs--they didnt sound too bad. Sleep on it.

_July 15_: BBC this morning reported Grass in the Ardennes. This
undoubtedly means a new influx from the Continent--the coastguard is
practically powerless--and we will be picked clean. In spite of the news
F absolutely refuses to set a definite date. Kept my temper with
difficulty.

Came home to be annoyed by Mrs H telling me K, one of the housemaids,
had been got into trouble by an undergardener. Asked Mrs H whether or
not it wasnt her function as a housekeeper to take care of such details.
Mrs H very tart, said in normal times she was perfectly capable of
handling the situation, but with everything going to pieces she didnt
know whether to turn off K or the undergardener, or both, or neither. I
thought her attitude toward me symptomatic of the general slackness and
demoralization setting in all over. Instructed her to discharge them
both and not bother me again with such trivia. Tried to phone the PM,
but the line was down. Another symptom.

As a sort of refuge, went to the library and wrote for four solid hours,
relating the origin of the Grass. Feeling much better afterwards, rang
for Mrs H and told her merely to give K a leave of absence and discharge
only the guilty undergardener. I could see she didnt approve my
leniency.

_July 16_: A maniac somehow got into The Ivies and forced his way into
the library where I was writing. A horrible looking fellow, with a
tortured face, he waved a pistol in front of me, ranting phrases
reminiscent of oldfashioned soapbox oratory. I am not ashamed to admit
nervousness, for this is not the first time my life has been threatened
since attaining prominence. Happily, the madman's aim was as wild as his
speech, and though he fired four shots, all lodged in the plaster. S,
Mrs H and B, hearing the noise, rushed in and grabbed him.

_July 17_: A little upset by the episode of the wouldbe assassin, I
decided to go up to London for the day. The library would be unusable
anyway, while the walls and ceiling were being repaired.

_July 18_: Shaking experience. Can write no more at the moment.

_Later_: I was walking in Regent Square when I saw her. As beautiful and
mysterious as she was last time. But now my tongue was not tied;
oblivious to restraint and ridicule, I shouted, rushed after her.

I-- But, really, that is all. I rushed after her, but she disappeared in
the idle crowd. People looked at me curiously as I pushed and shoved,
peering, crying, "Wait, wait a minute!" But she was gone.

_Still later_: I shall go back to The Ivies tonight. If I stay longer in
London I fear I shall be subject to further hallucinations.

If it was an hallucination and not the Strange Lady herself.

_July 19_: Grass reported in Lyons. F has new experiment scheduled for
tomorrow. Despite upset condition, I wrote six pages of my history. The
work of concentrating, under the circumstances, was terrific but I feel
repaid for my effort. I am the captain of my soul.

S says the cottagers no longer paying rent. Told him to evict them.


_96._ _July 20_: F's test today on some underbrush in a wood. Think in
future I shall go only to inspect the results; the spraying is very
dull. Wrote four pages and tore them up. S says it is impossible to
evict tenants. Asked him if there were no law left in England and he
answered, "Not very much." I shall begin looking about for a new
steward. Hear the Tharios are in London. Grass reported beyond the
Vosges.

_July 21_: Usual aftermath of F's experiment. Not a sign of vegetation
left. In the face of this, simply maddening that she doesnt get into
action directly against the Grass. Got no satisfaction from her by
direct questioning. Can her whole attitude be motivated by some sort of
diseased and magnified femininity?

_July 22_: Noticed Burlet at breakfast had left off his striped
waistcoat. Such a thing has never happened before. Not surprised when he
requested interview. He began by saying it had been quite some time
since he put before me his plan for what he calls "vertical cities." Not
caring for his attitude, pointed out that it was quite outside my
province as an employer to wetnurse any schemes of his; nevertheless,
out of kindness I had brought it to the attention of the proper people.

"But, Mr Weener, sir, people are losing their lives."

"So you said before, Burlet."

"And if nothing is done the time will come when you also will be killed
by refugees or drowned by the Grass."

"That borders on impertinence, Burlet."

"I ope I ave never forgot my place. But umanity takes precedence over
umility."

"That will be all, Burlet."

"Very good, sir. If convenient, I should like to give notice as of the
first."

"All right, Burlet."

When he left, I was unreasonably disturbed. If I had pressed his
scheme--but it was impracticable....

_July 23_: The Grass is in the neighborhood of Antwerp and questions are
being asked in Parliament. Unless the government can offer satisfactory
assurances of action by F they are expected to fall tomorrow. Assured
the PM I would put the utmost pressure on F, but I know it will do no
good. The woman is mad; I would have her certified and locked up in an
asylum in a second if only some other scientist would show some signs of
getting results. Did not write a word on my history today.

_July 24_: Debate in Parliament. Got nothing from F but rudeness. Wrote
considerably on my book. I would like to invite Stuart Thario to The
Ivies, if for no other reason than to show I bear no malice, but perhaps
it would not be wise.

Riots in Sheffield.

_July 25_: Vote of confidence in Commons. The PM asked the indulgence of
the House and played a record of Churchill's famous speech: "... Turning
to the question of invasion ... We shall not fail; we shall go on to the
end ... We shall defend our island whatever the cost. We shall fight on
beaches, in cities and on the hills. We shall never surrender." Result,
the government squeaked through; 209 for, 199 against, 176 abstaining.
No one satisfied with the results.

Mrs H came to me in great distress. It seems the larder is empty of
chutney, curry and worcestershire sauce and none of these items can be
purchased at Fortnum & Mason's or anywhere else. I assured her it was a
matter of indifference to me since I did not care particularly for any
of these delicacies.

Mrs H swept this aside as entirely irrelevant. "No wellconducted
establishment, Mr Weener, is without chutney, curry or worcestershire."
The insularity of the English is incredible. I have not tasted cocacola,
hotdogs, or had a bottle of ketchup for more than a year, but I don't
complain.

The Grass is in the Schelde estuary, almost within sight of the English
coast. I got nothing written on my history today.

_July 26_: Invited to see film of a flight made about six months ago
over what was once the United States. Very moving. New York still
recognizable from the awkward shapes assumed there by the Grass. In the
harbor a strange mound of vegetation. Several of the ladies wept.

I went home and thought about George Thario and carried my history of
the Grass up until the time it crossed Hollywood Boulevard.

_July 27_: The Grass is now in Ostend, definitely in sight from the
coast.

_July 28_: Grass in Dunkirk.

_July 29_: F astounded me this morning by coming to The Ivies, an
unprecedented thing. She is (finally!!!) about to undertake tests
directly against the Grass and wants airplanes and gasoline. I impressed
upon her how limited our facilities are and how they cannot be frittered
away. She screamed at me insanely (the woman is positively dangerous in
these frenzies) and I finally calmed her with the assurance--only
superficially exact--that I was dependent on the authorities for these
supplies. At length I persuaded her she could just as well use motor
launches since the Grass had now reached the Channel. She reluctantly
agreed and grumblingly departed. My joy and relief in her belated action
was dampened by her arrogant intemperance. Can a woman so unbalanced
really save humanity?

_July 30_: Wrote.

_July 31_: Wrote.

_August 1_: Attended at breakfast by footman. Extremely awkward and
irritating. Inquired, what had happened to Burlet? Reminded he had left.
Annoyed at this typical lack of consideration on the part of the
employed classes. We give them work and they respond with a lack of
gratitude which is amazing.

In spite of vexations, I brought my history up to the wiping out of Los
Angeles. Leave with F and party at midnight for the tests.

_August 4_: It is impossible for me to set down the extent of the
depression which besets me. F's assurance she has learned a great deal
from the tests and didnt for a minute expect to drive the Grass back at
this point doesnt counter the fact that her latest spray hadnt the
slightest effect on the green mass which has now replaced the sandy
beaches of the Pas de Calais. At great personal inconvenience I
accompanied her on her fruitless mission and I didnt find her excuses,
even when clothed in scientific verbiage, adequate compensation for the
wasted time.

_August 5_: The government finally fell today and there is talk of a
coalition of national unity, with the Queen herself assuming
extraordinary powers. There was general agreement that this would be
quite unconstitutional, but that won't prevent its being done anyway.

In spite of the stringent watch against refugees the population has so
enlarged that rations have again been cut. Mrs H says she doesnt know
where the next meal is coming from, but I feel she exaggerates. Farmers,
I hear, absolutely refuse to deliver grain.

_August 6_: Interview with S C. Offered him all the facilities now at
the disposal of F. I admitted I was not without influence and could
almost promise him a knighthood or an earldom. He said, "Mr Weener, I
don't need the offer of reward; I'm doing my best right now. But I'm
proceeding along entirely different lines than Miss Francis. If I were
to take her work over at this point I'd nullify whatever advance she's
made and not help my own research by as much as an inch." If C can't
replace F, I don't know who can. Very despondent, but wrote just the
same. Can't give in to moods.


_97._ _August 7_: BBC announced this morning the Grass is in Bordeaux
and under the Defense of the Realm Act every man and woman is
automatically in service and will be solely responsible for a hundred
square feet of the island's surface, their stations to be assigned by
the chief county constable. Tried to get Sir H C--no phone service.

Wrote on my history till noon. What a lot of bluster professional
authors make over the writing of a book--they should have had the
necessity every businessman knows for sticking eternally to it, and
experience in a newspaper cityroom--as I had. Just before luncheon an
overworked looking police constable bicycled over with designations of
the areas each of us is responsible for. Sir H very thoughtfully
allotted the patrolling of my library to me.

_August 8_: Grass in Troyes and Chalons. The assignment of everyone to a
definite post has raised the general spirit. Ive always said discipline
was what people needed in times of crisis--takes their minds off their
troubles.

The prime minister spoke briefly over the wireless, announcing he was in
constant touch with all the researchworkers, including Miss Francis.
Annoyed at his going over my head this way--a quite unnecessary
discourtesy.

Marked incivility and slipshodness among the staff. Spoke to Mrs H and
to S; both agreed it was deplorable, saw no immediate help for it. So
upset by petty annoyances I could not write on my history.

_August 9_: Glorious news. The BBC announced the antiGrass compound
would be perfected before Christmas.

_August 10_: F denies validity of the wireless report. Said no one with
the remotest trace of intelligence would make such a statement. "Is it
impossible to have the compound by then?" I asked her.

"It's not impossible to have it by tomorrow morning. Good heavens,
Weener, can't you understand? I'm not a soothsayer."

Can it be some scientist I know nothing of is getting ahead of her? Very
dishonorable of the government if so.

Despite uncertainties wrote three more pages.

_August 11_: Riots in Manchester and Birmingham. Demagogues pointing out
that even if the antiGrass compound is perfected by Christmas it will be
too late to save Britain. They don't count apparently on the Channel
holding the plague back for long. Possible the government may fall,
which won't disturb me, as I prefer the other party anyway.

_August 12_: After a long period of silence from the Continent, Radio
Mondiale went on the air from Cherbourg asking permission for the
government to come to London.

_August 13_: The watch on the south and east coasts has been tripled,
more as a precaution against the neverceasing wave of invasion than the
Grass. It has been necessary to turn machineguns on the immigrant
boats--purely in selfdefense.

The rioting in the Midlands has died down, possibly on the double
assurance that permission for the removal of the French government had
been refused (I cannot find out, to satisfy my idle curiosity, if it is
still the Republic One and Indivisible which made the request or whether
that creation was succeeded by a less eccentric one), and that Christmas
was a conservative estimate for the perfection of the compound--a last
possible date.

Brought my history up to the Last War.

_August 14_: Very disheartening talk with the PM today. It seems the
whole business of setting a date was an error from beginning to end. No
one gave any such promise. It dare not be denied now, however, for fear
of the effect upon the public. I must begin to think seriously of moving
to Ireland.

_August 15_: Grass reported in the Faeroes. French Channel coast covered
to the mouth of the Seine. What is the matter with F? Is it possible the
failure of the last experiment blasted all her hopes? If so, she should
have told me, so I might urge on others working along different lines.

Motored to the laboratory and spoke about moving to Ireland. She agreed
it might be a wise precaution. "You know, Weener, the jackass who said
Christmas mightnt have been so far out afterall." She seemed very
confident.

Came home relieved of all my recent pessimism and brought my book down
to the overrunning of the United States. I am not a morbid man, but I
pray I may live to set foot on my native soil once again.

_August 16_: No new reports from France. Can the Grass be slowing down?
Wrote furiously.

_August 17_: Wrote for nearly ten hours. Definitely decided to discharge
S; he is thoroughly incapable. No word from France, but there is a
general feeling of great optimism.

_August 18_: Bad news, very bad news. The Grass has jumped two hundred
miles, from the Faeroes to the Shetlands and we are menaced on three
sides. Went up to London to arrange for a place in Ireland. I cannot say
I was well received by the Irish agent, a discourteous and surly fellow.
Left orders to contact Dublin direct as soon as phone service is
resumed.

_August 19_: It seems Burlet has been interesting all sorts of radicals
and crackpots in his scheme for glassenclosed cities. Local MP very
reproachful; "You should have warned me, Mr Weener." I asked him if he
honestly thought the idea practical. "That isnt the point. Not the point
at all."

As far as can be learned France is completely gone now. It is supposed a
fragment of Spain and Portugal are still free of the Grass and a little
bit of Africa. It is almost unbelievable that all these millions have
perished and that the only untouched land left is these islands.

Many irritations. The phone is in order for perhaps halfanhour a day.
Only the wireless approximates a normal schedule. Wrote six pages.

_August 20_: Dublin apologized profusely for the stupidity of their
agent and offered me a residence near Kilkenny and all the facilities of
Trinity for F and her staff. Told F, who merely grunted. She then stated
she wanted a completely equipped seagoing laboratory for work along the
French coast. I said I'd see what could be done. Much encouraged by
this request.

_August 21_: The arrogance and shortsightedness of the workingclass is
beyond belief. They refuse absolutely to work for wages any longer. I
now have to pay for all services in concentrates. Even the warehouse
guards, previously so loyal, will accept nothing but food. I foresee a
rapid dwindling of our precious supplies under this onslaught.

_August 22_: With all the shipping Consolidated Pemmican owns I can find
nothing suitable for F's work. Almost decided to outfit my personal
yacht _Sisyphus_ for that purpose. It would be convenient to use for the
Irish removal if that becomes necessary.

Burlet's ideas have found their way into Parliament. The Independent
Labour member from South Tooting asked the Home Minister why nothing had
been done about vertical cities. The Home Minister replied that Britons
never would permit a stolon of the Grass to grow on English soil and
therefore such fantastic ideas were superfluous. ILP MP not satisfied.

_August 23_: Ordered the _Sisyphus_ to Southampton for refitting. It
will cost me thousands of tons of precious concentrates, besides lying
for weeks in a dangerously exposed spot. But I can make a better deal in
Southampton than elsewhere and I refuse to be infected by the general
cowardice of the masses.

Speaking of the general temper, I must say there has been a stiffening
of spirit in the last week or so; very laudable, and encouraging to one
who believes in the essential dignity of human nature.

No new report on the Grass for four days.

_August 24_: The member from South Tooting has introduced a bill to
start construction at once of one of Burlet's cities. The bill calls for
the conscription of manpower for the work and whatever materials may be
necessary, without compensation. The last clause is of course aimed
directly at me. Naturally, the bill will not pass.

_August 25_: Flew to Kilkenny. I fear this will be one of the last plane
trips I can make for a long time, since the store of aviation gasoline
is just about exhausted. The place is much more beautiful than
Hampshire, but deplorably inconvenient. However, since the Irish are
still willing to work for money, I have ordered extensive alterations.

_August 26_: I have stopped all sale of concentrates. Since money will
buy nothing, it would be foolish of me to give my most precious asset
away. Of course we cut the deliveries down to a mere dribble some time
ago, but even that dribble could bleed me to death in time. I have
doubled the wages--in concentrates--of the warehouse guards in fear of
possible looting.


_98._ _August 29_: The last three days have been filled with terror and
suspense. It began when a patrolling shepherd on the Isle of Skye found
a suspicious clump of grass. All conditions favored the invader: the
