
By April 20 we had risen to an average level of 1,500 meters.
The nearest land was the island group of the Bahamas, scattered
like a batch of cobblestones over the surface of the water.
There high underwater cliffs reared up, straight walls made of craggy
chunks arranged like big stone foundations, among which there
gaped black caves so deep our electric rays couldn't light them
to the far ends.

These rocks were hung with huge weeds, immense sea tangle, gigantic fucus--
a genuine trellis of water plants fit for a world of giants.

In discussing these colossal plants, Conseil, Ned, and I were naturally
led into mentioning the sea's gigantic animals.  The former were
obviously meant to feed the latter.  However, through the windows
of our almost motionless Nautilus, I could see nothing among these long
filaments other than the chief articulates of the division Brachyura:
long-legged spider crabs, violet crabs, and sponge crabs unique
to the waters of the Caribbean.

It was about eleven o'clock when Ned Land drew my attention to a
fearsome commotion out in this huge seaweed.

"Well," I said, "these are real devilfish caverns, and I wouldn't
be surprised to see some of those monsters hereabouts."

"What!"  Conseil put in.  "Squid, ordinary squid from
the class Cephalopoda?"

"No," I said, "devilfish of large dimensions.  But friend Land
is no doubt mistaken, because I don't see a thing."

"That's regrettable," Conseil answered.  "I'd like to come face
to face with one of those devilfish I've heard so much about,
which can drag ships down into the depths.  Those beasts go
by the name of krake--"

"Fake is more like it," the Canadian replied sarcastically.

"Krakens!"  Conseil shot back, finishing his word without wincing
at his companion's witticism.

"Nobody will ever make me believe," Ned Land said, "that
such animals exist."

"Why not?"  Conseil replied.  "We sincerely believed
in master's narwhale."

"We were wrong, Conseil."

"No doubt, but there are others with no doubts who believe
to this day!"

"Probably, Conseil.  But as for me, I'm bound and determined not
to accept the existence of any such monster till I've dissected it
with my own two hands."

"Yet," Conseil asked me, "doesn't master believe in gigantic devilfish?"

"Yikes!  Who in Hades ever believed in them?" the Canadian exclaimed.

"Many people, Ned my friend," I said.

"No fishermen.  Scientists maybe!"

"Pardon me, Ned.  Fishermen and scientists!"

"Why, I to whom you speak," Conseil said with the world's
straightest face, "I recall perfectly seeing a large boat dragged
under the waves by the arms of a cephalopod."

"You saw that?" the Canadian asked.

"Yes, Ned."

"With your own two eyes?"

"With my own two eyes."

"Where, may I ask?"

"In Saint-Malo," Conseil returned unflappably.

"In the harbor?"  Ned Land said sarcastically.

"No, in a church," Conseil replied.

"In a church!" the Canadian exclaimed.

"Yes, Ned my friend.  It had a picture that portrayed the
devilfish in question."

"Oh good!"  Ned Land exclaimed with a burst of laughter.
"Mr. Conseil put one over on me!"

"Actually he's right," I said.  "I've heard about that picture.
But the subject it portrays is taken from a legend, and you know
how to rate legends in matters of natural history!  Besides, when it's
an issue of monsters, the human imagination always tends to run wild.
People not only claimed these devilfish could drag ships under,
but a certain Olaus Magnus tells of a cephalopod a mile long that looked
more like an island than an animal.  There's also the story of how
the Bishop of Trondheim set up an altar one day on an immense rock.
After he finished saying mass, this rock started moving and went
back into the sea.  The rock was a devilfish."

"And that's everything we know?" the Canadian asked.

"No," I replied, "another bishop, Pontoppidan of Bergen,
also tells of a devilfish so large a whole cavalry regiment could
maneuver on it."

"They sure did go on, those oldtime bishops!"  Ned Land said.

"Finally, the naturalists of antiquity mention some monsters
with mouths as big as a gulf, which were too huge to get through
the Strait of Gibraltar."

"Good work, men!" the Canadian put in.

"But in all these stories, is there any truth?"  Conseil asked.

"None at all, my friends, at least in those that go beyond the bounds
of credibility and fly off into fable or legend.  Yet for the imaginings
of these storytellers there had to be, if not a cause, at least
an excuse.  It can't be denied that some species of squid and other
devilfish are quite large, though still smaller than cetaceans.
Aristotle put the dimensions of one squid at five cubits, or 3.1 meters.
Our fishermen frequently see specimens over 1.8 meters long.
The museums in Trieste and Montpellier have preserved some devilfish
carcasses measuring two meters.  Besides, according to the calculations
of naturalists, one of these animals only six feet long would
have tentacles as long as twenty-seven. Which is enough to make
a fearsome monster."

"Does anybody fish for 'em nowadays?" the Canadian asked.

"If they don't fish for them, sailors at least sight them.
A friend of mine, Captain Paul Bos of Le Havre, has often sworn
to me that he encountered one of these monsters of colossal size
in the seas of the East Indies.  But the most astonishing event,
which proves that these gigantic animals undeniably exist,
took place a few years ago in 1861."

"What event was that?"  Ned Land asked.

"Just this.  In 1861, to the northeast of Tenerife and fairly
near the latitude where we are right now, the crew of the gunboat
Alecto spotted a monstrous squid swimming in their waters.
Commander Bouguer approached the animal and attacked it with blows
from harpoons and blasts from rifles, but without much success
because bullets and harpoons crossed its soft flesh as if it
were semiliquid jelly.  After several fruitless attempts,
the crew managed to slip a noose around the mollusk's body.
This noose slid as far as the caudal fins and came to a halt.
Then they tried to haul the monster on board, but its weight
was so considerable that when they tugged on the rope, the animal
parted company with its tail; and deprived of this adornment,
it disappeared beneath the waters."

"Finally, an actual event," Ned Land said.

"An indisputable event, my gallant Ned.  Accordingly, people have
proposed naming this devilfish Bouguer's Squid."

"And how long was it?" the Canadian asked.

"Didn't it measure about six meters?" said Conseil, who was stationed
at the window and examining anew the crevices in the cliff.

"Precisely," I replied.

"Wasn't its head," Conseil went on, "crowned by eight tentacles
that quivered in the water like a nest of snakes?"

"Precisely."

"Weren't its eyes prominently placed and considerably enlarged?"

"Yes, Conseil."

"And wasn't its mouth a real parrot's beak but of fearsome size?"

"Correct, Conseil."

"Well, with all due respect to master," Conseil replied serenely,
"if this isn't Bouguer's Squid, it's at least one of his close relatives!"

I stared at Conseil.  Ned Land rushed to the window.

"What an awful animal!" he exclaimed.

I stared in my turn and couldn't keep back a movement of revulsion.
Before my eyes there quivered a horrible monster worthy of a place
among the most farfetched teratological legends.

It was a squid of colossal dimensions, fully eight meters long.
It was traveling backward with tremendous speed in the same direction
as the Nautilus.  It gazed with enormous, staring eyes that were tinted
sea green.  Its eight arms (or more accurately, feet) were rooted
in its head, which has earned these animals the name cephalopod;
its arms stretched a distance twice the length of its body and
were writhing like the serpentine hair of the Furies.  You could
plainly see its 250 suckers, arranged over the inner sides
of its tentacles and shaped like semispheric capsules.
Sometimes these suckers fastened onto the lounge window by creating
vacuums against it.  The monster's mouth--a beak made of horn
and shaped like that of a parrot--opened and closed vertically.
Its tongue, also of horn substance and armed with several rows
of sharp teeth, would flicker out from between these genuine shears.
What a freak of nature!  A bird's beak on a mollusk!
Its body was spindle-shaped and swollen in the middle,
a fleshy mass that must have weighed 20,000 to 25,000 kilograms.
Its unstable color would change with tremendous speed as the animal
grew irritated, passing successively from bluish gray to reddish brown.

What was irritating this mollusk?  No doubt the presence
of the Nautilus, even more fearsome than itself, and which it
couldn't grip with its mandibles or the suckers on its arms.
And yet what monsters these devilfish are, what vitality our Creator
has given them, what vigor in their movements, thanks to their owning
a triple heart!

Sheer chance had placed us in the presence of this squid, and I
didn't want to lose this opportunity to meticulously study such
a cephalopod specimen.  I overcame the horror that its appearance
inspired in me, picked up a pencil, and began to sketch it.

"Perhaps this is the same as the Alecto's," Conseil said.

"Can't be," the Canadian replied, "because this one's complete
while the other one lost its tail!"

"That doesn't necessarily follow," I said.  "The arms and tails
of these animals grow back through regeneration, and in seven years
the tail on Bouguer's Squid has surely had time to sprout again."

"Anyhow," Ned shot back, "if it isn't this fellow, maybe it's
one of those!"

Indeed, other devilfish had appeared at the starboard window.
I counted seven of them.  They provided the Nautilus with an escort,
and I could hear their beaks gnashing on the sheet-iron hull.
We couldn't have asked for a more devoted following.

I continued sketching.  These monsters kept pace in our waters
with such precision, they seemed to be standing still, and I
could have traced their outlines in miniature on the window.
But we were moving at a moderate speed.

All at once the Nautilus stopped.  A jolt made it tremble through
its entire framework.

"Did we strike bottom?"  I asked.

"In any event we're already clear," the Canadian replied,
"because we're afloat."

The Nautilus was certainly afloat, but it was no longer in motion.
The blades of its propeller weren't churning the waves.  A minute passed.
Followed by his chief officer, Captain Nemo entered the lounge.

I hadn't seen him for a good while.  He looked gloomy to me.
Without speaking to us, without even seeing us perhaps, he went
to the panel, stared at the devilfish, and said a few words
to his chief officer.

The latter went out.  Soon the panels closed.  The ceiling lit up.

I went over to the captain.

"An unusual assortment of devilfish," I told him, as carefree
as a collector in front of an aquarium.

"Correct, Mr. Naturalist," he answered me, "and we're going to fight
them at close quarters."

I gaped at the captain.  I thought my hearing had gone bad.

"At close quarters?"  I repeated.

"Yes, sir.  Our propeller is jammed.  I think the horn-covered
mandibles of one of these squid are entangled in the blades.
That's why we aren't moving."

"And what are you going to do?"

"Rise to the surface and slaughter the vermin."

"A difficult undertaking."

"Correct.  Our electric bullets are ineffective against such
soft flesh, where they don't meet enough resistance to go off.
But we'll attack the beasts with axes."

"And harpoons, sir," the Canadian said, "if you don't turn
down my help."

"I accept it, Mr. Land."

"We'll go with you," I said.  And we followed Captain Nemo,
heading to the central companionway.

There some ten men were standing by for the assault,
armed with boarding axes.  Conseil and I picked up two more axes.
Ned Land seized a harpoon.

By then the Nautilus had returned to the surface of the waves.
Stationed on the top steps, one of the seamen undid the bolts
of the hatch.  But he had scarcely unscrewed the nuts when the hatch
flew up with tremendous violence, obviously pulled open by the suckers
on a devilfish's arm.

Instantly one of those long arms glided like a snake into the opening,
and twenty others were quivering above.  With a sweep of the ax,
Captain Nemo chopped off this fearsome tentacle, which slid writhing
down the steps.

Just as we were crowding each other to reach the platform, two more arms
lashed the air, swooped on the seaman stationed in front of Captain Nemo,
and carried the fellow away with irresistible violence.

Captain Nemo gave a shout and leaped outside.  We rushed after him.

What a scene!  Seized by the tentacle and glued to its suckers,
the unfortunate man was swinging in the air at the mercy
of this enormous appendage.  He gasped, he choked, he yelled:
"Help!  Help!"  These words, pronounced in French, left me deeply stunned!
So I had a fellow countryman on board, perhaps several!
I'll hear his harrowing plea the rest of my life!

The poor fellow was done for.  Who could tear him from such
a powerful grip?  Even so, Captain Nemo rushed at the devilfish
and with a sweep of the ax hewed one more of its arms.
His chief officer struggled furiously with other monsters crawling
up the Nautilus's sides.  The crew battled with flailing axes.
The Canadian, Conseil, and I sank our weapons into these fleshy masses.
An intense, musky odor filled the air.  It was horrible.

For an instant I thought the poor man entwined by the devilfish
might be torn loose from its powerful suction.  Seven arms out of
eight had been chopped off.  Brandishing its victim like a feather,
one lone tentacle was writhing in the air.  But just as Captain Nemo
and his chief officer rushed at it, the animal shot off a spout
of blackish liquid, secreted by a pouch located in its abdomen.
It blinded us.  When this cloud had dispersed, the squid was gone,
and so was my poor fellow countryman!

What rage then drove us against these monsters!  We lost all self-control.
Ten or twelve devilfish had overrun the Nautilus's platform and sides.
We piled helter-skelter into the thick of these sawed-off snakes,
which darted over the platform amid waves of blood and sepia ink.
It seemed as if these viscous tentacles grew back like the many heads
of Hydra.  At every thrust Ned Land's harpoon would plunge into
a squid's sea-green eye and burst it.  But my daring companion was
suddenly toppled by the tentacles of a monster he could not avoid.

Oh, my heart nearly exploded with excitement and horror!
The squid's fearsome beak was wide open over Ned Land.  The poor
man was about to be cut in half.  I ran to his rescue.
But Captain Nemo got there first.  His ax disappeared between the two
enormous mandibles, and the Canadian, miraculously saved, stood and
plunged his harpoon all the way into the devilfish's triple heart.

"Tit for tat," Captain Nemo told the Canadian.  "I owed it to myself!"

Ned bowed without answering him.

This struggle had lasted a quarter of an hour.  Defeated, mutilated,
battered to death, the monsters finally yielded to us and disappeared
beneath the waves.

Red with blood, motionless by the beacon, Captain Nemo stared at
the sea that had swallowed one of his companions, and large tears
streamed from his eyes.





CHAPTER 19

The Gulf Stream


THIS DREADFUL SCENE on April 20 none of us will ever be able to forget.
I wrote it up in a state of intense excitement.  Later I reviewed
my narrative.  I read it to Conseil and the Canadian.  They found it
accurate in detail but deficient in impact.  To convey such sights,
it would take the pen of our most famous poet, Victor Hugo,
author of The Toilers of the Sea.

As I said, Captain Nemo wept while staring at the waves.
His grief was immense.  This was the second companion he had
lost since we had come aboard.  And what a way to die!
Smashed, strangled, crushed by the fearsome arms of a devilfish,
ground between its iron mandibles, this friend would never rest
with his companions in the placid waters of their coral cemetery!

As for me, what had harrowed my heart in the thick of this
struggle was the despairing yell given by this unfortunate man.
Forgetting his regulation language, this poor Frenchman had reverted
to speaking his own mother tongue to fling out one supreme plea!
Among the Nautilus's crew, allied body and soul with Captain Nemo and
likewise fleeing from human contact, I had found a fellow countryman!
Was he the only representative of France in this mysterious alliance,
obviously made up of individuals from different nationalities?
This was just one more of those insoluble problems that kept welling
up in my mind!

Captain Nemo reentered his stateroom, and I saw no more of him
for a good while.  But how sad, despairing, and irresolute he must
have felt, to judge from this ship whose soul he was, which reflected
his every mood!  The Nautilus no longer kept to a fixed heading.
It drifted back and forth, riding with the waves like a corpse.
Its propeller had been disentangled but was barely put to use.
It was navigating at random.  It couldn't tear itself away from
the setting of this last struggle, from this sea that had devoured
one of its own!

Ten days went by in this way.  It was only on May 1 that the Nautilus
openly resumed its northbound course, after raising the Bahamas at
the mouth of Old Bahama Channel.  We then went with the current of the
sea's greatest river, which has its own banks, fish, and temperature.
I mean the Gulf Stream.

It is indeed a river that runs independently through the middle
of the Atlantic, its waters never mixing with the ocean's waters.
It's a salty river, saltier than the sea surrounding it.
Its average depth is 3,000 feet, its average width sixty miles.
In certain localities its current moves at a speed of four kilometers
per hour.  The unchanging volume of its waters is greater than
that of all the world's rivers combined.

As discovered by Commander Maury, the true source of the Gulf Stream,
its starting point, if you prefer, is located in the Bay
of Biscay.  There its waters, still weak in temperature and color,
begin to form.  It goes down south, skirts equatorial Africa,
warms its waves in the rays of the Torrid Zone, crosses the Atlantic,
reaches Cape São Roque on the coast of Brazil, and forks into
two branches, one going to the Caribbean Sea for further saturation
with heat particles.  Then, entrusted with restoring the balance
between hot and cold temperatures and with mixing tropical and
northern waters, the Gulf Stream begins to play its stabilizing role.
Attaining a white heat in the Gulf of Mexico, it heads north up
the American coast, advances as far as Newfoundland, swerves away
under the thrust of a cold current from the Davis Strait,
and resumes its ocean course by going along a great circle
of the earth on a rhumb line; it then divides into two arms near
the 43rd parallel; one, helped by the northeast trade winds,
returns to the Bay of Biscay and the Azores; the other washes the shores
of Ireland and Norway with lukewarm water, goes beyond Spitzbergen,
where its temperature falls to 4 degrees centigrade, and fashions
the open sea at the pole.

It was on this oceanic river that the Nautilus was then navigating.
Leaving Old Bahama Channel, which is fourteen leagues wide by 350 meters
deep, the Gulf Stream moves at the rate of eight kilometers per hour.
Its speed steadily decreases as it advances northward, and we must
pray that this steadiness continues, because, as experts agree,
if its speed and direction were to change, the climates of Europe
would undergo disturbances whose consequences are incalculable.

Near noon I was on the platform with Conseil.  I shared with him
the relevant details on the Gulf Stream.  When my explanation was over,
I invited him to dip his hands into its current.

Conseil did so, and he was quite astonished to experience no sensation
of either hot or cold.

"That comes," I told him, "from the water temperature of the Gulf Stream,
which, as it leaves the Gulf of Mexico, is barely different from
your blood temperature.  This Gulf Stream is a huge heat generator
that enables the coasts of Europe to be decked in eternal greenery.
And if Commander Maury is correct, were one to harness the full
warmth of this current, it would supply enough heat to keep molten
a river of iron solder as big as the Amazon or the Missouri."

Just then the Gulf Stream's speed was 2.25 meters per second.
So distinct is its current from the surrounding sea, its confined
waters stand out against the ocean and operate on a different level
from the colder waters.  Murky as well, and very rich in saline material,
their pure indigo contrasts with the green waves surrounding them.
Moreover, their line of demarcation is so clear that abreast of
the Carolinas, the Nautilus's spur cut the waves of the Gulf Stream
while its propeller was still churning those belonging to the ocean.

This current swept along with it a whole host of moving creatures.
Argonauts, so common in the Mediterranean, voyaged here in schools
of large numbers.  Among cartilaginous fish, the most remarkable were
rays whose ultra slender tails made up nearly a third of the body,
which was shaped like a huge diamond twenty-five feet long;
then little one-meter sharks, the head large, the snout short
and rounded, the teeth sharp and arranged in several rows,
the body seemingly covered with scales.

Among bony fish, I noted grizzled wrasse unique to these seas,
deep-water gilthead whose iris has a fiery gleam, one-meter croakers
whose large mouths bristle with small teeth and which let out
thin cries, black rudderfish like those I've already discussed,
blue dorados accented with gold and silver, rainbow-hued parrotfish
that can rival the loveliest tropical birds in coloring,
banded blennies with triangular heads, bluish flounder without scales,
toadfish covered with a crosswise yellow band in the shape of a Greek t,
swarms of little freckled gobies stippled with brown spots,
lungfish with silver heads and yellow tails, various specimens
of salmon, mullet with slim figures and a softly glowing radiance
that Lacépède dedicated to the memory of his wife, and finally
the American cavalla, a handsome fish decorated by every honorary order,
bedizened with their every ribbon, frequenting the shores of this
great nation where ribbons and orders are held in such low esteem.

I might add that during the night, the Gulf Stream's phosphorescent
waters rivaled the electric glow of our beacon, especially in
the stormy weather that frequently threatened us.

On May 8, while abreast of North Carolina, we were across from
Cape Hatteras once more.  There the Gulf Stream is seventy-five
miles wide and 210 meters deep.  The Nautilus continued to wander
at random.  Seemingly, all supervision had been jettisoned.
Under these conditions I admit that we could easily have gotten away.
In fact, the populous shores offered ready refuge everywhere.
The sea was plowed continuously by the many steamers providing
service between the Gulf of Mexico and New York or Boston,
and it was crossed night and day by little schooners engaged
in coastal trade over various points on the American shore.
We could hope to be picked up.  So it was a promising opportunity,
despite the thirty miles that separated the Nautilus from
these Union coasts.

But one distressing circumstance totally thwarted the Canadian's plans.
The weather was thoroughly foul.  We were approaching waterways
where storms are commonplace, the very homeland of tornadoes
and cyclones specifically engendered by the Gulf Stream's current.
To face a frequently raging sea in a frail skiff was a race
to certain disaster.  Ned Land conceded this himself.
So he champed at the bit, in the grip of an intense homesickness
that could be cured only by our escape.

"Sir," he told me that day, "it's got to stop.  I want to get to
the bottom of this.  Your Nemo's veering away from shore and heading
up north.  But believe you me, I had my fill at the South Pole
and I'm not going with him to the North Pole."

"What can we do, Ned, since it isn't feasible to escape right now?"

"I keep coming back to my idea.  We've got to talk to the captain.
When we were in your own country's seas, you didn't say a word.
Now that we're in mine, I intend to speak up.  Before a few days
are out, I figure the Nautilus will lie abreast of Nova Scotia,
and from there to Newfoundland is the mouth of a large gulf,
and the St. Lawrence empties into that gulf, and the St. Lawrence
is my own river, the river running by Quebec, my hometown--
and when I think about all this, my gorge rises and my hair
stands on end!  Honestly, sir, I'd rather jump overboard!
I can't stay here any longer!  I'm suffocating!"

The Canadian was obviously at the end of his patience.
His vigorous nature couldn't adapt to this protracted imprisonment.
His facial appearance was changing by the day.  His moods grew gloomier
and gloomier.  I had a sense of what he was suffering because I also was
gripped by homesickness.  Nearly seven months had gone by without our
having any news from shore.  Moreover, Captain Nemo's reclusiveness,
his changed disposition, and especially his total silence since the battle
with the devilfish all made me see things in a different light.
I no longer felt the enthusiasm of our first days on board.
You needed to be Flemish like Conseil to accept these circumstances,
living in a habitat designed for cetaceans and other denizens
of the deep.  Truly, if that gallant lad had owned gills instead
of lungs, I think he would have made an outstanding fish!

"Well, sir?"  Ned Land went on, seeing that I hadn't replied.

"Well, Ned, you want me to ask Captain Nemo what he intends
to do with us?"

"Yes, sir."

"Even though he has already made that clear?"

"Yes.  I want it settled once and for all.  Speak just for me,
strictly on my behalf, if you want."

"But I rarely encounter him.  He positively avoids me."

"All the more reason you should go look him up."

"I'll confer with him, Ned."

"When?" the Canadian asked insistently.

"When I encounter him."

"Professor Aronnax, would you like me to go find him myself?"

"No, let me do it.  Tomorrow--"

"Today," Ned Land said.

"So be it.  I'll see him today," I answered the Canadian, who,
if he took action himself, would certainly have ruined everything.

I was left to myself.  His request granted, I decided to dispose
of it immediately.  I like things over and done with.

I reentered my stateroom.  From there I could hear movements
inside Captain Nemo's quarters.  I couldn't pass up this chance
for an encounter.  I knocked on his door.  I received no reply.
I knocked again, then tried the knob.  The door opened.

I entered.  The captain was there.  He was bending over his worktable
and hadn't heard me.  Determined not to leave without questioning him,
I drew closer.  He looked up sharply, with a frowning brow,
and said in a pretty stern tone:

"Oh, it's you!  What do you want?"

"To speak with you, captain."

"But I'm busy, sir, I'm at work.  I give you the freedom to enjoy
your privacy, can't I have the same for myself?"

This reception was less than encouraging.  But I was determined
to give as good as I got.

"Sir," I said coolly, "I need to speak with you on a matter that
simply can't wait."

"Whatever could that be, sir?" he replied sarcastically.
"Have you made some discovery that has escaped me?  Has the sea
yielded up some novel secret to you?"

We were miles apart.  But before I could reply, he showed me
a manuscript open on the table and told me in a more serious tone:

"Here, Professor Aronnax, is a manuscript written in several languages.
It contains a summary of my research under the sea, and God willing, it
won't perish with me.  Signed with my name, complete with my life story,
this manuscript will be enclosed in a small, unsinkable contrivance.
The last surviving man on the Nautilus will throw this contrivance
into the sea, and it will go wherever the waves carry it."

The man's name!  His life story written by himself!
So the secret of his existence might someday be unveiled?
But just then I saw this announcement only as a lead-in to my topic.

"Captain," I replied, "I'm all praise for this idea you're putting
into effect.  The fruits of your research must not be lost.
But the methods you're using strike me as primitive.  Who knows where
