credited. Her troops stormed easily the gates we had left to them, and
swarmed up till they stood where the pathway was broken down. In the
fierceness of their rush, the foremost were thrust over the brink by
those pressing up behind, before the advance could be halted, and these
went screaming to a horrid death in the great gulf below. But it was no
position here that a lavish spending of men could take, and presently
all were drawn off, save for some half-score who stood as outpost
sentries, and dodged out of arrow-shot behind angles of the rock.

It seems, too, that the Empress herself reconnoitered the place, using
due caution and quickness, and so got for herself a full plan of its
requirements without being obliged to trust the measuring of another
eye. With extraordinary nimbleness she must have planned an engine such
as was necessary to suit her purposes, and given orders for its making;
for even with the vast force and resources at her disposal, the speed
with which it was built was prodigious.

There was very little noise made to tell of what was afoot. All the
woodwork and metalwork was cut, and tongued, and forged, and fitted
first by skilled craftsmen below, in the plain at the foot of the cleft;
and when each ponderous balk and each crosspiece, and each plank was
dragged up the steep pass through the conquered gates, it was ready
instantly for fitting into its appointed place in the completed machine.

The cleft was straight where they set about their building, and there
was no curve or spur of the cliff to hide their handiwork from those of
the Priests who watched from the ramparts above our one remaining gate.
But Phorenice had a coyness lest her engine should be seen before it
was completed, and so to screen it she had a vast fire built at the
uppermost point where the causeway was broken off, and fed diligently
with wet sedge and green wood, so that a great smoke poured out, rising
like a curtain that shut out all view. And so though the Priests on the
rampart above the gate picked off now and again some of those who tended
the fire, they could do the besiegers no further injury, and remained up
to the last quite in ignorance of their tactics.

The passage up the cleft was in shadow during the night hours, for,
though all the crest of the Sacred Mountain was always lit brightly by
the eternal fires which made its defence on the farther side, their glow
threw no gleam down that flank where the cliff ran sheer to the plains
beneath. And so it was under cover of the darkness that Phorenice
brought up her engine into position for attack.

Planking had been laid down for its wheels, and the wheels themselves
well greased, and it may be that she hoped to march in upon us whilst
all slept. But there was a certain creaking and groaning of timbers,
and laboured panting of men, which gave advertisement that something was
being attempted, and the alarm was spread quietly in the hope that if a
surprise had been planned, the real surprise might be turned the other
way.

A messenger came to me running, where I sat in the house at the side of
my love, and she, like the soldier's wife she was made to be, kissed me
and bade me go quickly and care for my honour, and bring back my wounds
for her to mend.

On the rampart above the gate all was silence, save for the faint rustle
of armed men, and out of the black darkness ahead, and from the other
side of the broken causeway, came the sounds of which the messenger bad
warned me.

The captain of the gate came to me and whispered: "We have made no light
till the King came, not knowing the King's will in the matter. Is it
wished I send some of the throwing-fire down yonder, on the chance that
it does some harm, and at the same time lights up the place? Or is it
willed that we wait for their surprise?"

"Send the fire," I said, "or we may find that Phorenice's brain has been
one too many for us."

The captain of the gate took one of the balls in his hand, lit the fuse,
and hurled it. The horrid thing burst amongst a mass of men who were
labouring with a huge engine, sputtering them with its deadly fire, and
lighting their garments. The plan of the engine showed itself plainly.
They had built them a vast great tower, resting on wheels at its base,
so that it might by pushed forward from behind, and slanting at its foot
to allow for the steepness of the path and leave it always upright.

It was storeyed inside, with ladders joining each floor, and through
slits in the side which faced us bowmen could cover an attack. From its
top a great bridge reared high above it, being carried vertically till
the tower was brought near enough for its use. The bridge was hinged at
the third storey of the tower, and fastened with ropes to its extreme
top; but, once the ropes were cut, the bridge would fall, and light upon
whatever came within its swing, and be held there by the spikes with
which it was studded beneath.

I saw, and inwardly felt myself conquered. The cleverness of Phorenice
had been too strong for my defence. No war-engine of which we had
command could overset the tower. The whole of its massive timbers
were hung with the wet new-stripped skins of beasts, so that even the
throwing-fire could not destroy it. What puny means we had to impede
those who pushed it forward would have little effect. Presently it would
come to the place appointed, and the ropes would be cut, and the bridge
would thunder down on the rampart above our last gate, and the stormers
would pour out to their final success.

Well, life had loomed very pleasant for me these few days with a warm
and loving Nais once more in touch of my arms, but the High Gods in
Their infinite wisdom knew best always, and I was no rebel to stay
stiff-necked against their decision. But it is ever a soldier's
privilege, come what may, to warm over a fight, and the most exquisitely
fierce joy of all is that final fight of a man who knows that he must
die, and who lusts only to make his bed of slain high enough to carry a
due memory of his powers with those who afterwards come to gaze upon it.
I gripped my axe, and the muscles of my arms stood out in knots at the
thought of it. Would Tatho come to give me sport? I feared not. They
would send only the common soldiers first to the storm, and I must be
content to do my killing on those.

And Nais, what of her? I had a quiet mind there. When any spoilers came
to the house where she lay, she would know that Deucalion had been taken
up to the Gods, and she would not be long in following him. She had her
dagger. No, I had no fears of being parted long from Nais now.




19. DESTRUCTION OF ATLANTIS


A tottering old Priest came up and touched me on the shoulder.

"Well?" I said sharply, having small taste for interruption just now.

"News has been carried to the Three, my King, of what is threatened."

"Then they will know that I stand here now, brother, to enjoy the finest
fight of my life. When it is finished I shall go to the Gods, and be
there standing behind the stars to welcome them when presently they also
arrive. They have my regrets that they are too old and too feeble to die
and look upon a fine killing themselves."

"I have commands from them, my King, to lay upon you, which I fear you
will like but slenderly. You are forbidden to find your death here in
the fighting. They have a further use for you yet."

I turned on the old man angrily enough. "I shall take no such order,
my brother. I am not going to believe it was ever given. You must have
misunderstood. If I am a man, if I am a Priest, if I am a soldier, if
I am a King, then it stands to my honour that no enemy should pass this
gate whilst yet I live. And you may go back and throw that message at
their teeth."

The old man smiled enviously. He, too, had been a keen soldier in his
day. "I told them you would not easily believe such a message, and asked
them for a sign, and they bore with me, and gave me one. I was to give
you this jewel, my King."

"How came they by that? It is a bracelet from the elbow of Nais."

"They must have stripped her of it. I did not know it came from Nais.
The word I was to bring you said that the owner of the jewel was inside
the Ark of the Mysteries, and waited you there. The use which the Three
have for you further concerns her also."

Even when I heard that, I will freely confess that my obedience was
sorely tried, and I have the less shame in setting it down on these
sheets, because I know that all true soldiers will feel a sympathy for
my plight. Indeed, the promise of the battle was very tempting. But in
the end my love for Nais prevailed, and I gave the salutation that was
needful in token that I heard the order and obeyed it.

To the knot of Priests who were left for the defence, I turned and made
my farewells. "You will have what I shall miss, my brothers," I said. "I
envy you that fight. But, though I am King of Atlantis, still I am only
one of the Seven, and so am the servant of the Three and must obey their
order. They speak in words the will of the most High Gods, and we must
do as they command. You will stand behind the stars before I come, and
I ask of you that you will commend me to Those you meet there. It is not
my own will that I shall not appear there by your side."

They heard my words with smiles, and very courteously saluted me with
their weapons, and there we parted. I did not see the fight, but I know
it was good, from the time which passed before Phorenice's hordes broke
out on to the crest of the Mountain. They died hard, that last remnant
of the lesser Priests of Atlantis.

With a sour enough feeling I went up to the head of the pass, and then
through the groves, and between the temples and colleges and houses
which stood on the upper slopes of the Sacred Mountain, till I reached
that boundary, beyond which in milder days it was death for any but the
privileged few to pass. But the time, it appeared to me, was past for
conventions, and, moreover, my own temper was hot; and it is likely
that I should have strode on with little scruple if I had not been
interrupted. But in the temple which marked the boundary, there was old
Zaemon waiting; and he, with due solemnity of words, and with the whole
of some ancient ritual ordained for that purpose, sought dispensation
from the High Gods for my trespass, and would not give me way till he
was through with his ceremony.

Already Phorenice's tower and bridge were in position, for the clash and
yelling of a fight told that the small handful of Priests on the rampart
of the last gate were bartering their lives for the highest return in
dead that they could earn. They were trained fighting men all, but old
and feeble, and the odds against them were too enormous to be stemmed
for over long. In a very short time the place would be put to the storm,
and the roof of the Sacred Mountain would be at the open mercy of the
invader. If there was any further thing to be done, it was well that it
should be set about quickly whilst peace remained. It seemed to me
that the moment for prompt action, and the time for lengthy pompous
ceremonial was done for good.

But Zaemon was minded otherwise. He led me up to the Ark of the
Mysteries, and chided my impatience, and waited till I had given it my
reverential kiss, and then he called aloud, and another old man came
out of the opening which is in the top of the Ark, and climbed painfully
down by the battens which are fixed on its sides. He was a man I had
never seen before, hoary, frail, and emaciated, and he and Zaemon were
then the only two remaining Priests who had been raised to the highest
degree known to our Clan, and who alone had knowledge of the highest
secrets and powers and mysteries.

"Look!" cried Zaemon, in his shrill old voice, and swept a trembling
finger over the shattered city, and the great spread of sea and country
which lay in view of us below. I followed his pointing and looked, and a
chill began to crawl through me. All was plainly shown. Our Lord the Sun
burned high overhead in a sky of cloudless blue, and day shimmered in
His heat. All below seemed from that distance peaceful and warm and
still, save only that the mountains smoked more than ordinary, and some
spouted fires, and that the sea boiled with some strange disorder.

But it was the significance of the sea that troubled me most. Far out on
the distant coast it surged against the rocks in enormous rolls of surf;
and up the great estuary, at the head of which the city of Atlantis
stands, it gushed in successive waves of enormous height which never
returned. Already the lower lands on either side were blotted out
beneath tumultuous waters, the harbour walls were drowned out of sight,
and the flood was creeping up into the lower wards of the great city
itself.

"You have seen?" asked Zaemon.

"I have seen."

"You understand?"

"In part."

"Then let me tell you all. This is the beginning, and the end will
follow swiftly. The most High Gods, that sit behind the stars, have a
limit to even Their sublime patience; and that has been passed. The city
of Atlantis, the great continent that is beyond, and all that are in
them are doomed to unutterable destruction. Of old it was foreseen that
this great wiping-out would happen through the sins of men, and to this
end the Ark of the Mysteries was built under the direction of the Gods.
No mortal implements can so much as scratch its surface, no waves or
rocks wreck it. Inside is stored on sheets of the ancient writing all
that is known in the world of learning that is not shared by the
common people, also there is grain in a store, and sweet water in tanks
sufficient for two persons for the space of four years, together with
seeds, weapons, and all such other matters as were deemed fit.

"Out of all this vast country it has been decreed by the High Gods that
two shall not perish. Two shall be chosen, a man and a woman, who are
fit and proper persons to carry away with them the ancient learning to
dispose of it as they see best, and afterwards to rear up a race who
shall in time build another kingdom and do honour to our Lord the
Sun and the other Gods in another place. The woman is within the Ark
already, and seated in the place appointed for her, and though she is a
daughter of mine, the burden of her choosing is with you. For the man,
the choice has fallen upon yourself."

I was half numb with the shock of what was befalling. "I do not know
that I care to be a survivor."

"You are not asked for your wishes," said the old man. "You are given an
order from the High Gods, who know you to be Their faithful servant."

Habit rode strong upon me. I made salutation in the required form, and
said that I heard and would obey.

"Then it remains to raise you to the sublime degree of the Three, and if
your learning is so small that you will not understand the keys to many
of the Powers, and the highest of the Mysteries, when they are handed to
you, that fault cannot be remedied now."

Certainly the time remaining was short enough. The fight still raged
down at the gate in the pass, though it was a wonder how the handful of
Priests had held their ground so long. But the ocean rolled in upon the
land in an ever-increasing flood, and the mountains smoked and belched
forth more volleys of rock as the weight increased on their lower parts,
and presently those that besieged the Mountain could not fail to see
the fate that threatened them. Then there would be no withholding their
rush. In their mad fury and panic they would sweep all obstruction
resistlessly before them, and those who stood in their path might look
to themselves.

But there was no hurrying Zaemon and his fellow sage. They were without
temple for the ceremony, without sacrifice or incense to decorate it.
They had but the sky for a roof to make their echoes, and the Gods
themselves for witnesses. But they went through the work of raising
me to their own degree, with all the grand and majestic form which has
gathered dignity from the ages, and by no one sentence did they curtail
it. A burning mountain burst with a bellowing roar as the incoming
waters met its fires, but gravely they went on, in turn reciting their
sentences. Phorenice's troops broke down the last resistance, and poured
in a frenzied stream amongst the groves and temples, but still they
quavered never in the ritual.

It had been said that this ceremony is the grandest and the most
impressive of all those connected with our holy religion; and certainly
I found it so; and I speak as one intimate with all the others. Even the
tremendous circumstances which hemmed them in could do nothing to make
these frail old men forget the deference which was due to the highest
order of the Clan.

For myself, I will freely own I was less rapt. I stood there bareheaded
in the heat, a man trying to concentrate himself, and yet torn the while
by a thousand foreign emotions. The awful thing that was happening all
around compelled some of my attention. A continent was in the very act
and article of meeting with complete destruction, and if Zaemon and
the other Priest were strong enough to give their minds wholly up to a
matter parochial to the priesthood, I was not so stoical. And moreover,
I was filled with other anxieties and thoughts concerning Nais. Yet I
managed to preserve a decent show of attention to the ceremony; making
all those responses which were required of me; and trying as well as
might be to preserve in my mind those sentences which were the keys to
power and learning, and not mere phrasings of grandeur and devotion.

But it became clear that if the ceremony of my raising did not soon
arrive at its natural end, it would be cut short presently with
something of suddenness. Phorenice's conquering legions swarmed out
on to the crest of the Mountain, and now carried full knowledge of the
dreadful thing that was come upon the country. They were out of all
control, and ran about like men distracted; but knowing full well that
the Priests would have brought this terrible wreck to pass by virtue of
the powers which were stored within the Ark of the Mysteries, it would
be their natural impulse to pour out a final vengeance upon any of these
same Priests they could come across before it was too late.

It began to come to my mind that if the ceremony did not very shortly
