with Daoud after Manfred was killed. How he lay helpless with Daoud's
sword pointed at his face.

"He did not move for a long time," Simon said. "It was growing dark, but
I saw the look on his face. A gentle look. He did not want to kill me. I
am sure of it."

And then without any warning had come the treacherous crossbow bolt out
of the circle around them, and Daoud had fallen.

"It was Sordello. He could not understand my rage at him. He kept
protesting that he had saved my life. He had not."

Sophia thought of Sordello's attempt to seduce her. She clutched the
wooden railing, choking bile rising in her throat.

"I am glad I killed him," she whispered. "I have never killed anyone
before tonight. That I killed him was a gift from God."

Simon did not answer at once.

Then he said, "Tonight, before Daoud died, he told me that you were
innocently drawn into his conspiracy against the alliance. He said he
took advantage of my love for you, and that you and he were never close.
But now that you've heard he is dead, you are like a woman who has lost
a husband or a lover."

He stopped. He needed to say no more. She knew what he was asking.

The enormous aching void inside her made it almost impossible to think.
Daoud, even as he lay dying, had tried to protect her. Simon might have
suspicions, but about who she was or what she had done, he knew nothing.
Manfred was dead. Tilia, Ugolini and Lorenzo--wherever they might be
now--would say nothing.

She could, if she chose, become the person Simon thought she was--the
person who had given herself to Simon in love at the lake outside
Perugia. She need only seize the chance Daoud had given her.

In all Italy there was no place for her now. Once again she belonged
nowhere and to no one. And she could be a wife to this good young man.
She could be the Countess de Gobignon, with a station in life, with
power to accomplish things, to change the world.

"You want to know what Daoud meant to me," she said. "Did you tell him
what I meant to you?" She was amazed at how level her voice sounded.

"I think he knew," Simon spoke just above a whisper. "I did not feel I
had to tell him anything."

Then Daoud had died not knowing that she and Simon had for a moment been
lovers. Did it matter? If Daoud had known, perhaps he would have killed
Simon instead of just standing over him with his sword.

His not knowing had not hurt Daoud. But it was hurting her.

_There was a part of myself I withheld from him. And that was my loss,
because much as he loved me, he did not know me fully._

But if she regretted not telling Daoud the truth about that single
moment, how could she ever bear to hide from Simon the truth about her
whole life?

Could she pretend, forevermore, to be Sophia Orfali, the naive Sicilian
girl, the cardinal's niece, with whom Simon had fallen in love? Could
she pour all of herself into a mask? Could she live with Simon, enjoying
the love and the wealth and power he offered her, knowing that it was
all founded on a lie?

_No, never. Impossible._

The pain of Daoud's death was nearly unbearable, but it was _her_ pain,
true pain. Ever since that night of death in Constantinople--a night
much like this--she had not felt at home in the world. Now she saw her
place. All she owned in the world was the person she _really_ was, and
what she _really_ had done. If she deceived Simon, she would have to
deny her very existence.

_And I would have to deny the greatest happiness I have ever known, my
love for Daoud._

If she lied to Simon, it would be as if Daoud had never been. It would
be like killing him a second time. Her heart, screaming even now with
her longing for Daoud, would scream forever in silence. Buried alive.

Simon must already suspect the truth. He might try to believe whatever
she told him about herself. Still, some awareness of his self-deception
would remain with him, even if he refused to think about it. It would
fester inside him, slowly poisoning him.

Her eyes had adjusted to the darkness, and she could see the suffering
in Simon's long, narrow face as he waited for her answer. Starlight
twinkled on the jeweled handle of the sword at his belt. What she told
him might make him hate her so much that he would kill her.

_I have never been more willing to die._

"Simon, I promised you that when I saw you again I would tell you why I
could not marry you. I hoped I never would have to tell you."

He said, "I had not wanted to fight in this war of Charles against
Manfred, or to bring the men of Gobignon with me. When I found that you
had fled to Manfred's kingdom, I changed my mind."

Her pain had been like a pile of rocks heaped upon her, and what he said
was the final boulder crushing her. Her ribs seemed to splinter; her
lungs labored for breath.

_So I must bear the guilt for Simon's coming to the war. How many men
died today because of me?_

She could hardly feel more sorrow, but the night around her seemed to
grow blacker. Perhaps it would be best if he did kill her. She would
tell him everything straight out, without trying to protect herself from
his anger.

"My name is Sophia Karaiannides. I worked as a spy in Constantinople for
Michael Paleologos and helped him overthrow the Frankish usurper. I was
Michael's concubine for a time. Then he sent me to be his private
messenger to Manfred's court here in Italy. Manfred chose to make me his
mistress. But that became difficult for him and dangerous for me. When
Daoud came to Manfred asking for help in thwarting the Tartar alliance,
Manfred sent me along to Orvieto to help him. I fell in love with
Daoud."

Simon leaned his long body against the outer wall of the house. Having
to hear this all at once must be overwhelming.

"So you went from one to bed to the next as you went from one country to
the next."

It hurt her to hear his words, his voice tight with pain, but she had
expected this.

"Daoud and I did not come together as man and woman at first," she said.
"He did not want to be close to me."

He staggered back to the edge of the balcony as if she had struck him,
and she was afraid he might fall.

He whispered, "Not at first! But you did--"

"Yes, we did," she said, thinking, _Now he is going to draw that
scimitar and kill me_.

But the only movement he made was a slight wave of his hand, telling her
to go on.

"I must tell you, Simon, that it was I who first fell in love with
Daoud. There were moments when I hated him--when he killed your friend,
for instance--but as I got to know him better and better I could not
help loving him. I had been loved by an emperor and a king, but I had
never met a man like Daoud. He had begun as a slave, and he became
warrior, philosopher, poet, even a kind of priest, all in one
magnificent person. You probably have no idea what I am talking about.
You knew him only as the merchant David of Trebizond."

"I knew you only as Sophia Orfali."

"You may despise me now that you have learned so much about me, but the
more you knew of him, the more you would have had to admire him."

"How insignificant I must have seemed to you beside such grandeur." She
could hear him breathing heavily in the darkness, sounding like a man
struggling under a weight he could not bear.

"I did love you, Simon. That was why I cried when you said you wanted to
marry me. The word love has many meanings. And your French troubadours
may call it blasphemy, but it _is_ possible for a woman to love more
than one man."

"Not blasphemy. Trahison. Treachery."

"As you wish. But in that moment you and I shared by the lake near
Perugia, I was altogether yours. That, too, is why I fled from you. I
could not stand being torn in two."

"Why torn in two, if you find you can love more than one man?" The hate
in his voice made her want to throw herself from the balcony, but she
told herself it would ease his suffering for him to feel that way.

"I said it was possible. I did not say it was easy. Especially when the
two men are at war with each other."

"And did Daoud know about me? Did you tell him what you and I did that
day?"

"No," she said, finding it almost impossible to force the words through
her constricted throat. "I could never tell him."

"So you could not admit to this _magnificent_ man, this philosopher,
this priest, that you had betrayed him with me."

"No," she whispered. "He was jealous, as you are. At first he wanted me
to seduce you. But as he came to love me--I saw it happening and I saw
him fighting it--he came to hate the idea of letting you make love to
me. He came to hate you, because of that, and because he envied you."

"Envied me?"

"Yes. He saw you as one who had all that he never had--a home, a
family."

Simon stepped forward and brought his face close to hers. "Did you tell
him about my parentage?"

"No, never."

"Why not?" His voice was bitter. "Was that not the sort of thing you
were expected to find out? Could he not have found a way to use it? Were
you not betraying your war against us--what do you Byzantines call us,
Franks?--by withholding it?"

"I told you that loving you both was tearing me apart," she said
helplessly.

"But you loved him more--that is clear."

"Yes. I loved him more because he knew me as I was, and loved me as I
was. You loved me, and it broke my heart to see how much you loved me.
But you loved the woman I was pretending to be. Now that you really know
me, you hate me."

"Should I not? How can you tell me all this without shame?"

"I am not ashamed. I am sorry. More sorry than I can ever say. But what
have I to be ashamed of? I am a woman of Byzantium. I was fighting for
my people. Surely you know what your Franks did to Constantinople. Look
and listen to what Anjou's army is doing tonight to Benevento."

"Daoud spoke that way as he lay dying," Simon said slowly.

A sob convulsed Sophia. It was a moment before she could speak again.

"I hope, at least, you understand us--Daoud and me--a little better,"
said Sophia. "Kill me now, or hang me or burn me tomorrow. As I feel
now, death would be a relief."

"I know how you feel," said Simon. "I, too, have lost the one I loved."

"Oh, Simon." She felt herself starting to weep again, for Simon and
Daoud both.

"What do you want to do?" he asked.

"What does it matter? I am your prisoner. And Rachel. And Tilia and
Ugolini. All of us."

She remembered the hope she had been harboring these past few weeks. If
she died now, would another life within her die? If she lived, how would
she care for that life?

He sighed. "For me this is all over. If I hurt you, what good would that
do me now? It would be just one more unbearable memory to carry with me
through life. One more reason to hate myself. I want to know, if you
were free to do as you wish, what would you do?"

Her mind, numbed with sorrow, was a blank. With Daoud dead, the
remainder of her life seemed worthless to her. Even the thought that she
might be carrying Daoud's child seemed only added reason for sorrow.

"Now that all of Italy is in the hands of Manfred's enemies, I suppose I
would go back to Constantinople," she said. The thought of returning
home to the city she loved was a faint light in the blackness of her
despair.

"For my part, I would not stop you from going," he said. The weary
sadness in his voice stung her.

If he meant it--and he seemed to--she should be relieved. Overjoyed,
even. But all she felt was the weight of her grief, pressing pain into
the very marrow of her bones.

"What do you mean to do about Tilia Caballo and Ugolini?" she asked.

"I am sure King Charles wants them, but I do not care to be the one who
dooms them by turning them over to him."

_King Charles._ The title sounded so strange. That was how the ones who
supported him must speak of him, of course. And her heart wept a little
for Manfred, whom she had not thought of in her agony over Daoud's
death.

She heard the note of disdain toward Charles in Simon's voice and
wondered at it.

"You will not deliver Charles's enemies to him? After coming here and
helping him win his war? Have you turned against him?"

"Gradually--too gradually, I am sorry to say--I have come to see that
Charles d'Anjou was not the great man I once thought him to be. When I
learned that John and Philip were killed, that killed any remaining
feeling I have for Charles. So I will help you if I can. But where can
you all go? All of southern Italy and Sicily will be overrun with
Anjou's men. I cannot keep you, and you cannot safely leave me."

"Let us go back to the others," said Sophia. "It will be best if we talk
together about this."

She could hardly believe he was serious about letting her escape. Her
pain-wracked mind was unable to come to grips with what was happening to
her. How she needed Daoud! He would know what to do. As she entered the
firelit room her eyes blurred with tears.

But she saw at once that there were more people in the room than when
she had gone out on the balcony with Simon.

One of them was holding a crossbow leveled at Simon. Her heart stopped.
Then she recognized him, and she let her breath out in relief. Black and
white curly hair, graying mustache, broad shoulders. Lorenzo.

She heard a growling. Scipio stood there, held tightly on a leash by
Tilia. Ugolini was beside her.

Rachel hurried to Sophia and took her hand. "I'm glad you are back. I
was frightened for you."

"Simon wants to help us," said Sophia, taking Rachel's hand. She could
not give up in despair, she thought, while she had Rachel to care for.

"You took long enough to come in off that balcony, Count," Lorenzo said.

"Put down your crossbow," Sophia said. "Count Simon has decided to be a
friend to us."

"I would not regret giving our new friend just what _my_ friend Daoud
got today from his man Sordello," Lorenzo said.

Tilia said, "Do you--know, Sophia? About Daoud?"

Holding herself rigid against this fresh reminder of her grief, Sophia
said only, "Yes."

Friar Mathieu said, "Lorenzo, the man who killed Daoud lies there--on
the floor. No need to talk about revenge." He pointed to a corner of the
room where Sordello's body lay.

Needing a moment's relief from her pain, Sophia said, "Lorenzo, how did
you ever get here?"

Still holding the crossbow pointed at Simon, Lorenzo spoke without
looking at her.

"After I got Rachel and Friar Mathieu out of the French camp, I saw
this fellow's army charging down from the hills to attack Daoud and his
Falcons." Lorenzo shook the crossbow.

Sophia prayed that he would put the crossbow down. What if by accident
he unleashed a bolt at Simon? If Simon were to die before her eyes, that
would surely be more than she could bear.

"I had to try to warn Daoud," Lorenzo said. "I left Rachel and the friar
there and rode off. I never did reach Daoud." He hesitated a moment,
eyeing Simon, then smiled, a hard smile without warmth or mirth.

"I got your precious Tartars, though, Count Simon."

Simon nodded, his eyes bitter. "Sordello told me it was you who killed
them." He took a step toward Lorenzo, who shook the crossbow at him
again.

_Put it down!_ Sophia wanted to scream.

"Yes. That worm-eaten spy of yours told you, eh?" Lorenzo jerked his
head in the direction of Sordello's body. "He was trying to guard them
at the time. He did a bad job of it."

"Mere de Dieu!" was all Simon said. Anger reddened his face, but he was
looking off into space, not at Lorenzo.

"After that," Lorenzo went on, "I found the wagon, but Rachel and Friar
Mathieu were gone. I found another riderless horse and hitched it up,
and I drove the wagon into the forest west of here. Rachel, I buried
your chest. I hope I remember where.

"By then it was nightfall. I used my forged safe conduct to get me back
into Benevento. Then I had to dodge the mobs of drunken Frenchmen
running wild all over town. I knew where you were staying, Sophia, but
it took me all night to get into this house past Count Simon's guards. I
spent hours in hiding and scrambling about on rooftops."

"I thought I would die of fright," said Tilia, "when Lorenzo came
through our window."

_Thank God for Lorenzo! How I love him. Nothing can stop him. Nothing
can kill him._

"What were you planning to do with these people when you came here,
Count?" Lorenzo said. "Turn them over to your master, Anjou?"

Sophia turned to look at Simon. He stood composed, his empty hands at
his sides, his face, pink in the glow from the fire, calm as a statue's.

"_Your_ master--Daoud the Mameluke--asked me to come here," Simon said.

"_Please_ put your crossbow down, Lorenzo," Sophia said again.

"Are you sure, Sophia? This crossbow might be the only thing that keeps
us from getting dragged off to be hanged. This high-horse bastard has
fifty men outside."

Greek Fire blazed in Sophia's brain.

She screamed, "Do not call him a bastard!"

"Sophia!" said Simon wonderingly. "Thank you!"

She stood trembling, but almost as soon as the words flew from her
mouth, the fit of rage passed.

_I must be going mad._

But she had done no harm. She seemed to have made things better.

"Forgive me, Count." Lorenzo laid the crossbow on the bed. "It was rude
to call you that. But you did ruin our hope of victory today. Daoud had
the battle won. He almost had his hands on your bloody Charles d'Anjou,
when you charged out of the hills with your damned army. And now the
king I served for twenty years and my good friend are both dead." He
rubbed the back of his hand across his eyes. "That was hard, Count. Very
hard."

_So it was Simon's charge that turned the battle_, Sophia thought. _And
it was because of me that he entered this war._ Her grief grew heavier
still.

"You may hold those things against me," said Simon, "and I might hold
against you the deaths of John and Philip, whom I dedicated my life to
protecting."

Listening to that grave, quiet voice, Sophia realized that Simon no
longer seemed young to her. It was as if he had aged many years since
she had seen him last.

As long as she had known him, she had thought of him as a boy. And yet,
from what she was hearing, if Charles d'Anjou was now king of southern
Italy and Sicily, it was to Simon that he owed the crown.

"But I know who really killed the Tartars," Simon went on. "It was
Charles, Count Charles, now King Charles, who no more wants to make war
on Islam than your friend Daoud did. Charles kept the Tartars with
himself and away from King Louis, and he let them go out on the field
while the battle was raging, no doubt hoping they would die."

Lorenzo frowned. "You mean Charles used me to get rid of the Tartars?"

Simon nodded. "He could not have known it would be you, but he made sure
they would be in harm's way. Charles is very good at using people. My
mother warned me about him long before I let him persuade me to come to
Italy to guard the Tartars, but I did not listen. But now, how are we
going to get all of you safely out of Benevento?"

He kept coming back to that, Sophia thought. He seemed determined to
save them from Charles d'Anjou's vengeance.

"We may still have the wagon I hid out in the forest," Lorenzo said.
"And if you truly mean to help us, you might appropriate a horse or two.
There are many horses hereabouts whose owners will never need them
again."

"I can write you a genuine safe-conduct that will get you past Charles's
officials and agents," Simon said. "If you travel quickly enough, you
may get ahead of them into territory still friendly to you. There may be
no army left to oppose Charles, but it will take him some time to get
control of all the territory he has won. Where might you go?"

Sophia took Rachel's hand again, and they sat on the bed. Remembering
that she and Daoud had shared this bed last night, Sophia felt the
heaped stones of sorrow weigh heavier still.

_I will never hold him again._

To distract herself from her pain, she tried to listen to what people
around her were saying.

"To Palermo first," said Lorenzo decisively. "At a time like this, with
the king gone, every family must fend for itself. I want to get to mine
at once." He turned to Rachel, and his mustache stretched in one of the
smiles Sophia had seen all too rarely. "My wife, Fiorela, and I would be
honored to have you as a member of our family, Rachel."

Rachel gave a little gasp. "Truly?"

"Truly. I have been wanting to propose it for a long time."

Again Sophia thanked God for Lorenzo. She almost wished he would offer
to take her into his family too.

Simon stared at Lorenzo. "You are--were--an official at Manfred's court,
and your wife's name is Fiorela?"

Lorenzo frowned. "Yes, Count. What of it?"

Simon's interest puzzled Sophia. Could there be some connection between
him and Lorenzo?

"We must speak more about her later." Simon flexed his mail-clad arms.
"It will not be safe for you to try to leave Benevento until morning. I
will see to it that my men guard this house from the looters till then.
They will not, of course, know who is in here with me. Meanwhile, you
all had better sleep, if you can."

Weary and broken by sorrow though she was, Sophia knew that to try to
lie down in the dark would mean nothing but hours of suffering. She
would sleep only when she fainted from exhaustion. And she dreaded the
agony she would feel when she woke again and remembered what had
happened this day.

Tilia cleared her throat politely. "Your Signory, it will be hard to
sleep in the same room with dead bodies."

Simon frowned. "Dead bodies?"

"Well--I hope you will not hold it against myself and the cardinal--but
besides Sordello here, there are two of his henchmen in the room we have
been occupying."

"Also dead?"

"Also dead. They were trying to rob us."

Now Sophia remembered that Sordello had brought two Venetians with him,
and she remembered the barks and growls that had come up through the
floorboards while she was alone with Sordello. What had happened down
there between Ugolini and Tilia and Sordello's men? And Scipio?

Sophia looked at Tilia and noticed that she wore a small smile of
satisfaction and was fingering her jeweled pectoral cross.

_I need not worry about Tilia_, she thought grimly.

Simon sighed. "There must be a basement in this house, a root cellar,
something of the kind. Lorenzo, you and I will find a place to take the
bodies."

The room grew cold with Sophia and Rachel alone in it, and Sophia put
more logs on the fire, thankful that the merchant who had hurriedly
vacated this place had left plenty of wood. She lay down in the big bed
beside Rachel.

Hesitantly, Rachel told Sophia that she, with Friar Mathieu, had been
present at Daoud's death. She showed Sophia the little leather capsule,
and Sophia, remembering the many times she had seen it around Daoud's
neck, broke into a fresh storm of weeping.

Rachel held it out to her. "I think perhaps you should be the one to
have it."

"No. He gave it to you." Sophia wiped her eyes, drew out the locket and
opened it, looked sadly at the meaningless tracery of lines on its
rock-crystal surface, barely visible in the light from the low fire.

"This locket is what he gave me. It seems the magic in it died with him,
but it is a precious keepsake." She remembered that she had been looking
at the locket when Sordello tried to kill Simon. Why had he tried to do
that? It made no sense, but because of it she had killed Sordello, and
of that she was glad. She had avenged Daoud.

Desperately needing to know every detail of Daoud's death, Sophia
questioned Rachel until, in the middle of a sentence, the girl fell
asleep.

Sophia lay wide awake in the dark, crying silently. Lying there was
hell, as she had expected it would be. After what seemed like hours, the
fire on the hearth died. She got up and piled three bed carpets over
Rachel.

She wrapped herself in her winter cloak and slipped out of the room.
Going, she knew not where, but unable to remain still. Wanting only to
distract herself from her pain with a little movement.

She went down the stairs, passing the silent second-floor room were
Ugolini and Tilia lay. She heard men's voices from a room on the ground
floor.

The cabinet of the merchant who owned this house was just inside the
front door. There Sophia found Simon and Lorenzo seated facing each
other at a long black table. Scipio, lying on the floor near the
doorway, opened one eye, twitched an ear at her, and went back to sleep.
With a quill Simon was writing out a document, while Lorenzo used a
candle flame to melt sealing wax in a small brass pitcher on a tripod.

Simon gave her a brief, sad smile. He had taken off his mail, and wore
only his quilted white under-tunic.

Lorenzo stood up, went to a sideboard, and poured a cup of wine. Silent,
he handed it to Sophia. It was sweeter than she liked, but it warmed
her.

She took a chair at the end of the table. The two men sat there so
companionably that it was hard to believe that for more than two years
they had been enemies. She recalled with a pang how Daoud had said he no
longer hated Simon. If only he could be here to be part of this.

"One cannot predict these things," Lorenzo said, continuing the
conversation that had begun before Sophia arrived, "and I certainly do
not believe in trying to make them happen, but my son, Orlando, is at a
good age for marriage. And so is Rachel."

Simon looked up from his writing. "You would let your son marry a woman
who had spent over a year in a brothel?"

Lorenzo gave Simon a level look. "Yes. Do you disapprove?"

Simon shook his head. "From what I know of Rachel, not at all. But there
are many who would."

Knowing Lorenzo Celino, Sophia thought warmly, she was not surprised
that he did not feel as many other people would.

"Rachel is brave, intelligent, and beautiful," said Lorenzo. "What
happened to her was not her fault. And now she knows infinitely more of
the world than most women. If she should take an interest in Orlando,
he would be lucky to have her. And then Rachel will be your cousin,
Count Simon. She will surely be the only Jewish girl in all Europe who
is related--if only by marriage--to a great baron of France."

Sophia frowned at Lorenzo. Cousin? What was the man talking about?

Raising his head from his scroll, Simon saw her look and smiled. "I have
just discovered, Sophia, that Lorenzo Celino here is my uncle."

Sophia felt somewhat irritated. Were the two of them playing a sort of
joke on her?

"No, it's true, Sophia," said Lorenzo. "My wife came from Languedoc
years ago as a refugee from the war that was being fought there at the
time. Her maiden name was Fiorela de Vency. And her older brother,
Roland de Vency, went back to France and eventually married Simon's
mother, making him Simon's stepfather. So you see, I am Simon's uncle by
marriage."
