atrocious flaw, however, in the two stories by Capt. S. P. Meek about
the Heaviside Layer. How, may I ask, do meteors penetrate through that
imaginary substance which is too much for a powerful space flyer?
Also, how about refraction? A substance denser than air would produce
refraction that would have been noticed long ago. I don't mind minor
errors, but an author has no right to ignore the facts so
outrageously. Fiction goes too far when an author can invent such
false conditions.

In the latest issue "Stolen Brains" was fine, up to the Dr. Bird
standard. "The Invisible Death" was good enough, but too much like the
general run to be noteworthy. "Prisoners on the Electron"--couldn't
stomach it. Too hackneyed. "Jetta of the Lowlands," by Ray Cummings;
nuff said. "An Extra Man"--original idea and perfectly written. One of
the reasons I hang on to Science Fiction. A perfect gem.--Philip
Waite, 3400 Wayne Ave., New York, N. Y.

Dear Editor:

May I use enough space in your discussion columns to reply briefly to
the objections raised to the science in my two stories, "Beyond the
Heaviside Layer" and "The Attack from Space"? Understand that I am not
arguing that there actually is a thick wall of semi-plastic material
surrounding the earth through which a space flyer could not pass. If I
did, I would automatically bar myself from writing interplanetary
stories, a thing that is far from my desires. I do wish to point out,
however, that such a layer might exist, so far as we at present know.
The objections to which I wish to reply are two: first, "How do
meteors pass through that imaginary substance which is too much for a
powerful space flyer?" and second, "How about refraction?"

To reply to the first we must consider two things, kinetic energy and
resistance to the passage of a body. The kinetic energy of a moving
body is represented by the formula 1/2 mv^2 where m is the mass of the
body and v the velocity. The resistance of a substance to penetration
of a body is expressed by the formula A f_c where A is the area of the
body in contact with the resisting medium and f_c is the coefficient
of sliding friction between the penetrating body and the resisting
medium. Consider first the space flyer. To hold personnel the flyer
must be hollow. In other words, m must be small as compared to A. A
meteor, on the other hand, is solid and dense with a relatively large
m and small A. Given a meteor and a space flyer of the same weight,
the volume of the meteor would be much smaller, and as the area in
contact with the resisting medium is a function of volume, the total
resistance to be overcome by the space flyer would be much greater
than that to be overcome by the meteor. Again, consider the relative
velocities of a meteor and a space flyer coming from the earth toward
the heaviside layer. The meteor from space would have an enormous
velocity, so great that if it got into even very rare air, it would
become incandescent. As it must go through dense air, the space flyer
could attain only a relatively low velocity before it reached the
layer. Remember that the velocity is squared. A one thousand pound
meteor flying with a velocity 100 times that of the space ship would
have 100^2 or 10,000 times the kinetic energy of the space ship while
it would also have less friction to overcome due to its smaller size.

If my critic wishes to test this out for himself, I can suggest a very
simple experiment. Take a plank of sound pine wood, two inches thick
by twelve inches wide and four feet long. Support it on both ends and
then pile lead slabs onto it, covering the whole area of the board. If
the wood be sound the board will support a thousand pounds readily.
Now remove the lead slabs and fire a 200 grain lead bullet at the
board with a muzzle or initial velocity of 1,600 feet per second. The
bullet will penetrate the board very readily. Consider the heaviside
layer as the board, the space ship as the lead slabs and the bullet as
the meteor and you have the answer.

Consider one more thing. According to the stories, the layer grew
thicker and harder to penetrate as the flyer reached the outer
surface. The meteor would strike the most viscous part of the layer
with its maximum energy. As its velocity dropped and its kinetic
energy grew less, it would meet material easier to penetrate. On the
other hand the flyer, coming from the earth, would meet material easy
to penetrate and gradually lose its velocity and consequently its
kinetic energy. When it reached the very viscous portion of the layer,
it would have almost no energy left with which to force its way
through. Remember, the Mercurians made no attempt to penetrate the
layer until a portion of it had been destroyed by Carpenter's genius.

As for the matter of refraction. If you will place a glass cube or
other form in the air, you will have no difficulty in measuring the
refraction of the light passing through it. If, however, the observer
would place himself inside a hollow sphere of glass so perfectly
transparent as to be invisible, would not the refraction he would
observe be taken by him to be the refraction of air when in reality it
would be the combined refraction of the glass sphere and the air
around him?

I have taken glass as the medium to illustrate this because my critic
made the statement that "a substance denser than air would produce
refraction that would have been noticed long ago." However nowhere in
either story is the statement made that the material of the heaviside
layer was denser than air. The statement was that it was more viscous.
Viscosity is not necessarily a function of density. A heavy oil such
as you use in the winter to lubricate your automobile has a much
higher viscosity than water, yet it will float on water, i. e. it is
less dense. There is nothing in the story that would prevent the
heaviside layer from having a coefficient of refraction identical with
that of air.

To close, let me repeat that I am not arguing that such a layer
exists. I do not believe that it does and I do believe that my
generation will probably see the first interplanetary expedition start
and possibly see the first interplanetary trip succeed. I do, however,
contend that the science in my stories is accurate until it transcends
the boundaries of present day knowledge and ceases to be science and
becomes "super-science," and that my super-science is developed in a
logical manner from science and that nothing in present knowledge
makes the existence of such a layer impossible--S. P. Meek. Capt. Ord.
Dept., U. S. A.


_Likes Long Novelettes_

Dear Editor:

I have just finished reading the August issue of your magazine. I am
going to rate the different stories in per cents. 100% means
excellent; 75% fairly good; 50% passable; 25% just an ordinary story.

I give "Marooned Under The Sea," by Paul Ernst, 100%; 75% for "The
Attack From Space," by Captain S. P. Meek. "The Problem in
Communication," by Miles J. Breuer, M. D. and "Jetta of the Lowlands,"
by Ray Cummings; 50% for "The Murder Machine," by Hugh B. Cave and
"Earth, The Marauder," by Arthur J. Burks; 25% for "The Terrible
Tentacles of L-472," by Sewell Peaslee Wright.

I am happy to say that since I have been reading your magazine, I have
induced at least ten of my friends to be constant readers of this
magazine.

I like the long novelettes much better than continued novels, and hope
that in the future we will get bigger and better novelettes.--Leonard
Estrin, 1145 Morrison Ave., Bronx, N. Y.


_Hasn't Decided_

Dear Editor:

Move over, you old-timers, and let a newcomer say something.

A few months ago I didn't read any Science Fiction. Now I read it all.
I haven't decided yet which magazine I like best.

I was a little disappointed when you didn't have another story in the
September copy by R. P. Starzl, who wrote "Planet of Dread." I thought
you would hold on to a good author when you find one.

I would also like another story by the fellow who wrote the serial
"Murder Madness."

I like short stories best.

That idea of a mechanical nirvana in Miles J. Breuer's story was good.

"Jetta of the Lowlands?" Opinion reserved. I like the action of the
story, but I hate a hero who is always bragging about himself.

Don't think I'm complaining, but nothing is perfect.

Why not try to get a story of A. Merritt's, or Ralph Milne
Farley's?--A. Dougherty, 327 North Prairie Ave., Sioux Falls, So. Dak.


_Announcement_

Dear Editor:

May I enter "The Readers' Corner" to announce that a branch of The
Scienceers has recently been formed in Clearwater, Florida, by a group
of Science Fiction enthusiasts?

We have a library of 175 Science Fiction magazines, including a
complete file of Astounding Stories to date. We hold weekly meetings
at which scientific topics are discussed, and current Science Fiction
stories commented upon.

As the first branch of The Scienceers, we are striving to achieve a
success that will be a mark for other branches to aim at.--Carlton
Abernathy, P. O. Box 584, Clearwater, Fla.


_From Merrie England_

Dear Editor:

I came across your May publication of Astounding Stories the other
day, and I cannot resist writing to you to congratulate you on the
most interesting magazine I have ever read. I am now determined to
take it every month. Re "The Atom Smasher," it is A-1. I have read
several interplanetary stories over here but none to touch those of
your magazine.

Best wishes for the success of your book and its authors.--J. C.
Atkinson, 17 Balaclava Rd., Sheffield, England.


_Starting Young_

Dear Editor:

You'll excuse my writing, for it is the end of vacation.

I like your book very much, which many other readers approve of. Some
dislikes, of course, everyone has, and I have three which many readers
have, too. First, I wish the magazine were bigger and the paper
better. Second, have more stories and raise the price to 25c. Third,
have stories of the future such as "Earth, the Marauder," and stories
of lost Atlantis, the fourth dimension, other planets, atoms and
electrons.--Jack Farber, Payette, Idaho.

P. S. I am 11 years old and interested in science.


_Doesn't Like Serials_

Dear Editor:

I am a recent reader of the Astounding Stories magazine. I am going to
keep getting the magazine, as I like it very much.

I did not like "Murder Madness," or Burks' "Earth, the Marauder" very
much. I do not think "Murder Madness" is the type of story that
belongs in this magazine. I do not like continued stories very much as
I hate to break off at an interesting point and wait a whole month
before I can read the next installment or conclusion of the story. The
front piece of the magazine is very good, and except for the
criticisms mentioned above the magazine is excellent.--Kempt Mitchell.


_A Staunch Defender_

Dear Editor:

At one time a friend introduced your excellent little publication to
me. I read it and enjoyed every paragraph of it. This issue starred
"The Monsters of Moyen," which I consider a real super-science story.
I have followed "The Readers' Corner" quite a time.

In the September issue I saw where someone made a commentary on the
magazine. One of the things they said was that the paper should be of
a better grade. It is true that this would help, but "our" magazine is
not half full of advertisements to pay for this expense. Dear friends,
this is no Saturday Evening Post. Don't ask too much. Then, you may
take in consideration that other magazines of Science Fiction have no
better grade of paper than this, for I have purchased several.

I have but one thing to say as an improvement for it. That is, why
shouldn't there be a Quarterly? Other Science Fiction magazines have
them. They have complete stories and are double in size and price.
Dear Editor, please, for the public's sake, put out a Quarterly. I'm
sure others would like one.--H. C. Kaufman, Jr., 1730 N. Monroe St.,
Baltimore, Maryland.


_Announcement_

Dear Editor:

We would appreciate it very much if you would print this in your
"Readers' Corner" department.

We wish to inform the readers of Astounding Stories of an organization
lately formed, called The Boys' Scientifiction Club. Its purpose is to
promote scientific interest among boys between the ages of 10 and 15,
to encourage the reading of Science Fiction and scientific works, and
to create a bond of friendship among them.

A circulating library, composed of Science Fiction books, magazines,
articles, etc., is being constructed to circulate among members who
desire to read any of the contents.

Officers are: President-Librarian, Forrest J. Ackerman, 530 Staples
Ave., San Francisco, Cal.; Secretary-Treasurer, Frank Sipos, 174
Staples Ave., San Francisco, California.

Address all letters concerning membership to the President. He will be
glad to answer all letters and explain particulars of the club. Thank
you for your kindness.--Linus Hogenmiller, Vice-President B. S. C.,
502 N. Washington St., Farmington, Missouri.


_But--Ray Cummings Writes Us Only Brand New Stories!_

Dear Editor:

I want to commend Astounding Stories on carrying out an idea which I
have had in mind for some time; that is, some scientific articles. "A
Star That Breathes," in the July number, was very interesting, as were
the two articles in the August copy. However, I hope that this is only
the start of a valuable new addition to Astounding Stories. There
should be at least five or six in each magazine, and I think most of
the readers would prefer them at the end of the stories instead of in
the back of the magazine. Another thing that is absolutely essential
if Astounding Stories would hold its own as a high-class Science
Fiction magazine is a scientific editorial in the front of the book.
The way it starts off abruptly onto a story gives the impression of a
cheap publication.

A lot of your readers have been setting up a clamor for stories by Ray
Cummings. While it is true that he has written a few good stories, you
will find that his antiquated stuff is not being printed in any of the
other Science Fiction magazine, but only in ones devoted to
adventure-stories. For the sake of your many readers who would like to
see "our magazine" keep abreast of the times, Cummings should be
dropped and some of the peerless authors of to-day employed. As an
advance along this line you already have Capt. S. P. Meek, Harl
Vincent, Lilith Lorraine, Edmond Hamilton, and, in the latest copy, R.
F. Starzl. "The Planet of Dread," by R. F. Starzl was the best story
in the August issue. A wealth of ideas was contained in that treatise
of life on a young, warm planet, and the idea of fooling the liquid
intelligence by thought-suggestion is quite novel but entirely
reasonable. Mr. Starzl is an author of the highest type and ability,
and you will do well to secure more stories from his typewriter.

I was glad to see that the cover has finally been changed from the
conventional blue background, and I hope we will have a little
variation from now on. Concerning illustrations, Wesso is a great
artist, and aside from a few scientific errors his covers are
excellent. The inside drawings could be improved, however.

I hope for your continued success--Wayne D. Bray, Campbell, Mo.


_Are We All "Morons?"_

Dear Editor:

Having perused three issues of your magazine, I must agree that its
title is well chosen. The stories are nearly all "astounding";
astounding in that they utterly ignore every scientific fact and
discovery of the past ten centuries.

The cold of inter-stellar space; its lack of oxygen; the
interplanetary effects of gravitation--all are passed over as if
non-existent.

An "anti-gravity ovoid"--of which no description is given--if worn in
a man's hat, makes his whole body weightless.

Men, buildings and cities float through the air or become invisible,
yet not the least semi-scientific explanation is made as to the how of
it all.

In other words, the pattern of your stories appears to have been taken
from the Arabian Nights and from Grimm's Fairy Tales--but with not a
millionth part of the interest.

How anyone, save a young child or a moron, can read and enjoy such
futile nonsense is incredible.

If your writers would (like Jules Verne) only invent some
pseudo-scientific explanation for their marvels, your publication
might then be read with pleasure--but why do so when trash is
acceptable without thought behind it!--M. Clifford Johnston, 451
Central Avenue, Newark, N. J.


