     element-swept shore, cowered the Searcher.

     He crouched there in the darkness, his muffled figure
     swaying to the fierce tug of the wind and the impact of the
     driving rain. Water ran in streams from his drenched
     clothing. The icy breath of the wind pierced through to his
     soul like so many needles of death. Placing a gaunt, weary
     hand above his brow he strained his vision to pierce out
     into the darkness.

     And suddenly the storm ceased. The rain disappeared with a
     last futile spray, and the dark clouds overhead parted
     sullenly to reveal a cold frozen moon of silver. The
     thousands of tiny aberrations in the tossing wavelets on
     the ocean's bottom sent steely reflection of the moon's
     luminescence in sparkling sheens to the Searcher's eyes. For
     long he hung there motionless, a gaunt shadow peering into
     the distant darkness of the horizon. But abruptly--

     He started. He has sighted an object floating inward upon
     the tide. Running swiftly along the shore, he seized it
     eagerly as it fell to the shore at his feet. With a wild cry
     of exuberant delight he threw himself down upon the sands to
     scan its pages. It was a copy of Astounding Stories! Yes!

     Out of the great ocean of magazine fiction it had come to
     the Searcher's eyes, the magazine supreme--Astounding
     Stories! A magazine which was new, a magazine which
     expressed something new in an entirely different way! A
     thing super-ordinary, it was--a boon to the tired fiction
     reader.

     Yessirree! Something new and in a different way! You bet
     that's what I like, and that's why I halted, hearkened, and
     hastened to the newsstands to buy that new magazine,
     Astounding Stories. New authors!--a breath of delicious
     novelty!--the magazine of to-morrow's romance and the
     super-science thereof! Why, it's almost too good to be true,
     and here am I, ready to take that new mag to hand and make
     it our own.

     Yes, I think we can call it "our" own, for with the
     installation of Astounding Stories comes the new epic of the
     magazine, a magazine which is made by the reader. Sure
     nuff--our wants and whims rule the magazine; so it's surely
     "ours," and I mean possessively!

     So, Readers all, I'm going to take my part of the magazine
     this day and operate on it, no matter what Mr. Bates thinks
     or cares about it. Yes, sir.

     First, I'm creating a new department of a page which prints
     the picture of the most popular author (as voted for by the
     reader) and which gives a brief synopsis of his life. Once
     his picture has been printed, that's enough. Next time a new
     author.

     And then I'm filling that magazine with new "different"
     stories, daring in aspect beyond ordinary Science Fiction,
     more glorious by far than any predecessors.

     And now, the rest of you Readers, what are you going to do
     with your share? As I have said, I am going to do what I
     want with my part even if we have to split up the magazine
     and pass a page all around. There's just a lot of you
     Readers who look at a magazine, and, because it isn't your
     ideal, pass it up and go down the line passing up all the
     magazines. Take it from me, you'll never find your ideal.

     Savvy? The only way to get that ideal is to step in and take
     a hand. Make your ideal! A magazine must be fashioned to the
     reader's wants! The fact is our weapon, and believe me I'm
     beaning Mr. Bates a smacking good one with it. As I said,
     the magazine is ours, and my part in it surely is going to
     be more daring in tone, thought and structure than any
     paltry nowaday Science Fiction! Reach out into the
     imagination, stretch your faintest and most super-ordinary
     scientific hypothesis to its vaguest straining point, and
     produce--

     A real, honest-to-goodness, glorious he-man action magazine
     of Science Fiction!

     I mean it! And that's how my page is gonna be, and I'll bet
     that I have made my page of that future idealistic magazine,
     merely by writing this letter! How about it, Mr. Bates?

     Aren't we all signed up as associate editors for the future
     "ideal magazine?"--Tom Olog, 940--5th St., San Bernardino,
     Calif.


_Right! One on Us_

     Dear Editor:

     I have been following with great interest Ray Cummings'
     latest piece, "Jetta of the Lowlands," which is rather
     unique in its ideas. In a recent issue Mr. Cummings
     explained to his readers that the flyer was made invisible
     by bending the light rays around it. This in itself is quite
     plausible, but when he tells us he could see the land below
     them, and the other flyer, we have to draw a line. It is
     quite plain that if the light is bent away from the hull of
     the flyer that no light will come to the eyes within, and
     that the invisibility will be more of a hindrance than an
     advantage. However, it was a good story and we know that
     authors cannot be perfect any more than ordinary humans can.

     I am wishing you the best of luck for your second year,
     which you will soon enter!--W. Johnston, New York City.


_A Riddle_

     Dear Editor:

     I have only read two issues of Astounding Stories. These two
     have determined me to continue reading A. S. until I grow
     broke or give up my ghost.

     The only brickbats that you are going to get are: Use a
     better grade of paper and bind the magazines more securely.
     Your stories are O. K. In fact there is only one story in
     the two issues (October and November), that I did not give a
     darn about, and that was "The Extra Man," by Jackson Gee.

     As I have been a reader of Science Fiction for the past four
     years I think that I know a little about a good story when I
     read one.

     And last but not least, I have a riddle to ask you.

     Question: What is the difference between an egg and a copy
     of Astounding Stories?

     Answer: When an egg falls it busts. But when a copy of
     Astounding Stories falls only the cover comes off.

     A steady reader from now on.--Edward Anderson, 929 S.
     Westlake Ave., Los Angeles, Calif.


"_High Literary Quality_"

     Dear Editor:

     Just a few words to express my appreciation of the
     consistently high standard of stories which have so far
     appeared in Astounding Stories. I was mainly inspired to
     write to you by those two fine stories, "Brigands of the
     Moon," by Ray Cummings and "Murder Madness," by Murray
     Leinster. The former was one of the year's best
     interplanetary stories, and the latter a very fine adventure
     yarn. As well as being of scientific interest, these stories
     held my interest to the end by reason of their high literary
     quality and the fact that they did not lack excitement. I am
     afraid that these two qualities are lacking in a large
     number of Science Fiction stories. I would suggest that you
     accept these stories as a standard for the magazine.--A. M.
     D. Pender, 201, Red Lion Road, Tolworth, Surbiton, Surrey,
     England.


_Expert Testimony_

     Dear Editor:

     We had quite a little discussion at a recent meeting of The
     Scienceers as to why all of us consider Astounding Stories
     the best Science Fiction magazine printed to-day. One reason
     to which all of us agreed was your endless variety of good
     continued stories. They always have a new twist about them.
     I read a number of Science Fiction magazines each month.
     None of them comes anywhere near Astounding Stories as to
     the quality of the stories printed. On both long and short
     stories they rank way below the Astounding standard.

     Your best writer is Ray Cummings, with Harl Vincent and R.
     F. Starzl close behind. I consider "Vagabonds of space," by
     Harl Vincent, as the best story I have read so far. Ask Mr.
     Vincent to give us a sequel.--Herbert Smith, Sec.,
     Scienceers, 2791 Grand Concourse, Bronx, New York City.


"_Heads My List_"

     Dear Editor:

     I'm accepting your kind invitation to come over to "The
     Readers' Corner" and express my opinion of your magazine.

     I like it immensely. I read all the Science Fiction I can,
     and your magazine heads my list. I think the serial "The
     Pirate Planet," is as interesting a story as any I've read.
     Astounding Stories improves with every issue.--Dorothea
     Cutler, P.O. Box 122, Mesa, Arizona.


_Two Problems_

     Dear Editor:

     My last letter was entirely commendatory, but this time I am
     losing the full force of my critical powers (?) on the story
     "Marooned Under the Sea," by Paul Ernst. In this story the
     characters descend to the depths of the ocean by means of a
     large glass sphere. Mr. Ernst mentions the terrific strain
     on the supporting cable caused by the weight of the sphere.
     He quite overlooks the fact that it would float. As a matter
     of fact the sphere, not counting its contents, weighs about
     3,511,520 lbs.--less than an equal amount of water. Hard to
     believe, but true, as the figures show. The formula for the
     volume of a sphere is V equals pi 1/2 diameter cubed. It is
     a pretty little problem. Also, there was no need to break
     the helmets of the Quabos, since the hoses could be cut with
     an ax. However, it was a fine story. Let's have more like
     it.

     Here is another problem. X equals wonderful. Y equals
     superb. Z equals marvelous. XYZ equals Astounding Stories.
     Yes? No?

     You are getting many requests to change your size. Don't do
     it. As it is now, it is just the size to carry conveniently,
     or put in your pocket. It is easier to read, too. Don't
     change your grade of paper, either. Glazed paper is hard on
     the eyes. I join my fervent prayers to those who wish the
     edges cut smooth, however. It is hard to turn to the page
     you want, with the deckle edge you now have.

     "Earth, the Marauder" was wonderful. Too bad it wasn't
     longer. "The Pirate Planet" is fine. Dr. Bird is keeping up
     the good work. Some of his stories are a bit far-fetched,
     but that is no drawback.

     I notice that some authors repeat themselves. I read
     "Brigands of the Moon," by Cummings, and also his story,
     "Tarrano the Conqueror." The weapons used in both stories
     are identical--Hugh M. Gilmore, 11307 N. Orange Drive,
     Hollywood, California.


_Concerning "Indisputable Data"_

     Dear Editor:

     From the time Astounding Stories first made its debut, I
     have been a rabid and enthusiastic reader of your excellent
     publication. As yet, I have never missed an issue, and only
     a physical incapability could compel me to. The unlimited
     amount of pleasure derived from your magazine is beyond
     compensation. Your selections are varied, interesting and
     based on cold, scientific logic, barring minor
     discrepancies. My whole-hearted approval, commendation and
     good wishes go to you for your remarkably fine work.
     Continue along the lines you are now pursuing, and I feel
     assured your magazine will outrival all others in
     circulation, as it already does in literature.

     Perhaps I have been a trifle flowery, but I also have a
     criticism to make. Why do these skeptical and scientifically
     disposed critics continue to waste your valuable time
     picking scientific flaws in various stories? Some of the
     amateur experts' opinions really serve as a comic sequel
     after a night of interesting reading. If they would only
     stop to realize that some of their most indisputable data is
     merely hypothesis, the criticisms might be more lenient.

     I am certainly enjoying "The Pirate Planet," by Charles W.
     Diffin, in the current issue. It is exceptionally
     well-written, and I am looking forward to more work by his
     pen. Other stories of merit are "Gray Denim," by Harl
     Vincent and "Slaves of the Dust," by S. W. Ellis.

     Well, I guess I've unburdened myself enough for one evening.
     I give you many thanks for hours of enjoyable recreation,
     and wish everlasting success to your illustrious magazine
     and the personnel that makes it possible.--Mortimer
     Weisinger, 266 Van Cortland Ave., Bronx, N. Y.


_A Letter from England_

     Dear Editor:

     You will no doubt be surprised at receiving a letter of
     appreciation of your really stunning magazine from England.
     And here let me say as an aside, that I think Americans are
     very fortunate in having publishing concerns who are not
     afraid of publishing a modern book like Astounding Stories.
     In England I am considered abnormal minded because of my
     fondness for Science Fiction. We have nothing like it in our
     bookshops, where the stereotyped thriller and prosaic life
     and adventure novels are popular to the majority of English
     Readers.

     Unfortunately, my file is incomplete by the June, July,
     August and September issues. My only kick is that "Brigands
     of the Moon" remains unfinished for me; and "Murder Madness"
     whetted my palate for more. Still I am happy to be now in
     regular contact with the mag and hope for more stories like
     the above. Now for my only brickbat. Of all the stories I
     have read, "The Wall of Death" is the only one I dislike;
     and the worst of it is that it was written by Victor
     Rousseau, who is one of my favorite authors. The story is
     horribly reminiscent of the old Greek myth of the Minotaur,
     which it resembles in many phases. Still, this is an
     exception that proves Victor Rousseau's stories to be of
     high average value. And I shall expect to see more of him.

     As regards bouquets, I can only say that each succeeding
     magazine is more astounding, more wonderful and of better
     value than the last. Of your authors I class as favorites S.
     P. Meek, C. W. Diffin, Murray Leinster, Harl Vincent, Ray
     Cummings and S. P. Wright among others, not forgetting
     Victor Rousseau. In the current edition I think "The Pirate
     Planet" is going strong; and "Gray Denim" is a peach of a
     story, as is also "The Ape-Men of Xloti." I like
     extra-dimensional stories of which I see you have one in
     your next issue, so roll on, January! I should like to see
     Astounding Stories printed more often, or else have a
     brother mag. The mag itself stands pat as it is, and more
     power to your authors' elbows! You will please excuse my bad
     penmanship, but since the war, in which I served throughout,
     I cannot altogether control the nerves of my right hand when
     writing.

     I wish you a prosperous future with Astounding Stories!--Leo
     Greenhill, 5 Market Terrace, St. Leonards on Sea, Sussex,
     England.


"_At Last It's Come_"

     Dear Editor:

     I have read all the issues of your magazine from the July
     issue to the December, and it sure fills a long felt need in
     Science Fiction. Ever since I knew what an atom was I've
     been longing for just such a mag, and at last it's come. You
     sure deserve credit, and lots of it. You were better at the
     very start than your competitors ever will be, and that's
     saying a lot, as they're pretty good. By the way, you may
     have noticed that one of them has come down to your size and
     price since your mag came out. That's proof against big
     mags. They're awful. However, I would not mind an Astounding
     Stories quarterly, and I'd gladly pay fifty cents for one.
     As to reprints, I'm in favor of them. I think a story by
     Edgar Rice Burroughs running in your mag each month would
     make it just about perfect.

     As to your authors and stories, they're good as a general
     rule; however, you've made some pretty bad slips at times,
     such as "The Invisible Death," by Victor Rousseau, "The Wall
     of Death," by the same man, "Slaves of the Dust," "Gray
     Denim" and "The Ape-Men of Xloti." In fact, the December
     issue was pretty poor for you. I hope you make up for it
     next month.

     When it comes to artists I think that Wesso takes the cake,
     especially in drawing machinery, etc. However, Gould is good
     on people and inanimate things, and I don't think you should
