
_Historian_--Myrta Alice Little, Westville, N. H.

_Supervisor of Amendments_--(To be appointed.)

_Directors_--Paul J. Campbell, Route 2, Ridgefarm, Ill.; Anne T.
Renshaw, 2109 F St., N. W., Washington, D. C.; Jay Fuller Spoerri, 304
House Office Bldg., Washington, D. C.

_Department of Public Criticism_--Alfred Galpin, Jr., Chairman, 830 W.
Johnson St., Madison, Wis.

_Department of Private Criticism_--Maurice W. Moe, Chairman, 2812
Chestnut St., Milwaukee, Wis.

_Recruiting Committee_--Frank Belknap Long, Jr., Chairman, Paul J.
Campbell, Leo Fritter, Alfred L. Hutchinson, Gavin T. McColl, Maurice W.
Moe.

_Ladies' Auxiliary Committee_--Eleanor Beryl North, Chairman, Mary Faye
Durr, Jennie Eva Harris, Winifred Virginia Jackson, Margaret Mahon, Anne
T. Renshaw.

       *       *       *       *       *

LAUREATE TITLES

_Poetry_--S. Lilian McMullen; Honourable Mention, Mary Carver Williams.

_Story_--H. P. Lovecraft; Honourable Mention, Alfred Galpin, Jr.

_Essay_--Anna Helen Crofts and H. P. Lovecraft; Honourable Mention,
Alfred Galpin, Jr.

_Editorial_--(To be awarded.)

       *       *       *       *       *

LITERATI

_Poetry_--Arthur Goodenough, Olive G. Owen (deceased).

_Story_--Eleanor Barnhart Campbell.

_Editorial_--H. P. Lovecraft.

       *       *       *       *       *

INFORMATION

"Amateur Journalism is for those who cultivate literature from taste or
attachment, for those who write for the love of writing, for those who
pursue the art of letters for its own sake. They may or may not be
engaged (or aspire to be engaged) in authorship as a business, but those
who are members of that profession will undoubtedly find in Amateur
Journalism the air of freedom which develops personality in writing.
They will find every encouragement to self-development, amid an
environment of art. Amateur Journalism is for all those who do literary
work for the love of it."

"The privileges of the United Amateur Press Association are: The use of
the Manuscript Bureau and the columns of the papers connected with the
Association; the Official Organ; attendance at Conventions; proxy
representation at elections; laureate competitions, etc."

"Any person who edits or contributes prose or poetry to any amateur
paper is eligible to membership."

"Application for membership must be accompanied by one dollar dues and a
printed or written credential.... If rejected, dues will be returned."

"Renewal or reinstatement fee is two dollars."

"Applicants for membership should address their applications, with
credential and dues, to the Secretary, Miss Alma B. Sanger, 667 Lilley
Ave., Columbus, Ohio."

"Any person wishing to become connected with the Association without
furnishing a credential or becoming active, may upon payment of two
dollars be enrolled as a sustaining member for one year. A sustaining
member shall be entitled to all the privileges of active membership
except the right to vote or hold office."

"Laureate entries shall be poem, story, essay and editorial."

"Entries must be printed in an amateur paper, and a marked copy sent to
the Laureate Recorder by June 1."

Anyone desiring application blanks for recruiting may receive them by
applying to the Secretary.

       *       *       *       *       *

IMPORTANT

Members are urged to remember the recent doubling of dues, whereby all
renewals became _Two Dollars_ each.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fullest of apologies is due the membership for the lateness of this
issue of THE UNITED AMATEUR. A prostrating and overwhelming flood of
professional duties, coupled with a state of health permitting only the
shortest of working hours, has forced the editor to delay transmission
of this copy to the publisher until November 4: a date which should be
remembered in justice to the latter official, who is equally handicapped
in the matter of conflicting duties.

                                                            THE EDITOR


Editorial

In the excellent October _Woodbee_, Mr. Leo Fritter criticises with much
force the attempt of the present editor to conduct THE UNITED AMATEUR on
a tolerably civilised plane. He points out that the appearance of a
journal representing a fairly uniform maturity of thought and artistic
development may perhaps tend to discourage those newer aspirants who
have not yet attained their full literary stature, and thus defeat the
educational ends of the Association.

Mr. Fritter gathers his material for complaint from the opinions of
certain amateurs with whom he has held communication, and on this basis
alleges a "wide-spreading dissatisfaction" with the present editorial
policy. We have ourselves received numerous and enthusiastic assurances
of an opposite nature, especially since the Fritter attack, so that we
must rebut at least his charge that we are ignoring the membership's
wishes and "trying to conform them to a mould we have arbitrarily cast
according to ideas of our own." To adopt a lower standard would, indeed,
be affronting a more influential element than that which may at present
be dissatisfied; an element which has possibly gained higher claims to
consideration through the _continuous_ nature of its services to the
Association during trying times when others were silent and inactive.

But in determining the question of editorial policy, the abstract merits
of the case are more important than the act of pleasing this or that
person or group. Were we convinced that the existing order hampered the
sincere novice, we would abandon it without pride or ceremony. That we
do not, is because we are certain that retrogression and decadence would
constitute a fatal mistake. The public we serve is assumed to be a
genuinely progressive one, a group bent upon attaining some measure of
proficiency in that sincere self-expression which is art. If it were
not, it would have joined some other association of different
purposes--the defiantly crude Erford pseudo-United or the complacently
social and stationary National. What justifies the separate existence
and support of the United is its higher aesthetic and intellectual cast;
its demand for the unqualified best as a goal--which demand, by the way,
must not be construed as discriminating against even the crudest
beginner who honestly cherishes that goal. With these objects in mind,
it will be seen that the self-satisfied exultation of the superficial,
the obvious, the commonplace, and the conventional, would form the
greatest possible tactical error. The goal would be unjustifiably
obscured, and the aspiration of the membership stunted, through the
enshrining of a false and inferior goal--a literary Golden Calf. We must
envisage a genuine scale of values, and possess a model of genuine
excellence toward which to strive. It would pay better to work toward a
high standard oneself, than to seek to drag the standard down to fit
whatever particular grade of ignorance one may happen to have at a given
moment. With proper effort any member may eventually produce work of the
UNITED AMATEUR grade, and such work will be certain of a cordial welcome
in this office. The official organ is not so narrow as it seems; if more
of our capable members would favour it with their literary
contributions, the range of authors represented would not be so
restricted. It is not the editor but the body of our _literati_ who must
bear responsibility for the constant reappearance of certain names. This
issue is headed by the same poet who headed the last two--but only
because another eminent amateur, so far unrepresented during the present
regime, utterly ignored our repeated requests for a contribution.

Mr. Fritter--who, I fear, wrongs etymology in his acceptance of the word
_amateur_ as meaning a tyro rather than a genuine and disinterested
artist--forgets that a relapse to cruder standards would totally unfit
the United for serving that staunch element which has contributed most
to its present welfare. Many would find a society of the lower grade
intolerable; certainly it could not hope to hold the very ones who have
given this organization its existing distinctiveness and pre-eminence.

Yet in the arguments of Mr. Fritter there is an underlying soundness
which misapplication should not obscure to the analytical reader. He is
right in lamenting, as we believe he does, the absence of a suitable
publishing medium for the work of our younger writers. It is not in a
spirit of affront to him that we give preference to the plan of
President Haughton, as outlined in her opening message, for the
re-establishment of a special magazine for credentials. We should be
glad to curtail the official organ in the interest of such a magazine,
as indeed we offered to do at the beginning of the term.

_Frustra laborat_, says the old proverb, _qui omnibus placere studet_.
We regret that any one policy must of necessity displease a few members,
yet do not see how any improvement could be effected by making a change
which would merely shift the displeasure to another and even more
continuously industrious group. It is significant that the Gothic party
have no editorial candidate of their own to offer, so that the thankless
and toilsome office has been forced upon one whose indifferent health
makes it an almost unbearable burden to him. The question is one which
should ultimately be decided at the polls, each party putting forward a
nominee who can be depended upon to fulfil its mandates. Meanwhile the
present editor, whose sincere beliefs and policies were fully known long
before his unopposed election, stands ready to resign most cheerfully
whenever a suitable successor can be found. Bitterness, division and
personalities must be avoided at any cost, and we may be reckoned as a
supporter of THE UNITED AMATEUR under any editor and policy.




 THE UNITED AMATEUR    NOVEMBER 1921


            THE UNITED AMATEUR

              Official Organ
                  of the
     UNITED AMATEUR PRESS ASSOCIATION

 H. P. LOVECRAFT         _Official Editor_
 E. EDWARD ERICSON    _Official Publisher_

Issued bi-monthly by the United Amateur Press Association.

Subscription Price, 50 cents per year.

Published at Elroy, Wisconsin.

Entered as second-class mail matter at the post office at Elroy, Wis.

       *       *       *       *       *

Members who criticised the present editor for severity during the
chairmanship of the critical department are invited to take a vicarious
revenge this month, observing the uncensored remarks of the present
juvenile chairman concerning our pathetic ignorance. Of us Master Galpin
says: "when the author approaches involved or technical subjects, he
shows clearly the unfortunate circumstance that he has never profited by
an advanced education." This certainly should purge us of all suspicion
of conducting THE UNITED AMATEUR on too Olympian a level, although the
critic qualifies his dictum by conceding that we realise our own crudity
and are striving in our old age to acquire at least the rudiments of an
elementary education. In the course of a few years we hope to guarantee
our readers an official organ practically free from the grosser errors
of spelling and grammar: meanwhile, _vivat Galpinius parvulus_!

       *       *       *       *       *

Myrta Alice Little, Eugene B. Kuntz, Leo G. Schussman, Margaret Richard,
Daisy Crump Whitehead, Clara L. Bell, John O. Baldwin, and the Editor.

The Tryout. October 1921. Uniform size. Contributions by H. P.
Lovecraft, Margaret Richard, Beth Cheney Nichols, Arthur Goodenough, K.
Leyson Brown, Horace L. Lawson, John Milton Samples, Washington Van
Dusen, Leo G. Schussman, Lilian Middleton, Anita Roberta Kirksey, and
the Editor.

THE UNITED AMATEUR. March 1921. Official Organ of the United Amateur
Press Association. 14 Pages and cover. 7x10. Contributions by Winifred
Virginia Jackson, Lilian Middleton, Frank Belknap Long, Jr., J. E. Hoag,
Anna H. Crofts, Eleanor Beryl North, Ward Phillips, and the Editor,
H. P. Lovecraft.

THE UNITED AMATEUR. May 1921. 8 pages. 7x10. Contributions by Lilian
Middleton, Alfred Galpin, Jr., Eugene B. Kuntz, Margaret Mahon, Winifred
Virginia Jackson, and Adam Harold Brown.

THE UNITED AMATEUR. July 1921. 6 pages. 7x10. Contributions by Lilian
Middleton and Myrta Alice Little.

The United Co-Operative. April 1921. 16 pages. 6x9. Contributions by
Lilian Middleton, Elizabeth Berkeley and Lewis Theobald, Jr., W. Edwin
Gibson, John C. Pryor, H. P. Lovecraft, Samuel Loveman, Eugene B. Kuntz.
Published under the auspices of the U. A. P. A. by the following
members: Anne Tillery Renshaw, Rev. John Clinton Pryor, W. Edwin Gibson,
H. P. Lovecraft.

The Woodbee. October 1921. 16 pages and cover. 5x7. Contributions by
Bess Ballou, Alma B. Sanger, Norma Helena Marie Sanger, Leo Fritter,
Edna M. Haughton, Peggy Hepner Fritter, Henriette Ziegfeld, and the
President, Ida C. Haughton. Official Organ of the Woodbee Press Club,
Columbus, Ohio.

Ziegfeld's Follies. September 1921. 1 page. 51/2x81/2. Contributions by the
Editor, Arthur F. Ziegfeld.

Ziegfeld's Follies. October 1921. 4 pages. Uniform size. Contributions
by Ida C. Haughton, Leo Fritter, and the Editor, Arthur F. Ziegfeld.

                                               MYRTA ALICE LITTLE,
                                                            Historian.


OFFICIAL ORGAN FUND

Providence, R. I., December 29, 1921.

 On Hand, July 1, 1921                       $4.00

 RECEIPTS SINCE JULY 1

 Sonia H. Greene                            $50.00
 From Treasury, up to Dec. 29, 1921          41.60
 H. P. Lovecraft                             15.40
 Mr. and Mrs. Leo Fritter                     6.00
 Howard R. Conover                            5.00
 Woodbee Press Club                           5.00
 Theodore D. Gottlieb                         1.00
 Ida C. Haughton                              1.00
                                           -------
     Total Receipts                        $129.00

 EXPENDITURES

 To E. E. Ericson, for May U. A.            $24.00
 To E. E. Ericson, for July U. A.            18.00
 To E. E. Ericson, for Sept. U. A.           36.00
 To E. E. Ericson, for Nov. U. A.            36.00
                                           -------
     Total Expenditures                    $114.00

 Balance on Hand, December 29, 1921         $15.00

                            H. P. LOVECRAFT,
                                      Custodian.




 THE UNITED AMATEUR    JANUARY 1922


            THE UNITED AMATEUR

              Official Organ
                  of the
     UNITED AMATEUR PRESS ASSOCIATION

 H. P. LOVECRAFT         _Official Editor_
 E. EDWARD ERICSON    _Official Publisher_

Issued bi-monthly by the United Amateur Press Association.

Subscription Price, 50 cents per year.

Published at Elroy, Wisconsin.

Entered as second-class mail matter at the post office at Elroy, Wis.


Editorial

Amidst the prevailing efforts of a small but pugnacious group to "liven"
up the United through attacks on the Official Organ, a few basic
principles should be remembered by those who stand in bewilderment.

Our constitution does not define the functions of THE UNITED AMATEUR
beyond making imperative the publication of certain official documents.
The rest is left to an unwritten combination of tradition and editorial
judgment. Any editor, once elected, is absolutely in control of the
magazine aside from the essential official matter; his only external
obligation being a tacit recognition of the prevailing objects of the
Association. In the present case a narrow circle of agitators seems to
be seeking political capital by accusing the editor of placing too high
an estimate on the membership and purposes of the United.

Since the whole development of the Association is involved in this
matter, it is important that a prompt and perfect understanding be
reached. The opinions of all members should be known, and if the editor
finds that he has been in error, he will be glad to arrange for the
accommodation of the Organ to the wishes of the majority. Up to the
present time, despite the florid overstatements of the few who are
trying to work up a new and wholly artificial dissatisfaction, this
office has received _not so much as one complaint_ as to policy save
from the two politicians who are seeking to lower the United's
standards. Endorsements as to the existing policy have been many, and as
long as these remain so tremendously in the Majority, it would be a
betrayal of trust to make a change to please a tiny group. If there are
those who differ, why do they not speak?

Since truth is the only perfect clarifier when politics seeks to
becloud, it is necessary that the editor state his policy here and now
with the utmost candour. Shorn of all irrelevant things, that policy is
simply the maintenance of those standards established in the United by
the departure of the chronically political element in 1912. Prior to
that time the Official Organ was mainly a bulletin of reports: not, as
the present agitators would imply, a repository for indiscriminate
amateur writings. The standard developed since then is the creation of
no one person, but a logical outgrowth of the rising calibre of a vital
and progressive society. It is neither one of favouritism nor one of
