_The Effects of Cannabis_

     Dear Editor:

     I have sold magazines, written for magazines, and, now that
     I have just concluded your April issue, I am editing
     one--for myself. Specifically, one story, "Four Miles
     Within." Inside of a radium mine! Chased by an amoeboid
     body! Ooh!

     Several years ago when I was a clinical chemist in hospital
     service, the Roentgenologist, also a young chap, and a
     surgical nurse and myself were so badly burned with three
     grains of the substance enclosed in a lead capsule that we
     were crippled for nearly a month. [No fair. Your experience
     was with pure radium. It was only radium ore in the
     story.--_Ed._] Imagine being four miles inside of the earth
     exposed to radium "ore"!

     And chased and pursued by a gigantic amoeba! Oh, oh! That
     must have been my pet mother-of-vinegar that escaped. She
     was hard to herd. She took after my dad's pet fish which
     fell through a crack in a bridge and was drowned.

     In passing, it is interesting to note that persons can
     vanish "into" a plane surface; say, "into" a fifth
     dimension. My instructor in trig. must have been all wet.

     And Dr. Bird catches a man withdrawing "menthium" from human
     brains with a "needle," without the use of either x-ray or a
     trephine!

     And then low forms of life such as crabs and alligators with
     very highly developed scientific knowledge! A few issues ago
     octopi were in the lead!

     And those "space" ships! Mars must be an interesting spot.
     And those Martians! Sometimes they are ant-like, and other
     times worms, and again human freaks! (I still prefer the
     silver-green messenger I saw on the stage twenty years ago.
     He was a gentleman and a scholar and no one yet has improved
     upon him.)

     And those radio waves that can vibrate matter in a straight
     line! One Jackson Gee vibrates it in two straight lines.
     (Rather funny at that.)

     And people disappear into an atom by taking pellets! They
     take the pellets into their system and that shrinks or
     expands them. How does the author calculate that in "Beyond
     The Vanishing Point"? The pellets must contain cannabis
     indica (hashish) I guess. Once upon a time I was suffering
     from an acute attack of colic and was obliged to use an
     anti-spasmodic. I took cannabis, and in the delirium that
     followed I shrunk small enough to walk into a mouse-hole
     into which I had seen a mouse disappear a few hours
     previous. The mouse was there and looked like an elephant. I
     awoke in a sweat.

     Maybe all your stories won't be weird and full of
     monstrosities. Science is full of beauty and culture, you
     know.--Arthur H. Carrington, Seaside Heights Pharmacy,
     Seaside Heights, N. J.


_Where Fantasy Meets Science Fiction_

     Dear Editor:

     I have purchased many of the issues of your magazine, and
     have read everything in them, including the letter columns,
     with great interest. I have particularly enjoyed certain
     stories, such as "The Forgotten Planet," "The Jovian Jest"
     and "The Planet of Dread," in which genuine imaginative
     quality was combined with good writing. Many other tales,
     not so well written, I have enjoyed for their fantasy, their
     suggestive ideas.

     In following "The Readers' Corner" I have noted the
     objection to so-called "impossible" stories, voiced by some
     of your Readers. Stories thus classified, one would infer,
     are tales dealing with the marvelous and the mysterious in
     which the author has not attempted to give a naturalistic or
     scientific explanation of his wonders and mysteries. In
     other words, he has not rendered them in terms of the
     test-tube. He has admitted the inexplicable, the
     "supernatural."

     Personally, I enjoy stories of this type, as well as those
     that are written with the purely scientific approach. I
     suspect that those who condemn them are suffering from a
     rather amusing--and also pathetic--sort of unconscious
     hypocrisy. I think that people who read your magazine, as
     well as Science Fiction magazines in general, are people
     with the ingrained human love for wonder and mystery; but
     some of them are afraid to accept and enjoy anything--even a
     fairy tale--that is not couched in the diction of modern
     materialistic science, with a show of concern for verified
     credibilities. Probably, in most cases, they would like and
     prize the very stories that they condemn if the writer had
     used a different terminology, and had offered explanations
     that were even superficially logical according to known
     laws.

     Please do not think that I am decrying, or even criticizing,
     Science Fiction. I consider it a highly important and
     significant branch of present-day writing, and have hopes of
     contributing to it myself. I am merely advocating an open
     attitude of mind and imagination. For those who think that
     the "impossible" requires justification--or cannot be
     justified--I would suggest that the only impossible thing is
     to define and delimit the impossible. In an infinite,
     eternal universe, there is nothing imaginable--or
     unimaginable--which might not happen, might not be true,
     somewhere or sometime. Science has discovered, and will
     continue to discover, an enormous amount of relative data;
     but there will always remain an illimitable residue of the
     undiscovered and the unknown. And the field for imaginative
     fiction, both scientific and non-scientific, is, it seems to
     me, wholly inexhaustible.--Clark Ashton Smith, Auburn, Cal.


_Heroes Too Heroic?_

     Dear Editor:

     I wrote you a letter last month. I'm writing you a letter
     this month, and I'll write you a letter next month. In fact,
     I'm going to write you a letter every month just as soon as
     I finish the latest issue of Astounding Stories, so you
     might as well have a special department installed in
     Astounding Stories right away entitled "Letters from the Sap
     Who Thinks He Is So Smart," or something else equally
     appropriate.

     Have you ever noticed that 99% of Edmond Hamilton's stories
     have the same plot as "Monsters of Mars"? The plot I mean is
     this:

     A group of men, preferably three, get into enemy territory.
     As to the enemy (if the enemy are not lizards or some other
     repulsive form of life), Mr. Hamilton has them wear
     repulsive clothes, live in ugly buildings, etc., to make the
     reader dislike them at the start. An old, old idea, and
     quite a commonly used one, is to have these creatures about
     to declare war and conquer the hero's country with the
     enemy's super-weapons; and after capturing our brave, bold,
     and heroic heroes, proceed to tell the heroes the way the
     weapons work, the zero hour set for attack, and the line of
     march of the enemy's armies (as if prisoners are told all
     these things!). Our heroes then cleverly escape and grab an
     enemy machine. About two thousand of the enemy close in to
     the kill, but (Mr. Hamilton simply loves "buts") our brave
     heroes glance over the strange controls of the captured
     craft and without hesitation pick out the right levers and
     hold the enemy at bay. After annihilating most of them, and
     after the zero hour has come, the heroes prevent the great
     invasion and return to their native land.

     It is interesting to note that the heroes, though greatly
     outnumbered and with strange weapons, always down many of
     the enemy while they themselves escape unscathed. Also, Mr.
     Hamilton loves narrow escapes, and phrases such as these
     appear frequently in his story: "But even as he raised his
     deadly ray-tube, I leaped and knocked it from his hand. They
     charged, but I was too quick and dodged as the foremost
     hurtled at me."

     These incidents are supposed to get the reader all excited,
     but after a while they grow monotonous.

     The second story in the April issue, "The Exile of Time,"
     promises to be excellent in every way. It would be
     interesting if George Rankin, in his time-traveling, should
     witness the signing of the Declaration of Independence or
     the Battle of Bunker Hill.

     "Four Miles Within" was good also, save that the heroes'
     escape from being marooned and James Quade's death savored
     unpleasantly of Edmond Hamilton.

     Sewell Peaslee Wright's adventures of the space patrol are
     always fascinating, and "The Ghost World" is a splendid
     example of this.

     On the whole, your magazine is practically perfect.--Robert
     Baldwin, 359 Hazel Ave., Highland Park, Ill.


_Likes 'Em to Seem Real_

     Dear Editor:

     I've been reading Astounding Stories since the November
     issue, and I think that, on the whole, it is a very good
     magazine. It is of a handy size, convenient price, and O.
     K., except that you might cut the edges of the pages
     smoother. Wesso is an excellent artist.

     I think your best authors are Harl Vincent, Ray Cummings and
     Capt. S. P. Meek. I like Capt. Meek's Dr. Bird stories
     immensely. Also among your best authors are Charles W.
     Diffin aid Murray Leinster. And now about the stories
     themselves.

     I've noticed that quite a few in "The Readers' Corner" are
     all for fiction and no scientific explanation. I like
     fiction, too, but anybody can make up a pretty good plot
     about a girl, a lover, and a villain, and have a wild theory
     of super-science for a basis, and then not explain it. What
     I like most is when an Author--who uses such a theory as,
     for instance, making matter invisible by bathing it with a
     ray, the color of which is beyond the range of the spectrum,
     as in "Terrors Unseen," by Harl Vincent--backs up his idea
     with a clear explanation and makes it plausible and
     convincing. It makes his tale seem more possible, and hence
     more real. I like it much better when the writer doesn't
     even suggest a theory in his plot--to say nothing of trying
     to prove it--than when he gives you the invention of a
     professor in the year 2431, and lets you imagine how and why
     it works.--T. Caldwell, 912 Moreno Road, Santa Barbara, Cal.


_Covers Too Imaginative?_

     Dear Editor:

     For crying out loud, why can't everyone be satisfied! One
     person says "our" mag is too small, another says it's O. K.;
     one wants so-and-so's work, someone else doesn't, etc. Why
     can't Readers be reasonable? They'll continually admit A. S.
     is the best Science Fiction mag on the market (with which I
     thoroughly agree) and then they'll start complaining. As if
     anything can be 100% perfect--though A. S. comes awfully
     near it!

     Then for some of the complaints, I recall but two sensible
     ones. I have read every issue of A. S. except the first two,
     and several times I have been tempted to write to you about
     them.

     1--Too imaginative a cover gives the narrow-minded
     non-Science Fiction reader an idea that "our" mag contains
     trash. I refer to such covers as those on the August,
     September, October, 1930, issues, and the March, April, and
     especially May, 1931, issues. These people's opinions
     reflect rather harshly on the faithful A. S. Readers. Can't
     the covers be more like those on the March, May, June and
     July, 1930, issues? (All those stories themselves, however,
     were great, as usual.)

     2--Please hold down on "The Readers' Corner." Isn't an eight
     and nine-page section a bit too much? A short story has been
     suggested--good idea. Why not limit it to a maximum of, say,
     five pages?

     I shall not complain of any of the stories, because I
     realize that others probably enjoyed what very few I may not
     have. I must, however, say that Ray Cummings' "Brigands of
     the Moon" holds first place, in my opinion. It was great!
     Please keep up the excellent work.--Meredith L. Evons, 4001
     Cedar Lane, Drexel Hill, Pa.


"_Evenly Divided_"

     Dear Editor:

     Although I missed the first few issues of Astounding Stories
     due to the fact that I was not aware of its publication, I
     have become a regular reader.

     In glancing through your "Readers' Corner," I became aware
     of the fact that most of the letters therein praise
     Astounding Stories to the skies, and put it far ahead of any
     other Science Fiction magazine. I will not go quite so far,
     as it is my belief that most magazines of this type are on
     the same level. In fact, it seems absurd to me to state
     otherwise, as the authors who write for you one month
     publish stories in another magazine the next month. Of
     course, these authors put out, once in a while, stories that
     are much better than their usual offering, but, taken over a
     fairly long period of time, these periodic occurrences will
     be about evenly divided among various magazines. I have the
     conceit to believe that I know what I am talking about, as
     my observations are based on five years of Science Fiction
     reading.

     Of course, while I believe that there are other magazines
     equally as good, Astounding Stories is certainly not
     inferior to any. There is always room for a Science Fiction
     magazine of the same caliber as Astounding Stories, but
     unfortunately for the public there are too few of
     them.--James M. Kennedy, Ithaca, N. Y.


_Machine or Beast?_

     Dear Editor:

     Having read about every issue of Astounding Stories to date,
     I have decided that it is the best of the three Science
     Fiction magazines that I have read.

     The best story that you have published yet, in my opinion,
     is "Brigands of the Moon," by Ray Cummings. Sewell Peaslee
     Wright and Victor Rousseau are also very good writers. The
     only two stories that I did not like were "Murder Madness"
     and "Earth, the Marauder." The former belonged in a
     detective magazine, and the latter in the waste basket. It
     was too far-fetched for even my imagination.

     Now a word about your cover illustrations. The first issue
     that I bought convinced me that your artist was a genius,
     but my opinion of him is steadily decreasing. That
     illustration that I speak of was a scene from "Brigands of
     the Moon." It certainly was good. Lately, I am ashamed to
     show the magazine to my friends because of the gaudily
     painted and repugnant creatures on the cover. A picture of a
     machine is much more appropriate than a beast of some kind.
     Wesso seems to be able draw a picture like that which is on
     the March or April, 1930, numbers better than those of late.

     I would like to communicate with Science Fiction Readers of
     about my age, which is 15. I will answer any or all letters
     that are written to me.--William D. Crocker, Ashfield, Mass.


_Expert Opinion_

     Dear Editor:

     May I express my pleasure and gratification in your worthy
     magazine? I read two other Science Fiction publications
     beside yours, but Astounding Stories is by far their
     superior, especially as there is a human interest to your
     stories that is sadly lacking in others. They also contain
     too much technical detail. Your magazine is just right. The
     paper is easy on the eyes and the type is distinct and
     doesn't blur or tire the eyes.

     The cover illustrations leave nothing to be desired. The
     edges, size, number of pages, etc., are of no concern to me.
     I have read every issue of Astounding Stories since it was
     published and can find no fault with it whatever. If those
     soreheads who howl incessantly about minor details would
     only try to get out a paper of their own they would soon see
     what a wonderful work you are doing. The May 1931, issue,
     which I have just finished, is really the best collection of
     Science Fiction stories I've read in many a day, and I've
