For all their stillness, their immobility, it came to me that Emperor
and Keeper were at grapple, locked in death grip; the realization was as
definite as though, like Ruth, I thought with Norhala's mind, saw with
her eyes.

Clearly too it came to me that in this contest between the two was
epitomized all the vast conflict that raged around them; that in it was
fast ripening that fruit of destiny of which Ventnor had spoken, and
that here in the Hall of the Cones would be settled--and soon--the fate
not only of Disk and Cross, but it might be of humanity.

But with what unknown powers was that duel being fought? They cast no
lightnings, they battled with no visible weapons. Only the great planes
of the inverted cruciform Shape smoked and smoldered with their sullen
flares of ochres and of scarlets; while over all the face of the
Disk its cold and irised fires raced and shone, beating with a rhythm
incredibly rapid; its core of incandescent ruby blazed, its sapphire
ovals were cabochoned pools of living, lucent radiance.

There was a splitting roar that arose above all the clamor, deafening
us even in the shelter of the silent veils. On each side of the crater
whole masses of the City dropped away. Fleetingly I was aware of scores
of smaller pits in which uprose lesser replicas of the Coned Mount,
lesser reservoirs of the Monster's force.

Neither the Emperor nor the Keeper moved, both seemingly indifferent to
the catastrophe fast developing around them.

Now I strained forward to the very thinnest edge of the curtainings.
For between the Disk and Cross began to form fine black mist. It was
transparent. It seemed spun of minute translucent ebon corpuscles. It
hung like a black shroud suspended by unseen hands. It shook and wavered
now toward the Disk, now toward the Cross.

I sensed a keying up of force within the two; knew that each was
striving to cast like a net that hanging mist upon the other.

Abruptly the Emperor flashed forth, blindingly. As though caught upon a
blast, the black shroud flew toward the Keeper--enveloped it. And as the
mist covered and clung I saw the sulphurous and crimson flares dim. They
were snuffed out.

The Keeper fell!


Upon Norhala's face flamed a wild triumph, banishing despair. The
outstretched planes of the Cross swept up as though in torment. For an
instant its fires flared and licked through the clinging blackness; it
writhed half upright, threw itself forward, crashed down prostrate upon
the enigmatic tablet which only its tentacles could manipulate.

From Norhala's face the triumph fled. On its heels rushed stark,
incredulous horror.

The Mount of Cones shuddered. From it came a single mighty throb of
force--like a prodigious heart-beat. Under that pulse of power the
Emperor staggered, spun--and spinning, swept Norhala from her feet,
swung her close to its flashing rose.

A second throb pulsed from the cones, and mightier.

A spasm shook the Disk--a paroxysm.

Its fires faded; they flared out again, bathing the floating, unearthly
figure of Norhala with their iridescences.

I saw her body writhe--as though it shared the agony of the Shape that
held her. Her head twisted; the great eyes, pools of uncomprehending,
unbelieving horror, stared into mine.

With a spasmodic, infinitely dreadful movement the Disk closed--

And closed upon her!

Norhala was gone--was shut within it. Crushed to the pent fires of its
crystal heart.

I heard a sobbing, agonized choking--knew it was I who sobbed. Against
me I felt Ruth's body strike, bend in convulsive arc, drop inert.

The slender steeple of the cones drooped sending its faceted coronet
shattering to the floor. The Mount melted. Beneath the flooding radiance
sprawled Keeper and the great inert Globe that was the Goddess woman's
sepulcher.

The crater filled with the pallid luminescence. Faster and ever faster
it poured down into the Pit. And from all the lesser craters of the
smaller cones swept silent cataracts of the same pale radiance.

The City began to crumble--the Monster to fall.

Like pent-up waters rushing through a broken dam the gleaming deluge
swept over the valley; gushing in steady torrents from the breaking
mass. Over the valley fell a vast silence. The lightnings ceased. The
Metal Hordes stood rigid, the shining flood lapping at their bases,
rising swiftly ever higher.

Now from the sinking City swarmed multitudes of its weird luminaries.

Out they trooped, swirling from every rent and gap--orbs scarlet and
sapphire, ruby orbs, orbs tuliped and irised--the jocund suns of the
birth chamber and side by side with them hosts of the frozen, pale gilt,
stiff rayed suns.

Thousands upon thousands they marched forth and poised themselves
solemnly over all the Pit that now was a fast rising lake of yellow
froth of sun flame.

They swept forth in squadrons, in companies, in regiments, those
mysterious orbs. They floated over all the valley; they separated and
swung motionless above it as though they were mysterious multiple souls
of fire brooding over the dying shell that had held them.

Beneath, thrusting up from the lambent lake like grotesque towers of
some drowned fantastic metropolis, the great Shapes stood, black against
its glowing.

What had been the City--that which had been the bulk of the Monster--was
now only a vast and shapeless hill from which streamed the silent
torrents of that released, unknown force which, concentrate and bound,
had been the cones.

As though it was the Monster's shining life-blood it poured, raising
ever higher in its swift flooding the level radiant lake.

Lower and lower sank the immense bulk; squattered and spread, ever
lowering--about its helpless, patient crouching something ineffably
piteous, something indescribably, COSMICALLY tragic.

Abruptly the watching orbs shook under a hail of sparkling atoms
streaming down from the glittering sky; raining upon the lambent lake.
So thick they fell that now the brooding luminaries were dim aureoles
within them.

From the Pit came a blinding, insupportable brilliancy. From every
rigid tower gleamed out jeweled fires; their clinging units opened into
blazing star and disk and cross. The City was a hill of living gems over
which flowed torrents of pale molten gold.

The Pit blazed.


There followed an appalling tensity; a prodigious gathering of force;
a panic stirring concentration of energy. Thicker fell the clouds of
sparkling atoms--higher rose the yellow flood.

Ventnor cried out. I could not hear him, but I read his purpose--and
so did Drake. Up on his broad shoulders he swung Ruth as though she had
been a child. Back through the throbbing veils we ran; passed out of
them.

"Back!" shouted Ventnor. "Back as far as you can!"

On we raced; we reached the gateway of the cliffs; we dashed on and
on--up the shining roadway toward the blue globe now a scant mile before
us; ran sobbing, panting--ran, we knew, for our lives.

Out of the Pit came a sound--I cannot describe it!

An unutterably desolate, dreadful wail of despair, it shuddered past us
like the groaning of a broken-hearted star--anguished and awesome.

It died. There rushed upon us a sea of that incredible loneliness, that
longing for extinction that had assailed us in the haunted hollow where
first we had seen Norhala. But its billows were resistless, invincible.
Beneath them we fell; were torn by desire for swift death.

Dimly, through fainting eyes, I saw a dazzling brilliancy fill the sky;
heard with dying ears a chaotic, blasting roar. A wave of air thicker
than water caught us up, hurled us hundreds of yards forward. It dropped
us; in its wake rushed another wave, withering, scorching.

It raced over us. Scorching though it was, within its heat was
energizing, revivifying force; something that slew the deadly despair
and fed the fading fires of life.

I staggered to my feet; looked back. The veils were gone. The precipice
walled gateway they had curtained was filled with a Plutonic glare as
though it opened into the incandescent heart of a volcano.

Ventnor clutched my shoulder, spun me around. He pointed to the sapphire
house, started to run to it. Far ahead I saw Drake, the body of the girl
clasped to his breast. The heat became blasting, insupportable; my lungs
burned.

Over the sky above the canyon streaked a serpentine chain of lightnings.
A sudden cyclonic gust swept the cleft, whirling us like leaves toward
the Pit.

I threw myself upon my face, clutching at the smooth rock. A volley of
thunder burst--but not the thunder of the Metal Monster or its Hordes;
no, the bellowing of the levins of our own earth.

And the wind was cold; it bathed the burning skin; laved the fevered
lungs.

Again the sky was split by the lightnings. And roaring down from it in
solid sheets came the rain.

From the Pit arose a hissing as though within it raged Babylonian
Tiamat, Mother of Chaos, serpent dweller in the void; Midgard-snake of
the ancient Norse holding in her coils the world.

Buffeted by wind, beaten down by rain, clinging to each other like
drowning men, Ventnor and I pushed on to the elfin globe. The light was
dying fast. By it we saw Drake pass within the portal with his burden.
The light became embers; it went out; blackness clasped us. Guided by
the lightnings, we beat our way to the door; passed through it.

In the electric glare we saw Drake bending over Ruth. In it I saw
a slide draw over the open portal through which shrieked the wind,
streamed the rain.

As though its crystal panel was moved by unseen, gentle hands, the
portal closed; the tempest shut out.

We dropped beside Ruth upon a pile of silken stuffs--awed, marveling,
trembling with pity and--thanksgiving.

For we knew--each of us knew with an absolute definiteness as we
crouched there among the racing, dancing black and silver shadows with
which the lightnings filled the blue globe--that the Metal Monster was
dead.

Slain by itself!




CHAPTER XXX. BURNED OUT

Ruth sighed and stirred. By the glare of the lightnings, now almost
continuous, we saw that her rigidity, and in fact all the puzzling
cataleptic symptoms, had disappeared. Her limbs relaxed, her skin
faintly flushed, she lay in deepest but natural slumber undisturbed by
the incessant cannonading of the thunder under which the walls of the
blue globe shuddered. Ventnor passed through the curtains of the central
hall; he returned with one of Norhala's cloaks; covered the girl with
it.

An overwhelming sleepiness took possession of me, a weariness ineffable.
Nerve and brain and muscle suddenly relaxed, went slack and numb.
Without a struggle I surrendered to an overpowering stupor and cradled
deep in its heart ceased consciously to be.


When my eyes unclosed the chamber of the moonstone walls was filled
with a silvery, crepuscular light. I heard the murmuring and laughing of
running water, the play, I lazily realized, of the fountained pool.

I lay for whole minutes unthinking, luxuriating in the sense of tension
gone and of security; lay steeped in the aftermath of complete rest.
Memory flooded me.

Quietly I sat up; Ruth still slept, breathing peacefully beneath the
cloak, one white arm stretched over the shoulder of Drake--as though in
her sleep she had drawn close to him.

At her feet lay Ventnor, as deep in slumber as they. I arose and
tip-toed over to the closed door.

Searching, I found its key; a cupped indentation upon which I pressed.

The crystalline panel slipped back; it was moved, I suppose, by some
mechanism of counterbalances responding to the weight of the hand.
It must have been some vibration of the thunder which had loosed that
mechanism and had closed the panel upon the heels of our entrance--so I
thought--then seeing again in memory that uncanny, deliberate shutting
was not at all convinced that it had been the thunder.

I looked out. How many hours the sun had been up there was no means of
knowing.

The sky was low and slaty gray; a fine rain was falling. I stepped out.

The garden of Norhala was a wreckage of uprooted and splintered trees
and torn masses of what had been blossoming verdure.

The gateway of the precipices beyond which lay the Pit was hidden in the
webs of the rain. Long I gazed down the canyon--and longingly; striving
to picture what the Pit now held; eager to read the riddles of the
night.

There came from the valley no sound, no movement, no light.

I reentered the blue globe and paused on the threshold--staring into
the wide and wondering eyes of Ruth bolt upright in her silken bed
with Norhala's cloak clutched to her chin like a suddenly awakened and
startled child. As she glimpsed me she stretched out her hand. Drake,
wide awake on the instant, leaped to his feet, his hand jumping to his
pistol.

"Dick!" called Ruth, her voice tremulous, sweet.

He swung about, looked deep into the clear and fearless brown eyes in
which--with leaping heart I realized it--was throned only that spirit
which was Ruth's and Ruth's alone; Ruth's clear unshadowed eyes glad and
shy and soft with love.

"Dick!" she whispered, and held soft arms out to him. The cloak fell
from her. He swung her up. Their lips met.

Upon them, embraced, the wakening eyes of Ventnor dwelt; they filled
with relief and joy, nor was there lacking in them a certain amusement.

She drew from Drake's arms, pushed him from her, stood for a moment
shakily, with covered eyes.

"Ruth," called Ventnor softly.

"Oh!" she cried. "Oh, Martin--I forgot--" She ran to him, held him
tight, face hidden in his breast. His hand rested on the clustering
brown curls, tenderly.

"Martin." She raised her face to him. "Martin, it's GONE! I'm--ME again!
All ME! What happened? Where's Norhala?"

I started. Did she not know? Of course, lying bound as she had in the
vanished veils, she could have seen nothing of the stupendous tragedy
enacted beyond them--but had not Ventnor said that possessed by the
inexplicable obsession evoked by the weird woman Ruth had seen with her
eyes, thought with her mind?

And had there not been evidence that in her body had been echoed the
torments of Norhala's? Had she forgotten? I started to speak--was
checked by Ventnor's swift, warning glance.

"She's--over in the Pit," he answered her quietly. "But do you remember
nothing, little sister?"

"There's something in my mind that's been rubbed out," she replied.
"I remember the City of Cherkis--and your torture, Martin--and my
torture--"

Her face whitened; Ventnor's brow contracted anxiously. I knew for what
he watched--but Ruth's shamed face was all human; on it was no shadow
nor trace of that alien soul which so few hours since had threatened us.

"Yes," she nodded, "I remember that. And I remember how Norhala
repaid them. I remember that I was glad, fiercely glad, and then I was
tired--so tired. And then--I come to the rubbed-out place," she ended
perplexedly.

Deliberately, almost banally had I not realized his purpose, he changed
the subject. He held her from him at arm's length.

"Ruth!" he exclaimed, half mockingly, half reprovingly. "Don't you think
your morning negligee is just a little scanty even for this Godforsaken
corner of the earth?"

Lips parted in sheer astonishment, she looked at him. Then her eyes
dropped to her bare feet, her dimpled knees. She clasped her arms across
her breasts; rosy red turned all her fair skin.

"Oh!" she gasped. "Oh!" And hid from Drake and me behind the tall figure
of her brother.

I walked over to the pile of silken stuffs, took the cloak and tossed it
to her. Ventnor pointed to the saddlebags.

"You've another outfit there, Ruth," he said. "We'll take a turn through
the place. Call us when you're ready. We'll get something to eat and go
see what's happening--out there."

She nodded. We passed through the curtains and out of the hall into the
chamber that had been Norhala's. There we halted, Drake eyeing Martin
