Hugo sighed. "Suppose I went ahead?"

"One thing!" The Russian turned with a livid face. "One thing the chief
bade me tell you. If those men escape--you die."

"Oh," Hugo said. He stared through the window. "And supposing I were to
offer your chief a million--or nearly a million--for the privilege of
freeing them?"

Skorvsky's face returned to its look of transfiguration, the look that
had accompanied his noblest words of the night before. "You would do
that, comrade?" he whispered. "You would give us--give the cause--a
million? Never since the days of our Saviour has a man like you walked
on this--"

Hugo stood up suddenly. "Get out of here!" His voice was a cosmic
menace. "Get out of here, you dirty swine. Get out of here before I
break you to matchwood, before I rip out your guts and stuff them back
through your filthy, lying throat. Get out, oh, God, get out!"




XXII


Hugo realized at last that there was no place in his world for him.
Tides and tempest, volcanoes and lightning, all other majestic
vehemences of the universe had a purpose, but he had none. Either
because he was all those forces unnaturally locked in the body of a man,
or because he was a giant compelled to stoop and pander to live at all
among his feeble fellows, his anachronism was complete.

That much he perceived calmly. His tragedy lay in the lie he had told to
his father: great deeds were always imminent and none of them could be
accomplished because they involved humanity, humanity protecting its
diseases, its pettiness, its miserable convictions and conventions, with
the essence of itself--life. Life not misty and fecund for the future,
but life clawing at the dollar in the hour, the security of platitudes,
the relief of visible facts, the hope in rationalization, the needs of
skin, belly, and womb.

Beyond that, he could see destiny by interpreting his limited career.
Through a sort of ontogenetic recapitulation he had survived his savage
childhood, his barbaric youth, and the Greeces, Romes, Egypts, and
Babylons of his early manhood, emerging into a present that was endowed
with as much aspiration and engaged with the same futility as was his
contemporary microcosm. No life span could observe anything but material
progress, for so mean and inalterable is the gauge of man that his races
topple before his soul expands, and the eventualities of his growth in
space and time must remain a problem for thousands and tens of thousands
of years.

Searching still further, he appreciated that no single man could force a
change upon his unwilling fellows. At most he might inculcate an idea in
a few and live to see its gradual spreading. Even then he could have no
assurance of its contortions to the desire for wealth and power or of
the consequences of those contortions.

Finally, to build, one must first destroy, and he questioned his right
to select unaided the objects for destruction. He looked at the Capitol
in Washington and pondered the effect of issuing an ultimatum and
thereafter bringing down the great dome like Samson. He thought of the
churches and their bewildering, stupefying effect on masses who were
mulcted by their own fellows, equally bewildered, equally stupefied.
Suppose through a thousand nights he ravaged the churches, wrecking
every structure in the land, laying waste property, making the loud,
unattended volume of worship an impossibility, taking away the
purple-robed gods of his forbears? Suppose he sank the navy, annihilated
the army, set up a despotism? No matter how efficiently and well he
ruled, the millions would hate him, plot against him, attempt his life;
and every essential agent would be a hypocritical sycophant seeking
selfish ends.

He reached the last of his conclusions sitting beside a river whither he
had walked to think. An immense loathing for the world rose up in him.
At its apex a locomotive whistled in the distance, thundered
inarticulately, and rounded a bend. It came very near the place where
Hugo reclined, black, smoking, and noisy, drivers churning along the
rails, a train of passenger cars behind. Hugo could see the dots that
were people's heads. People! Human beings! How he hated them! The train
was very near. Suddenly all his muscles were unsprung. He threw himself
to his feet and rushed toward the train, with a passionate desire to get
his fingers around the sliding piston, to up-end the locomotive and to
throw the ordered machinery into a blackened, blazing, bloody tangle of
ruin.

His lips uttered a wild cry; he jumped across the river and ran two
prodigious steps. Then he stopped. The train went on unharmed. Hugo
shuddered.

If the world did not want him, he would leave the world. Perhaps he was
a menace to it. Perhaps he should kill himself. But his burning,
sickened heart refused once more to give up. Frenzy departed, then
numbness. In its place came a fresh hope, new determination. Hugo Danner
would do his utmost until the end. Meanwhile, he would remove himself
some distance from the civilization that had tortured him. He would go
away and find a new dream.

The sound of the locomotive was dead in the distance. He crossed the
river on a bridge and went back to his house. He felt strong again and
glad--glad because he had won an obscure victory, glad because the farce
of his quest in political government had ended with no tragic
denouement.

They were electrocuting Davidoff and Pletzky that day. The news scarcely
interested Hugo. The part he had very nearly played in the affair seemed
like the folly of a dimly remembered acquaintance. The relief of
resigning that impossible purpose overwhelmed him. He dismissed his
servants, closed his house, and boarded a train. When the locomotive
pounded through the station, he suffered a momentary pang. He sat in a
seat with people all around him. He was tranquil and almost content.




XXIII


Hugo had no friends. One single individual whom he loved, whom he could
have taken fully into his confidence, might, in a measure, have resolved
his whole life. Yet so intense was the pressure that had conditioned him
that he invariably retreated before the rare opportunities for such
confidences. He had known many persons well: his father and mother, Anna
Blake, Lefty Foresman, Charlotte, Iris, Tom Shayne, Roseanne, even
Skorvsky--but none of them had known him. His friendlessness was
responsible for a melancholy yearning to remain with his kind. Having
already determined to go away, he sought for a kind of compromise.

He did not want to be in New York, or Washington, or any other city; the
landscape of America was haunted for him. He would leave it, but he
would not open himself to the cruel longing for his own language, the
sight of familiar customs and manners. From his hotel in New York he
made excursions to various steamship agencies and travel bureaus. He
had seen many lands, and his _Wanderlust_ demanded novelty. For days he
was undecided.

It was a chance group of photographs in a Sunday newspaper that excited
his first real interest. One of the pictures was of a man--erect,
white-haired, tanned, clear-eyed--Professor Daniel Hardin--a procession
of letters--head of the new expedition to Yucatan. The other pictures
were of ruined temples, unpiled stone causeways, jungle. He thought
instantly that he would like to attach himself to the party.

Many factors combined to make the withdrawal offered by an expedition
ideal. The more Hugo thought about it, the more excited he became. The
very nascency of a fresh objective was accompanied by and crowded with
new hints for himself and his problems. The expedition would take him
away from his tribulations, and it would not entirely cut him off from
his kind: Professor Hardin had both the face and the fame of a
distinguished man.

A thought that had been in the archives of his mind for many months came
sharply into relief: of all human beings alive, the scientists were the
only ones who retained imagination, ideals, and a sincere interest in
the larger world. It was to them he should give his allegiance, not to
the statesmen, not to industry or commerce or war. Hugo felt that in one
quick glimpse he had made a long step forward.

Another concept, far more fantastic and in a way even more intriguing,
dawned in his mind as he read accounts of the Maya ruins which were to
be excavated. The world was cluttered with these great lumps of
incredible architecture. Walls had been builded by primitive man,
temples, hanging gardens, obelisks, pyramids, palaces, bridges,
terraces, roads--all of them gigantic and all of them defying the
penetration of archaeology to find the manner of their creation. Was it
not possible--Hugo's heart skipped a beat when it occurred to him--that
in their strange combination of ignorance and brilliance the ancients
had stumbled upon the secret of human strength--his secret! Had not
those antique and migratory peoples carried with them the formula which
could be poured into the veins of slaves, making them stronger than
engines? And was it not conceivable that, as their civilizations
crumbled, the secret was lost, together with so many other formulae of
knowledge?

He could imagine plumed and painted priests with prayer and sacrifice
cutting open the veins of prehistoric mothers and pouring in the magic
potion. When the babies grew, they could raise up the pyramids, walls,
and temples; they could do it rapidly and easily. A great enigma was
thus resolved. He set out immediately to locate Professor Hardin and
with difficulty arranged an interview with him.

Preparations for the expedition were being carried on in an ordinary New
York business office. A secretary announced Hugo and he was conducted
before the professor. Daniel Hardin was no dusty pedagogue. His
knowledge was profound and academic, his books were authoritative, but
in himself he belonged to the type of man certain to succeed, whatever
his choice of occupation. Much of his life had been spent in field
work--arduous toil in bizarre lands where life depended sometimes on
tact and sometimes on military strategy. He appraised Hugo shrewdly
before he spoke.

"What can I do for you, Mr. Danner?"

Hugo came directly to the point. "I should like to join your Yucatan
expedition."

Professor Hardin smiled. "I'm sorry. We're full up."

"I'd be glad to go in any capacity--"

"Have you special qualifications? Knowledge of the language? Of
archaeology?"

"No."

The professor picked up a tray of letters. "These letters--more than
three hundred--are all from young men--and women--who would like to join
my expedition."

"I think I should be useful," Hugo said, and then he played his trump,
"and I should be willing to contribute, for the favour of being
included, a sum of fifty thousand dollars."

Professor Hardin whistled. Then his eyes narrowed. "What's your object,
young man? Treasure?"

"No. A life--let us say--with ample means at my disposal and no definite
purpose."

"Boredom, then." He smiled. "A lot of these other young men are
independently wealthy, and bored. I must say, I feel sorry for your
generation. But--no--I can't accept. We are already adequately
financed."

Hugo smiled in response. "Then--perhaps--I could organize my own party
and camp near you."

"That would hamper me."

"Then--a hundred thousand dollars."

"Good Lord. You are determined."

"I have decided. I am familiar with the jungle. I am an athlete. I speak
a little Spanish--enough to boss a labour gang. I propose to assist you
in that way, as well as financially. I will make any contract with you
that you desire--and attach no strings whatever to my money."

Professor Hardin pondered for a long time. His eyes twinkled when he
replied. "You won't believe it, but I don't give a damn for your money.
Not that it wouldn't assist us. But--the fact is--I could use a man like
you. Anybody could. I'll take you--and you can keep your money."

"There will be a check in the mail to-morrow," Hugo answered.

The professor stood. "We're hoping to get away in three weeks. You'll
leave your address with my secretary and I'll send a list of the things
you'll want for your kit." He held out his hand and Hugo shook it. When
he had gone, the professor looked over the roof-tops and swore gleefully
to himself.

Hugo discovered, after the ship sailed, that everyone called Professor
Hardin "Dan" and they used Hugo's first name from the second day out.
Dan Hardin was too busy to be very friendly with any of the members of
his party during the voyage, but they themselves fraternized
continually. There were deck games and card games; there were long and
erudite arguments about the people whom they were going to study. What
was the Mayan time cycle and did it correspond to the Egyptian Sothic
cycle or the Greek Metonic cycle. Where did the Mayans get their jade?
Did they come from Asia over Bering Strait or were they a colony of
Atlantis? When they knew so much about engineering, why did they not use
the keystone arch and the wheel? Why was their civilization decadent,
finished when the _conquistadores_ discovered it? How old were
they--four thousand years or twelve thousand years? There were
innumerable other debates to which Hugo listened like a man new-born.

The cold Atlantic winds were transformed overnight to the balm of the
Gulf stream. Presently they passed the West Indies, which lay on the
water like marine jewels. Ages turned back through the days of
buccaneering to the more remote times. In the port of Xantl a rickety
wharf, a single white man, a zinc bar, and a storehouse filled with
chicle blocks marked off the realm of the twentieth century. The ship
anchored. During the next year it would make two voyages back to the
homeland for supplies. But the explorers would not emerge from the
jungle in that time.

An antiquated, wood-burning locomotive, which rocked along over
treacherous rails, carried them inland. The scientists became silent and
pensive. In another car the Maya Indians who were to do the manual
labour chattered incessantly in their explosive tongue. At the last
sun-baked stop they disembarked, slept through an insect-droning night,
and entered the jungle. For three weeks they hacked and hewed their way
forward; the vegetation closed behind them, cutting off the universe as
completely as the submerging waves of the sea. It was hot, difficult
work, to which Hugo lent himself with an energy that astounded even
Hardin, who had judged him valuable.

One day, when the high mountains loomed into view, Hugo caught his first
glimpse of Uctotol, the Sacred City. A creeper on the hillside fell
before his machete, then another--a hole in the green wall--and there it
stood, shining white, huge, desolate, still as the grave. His arm hung
in mid-air. Over him passed the mystic feeling of familiarity, that
fugitive sense of recognition which springs so readily into a belief in
immortality. It seemed to him during that staggering instant that he
knew every contour of those great structures, that he had run in the
streets, lived, loved, died there--that he could almost remember the
names and faces of its inhabitants, dead for thousands of years--that he
could nearly recall the language and the music--that destiny itself had
arranged a home-coming. The vision died. He gave a great shout. The
others rushed to his side and found him trembling and pointing.

Tons of verdure were cut down and pushed aside. A hacienda was
constructed and a camp for the labourers. Then the shovels and picks
were broken from their boxes; the scientists arranged their
paraphernalia, and the work began, interrupted frequently by the
exultant shouts that marked a new finding. No one regretted Hugo. He
made his men work magically; his example was a challenge. He could do
more than any of them, and his hair and eyes, black as their own, his
granite face, stern and indefatigable, gave him a natural dominion over
them.

All this--the dark, starlit, plushy nights with their hypnotic silences,
the vivid days of toil, the patient and single-minded men--was respite
