kind occurs with certain Gramineae. At the close of this same chapter, a
few observations were appended on what may be called the embryology of
leaves. The leaves produced by young shoots on cut-down plants of Melilotus
Taurica slept like those of a Trifolium, whilst the leaves on the older
branches on the same plants slept in a very different manner, proper to the
genus; and from the reasons assigned we are tempted to look at this case as
one of reversion to a former nyctitropic habit. So again with Desmodium
gyrans, the absence of small lateral leaflets on very young plants, makes
us suspect that the immediate progenitor of this species did not possess
lateral leaflets, and that their appearance in an almost rudimentary
condition at a somewhat more advanced age is the result of reversion to a
trifoliate predecessor. However this may be, the rapid circumnutating or
[page 563]
gyrating movements of the little lateral leaflets, seem to be due
proximately to the pulvinus, or organ of movement, not having been reduced
nearly so much as the blade, during the successive modifications through
which the species has passed.

We now come to the highly important class of movements due to the action of
a lateral light. When stems, leaves, or other organs are placed, so that
one side is illuminated more brightly than the other, they bend towards the
light. This heliotropic movement manifestly results from the modification
of ordinary circumnutation; and every gradation between the two movements
could be followed. When the light was dim, and only a very little brighter
on one side than on the other, the movement consisted of a succession of
ellipses, directed towards the light, each of which approached nearer to
its source than the previous one. When the difference in the light on the
two sides was somewhat greater, the ellipses were drawn out into a
strongly-marked zigzag line, and when much greater the course became
rectilinear. We have reason to believe that changes in the turgescence of
the cells is the proximate cause of the movement of circumnutation; and it
appears that when a plant is unequally illuminated on the two sides, the
always changing turgescence is augmented along one side, and is weakened or
quite arrested along the other sides. Increased turgescence is commonly
followed by increased growth, so that a plant which has bent itself towards
the light during the day would be fixed in this position were it not for
apogeotropism acting during the night. But parts provided with pulvini
bend, as Pfeffer has shown, towards the light; and here growth does not
come into play any more than in the ordinary circumnutating movements of
pulvini.
[page 564]

Heliotropism prevails widely throughout the vegetable kingdom, but
whenever, from the changed habits of life of any plant, such movements
become injurious or useless, the tendency is easily eliminated, as we see
with climbing and insectivorous plants.

Apheliotropic movements are comparatively rare in a well-marked degree,
excepting with sub-aërial roots. In the two cases investigated by us, the
movement certainly consisted of modified circumnutation.

The position which leaves and cotyledons occupy during the day, namely,
more or less transversely to the direction of the light, is due, according
to Frank, to what we call diaheliotropism. As all leaves and cotyledons are
continually circumnutating, there can hardly be a doubt that
diaheliotropism results from modified circumnutation. From the fact of
leaves and cotyledons frequently rising a little in the evening, it appears
as if diaheliotropism had to conquer during the middle of the day a widely
prevalent tendency to apogeotropism.

Lastly, the leaflets and cotyledons of some plants are known to be injured
by too much light; and when the sun shines brightly on them, they move
upwards or downwards, or twist laterally, so that they direct their edges
towards the light, and thus they escape being injured. These
paraheliotropic movements certainly consisted in one case of modified
circumnutation; and so it probably is in all cases, for the leaves of all
the species described circumnutate in a conspicuous manner. This movement
has hitherto been observed only with leaflets provided with pulvini, in
which the increased turgescence on opposite sides is not followed by
growth; and we can understand why this should be so, as the movement is
required only for a temporary purpose. It would manifestly be dis-
[page 565]
advantageous for the leaf to be fixed by growth in its inclined position.
For it has to assume its former horizontal position, as soon as possible
after the sun has ceased shining too brightly on it.

The extreme sensitiveness of certain seedlings to light, as shown in our
ninth chapter, is highly remarkable. The cotyledons of Phalaris became
curved towards a distant lamp, which emitted so little light, that a pencil
held vertically close to the plants, did not cast any shadow which the eye
could perceive on a white card. These cotyledons, therefore, were affected
by a difference in the amount of light on their two sides, which the eye
could not distinguish. The degree of their curvature within a given time
towards a lateral light did not correspond at all strictly with the amount
of light which they received; the light not being at any time in excess.
They continued for nearly half an hour to bend towards a lateral light,
after it had been extinguished. They bend with remarkable precision towards
it, and this depends on the illumination of one whole side, or on the
obscuration of the whole opposite side. The difference in the amount of
light which plants at any time receive in comparison with what they have
shortly before received, seems in all cases to be the chief exciting cause
of those movements which are influenced by light. Thus seedlings brought
out of darkness bend towards a dim lateral light, sooner than others which
had previously been exposed to daylight. We have seen several analogous
cases with the nyctitropic movements of leaves. A striking instance was
observed in the case of the periodic movements of the cotyledons of a
Cassia; in the morning a pot was placed in an obscure part of a room, and
all the cotyledons rose up closed; another pot had stood in the sunlight,
and
[page 566]
the cotyledons of course remained expanded; both pots were now placed close
together in the middle of the room, and the cotyledons which had been
exposed to the sun, immediately began to close, while the others opened; so
that the cotyledons in the two pots moved in exactly opposite directions
whilst exposed to the same degree of light.

We found that if seedlings, kept in a dark place, were laterally
illuminated by a small wax taper for only two or three minutes at intervals
of about three-quarters of an hour, they all became bowed to the point
where the taper had been held. We felt much surprised at this fact, and
until we had read Wiesner's observations, we attributed it to the
after-effects of the light; but he has shown that the same degree of
curvature in a plant may be induced in the course of an hour by several
interrupted illuminations lasting altogether for 20 m., as by a continuous
illumination of 60 m. We believe that this case, as well as our own, may be
explained by the excitement from light being due not so much to its actual
amount, as to the difference in amount from that previously received; and
in our case there were repeated alternations from complete darkness to
light. In this, and in several of the above specified respects, light seems
to act on the tissues of plants, almost in the same manner as it does on
the nervous system of animals.
There is a much more striking analogy of the same kind, in the
sensitiveness to light being localised in the tips of the cotyledons of
Phalaris and Avena, and in the upper part of the hypocotyls of Brassica and
Beta; and in the transmission of some influence from these upper to the
lower parts, causing the latter to bend towards the light. This influence
is also trans-
[page 567]
mitted beneath the soil to a depth where no light enters. It follows from
this localisation, that the lower parts of the cotyledons of Phalaris,
etc., which normally become more bent towards a lateral light than the
upper parts, may be brightly illuminated during many hours, and will not
bend in the least, if all light be excluded from the tip. It is an
interesting experiment to place caps over the tips of the cotyledons of
Phalaris, and to allow a very little light to enter through minute orifices
on one side of the caps, for the lower part of the cotyledons will then
bend to this side, and not to the side which has been brightly illuminated
during the whole time. In the case of the radicles of Sinapis alba,
sensitiveness to light also resides in the tip, which, when laterally
illuminated, causes the adjoining part of the root to bend
apheliotropically.

Gravitation excites plants to bend away from the centre of the earth, or
towards it, or to place themselves in a transverse position with respect to
it. Although it is impossible to modify in any direct manner the attraction
of gravity, yet its influence could be moderated indirectly, in the several
ways described in the tenth chapter; and under such circumstances the same
kind of evidence as that given in the chapter on Heliotropism, showed in
the plainest manner that apogeotropic and geotropic, and probably
diageotropic movements, are all modified forms of circumnutation.

Different parts of the same plant and different species are affected by
gravitation in widely different degrees and manners. Some plants and organs
exhibit hardly a trace of its action. Young seedlings which, as we know,
circumnutate rapidly, are eminently sensitive; and we have seen the
hypocotyl of Beta bending
[page 568]
upwards through 109o in 3 h. 8 m. The after-effects of apogeotropism last
for above half an hour; and horizontally-laid hypocotyls are sometimes thus
carried temporarily beyond an upright position. The benefits derived from
geotropism, apogeotropism, and diageotropism, are generally so manifest
that they need not be specified. With the flower-peduncles of Oxalis,
epinasty causes them to bend down, so that the ripening pods may be
protected by the calyx from the rain. Afterwards they are carried upwards
by apogeotropism in combination with hyponasty, and are thus enabled to
scatter their seeds over a wider space. The capsules and flower-heads of
some plants are bowed downwards through geotropism, and they then bury
themselves in the earth for the protection and slow maturation of the
seeds. This burying process is much facilitated by the rocking movement due
to circumnutation.

In the case of the radicles of several, probably of all seedling plants,
sensitiveness to gravitation is confined to the tip, which transmits an
influence to the adjoining upper part, causing it to bend towards the
centre of the earth. That there is transmission of this kind was proved in
an interesting manner when horizontally extended radicles of the bean were
exposed to the attraction of gravity for 1 or 1 ½ h., and their tips were
then amputated. Within this time no trace of curvature was exhibited, and
the radicles were now placed pointing vertically downwards; but an
influence had already been transmitted from the tip to the adjoining part,
for it soon became bent to one side, in the same manner as would have
occurred had the radicle remained horizontal and been still acted on by
geotropism. Radicles thus treated continued to grow out horizontally for
two or three days, until a new tip was
[page 569]
re-formed; and this was then acted on by geotropism, and the radicle became
curved perpendicularly downwards.

It has now been shown that the following important classes of movement all
arise from modified circumnutation, which is omnipresent whilst growth
lasts, and after growth has ceased, whenever pulvini are present. These
classes of movement consist of those due to epinasty and hyponasty,--those
proper to climbing plants, commonly called revolving nutation,--the
nyctitropic or sleep movements of leaves and cotyledons,--and the two
immense classes of movement excited by light and gravitation. When we speak
of modified circumnutation we mean that light, or the alternations of light
and darkness, gravitation, slight pressure or other irritants, and certain
innate or constitutional states of the plant, do not directly cause the
movement; they merely lead to a temporary increase or diminution of those
spontaneous changes in the turgescence of the cells which are already in
progress. In what manner, light, gravitation, etc., act on the cells is not
known; and we will here only remark that, if any stimulus affected the
cells in such a manner as to cause some slight tendency in the affected
part to bend in a beneficial manner, this tendency might easily be
increased through the preservation of the more sensitive individuals. But
if such bending were injurious, the tendency would be eliminated unless it
was overpoweringly strong; for we know how commonly all characters in all
organisms vary. Nor can we see any reason to doubt, that after the complete
elimination of a tendency to bend in some one direction under a certain
stimulus, the power to bend in a directly
[page 570]
opposite direction might gradually be acquired through natural selection.*

Although so many movements have arisen through modified circumnutation,
there are others which appear to have had a quite independent origin; but
they do not form such large and important classes. When a leaf of a Mimosa
is touched it suddenly assumes the same position as when asleep, but Brucke
has shown that this movement results from a different state of turgescence
in the cells from that which occurs during sleep; and as sleep-movements
are certainly due to modified circumnutation, those from a touch can hardly
be thus due. The back of a leaf of Drosera rotundifolia was cemented to the
summit of a stick driven into the ground, so that it could not move in the
least, and a tentacle was observed during many hours under the microscope;
but it exhibited no circumnutating movement, yet after being momentarily
touched with a bit of raw meat, its basal part began to curve in 23
seconds. This curving movement therefore could not have resulted from
modified circumnutation. But when a small object, such as a fragment of a
bristle, was placed on one side of the tip of a radicle, which we know is
continually circumnutating, the induced curvature was so similar to the
movement caused by geotropism, that we can hardly doubt that it is due to
modified circumnutation. A flower of a Mahonia was cemented to a stick, and
the stamens exhibited no signs of circumnutation under the microscope, yet
when they were lightly touched they suddenly moved towards the pistil.
Lastly, the curling of the extremity of a tendril when

* See the remarks in Frank's 'Die wagerechte Richtung von Pflanzentheilen'
(1870, pp. 90, 91, etc.), on natural selection in connection with
geotropism, heliotropism, etc.
[page 571]

touched seems to be independent of its revolving or circumnutating
movement. This is best shown by the part which is the most sensitive to
contact, circumnutating much less than the lower parts, or apparently not
at all.*

Although in these cases we have no reason to believe that the movement
depends on modified circumnutation, as with the several classes of movement
described in this volume, yet the difference between the two sets of cases
may not be so great as it at first appears. In the one set, an irritant
causes an increase or diminution in the turgescence of the cells, which are
already in a state of change; whilst in the other set, the irritant first
starts a similar change in their state of turgescence. Why a touch, slight
pressure or any other irritant, such as electricity, heat, or the
absorption of animal matter, should modify the turgescence of the affected
cells in such a manner as to cause movement, we do not know. But a touch
acts in this manner so often, and on such widely distinct plants, that the
tendency seems to be a very general one; and if beneficial, it might be
increased to any extent. In other cases, a touch produces a very different
effect, as with Nitella, in which the protoplasm may be seen to recede from
the walls of the cell; in Lactuca, in which a milky fluid exudes; and in
the tendrils of certain Vitaceae, Cucurbitaceae, and Bignoniaceae, in which
slight pressure causes a cellular outgrowth.

Finally it is impossible not to be struck with the resemblance between the
foregoing movements of plants and many of the actions performed
unconsciously by the lower animals.** With plants an

* For the evidence on this head, see the 'Movements and Habits of Climbing
Plants,' 1875, pp. 173, 174.

** Sachs remarks to nearly the same effect: "Dass sich die le-
[[page 572]]
bende Pflanzensubstanz derart innerlich differenzirt, dass einzelne Theile
mit specifischen Energien ausgerüstet sind, ähnlich, wie die verschiedenen
Sinnesnerven des Thiere" ('Arbeiten des Bot. Inst. in Würzburg,' Bd. ii.
1879, p. 282).
[page 572]

astonishingly small stimulus suffices; and even with allied plants one may
be highly sensitive to the slightest continued pressure, and another highly
sensitive to a slight momentary touch. The habit of moving at certain
periods is inherited both by plants and animals; and several other points
of similitude have been specified. But the most striking resemblance is the
localisation of their sensitiveness, and the transmission of an influence
from the excited part to another which consequently moves. Yet plants do
not of course possess nerves or a central nervous system; and we may infer
that with animals such structures serve only for the more perfect
transmission of impressions, and for the more complete intercommunication
of the several parts.

We believe that there is no structure in plants more wonderful, as far as
its functions are concerned, than the tip of the radicle. If the tip be
lightly pressed or burnt or cut, it transmits an influence to the upper
adjoining part, causing it to bend away from the affected side; and, what
is more surprising, the tip can distinguish between a slightly harder and
softer object, by which it is simultaneously pressed on opposite sides. If,
however, the radicle is pressed by a similar object a little above the tip,
the pressed part does not transmit any influence to the more distant parts,
but bends abruptly towards the object. If the tip perceives the air to be
moister on one side than on the other, it likewise transmits an influence
to the upper adjoining part, which bends towards the source of moisture.
When the tip is excited by light (though
[page 573]
in the case of radicles this was ascertained in only a single instance) the
adjoining part bends from the light; but when excited by gravitation the
same part bends towards the centre of gravity. In almost every case we can
clearly perceive the final purpose or advantage of the several movements.
Two, or perhaps more, of the exciting causes often act simultaneously on
the tip, and one conquers the other, no doubt in accordance with its
importance for the life of the plant. The course pursued by the radicle in
penetrating the ground must be determined by the tip; hence it has acquired
such diverse kinds of sensitiveness. It is hardly an exaggeration to say
that the tip of the radicle thus endowed, and having the power of directing
the movements of the adjoining parts, acts like the brain of one of the
lower animals; the brain being seated within the anterior end of the body,
receiving impressions from the sense-organs, and directing the several
movements.

[page 574]


INDEX.

ABIES--AMPHICARPOEA.

A.

Abies communis, effect of killing or injuring the leading shoot, 187
-- pectinata, effect of killing or injuring the leading shoot, 187
--, affected by Aecidium elatinum, 188


Abronia umbellata, its single, developed cotyledon, 78
--, rudimentary cotyledon, 95
--, rupture of the seed coats, 105

Abutilon Darwinii, sleep of leaves and not of cotyledons, 314
--, nocturnal movement of leaves, 323

Acacia Farnesiana, state of plant when awake and asleep, 381, 382
--, appearance at night, 395
--, nyctitropic movements of pinnae, 402
--, the axes of the ellipses, 404
-- lophantha, character of first leaf, 415
-- retinoides, circumnutation of young phyllode, 236

Acanthosicyos horrida, nocturnal movement of cotyledon 304

Acanthus candelabrum, inequality in the two first leaves, 79
--, petioles not arched, 553
-- latifolius, variability in first leaves 79
-- mollis, seedling, manner of breaking through the ground, 78, 79
--, circumnutation of young leaf, 249, 269
-- spinosus, 79
--, movement of leaves, 249

Adenanthera pavonia, nyctitropic movements of leaflets, 374

Aecidium elatinum, effect on the lateral branches of the silver fir, 188

Aesculus hippocastanum, movements of radicle, 28, 29
--, sensitiveness of apex of radicle, 172-174

Albizzia lophantha, nyctitropic movements of leaflets, 383
--, of pinnae, 402

Allium cepa, conical protuberance on arched cotyledon, 59
--, circumnutation of basal half of arched cotyledon, 60
--, mode of breaking through ground, 87
--, straightening process, 101
-- porrum, movements of flower-stems, 226

Alopecurus pratensis, joints affected by apogeotropism, 503

Aloysia citriodora, circumnutation of stem, 210

Amaranthus, sleep of leaves, 387
-- caudatus, nocturnal movement of cotyledons, 307

Amorpha fruticosa, sleep of leaflets, 354

Ampelopsis tricuspidata, hyponastic movement of hooked tips, 272-275

Amphicarpoea monoica, circumnutation and nyctitropic movements of leaves,
365
--, effect of sunshine on leaflets, 445
--, geotropic movements of, 520
[page 575]

ANODA--BRASSICA

Anoda Wrightii, sleep of cotyledons, 302, 312
--, of leaves, 324
--, downward movement of cotyledons, 444

Apheliotropism, or negative heliotropism, 5, 419, 432

Apios graveolens, heliotropic movements of hypocotyl, 422-424
-- tuberosa, vertical sinking of leaflets at night, 368

Apium graveolens, sleep of cotyledons, 305
--, petroselinum, sleep of cotyledons, 304

Apogeotropic movements effected by joints or pulvini, 502

Apogeotropism, 5, 494; retarded by heliotropism, 501; concluding remarks
on, 507

Arachis hypogoea, circumnutation of gynophore, 225
--, effects of radiation on leaves, 289, 296
--, movements of leaves, 357
-- rate of movement, 404
--, circumnutation of vertically dependent young gynophores, 519
--, downward movement of the same, 519

Arching of various organs, importance of, to seedling plants, 87, 88;
emergence of hypocotyls or epicotyls in the form of an, 553

Asparagus officinalis, circumnutation of plumules, 60-62.
--, effect of lateral light, 484

Asplenium trichomanes, movement in the fruiting fronds, 257, n.

Astragalus uliginosus, movement of leaflets, 355

Avena sativa, movement of cotyledons, 65, 66.
--, sensitiveness of tip of radicle to moist air, 183
--, heliotropic movement and circumnutation of cotyledon, 421, 422
--, sensitiveness of cotyledon to a lateral light, 477
--, young sheath-like cotyledons strongly apogeotropic, 499

Avena sativa, movements of oldish cotyledons, 499, 500

Averrhoa bilimbi, leaf asleep, 330
--, angular movements when going to sleep, 331-335
--, leaflets exposed to bright sunshine, 447

Azalea Indica, circumnutation of stem, 208

B.

Bary, de, on the effect of the Aecidium on the silver fir, 188

Batalin, Prof., on the nyctitropic movements of leaves, 283; on the sleep
of leaves of Sida napoea, 322; on Polygonum aviculare, 387; on the effect
of sunshine on leaflets of Oxalis acetosella, 447

Bauhinia, nyctitropic movements, 373
--, movements of petioles of young seedlings, 401
--, appearance of young plants at night, 402

Beta vulgaris, circumnutation of hypocotyl of seedlings, 52
--, movements of cotyledons, 52, 53
--, effect of light, 124
--, nocturnal movement of cotyledons, 307
--, heliotropic movements of, 420
--, transmitted effect of light on hypocotyl, 482
--, apogeotropic movement of hypocotyl, 496

Bignonia capreolata, apheliotropic movement of tendrils, 432, 450

Bouché on Melaleuca ericaefolia, 383

Brassica napus, circumnutation of flower-stems, 226

Brassica oleracea, circumnutation of seedling, 10
--, of radicle, 11
--, geotropic movement of radicle, 11
[page 576]

Brassica oleracea, movement of buried and arched hypocotyl, 13, 14, 15
--, conjoint circumnutation of hypocotyl and cotyledons, 16, 17, 18
--, of hypocotyl in darkness, 19
--, of a cotyledon with hypocotyl secured to a stick, 19, 20
--, rate of movement, 20
--, ellipses described by hypocotyls when erect, 105
--, movements of cotyledons, 115
--, -- of stem, 202
--, -- of leaves at night, 229, 230
--, sleep of cotyledons, 301
--, circumnutation of hypocotyl of seedling plant, 425
--, heliotropic movement and circumnutation of hypocotyls, 426
--, effect of lateral light on hypocotyls, 479-482
--, apogeotropic movement of hypocotyls, 500, 501

Brassica rapa, movements of leaves, 230

Brongniart, A., on the sleep of Strephium floribundum, 391

Bruce, Dr., on the sleep of leaves in Averrhoa, 330

Bryophyllum (vel Calanchoe) calycinum, movement of leaves, 237

C.

Camellia Japonica, circumnutation of leaf, 231, 232

Candolle, A. de, on Trapa natans, 95; on sensitiveness of cotyledons, 127

Canna Warscewiczii, circumnutation of plumules, 58, 59
--, of leaf, 252

Cannabis sativa, movements of leaves, 250
--, nocturnal movements of cotyledons, 307
Cannabis sativa, sinking of the young leaves at night, 444

Cassia, nyctitropic movement of leaves, 369

Cassia Barclayana, nocturnal movement of leaves, 372
--, slight movement of leaflets, 401
-- calliantha, uninjured by exposure at night, 289, n.
--, nyctitropic movement of leaves, 371
-- circumnutating movement of leaves, 372
-- corymbosa, cotyledons sensitive to contact, 126
--, nyctitropic movement of leaves, 369
-- floribunda, use of sleep movements, 289
--, effect of radiation on the leaves at night, 294
--, circumnutating and nyctitropic movement of a terminal leaflet, 372, 373
--, movements of young and older leaves, 400
-- florida, cotyledons sensitive to contact, 126
--, sleep of cotyledons, 308
-- glauca, cotyledons sensitive to contact, 126
--, sleep of cotyledons, 308
-- laevigata, effect of radiation on leaves, 289, n.
-- mimosoides, movement of cotyledons. 116
--, sensitiveness of, 126
--, sleep of, 308
--, nyctitropic movement of leaves, 372
--, effect of bright sunshine on cotyledons, 446
-- neglecta, movements of, 117
--, effect of light, 124
--, sensitiveness of cotyledons, 126
-- nodosa, non-sensitive cotyledons, 126
--, do not rise at night, 308
-- pubescens, non-sensitive cotyledons, 126
[page 577]

CASSIA--CRINUM

Cassia pubescens, uninjured by exposure at night, 293
--, sleep of cotyledons, 308
--, nyctitropic movement of leaves, 371
--, circumnutating movement of leaves, 372
--, nyctitropic movement of petioles, 400
--, diameter of plant at night, 402
-- sp. (?) movement of cotyledons, 116
-- tora, circumnutation of cotyledons and hypocotyls, 34, 35, 109, 308
--, effect of light, 124, 125
--, sensitiveness to contact, 125
--, heliotropic movement and circumnutation of hypocotyl, 431
--, hypocotyl of seedling slightly heliotropic, 454
--, apogeotropic movement of old hypocotyl, 497
--, movement of hypocotyl of young seedling, 510

Caustic (nitrate of silver), effect of, on radicle of bean, 150, 156; on
the common pea, 160.

Cells, table of the measurement of, in the pulvini of Oxalis corniculata,
120; changes in, 547

Centrosema, 365

Ceratophyllum demersum, movements of stem, 211

Cereus Landbeckii, its rudimentary cotyledons, 97
-- speciossimus, circumnutation of stem, 206, 207

Cerinthe major, circumnutation of hypocotyl, 49
--, of cotyledons, 49
--, ellipses described by hypocotyls when erect, 107
-- effect of darkness, 124

Chatin, M., on Pinus Nordmanniana, 389

Chenopodium album, sleep of leaves but not of cotyledons, 314, 319

Chenopodium album, movement of leaves, 387

Chlorophyll injured by bright light, 446

Ciesielski, on the sensitiveness of the tip of the radicles, 4, 523

Circumnutation, meaning explained, 1; modified, 263-279; and heliotropism,
relation between, 435; of paramount importance to every plant, 547

Cissus discolor, circumnutation of leaf, 233

Citrus aurantium, circumnutation of epicotyl, 28
--, unequal cotyledons, 95

Clianthus Dampieri, nocturnal movement of leaves, 297

Coboea scandens, circumnutation of, 270

Cohn, on the water secreted by Lathraea squamaria, 86, n.; on the movement
of leaflets of Oxalis, 447

Colutea arborea, nocturnal movement of leaflets, 355

Coniferae, circumnutation of, 211
Coronilla rosea, leaflets asleep, 355

Corylus avellana, circumnutation of young shoot, emitted from the epicotyl,
55, 56
--, arched epicotyl, 77

Cotyledon umbilicus, circumnutation of stolons, 219, 220

Cotyledons, rudimentary, 94-98; circumnutation of, 109-112; nocturnal
movements, 111, 112; pulvini or joints of, 112-122; disturbed periodic
movements by light, 123; sensitiveness of, to contact, 125; nyctitropic
movements of, 283, 297; list of cotyledons which rise or sink at night,
300; concluding remarks on their movements, 311

Crambe maritima, circumnutation of leaves, 228, 229

Crinum Capense, shape of leaves, 253
[page 578]

CRINUM--DESMODIUM

Crinum Capense, circumnutation of, 254

Crotolaria (sp.?), sleep of leaves, 340

Cryptogams, circumnutation of, 257-259

Cucumis dudaim, movement of cotyledons, 43, 44
--, sleep of cotyledons, 304

Cucurbita aurantia, movement of hypocotyl, 42
--, cotyledons vertical at night, 304
--, ovifera, geotropic movement of radicle, 38, 39
--, circumnutation of arched hypocotyl, 39
--, of straight and vertical hypocotyl, 40
--, movements of cotyledons, 41, 42, 115, 124
--, position of radicle, 89
--, rupture of the seed-coats, 102
--, circumnutation of hypocotyl when erect, 107, 108
--, sensitiveness of apex of radicle, 169-171
--, cotyledons vertical at night, 304
--, not affected by apogeotropism, 509
--, tips cauterised transversely, 537

Curvature of the radicle, 193

Cycas pectinata, circumnutation of young leaf, whilst emerging from the
ground, 58
--, first leaf arched, 78
--, circumnutation of terminal leaflets, 252

Cyclamen Persicum, movement of cotyledon, 46
--, undeveloped cotyledons, 78, 96
--, circumnutation of peduncle, 225
--, --, of leaf, 246, 247
--, downward apheliotropic movement of a flower-peduncle, 433-435

Cyclamen Persicum, burying of the pods, 433
