She looked keenly at him, astonished at the new aspect he presented.

Without came the shrill ringing of a bell, the sound of feet and the
gabble of a phonographic message. The man in yellow appeared. "Yes?"
said Graham.

"They are at Vichy."

"Where are the attendants who were in the great Hall of the Atlas?"
asked Graham abruptly.

Presently the Babble Machine rang again. "We may win yet," said the man
in yellow, going out to it. "If only we can find where Ostrog has hidden
his guns. Everything hangs on that now. Perhaps this--"

Graham followed him. But the only news was of the aeroplanes. They had
reached Orleans.

Graham returned to Helen. "No news," he said "No news."

"And we can do nothing?"

"Nothing."

He paced impatiently. Suddenly the swift anger that was his nature swept
upon him. "Curse this complex world!" he cried, "and all the inventions
of men! That a man must die like a rat in a snare and never see his foe!
Oh, for one blow!..."

He turned with an abrupt change in his manner. "That's nonsense," he
said. "I am a savage."

He paced and stopped. "After all London and Paris are only two cities.
All the temperate zone has risen. What if London is doomed and Paris
destroyed? These are but accidents." Again came the mockery of news to
call him to fresh enquiries. He returned with a graver face and sat down
beside her.

"The end must be near," he said. "The people it seems have fought and
died in tens of thousands, the ways about Roehampton must be like a
smoked beehive. And they have died in vain. They are still only at the
sub stage. The aeroplanes are near Paris. Even were a gleam of success
to come now, there would be nothing to do, there would be no time to do
anything before they were upon us. The guns that might have saved us are
mislaid. Mislaid! Think of the disorder of things! Think of this foolish
tumult, that cannot even find its weapons! Oh, for one aeropile--just
one! For the want of that I am beaten. Humanity is beaten and our cause
is lost! My kingship, my headlong foolish kingship will not last a
night. And I have egged on the people to fight--."

"They would have fought anyhow."

"I doubt it. I have come among them--"

"No," she cried, "not that. If defeat comes--if you die--. But even that
cannot be, it cannot be, after all these years."

"Ah! We have meant well. But--do you indeed believe--?"

"If they defeat you," she cried, "you have spoken. Your word has gone
like a great wind through the world, fanning liberty into a flame. What
if the flame sputters a little! Nothing can change the spoken word. Your
message will have gone forth...."

"To what end? It may be. It may be. You know I said, when you told me
of these things dear God! but that was scarcely a score of hours ago!--I
said that I had not your faith. Well--at any rate there is nothing to do
now...."

"You have not my faith! Do you mean--? You are sorry?"

"No," he said hurriedly, "no! Before God--no!" His voice changed.
"But--. I think--I have been indiscreet. I knew little--I grasped too
hastily...."

He paused. He was ashamed of this avowal. "There is one thing that makes
up for all. I have known you. Across this gulf of time I have come to
you. The rest is done. It is done. With you, too, it has been something
more--or something less--"

He paused with his face searching hers, and without clamoured the
unheeded message that the aeroplanes were rising into the sky of Amiens.

She put her hand to her throat, and her lips were white. She stared
before her as if she saw some horrible possibility. Suddenly her
features changed. "Oh, but I have been honest!" she cried, and then,
"Have I been honest? I loved the world and freedom, I hated cruelty and
oppression. Surely it was that."

"Yes," he said, "yes. And we have done what it lay in us to do. We have
given our message, our message! We have started Armageddon! But now--.
Now that we have, it may be our last hour, together, now that all these
greater things are done...."

He stopped. She sat in silence. Her face was a white riddle.

For a moment they heeded nothing of a sudden stir outside, a running
to and fro, and cries. Then Helen started to an attitude of tense
attention. "It is--," she cried and stood up, speechless, incredulous,
triumphant. And Graham, too, heard. Metallic voices were shouting
"Victory!" Yes it was "Victory!" He stood up also with the light of a
desperate hope in his eyes.

Bursting through the curtains appeared the man in yellow, startled and
dishevelled with excitement. "Victory," he cried, "victory! The people
are winning. Ostrog's people have collapsed."

She rose. "Victory?" And her voice was hoarse and faint.

"What do you mean?" asked Graham. "Tell me! What?"

"We have driven them out of the under galleries at Norwood, Streatham
is afire and burning wildly, and Roehampton is ours. Ours!--and we have
taken the aeropile that lay thereon."

For an instant Graham and Helen stood in silence, their hearts were
beating fast, they looked at one another. For one last moment there
gleamed in Graham his dream of empire, of kingship, with Helen by his
side. It gleamed, and passed.

A shrill bell rang. An agitated grey-headed man appeared from the room
of the Ward Leaders. "It is all over," he cried.

"What matters it now that we have Roehampton? The aeroplanes have been
sighted at Boulogne!"

"The Channel!" said the man in yellow. He calculated swiftly. "Half an
hour."

"They still have three of the flying stages," said the old man.

"Those guns?" cried Graham.

"We cannot mount them--in half an hour."

"Do you mean they are found?"

"Too late," said the old man.

"If we could stop them another hour!" cried the man in yellow.

"Nothing can stop them now," said the old man, "they have near a hundred
aeroplanes in the first fleet."

"Another hour?" asked Graham.

"To be so near!" said the Ward Leader. "Now that we have found those
guns. To be so near--. If once we could get them out upon the roof
spaces."

"How long would that take?" asked Graham suddenly.

"An hour--certainly."

"Too late," cried the Ward Leader, "too late."

"Is it too late?" said Graham. "Even now--. An hour!"

He had suddenly perceived a possibility. He tried to speak calmly,
but his face was white. "There is one chance. You said there was an
aeropile--?"

"On the Roehampton stage, Sire."

"Smashed?"

"No. It is lying crossways to the carrier. It might be got upon the
guides--easily. But there is no aeronaut--."

Graham glanced at the two men and then at Helen. He spoke after a long
pause. "We have no aeronauts?"

"None."

"The aeroplanes are clumsy," he said thoughtfully, "compared with the
aeropiles."

He turned suddenly to Helen. His decision was made. "I must do it."

"Do what?"

"Go to this flying stage--to this aeropile."

"What do you mean?"

"I am an aeronaut. After all--. Those days for which you reproached me
were not wasted."

He turned to the old man in yellow. "Put the aeropile upon the guides."

The man in yellow hesitated.

"What do you mean to do?" cried Helen.

"This aeropile--it is a chance--."

"You don't mean--?"

"To fight--yes. To fight in the air. I have thought before--. An
aeroplane is a clumsy thing. A resolute man--!"

"But--never since flying began--" cried the man in yellow.

"There has been no need. But now the time has come. Tell them now--send
them my message--to put it upon the guides."

The old man dumbly interrogated the man in yellow, nodded, and hurried
out.

Helen made a step towards Graham. Her face was white. "But--How can one
fight? You will be killed."

"Perhaps. Yet, not to do it--or to let someone else attempt it--."

He stopped, he could speak no more, he swept the alternative aside by a
gesture, and they stood looking at one another.

"You are right," she said at last in a low tone. "You are right. If it
can be done... must go."

Those days for not altogether

He moved a step towards her, and she stepped back, her white face
struggled against him and resisted him. "No," she gasped. "I cannot
bear--. Go now."

He extended his hands stupidly. She clenched her fists. "Go now," she
cried. "Go now."

He hesitated and understood. He threw his hands up in a queer
half-theatrical gesture. He had no word to say. He turned from her.

The man in yellow moved towards the door with clumsy belated tact. But
Graham stepped past him. He went striding through the room where the
Ward Leader bawled at a telephone directing that the aeropile should be
put upon the guides.

The man in yellow glanced at Helen's still figure, hesitated and hurried
after him. Graham did not once look back, he did not speak until the
curtain of the ante-chamber of the great hall fell behind him. Then he
turned his head with curt swift directions upon his bloodless lips.



CHAPTER XXIV. THE COMING OF THE AEROPLANES

Two men in pale blue were lying in the irregular line that stretched
along the edge of the captured Roehampton stage from end to end,
grasping their carbines and peering into the shadows of the stage called
Wimbledon Park. Now and then they spoke to one another. They spoke the
mutilated English of their class and period. The fire of the Ostrogites
had dwindled and ceased, and few of the enemy had been seen for some
time. But the echoes of the fight that was going on now far below in
the lower galleries of that stage, came every now and then between the
staccato of shots from the popular side. One of these men was describing
to the other how he had seen a man down below there dodge behind a
girder, and had aimed at a guess and hit him cleanly as he dodged too
far "He's down there still," said the marksman. "See that little patch.
Yes. Between those bars." A few yards behind them lay a dead stranger,
face upward to the sky, with the blue canvas of his jacket smoldering
in a circle about the neat bullet hole on his chest. Close beside him a
wounded man, with a leg swathed about, sat with an expressionless face
and watched the progress of that burning. Gigantic behind them, athwart
the carrier lay the captured aeropile.

"I can't see him now," said the second man in a ton of provocation.

The marksman became foul-mouthed and high-voiced in his earnest
endeavour to make things plain And suddenly, interrupting him, came a
noisy shouting from the substage.

"What's going on now," he said, and raised himself on one arm to stare
at the stairheads in the central groove of the stage. A number of blue
figures were coming up these, and swarming across the stage to the
aeropile.

"We don't want all these fools," said his friend. "They only crowd up
and spoil shots. What are they after?"

"Ssh!--they're shouting something."

The two men listened. The swarming new-comers had crowded densely about
the aeropile. Three Ward Leaders, conspicuous by their black mantles and
badges, clambered into the body and appeared above it. The rank and file
flung themselves upon the vans, gripping hold of the edges, until the
entire outline of the thing was manned, in some places three deep. One
of the marksmen knelt up. "They're putting it on the carrier--that's
what they're after."

He rose to his feet, his friend rose also. "What's the good?" said his
friend. "We've got no aeronauts."

"That's what they're doing anyhow." He looked at his rifle, looked at
the struggling crowd, and suddenly turning to the wounded man. "Mind
these, mate," he said, handing his carbine and cartridge belt; and in a
moment he was running towards the aeropile. For a quarter of an hour he
was a perspiring Titan, lugging, thrusting, shouting and heeding shouts,
and then the thing was done, and he stood with a multitude of others
cheering their own achievement. By this time he knew, what indeed
everyone in the city knew, that the Master, raw learner though he
was, intended to fly this machine himself, was coming even now to take
control of it, would let no other man attempt it. "He who takes the
greatest danger, he who bears the heaviest burden, that man is King,"
so the Master was reported to have spoken. And even as this man cheered,
and while the beads of sweat still chased one another from the disorder
of his hair, he heard the thunder of a greater tumult, and in fitful
snatches the beat and impulse of the revolutionary song. He saw through
a gap in the people that a thick stream of heads still poured up
the stairway. "The Master is coming," shouted voices, "the Master is
coming," and the crowd about him grew denser and denser. He began to
thrust himself towards the central groove. "The Master is coming!" "The
Sleeper, the Master!" "God and the Master!" roared the Voices.

And suddenly quite close to him were the black uniforms of the
revolutionary guard, and for the first and last time in his life he saw
Graham, saw him quite nearly. A tall, dark man in a flowing black robe,
with a white, resolute face and eyes fixed steadfastly before him; a man
who for all the little things about him held neither ears nor eyes
nor thoughts.... For all his days that man remembered the passing of
Graham's bloodless face. In a moment it had gone and he was fighting
in the swaying crowd. A lad weeping with terror thrust against him,
pressing towards the stairways, yelling "Clear for the aeropile!" The
