
She drew back from me, breathing quickly, faith and doubt fighting a
battle royal in her eyes. "But the checks, Karl?" she stammered; "those
checks the girl on the Free Level cashes each month, and worse than that
the check at the Jeweller's where you bought a necklace for twenty
thousand marks?"

"Quite right, there are such checks, and I shall explain them. But
before I begin, may I ask just how you came to know about those checks?
Not that I care; I am glad you do know; but the fact of your knowledge
puzzles me, for I thought the privacy of a man's checking account was
one of the unfair privileges that man has usurped for himself and not
granted to women."

"But I did not pry into the matter. I would never have thought of such a
thing until he forced the facts upon me."

"He? You mean von Kufner?"

"Yes, it was five days ago. I was out walking with him and he insisted
on my going into a jewellery store we were passing. I at first refused
to go as I thought he wished to buy me something. But he insisted that
he merely wanted me to look at things and I went in. You see, I was
trying not to offend him."

"Of course," I said, "there was no harm in that. And--"

"The Admiral winked at the Jeweller. I saw him do that; and the jeweller
set out a tray of ruby necklaces and began to talk about them, and then
von Kufner remarked that since they were so expensive he must not sell
many. 'Oh, yes,' said the Jeweller, 'I sell a great number to young men
who have just come into money. I sold one the other day to Herr von
Armstadt of the Chemical Staff,' and he reached for his sales book and
opened it to the page with a record of the sale. He had the place
marked, for I saw him remove a slip as he opened the book."

"Rather clever of von Kufner," I commented; "how do you suppose he got
trail of it?"

"He admitted his trailing quite frankly," said Marguerite, "for as soon
as we were out of the shop, I accused him of preparing the scene. 'Of
course,' he said, 'but I had to convince you that your chemist was not
so saintly as you thought him. His banker is a friend of mine, and I
asked him about von Armstadt's account. He is keeping a girl on the Free
Level and evidently also making love to one of better caste, or he would
hardly be buying ruby necklaces.' I told von Kufner that he was a
miserable spy, but he only laughed at me and said that all men were
alike and that I ought to find it out while I was young--and then he
asked if I would like him to have the young woman's record sent up from
the Free Level for my inspection. I ordered him to leave me at once and
I have not seen or heard from him since, until I received a note from
him today telling me of the Royal order for you to go to the Arctic."

I first set Marguerite's mind at ease about the checks to Bertha by
explaining the incident of the geography, and then told the story of
Katrina and the meeting in the cafe, and the later affair of Holknecht
and the necklace.

"And you will promise me never to see her again?"

"But you have forgotten," I said, "that I am leaving Berlin in four
days."

"Oh, Karl," she cried, "I have forgotten everything--I cannot even
remember that new name you gave us--I believe I must be dreaming--or
that it is all a wild story you have told us to see how much we in our
simplicity and ignorance will believe."

"No," I said gently, "it is not a dream, though I could wish that it
were, for Grauble says that there is no hope of taking you with me; and
yet I must go, for the Emperor has ordered me to the Arctic and von
Kufner will see to it that I make no excuses. If I once leave Berlin by
submarine with Grauble I do not see how I can refuse to carry out my
part of this project to which I am pledged, and make the effort to reach
the free world outside."

Marguerite turned on me with a bitter laugh. "The free world," she
cried, "your world. You are going back to it and leave me here. You are
going back to your own people--you will not save Germany at all--you
will never come back for me!"

"You are very wrong," I said gently. "It is because I have known you and
known such men as Dr. Zimmern and Col. Hellar that I do want to carry
the message that will for ever end this sunless life of your
imprisoned race."

"But," cried Marguerite, "you do not want to take me; you could find a
way if you would--you made the Emperor do your bidding once--you could
do it again if you wanted to."

"I very much want to take you; to go without you would be but a bitter
success."

"But have you no wife, or no girl you love among your own people?"

"No."

"But if I should go with you, the people of your world would welcome you
but they would imprison me or kill me as a spy."

"No," and I smiled as I answered, "they do not kill women."

~4~

During four brief days that remained until Capt. Grauble's vessel was
due to depart my every hour was full of hurried preparations for my
survey of the Arctic mines. Clothing for the rigours and rough labour of
that fearful region had to be obtained and I had to get together the
reports of previous surveys and the instruments for the ore analyses
that would be needed. Nor was I altogether faithless in these
preparations for at times I felt that my first duty might be thus to aid
in the further provisioning of the imprisoned race, for how was I to
know that I would be able to end the state of war that had prevailed in
spite of the generations of pacifist efforts? At times I even doubted
that this break for the outer world would ever be made. I doubted that
Capt. Grauble, though he solemnly assured us that he was ready for the
venture, was acting in good faith. Could he, I asked, persuade his men
to their part of the adventure? Would not our traitorous design be
discovered and we both be returned as prisoners to Berlin? Granted even
that Grauble could carry out his part and that the submarine proceeded
as planned to rise to the surface or attempt to make some port, with the
best of intentions of surrendering to the World State authorities, might
not we be destroyed before we could make clear our peaceful and friendly
intentions? Could I, coming out of Germany with Germans prove my
identity? Would my story be believed? Would I have believed such a story
before the days of my sojourn among the Germans? Might I not be
consigned to languish in prison as a merely clever German spy, or be
consigned to an insanity ward?

At times I doubted even my own desire to escape from Berlin if it meant
the desertion of Marguerite, for there could be no joy in escape for me
without her. Yet I found small relish in looking forward to life as a
member of that futile clan of parasitical Royalty. Had Germany been a
free society where we might hope to live in peace and freedom perhaps I
could have looked forward to a marriage with Marguerite and considered
life among the Germans a tolerable thing. But for such a life as we must
needs live, albeit the most decent Berlin had to offer, I could find no
relish--and the thought of escape and call of duty beyond the bomb proof
walls and poisoned soil called more strongly than could any thought of
love and domesticity within the accursed circle of fraudulent divinity.

There was also the danger that lurked for me in Holknecht's knowledge of
my identity and the bitterness of his anger born of his insane and
stupid jealousy.

Rather than remain longer in Berlin I would take any chance and risk any
danger if only Marguerite were not to be left behind. And yet she must
be left behind, for such a thing as getting a woman aboard a submarine
or even to the submarine docks had never been heard of. I thought of all
the usual tricks of disguising her as a man, of smuggling her as a
stowaway amidst the cargo, but Grauble's insistence upon the
impossibility of such plans had made it all too clear that any such wild
attempt would lead to the undoing of us all.

If escape were possible with Marguerite--! But cold reason said that
escape was improbable enough for me alone. For a woman of the House of
Hohenzollern the prison of Berlin had walls of granite and locks
of steel.

The time of departure drew nearer. I had already been passed down by the
stealthy guards and through the numerous locked and barred gates to the
subterranean docks where Grauble's vessel, the _Eitel 3_, rested on the
heavy trucks that would bear her away through the tunnel to the
pneumatic lock that would float her into the passage that led to
the open sea.

My supplies and apparatus were stored on board and the crew were making
ready to be off. But three hours were left until the time of our
departure and these hours I had set aside for my final leave-taking of
Marguerite. I hastened back through the guarded gates to the elevator
and was quickly lifted to the Royal Level where Marguerite was to be
waiting for me.

With fast beating and rebellious heart I rang the bell of the Countess'
apartment. I could scarcely believe I heard aright when the servant
informed me that the Princess Marguerite had gone out.

I demanded to see the Countess and was ushered into the reception-room
and suffered unbearably during the few minutes till she appeared. To my
excited question she replied with a teasing smile that Marguerite had
gone out a half hour before with Admiral von Kufner. "I warned you,"
said the Countess as she saw the tortured expression of my face, "but
you would not believe me, when I told you the Admiral would prove a
dangerous man."

"But it is impossible," I cried. "I am leaving for the Arctic mines. I
have only a couple of hours; surely you are hiding something. Did you
see her go? Did she leave no word? Do you know where they have gone or
when they will return?"

The Countess shook her head. "I only know," she replied more
sympathetically, "that Marguerite seemed very excited all morning. She
talked with me of your leaving and seemed very wrought up over it, and
then but an hour or so ago she rushed into her room and telephoned--it
must have been to the Admiral, for he came shortly afterwards. They
talked together for a little while and then, without a word to me they
went out, seeming to be in a great hurry. Perhaps she felt so upset over
your leaving that she thought it kinder not to risk a parting scene. She
is so honest, poor child, that she probably did not wish to send you
away with any false hopes."

"But do you mean," I cried, "that you think she has gone out with von
Kufner to avoid seeing me?"

"I am sorry," consoled the Countess, "but it looks that way. It was
cruel of her, for she might have sent you away with hope to live on till
your return, even if she felt she could not wait for you."

I strove not to show my anger to the Countess, for, considering her
ignorance of the true significance of the occasion, I could not expect a
full understanding.

Miserably I waited for two hours as the Countess tried to entertain me
with her misplaced efforts at sympathy while I battled to keep my faith
in Marguerite alive despite the damaging evidence that she had deserted
me at the last hour.

I telephoned to von Kufner's office and to his residence but could get
no word as to his whereabouts, and Marguerite did not return.

I dared not wait any longer--asking for envelope and paper, I penned a
hasty note to Marguerite: "I shall go on to the Arctic and come back to
you. The salvation of Berlin must wait till you can go with me. I
cannot, will not, lose you."

And then I tore myself away and hastened to the elevator and was dropped
to a subterranean level and passed again through the locked and
guarded gates.

~5~

As I came to the vessel no one was in sight but the regular guards
pacing along the loading docks. I mounted the ladder to the deck. The
second officer stood by the open trap. "They are waiting for you," he
said. "The Admiral himself is below. He came with his lady to see
you off."

I hastened to descend and saw von Kufner and Marguerite chatting with
Captain Grauble.

"Why the delay?" asked von Kufner. "It is nearly the hour of departure,
and I have brought the Princess to bid you farewell. We have been
showing her the vessel."

"It is all very wonderful," said Marguerite with a calm voice, but her
eyes spoke the feverish excitement of a great adventure.

"The Princess Marguerite," said von Kufner, "is the only woman who has
ever seen a submarine since the open sea traffic was closed. But she has
seen it all and now we must take our leave for it is time that you
should be off."

As he finished speaking the Admiral politely stepped away to give me
opportunity for a farewell word with Marguerite. Grauble followed him
and, as he passed me, he gave me a look of gloating triumph and then
opened the door of his cabin, which the Admiral entered.

"I am going with you," whispered Marguerite. "Grauble understands."

There was the sound of a scuffle and a strangled oath. Grauble's head
appeared at the cabin door. "Here, Armstadt; be quick, and keep
him quiet."

I plunged into the cabin and saw von Kufner crumpled against the bunk;
his hands were manacled behind him and his mouth stuffed with a cloth.

With an exulting joy I threw myself upon the man as he struggled to
rise. I easily held him down, and whipping out my own kerchief I bound
it tightly across his mouth to more effectively gag him.

Then rolling him over I planted my knee on his back while I ripped a
sheet from the bunk and bound his feet.

From without I heard Grauble's voice in command: "Close the hatch." Then
I felt the vessel quiver with machinery in motion and I knew that we
were moving along the tunnel toward the sea.

Grauble appeared again in the door of the cabin. "The mate understands,"
he said, "and the crew will obey. I told them that the Admiral was going
out with us to inspect the lock. But the presence of a woman aboard will
puzzle them. I have placed the Princess in the mate's cabin so no one
can molest her. We have other things to keep us occupied."

With Grauble's help I now bound von Kufner to the staunch metal leg of
the bunk and we left him alone in the narrow room to ponder on the
meaning of what he had heard.

Outside Grauble led me over to the instrument board where the mate was
stationed.

"Any unusual message?" asked Grauble.

"None," said the mate. "I think we will go through without interruption
at least until we reach the lock; if anything is suspicioned we will be
held up there for examination."

"Do you think the guards at the dock suspected anything?" questioned
Grauble.

"It is not likely," replied the mate. "They saw him come aboard, but he
spoke to none of them. They will presume he is going out to the lock.
The presence of a woman will puzzle them; but, as she was with the
Admiral, they will not dare interfere or even report the fact."

"Then what do you think we have to fear?" asked Grauble.

"Only the chance that the Admiral's absence may be noted at his office
and inquiry be made."

"Of that the Princess could tell us something," said Grauble. "We will
talk with her."

Grauble now led me to the mate's snug cabin, where we found Marguerite
seated on the bunk, looking very pale and anxious.

"Everything is going nicely, so far," the Captain assured her. "We have
only one thing to fear, and that is that inquiry from the Administration
Office for the Admiral may be addressed to the Commander of the Lock."

"But how will they know that he is with us?" asked Marguerite. "Will the
guards report it?"

"I do not think so," said Grauble, "but does any one at his office know
that he came to the docks?"

"I do not see how they could," replied Marguerite; "he was at his
