immense dark clot in the sky, so black, with no stars behind it.  He
would see how untouchable they were.

His hatred had had four long years to smolder.  The year of isolation
had been longest, training himself to feel nothing, in the face of
danger.  Even the fourteen odd months of pirating had crawled---the
killing of his crew had been a sad necessity.  Then the slow,
meticulous construction of the fleet.  Human minds were worthless here;
they would only be read and turned to jelly with strange fears and
false images.  Only a close-knit, automatic response to telepathic
command, forty fast-black robot ships, were of any use.  Why he had
chosen black he couldn't say, unless perhaps it was a gut feeling they
didn't like it.  But the Hole was black.....  STOP THESE USELESS
THOUGHTS!  NEXT YOU'LL BE THINKING OF MARIA.

It was not possible they weren't aware of his opposition.  But they
seemed to allow such things. . .or perhaps they couldn't stop them.
No, that was too much to ask himself to believe.  Certainly no one had
stopped the fascist uprising, the snowballing of events which had led
to interworld war, the slaughter, the death camps.  True the
Commonwealth had eventually come to grips.  But the destruction, the
loss of life, could never be justified.  So much for Divine
intervention.

He had to start closing down his mind, as he had taught himself through
the years of emptiness.  He wasn't sure how greatly distance mattered,
but he was getting close.  Already the shimmering outline could be seen
on the monitor, the bright specks of racing white.  From here the
blackness beyond did not seem so dark.  But soon it would be Darkness
itself, enveloping the sky.  It was for the heart of the blackness he
aimed.  Perhaps it was their only vulnerable point, they guarded it so
well.  He looked up at the wide portal, and as he expected the visions
had begun.  A long chute, a cylindrical spiraling of gray and glossy
skulls.

He looked away, then remembered.  Shook his head sardonically and
tightened his face.  The images weren't outside, they were inside.  He
stood atop a geyser of emerald fire.  But they couldn't stop his
thoughts.  "Central computer, phase three," he just managed.  Now
unless his commands were coded and specific the ships would not
respond.  He felt his own surge forward, felt the sharp jolt of
electric current as for a moment his wired throat cleared the images
away.

"Bastards!"  He could see them now, closer, breaking away from the
strands and coming at him like miniature suns.  He felt them probing
the mechanized brain.  "One-nine three-nine!"  And the unreal minds all
functioned in a different key.  He managed to fire three burst from the
left wing before his fingers turned to lizards and were gone.

"AAHH!"  Another shock, stronger, and he could see again.  He was
closer still, the web becoming an expanding grid pocked with dark and
geometric holes.  His ships crossed and interwove, fired a massive
burst.  The globes hovered and sometimes blinded him with light, but
either could not or would not attack the ships.  Their shields were up,
but how much that mattered.....

Then his fleet was gone, as if it had never been, and the globes
receded.  A harder jolt, but somehow he knew this was no illusion.  All
false images faded.  He was himself, without pain, in his own vessel.
And the grid was still larger, the growing blackness like wet and
physical night behind it.
        His hands were back on the console and he fired seven bursts,
at the racing globes or at the shafts themselves.  But each time he
fired into nothingness:  the lines of brilliance were no longer there.
Above, to the side, but not there.  And this too was no illusion.  He
hurled his rage at nothing and no one.

Suddenly a huge black hexagon was before him.

Fear.

His mind began to signal reverse thrust, and only a supreme effort of
will overrode it.  The blackness he headed toward.....  Why did it
terrify him so?  It was as Fear itself.  And suddenly the looming shaft
above him appeared not as a barrier, but as the strand of a protective
net which covered a great abyss, a hole in living Space.  And he was
falling through.

"No!"  He could not turn back now!  This was why he had come.  He would
destroy them.  Somehow!  This had to be the key.  But they no longer
seemed an enemy and this silent, screaming void was no friend.  Was it
yet too late.....

"NO!"  He was inside.


*


It was cold in that place, through the ship and through the celluloid,
and the last thing he saw as he looked back through the monitor was a
tightening circle of black, like a swirl of inky cloud, enveloping the
Guardians' web.

Then all was dark, but for a sickly and sporadic flashing of the
console.  He felt a kind of dull dread, a physical weakness, but not
yet fear.  He had pierced all barriers, and stood at the heart of the
nightmare.

Only he could not remember why he had come.  No, he remembered.  But it
did not seem like much of a reason.  "Guardians!"  His rage would not
fire in that place, and the screaming hurt his throat.  As the silence
hurt his ears.

The ship's momentum had begun to deteriorate, as if such principles did
not apply here.  This did not startle him.  It seemed almost doubly
familiar.  But then the outer hull began to deteriorate as well---he
could feel it.  "It isn't possible."  The shields were down, this he
knew, but the vessel's outer skin was of pure platinated osmodidium,
seven times descended from stainless steel.  It resisted heat,
friction, impact and atmosphere.  But in that cold wet nothing it
tinged and flaked as if with rust, was pocked and threw out buds like a
face torn by a shotgun.  It broke down, came apart, and fell away all
around him, leaving him naked and without a ship.

He stood alone in the black without protection.  The celluloid and
wires were all that remained---why he couldn't say.  For a time his
body was suspended, and his feet danced like those of a marionette
trying to find the stage.  Then they touched bottom on something very
hard and smooth.  A wide stair.  He began to feel suffocated, knew
there was no oxygen but this wasn't why.  He took a step forward, up
another, and the feeling eased, if only slightly.  He was as a shark
that could never sleep.  Unless it kept moving, he would die.

He continued to climb, as the steps got steeper, which was very soon.
They were taller, progressing, and he labored on and it was harder and
harder to breathe.  Finally the stairs were eight feet high and he
could go no further.  He was almost weeping, feeling lost, when he went
to lean against the obstructing wall before him.  But it was gone, and
he fell forward into grey mists.

He stumbled to the rocky ground---the rocks were red---and he found
himself in a deep chasm lit and shadowed by a pale sun in a purple sky.
 Looking up he saw an ancient and abandoned stone fortress upon the
heights to his left, with tattered streams of white flying distended
circles about it and a sound like the wind wailing but there was no
wind.  The air was thin and weak.

He suddenly felt exposed there, and sought shelter from the wraiths
above among the overhung shadows of the left-hand wall.  He hunched to
a leaning sit and tried to think very carefully.

He understood.  This was his past, and he knew what must be done.  A
beautiful and wistful woman was imprisoned there, in that place, and he
would have her as his own at all costs.  And for the first time he felt
his aggression not as a flaw, a defense against the void, but as a
rightness and a strength, because he knew she needed him.  So he stayed
very still and waited for the darkness of night.  Not that this would
blind their sight but because he felt safer in the dark, though not the
black.  So as the sky lost red and reached its deepest blue, he set out.

He moved out from the overhang to a narrow vertical slit, a long scar
in the rockface.  He climbed slowly and determinedly, sure of each step
and never making a sound.  He reached and sweated and pulled, till he
was nearly halfway up.

Then suddenly the wraiths were aware of him and streaked down from the
high walls with a shrieking wail that was horrible to hear.  They
reached him, swirled about him and gnashed their sharp teeth from
mouths that were like bats' mouths and screamed their terrible scream.
He reached with one arm to ward them off, nearly fell.  He found his
grip and seized a stone and hurled it at the nearest.  It went clean
through, and he nearly fell again.

But then, as he hung by one hand, vulnerable, the screaming increased
and they came closer but did not finish him.  Then he realized that
they could not.  They were as fear, and could not physically harm him,
but only make him do the things to harm himself.  So he cautiously
recovered himself, stood firmly on the tiny ledge, and put them from
his mind.  There might be other obstacles to reach her, but these he
would not fear.

He reached up and continued to climb as the noise died away and only a
ghost image of the wraiths remained frozen in the air.  Climbing
steadily, he had almost reached a level with the first buttress---one
last knot of stone---when a low studded door burst open from the
darkness of the wall to the extreme right, and four black wolves poured
out and rushed headlong toward the place where he would emerge above
the cliffs, and he was hard pressed to reach it before they did.

These were no illusion.  He leapt to his feet and pulled the long knife
from its sheath as the first was upon him.  One back-slash with the
blade as he dropped to a knee and it fell dying before him, its throat
cut.  The others closed as he rose again and they snarled and tore as
he kicked and slashed, and after a time two more were dead but his legs
were badly marked and it was hard to stand, and he fell to the ground.

Then the last, the largest, which had bided its time was upon him,
going for his throat.  The knife had fallen away and he reached up with
his hands to grab it around the neck and try to pull it off.  He
succeeded partially, raising himself halfway; but it was soon at him
again, tearing at the side of his face.  Driven by an overpowering
rage, he seized it just below the ear and dragged it away until he had
its neck firmly in his two hands, and squeezed and kicked until the
wolf moved no more.  He let it fall to the ground as he rose, and
sullenly brushed the dirt from him and strained his eyes to focus on
the dark castle before him.

There was only one entrance, near to the small door which had emitted
the wolves, locked tight upon their demise.  There it was:  a vast arch
guarded by a spiked portcullis.  To his amazement as he came forward he
saw that the grid was raised, the way open.

He stepped toward it cautiously, came to it, looked about him for some
kind of trap.  But he found none, passed through and entered a long
corridor, which led in time to a double-door upon his right.  He
entered a broad chamber of half-light, knowing he had reached the heart
of the Castle.  He entered.

A lone figure sat in a heavy throne at its head, a circled fire to one
side, an enormous leopard chained to an iron ring on the other.  Six
doors stood silent at the back of the chamber.

"Hello Nieman," said the bald figure from its throne.  The firelight
distorted his features, but the fat and sneering visage would have been
ugly in any light.  He wore a mantle of crimson, edged in gold.

"Where is she?" he demanded.

"Not so fast," spoke the other calmly.  "I am not a person to offend."

"I'm not afraid of you."

The mouth gave a dry, humorless laugh.  "Do you know who I am?"  He
twisted a ring around his fat finger with the opposite hand.

"I know what you're called," retorted Nieman, his anger growing.  "The
ancients called you daemon.  Religious fools say you're the Devil."

"And what do you say?"  It turned the ring more quickly.

"That you don't exist.  I am talking to myself."  He looked to the row
of doors, tried to feel her presence among the stone.  He stepped
toward the second in line.

"Stop!" cried the visage, which he ignored.  He pulled open the door as
the great cat broke free of its chains and came after him.  It rushed
and leapt full in his face.  But he had turned; he caught it in mid-air
and hurled it against the wall.  It gave a cry of pain and alarm,
crashed to the floor senseless, where he left it.  He was tired of
killing.

"Fool!" cried the god.  "Do you still doubt me?"

"The servant is real but the master a dream."  He paid no further
attention as the visage dissolved into excrement.  But the fire
remained.

The way before him was too dark to see, so he went back to the entrance
and pulled a torch from its mount just inside the arch.  He returned to
the door, and looked inside.

He entered a shallow stone hallway which ended in a tight spiral of
stairs, leading downward.  His torch was the only light.  He descended
slowly, the way cramped and his legs tight and bleeding, and after
perhaps three hundred steps came upon a long catacomb, which he entered
from a recessed hole in its side.  The way was thick with webs which he
brushed aside with is free hand, as he stepped out silently into the
endless row of tombs.

She had to be there, somewhere:  the way the shadows played upon the
walls, the branching crypts and long row of stone caskets.  The way his
shadow-self stalked behind him, so tall.

He walked a long way, silent but for the sounds of his moving, then
heard something like a faint groan of pain, unmistakably feminine, to
his left and a short way ahead.  He moved towards it, thrust the torch
ahead of him and into a high, wide antechamber like a small cathedral,
several caskets deep.  He heard the sound again, this time a cry of
terror and alarm, and strained his eyes to see.  He moved closer,
wedged the torch between two caskets and looked to the front of the
chamber.

And there she was, the love of his life:  above an altar, mounted
halfway up the wall behind it, spread like a crucifix, arms and legs
bound by iron shackles, garment torn, a hideous mask covering her face
and spreading out in huge lizard's fins an arm's length wide.  Only her
eyes were visible, wide with terror, pleading against the act sure to
come.

"Please, no.  No. . .God.  Please, I beg you.  Please."  And she lost
all control and wept bitterly.  He lowered his head, his heart torn
apart.

"Don't cry, I won't hurt you."  He stumbled for words, inadequate.  "I
haven't come to hurt you, I swear it.....  By everything that is and
isn't sacred I make this vow:  that I will be to you whatever you need
me to be, that I will never leave you, and that the day I knowingly
cause you pain I will be the instrument of my own destruction.  Please,
don't cry."

He felt the tears pushing at his eyes, but would not leave her there a
moment longer.  He shook off emotion, climbed onto the altar and lifted
the heavy mask from its hook above her head, set it quietly beside him.

Her deep, gentle face looked out at him with disbelieving gratitude and
love.  It was cut in several places from the short spikes which lined
the inside of the mask; but as she had remained very still the damage
was not deep.  He found an iron bar leaned against the ground,
remounted the altar and began to pry away the rusted bands.  It was not
possible to do so without hurting her, but she bit her lip and endured
the pain.

And as the last shackle came off her wrist she slid into his arms.  And
suddenly she knew him, and trusted him, and he embraced her heavily,
weeping.  She returned the affection weakly, touching the back of his
neck with her fingers.  He had never felt this way, nor ever thought he
could.  The tears would not stop.

"I'm so glad I found you," he stammered.  "Dear God, I'm glad.  What
if.....  What if I had never found you?"  He stepped back, and an
incomprehensible horror engulfed him.

The words echoed all around him, down the row of tombs, endless.

"Never found you.  Never found you.  Never found....."  And with a
sudden fearful burst like the realization of death, he remembered.
Remembered where he was, and understood.  Dear God, he understood.

She slipped back out of his grasp as darkness poured into the room.
Like reverse action she was back upon the wall, the iron hoops
replacing themselves.  The mask was up and she was crying.  Her blood
flowed gently down the spikes.

"NO!"

But the room began to spin, to break into fragments, and she was gone.
He floated again in the cold wet nothing, the world without order or
hope.  He shrank into a weeping ball and clutched his head with his
hands, lost as he had never been lost.

But then to his bewilderment, he began to feel a weight of substance
around him, a materializing structure:  his ship was coming back.  A
floor, walls, then the hull returned, and he knelt in the familiar
control room, looking up at the monitor.  The inky black was patching,
broke, and he could see the outline of a vast web.  This time he did
not fight as the ship drew closer, and closer still.  A great silver
shaft was above him. . .and he emerged once more into the present,
living, and unchangeable world.


*


At a distance of two hundred miles he turned his ship around, back to
face the Guardians.  There the vessel stood still in Space, as a single
globe approached him from out of the glowing network.  It came very
close, filling all the screen, but was silent.  Thinking it a
messenger, he addressed it with words.

"All right," he said, broken at the last.  "All right, you helped me
find her.  The one miracle of my life.  I am grateful."  The white
sphere did not react.  "But if you have that power, then you could have
saved her life.....  No.  I left her."  The realization staggered him.
"I.....  But now I have learned.  I respect you.  Bring her back.
Please. . .bring her back."  He began to sob without tears.

"PLEASE."

At that moment the sphere glowed with a blinding light.  It might have
been an unreadable message.  It might have been a warning, or a gesture
of peace.  But whatever it was or was not, it remained beyond human
understanding.  It could not change the past or help him now.

As the globe receded he turned the ship again, bewildered, and flew
toward unfamiliar stars.


The End


www.aragornbooks.com




ABOUT THE AUTHOR


Christopher Leadem was born in Arlington, Virginia in 1956, the second
son of an Air Force Intelligence officer and a schoolteacher. Shortly
after his birth, his father transferred to the Central Intelligence
Agency, and the young family moved frequently.

Leadem's primary education was in Catholic schools, where he earned the
reputation of a gifted student. Attending public high school in Bucks
County, Pennsylvania, the birthplace of James Michener, he displayed a
talent for writing, and a love of history and science. At the age of
fourteen, he saw a short film by Ray Bradbury about the life of a
writer, which galvanized his desire to be an author himself.

Burned out by a stifling high school environment, he did not
immediately attend college, but launched headlong into his writing.
This began with a spiritual novel, "In Search of the Evermore," whose
length and sweeping scope proved too difficult for a first attempt.

He then attended Penn State and the University of Colorado, excelling
