      into the lungs than any of the other methods of artificial
      respiration, and more even than is introduced by ordinary breathing.

   41 Osier, _The Principles and Practice of Medicine_.

   42 Huber, _Consumption and Civilization_.

   43 To prepare limewater some small lumps of _fresh_ lime (either
      slacked or unslacked) are added to a large bottle of water and
      thoroughly shaken. This is put aside until the lime all settles to
      the bottom and the water above is perfectly clear. This is now ready
      for use and may be poured off as needed. When the supply is
      exhausted add more water and shake again.

   44 An _element_ is a single kind of matter. Those substances are
      classed as elements which cannot be separated into different kinds
      of matter. Two or more elements combined in definite proportions by
      weight form a _compound_. The elements are few in number, only about
      eighty being known. Compounds, on the other hand, are exceedingly
      numerous.

   45 The term _energy_, as used here, has the same general meaning as the
      word _power_. See Chapter XII.

   46 The oxygen pressure of the atmosphere is that portion of the total
      atmospheric pressure which is due to the weight of the oxygen. Since
      oxygen comprises about one fifth of the atmosphere, the pressure
      which it exerts is about one fifth of the total atmospheric
      pressure, or, at the sea level, about three pounds to the square
      inch (15 x 1/5 = 3). This is the oxygen pressure of the atmosphere.
      The low oxygen pressure in the tissues is due to its scarcity, and
      this scarcity is due to its entering into combination at the cells.

   47 See footnote on oxygen pressure, page 109.

   48 The impression prevails to some extent that carbon dioxide, on
      account of its weight, settles out of the atmosphere, collecting in
      old wells and at the floor in crowded rooms. Any such settling of
      the carbon dioxide is prevented by the rapid motion of its
      molecules. This motion not only prevents a separation of carbon
      dioxide and air after they are mixed, but causes them to mix rapidly
      when they are separated, if they still have surface contact. The
      carbon dioxide found in old wells is formed there by decaying
      vegetable or animal matter. In rooms it is no more abundant at the
      floor than in other parts.

   49 On account of the formation of carbon dioxide in places containing
      decaying material, the descent into an old well or other opening
      into the earth is often a hazardous undertaking. Before making such
      a descent the air should always be tested by lowering a lighted
      lantern or candle. Artificial respiration is the only means of
      restoring one who has been overcome by this gas (page 97).

   50 While awaiting oxidation at the cells, the carbohydrates and fats
      are stored up by the body, the carbohydrates as glycogen and the
      fats as some form of fat. In this sense they are sometimes looked
      upon as serving to build up certain of the tissues.

   51 The following table shows the main elements in the body and their
      relation to the different nutrients:

                                [Nutrient Table]


   52 The recently advanced theory that the molecules of the mineral
      salts, by dissolving in water, separate into smaller divisions, part
      of which are charged with positive electricity and part with
      negative electricity, has suggested several possible uses for sodium
      chloride and other mineral salts in the body. The sodium chloride in
      the tissues is in such concentration as to be practically all
      separated into its sodium and chlorine particles, or ions. It has
      recently been shown that the sodium ions are necessary for the
      contraction of the muscles, including the muscles of the heart.
      There is also reason for believing that the different ions may enter
      into temporary combination with food particles, and in this way
      assist in the processes of nutrition.

   53 Chittenden, _The Nutrition of Man_.

   54 Compiled from different sources, but mainly from Atwater's _Foods:
      Nutritive Value and Cost_, published by the U.S. Department of
      Agriculture.

   55 The calorie is the adopted heat unit. As used in this table it may
      be defined as the quantity of heat required to raise 1 kilogram (2.2
      pounds) of water, 1 degree centigrade. The calories also show the
      relative amount of energy supplied by the different foods.

   56 While alcohol cannot be classed as a food, it is believed by some
      authorities to contain _food value_ and, in the hands of the
      physician, to be a substance capable of rendering an actual service
      in the treatment of certain diseases. It might, for example, be used
      where one's power of digestion is greatly impaired, since alcohol
      requires no digestion. But upon this point there is a decided
      difference of opinion. Certain it is that no one should attempt to
      use alcohol as food or medicine except under the advice and
      direction of his physician.

   57 A layer of connective tissue between the mucous membrane and the
      muscular coat is usually referred to as the _submucous_ coat. This
      contains numerous blood vessels and nerves and binds the muscular
      coat to the mucous membrane.

   58 The saliva may continue to act for a considerable time after the
      food enters the stomach. "Careful examination of the contents of the
      fundus (large end of the stomach) by Cannon and Day has shown that
      no inconsiderable amount of salivary digestion occurs in the
      stomach."--FISCHER, _The Physiology of Alimentation_.

   59 Perhaps the simplest method of inducing vomiting is that of
      thrusting a finger down the throat. To make this method effective
      the finger should be held in the throat until the vomiting begins.
      An emetic, such as a glass of lukewarm salt water containing a
      teaspoonful of mustard, should also be taken, and, in the case of
      having swallowed poison, the vomiting should be repeated several
      times. It may even be advantageous to drink water and then vomit it
      up in order to wash out the stomach.

   60 Hammerstein, _Text-book of Physiological Chemistry._

   61 Amylopsin is absent from the pancreatic juice of infants, a
      condition which shows that milk and not starch is their natural
      food.

   62 The fact that butter is more easily digested than other fatty
      substances is probably due to its consisting largely of a kind of
      fat which, on splitting, forms a fatty acid (butyric) which is
      soluble in water.

   63 Fischer, _Physiology of Alimentation._

   64 Beginning the meal with a little soup, as is frequently done, may be
      of slight advantage in stimulating the digestive glands. To serve
      this purpose, however, and not interfere with the meal proper, it
      should contain little greasy or starchy material and should be taken
      in small amount.

   65 Dr. William Beaumont, an American surgeon of the last century, made
      a series of observations upon a human stomach (that of Alexis St.
      Martin) having an artificial opening, the result of a gunshot wound.
      Much of our knowledge of the digestion of different foods was
      obtained through these observations. In spite of the protests of his
      physician, St. Martin would occasionally indulge in strong drink and
      always with the same result--the lining of the stomach became much
      inflamed and very sensitive, and the natural processes of digestion
      were temporarily suspended.

   66 The lacteals (from the Latin _lacteus_, milky) are so called on
      account of their appearance, which is white, or milk-like, due to
      the fat droplets.

   67 Peptones and proteoses, when injected directly into the blood, are
      found to act as poisons.

   68 The soluble double sugars (maltose, milk sugar, and cane sugar) are
      reduced to the simple sugars (dextrose and levulose). Furthermore
      the action on the proteids does not stop with the production of
      peptones and proteoses, but these in turn are still further reduced.

   69 Energy, which is defined as _the ability to do work_, or _to cause
      motion_, exists in two general types, or forms, known as kinetic
      energy and as potential energy. _Kinetic_ energy is energy at work,
      or energy in the act of producing motion; while _potential_ energy
      is reserve, or stored, energy. All moving bodies have kinetic
      energy, and all stationary bodies which have within them the
      _capability_ of causing motion possess potential energy. A bent bow,
      a piece of stretched rubber, a suspended weight, the water above a
      mill dam, all have the capability of causing motion and all have
      potential energy. Examples of kinetic energy are found in the
      movements of machinery, in steam and electricity, in winds, and in
      currents of water. Kinetic is the active, and potential the
      inactive, form of energy.

   70 As the atoms of hydrogen and oxygen that make up the molecules of
      water separate, they unite with atoms of their own kind--the hydrogen
      with hydrogen and the oxygen with oxygen atoms. Since these
      combinations are weaker than those of the water molecules, energy is
      required to bring about the change. But when hydrogen burns in the
      oxygen, the change is from a weaker to a stronger combination. The
      stored-up energy is then given up or becomes active.

   71 In the evaporation of water, the energy of the sun is stored with
      reference to the force of gravity. In evaporating, water rises as a
      gas, or vapor, above the earth's surface, but on condensing into a
      liquid, it falls as rain. It then finds its way through streams back
      to the ocean. All water above the sea level is in such a position
      that gravity can act on it to cause motion, and it possesses, on
      this account, potential or stored-up energy. It is because of this
      energy that rapids and waterfalls are such important sources of
      power.

   72 Energy, like matter, can neither be created nor destroyed. It can,
      however, be transferred from one body to another and transformed
      from one form to another form. Whenever work is done, energy is
      transferred from the body doing the work, to the body upon which the
      work is done. During this process there may, or may not, be a
      transformation of energy. In turning a grindstone, kinetic energy is
      passed to the stone and used without transformation, but in winding
      a clock, the kinetic energy from the hand is transformed into
      potential energy in the clock spring. Then as the clock runs down
      this is retransformed into kinetic energy, causing the movements of
      the wheels.

      Not only is kinetic transformed into potential energy and _vice
      versa_, but the different forms of kinetic energy (heat, light,
      electricity, sound, and mechanical motion) are readily transformed
      the one into the other. With suitable devices, mechanical motion can
      be changed into heat, sound, or electricity; heat into motion and
      light; and electricity into all the other forms of energy. These
      transformations are readily explained by the fact that the different
      varieties of kinetic energy are but different forms of motion (Fig.
      84).

   73 The simplest arrangement of the parts of a gland is that where they
      are spread over a plain surface. This arrangement is found in serous
      membranes, such as the pleura and peritoneum. These membranes,
      however, are not called glands, but secreting surfaces.

   74 In the oxidations that occur in the body it is not supposed that the
      nutrients are immediately converted to carbon dioxide, water, and
      urea. On the other hand, it is held that their reduction takes place
      gradually, as the reduction of sugar by fermentation, and that the
      wastes leaving the body are but the "end products" and show only the
      final results.

   75 Alcohol, if used in considerable quantity, leads to cirrhosis of the
      liver and Bright's disease of the kidneys, both very dangerous
      diseases. Dr. William Osler in his treatise, _The Practice of
      Medicine_, states that alcohol is the chief cause of cirrhosis of
      the liver. Dr. T.N. Bogart, specialist in kidney diseases, asserts
      that one third of all the cases of Bright's disease coming under his
      observation are caused by alcohol.

   76 Hall, _The Purin Bodies_.

   77 Review "Main Physiological Problems," page 21.

   78 In the production of motion in the body, as well as in the
      production of any kind of _purposeful_ motion outside of the body,
      three conditions must be fulfilled. There is required, in the first
      place, a mechanical device or machine which is so constructed as to
      produce a certain kind of motion. In the second place, energy is
      needed to operate this device. And, finally, there must be some
      controlling force, by means of which the motion is made to
      accomplish definite results. The driving of a horse hitched to a
      wagon will illustrate these conditions. The wagon is the mechanical
      device, the horse furnishes the energy, and the driver supplies the
      controlling force. In this, as in most cases, the machinery, the
      source of energy, and the controlling force are disconnected except
      when at work; but in the body all three occur together in the same
      structure.

   79 The dependence of the outer layers of bone cells upon the periosteum
      for nourishment causes a destruction of this membrane to affect
      seriously the bone beneath, producing in many instances a decay of
      the bone substance.

   80 It has been claimed that the introduction of vertical writing has
      reduced the number of cases of spinal curvature originating in the
      schoolroom, and statistics appear to prove the claim. It is shown,
      on the other hand, that unnatural positions also are unnecessary in
      the slanting system of writing, and that in either system the pupil
      who is permitted to do so is liable to assume an improper position.

   81 Lovett, _Lateral Curvature of the Spine and Round Shoulders_.

   82 See "Hygiene of Muscles," Chapter XV.

   83 On account of the striations of these cells the muscles which they
      form are called striated muscles.

   84 The striated muscle cells, having many nuclei, are said to be
      multi-nucleated.

   85 Every movement in the body has its opposing movement. This is
      necessary both on account of the work to be accomplished and for
      preserving the natural form of the body.

   86 The distance from the fulcrum to the power is called the _power-arm_
      and the distance from the fulcrum to the weight is called the
      _weight-arm_ (Fig. 115).

   87 The foot in lifting the body on tiptoe appears at first thought to
      be a lever of the second class, the body being the weight and the
      toe serving as the fulcrum. However, if the distance which the body
      is raised is compared with the distance which the muscle shortens,
      it is found that the _supposed_ weight has moved _farther_ than the
      power (Fig. 118). It will also be noted that the muscle which
      furnishes the power is attached at its upper end to the "weight."
      These facts show clearly that we are not here dealing with a lever
      of the second class. The foot in this instance acts as a lever of
      the first class with the fulcrum at the ankle joint and the toe
      pressing against the earth, which is the _actual_ weight. Since the
      earth is immovable, the body is lifted or pushed upward, somewhat as
      a fulcrum support is made to move when it is too weak to hold up the
      weight that is being lifted. In other words, we have the same lever
      action in the foot in lifting the body as we have when one lies face
      downward, and, bending the knee, lifts some object on the toes.

_   88 Walking_ is considered one of the very best forms of counter-active
      exercise for the brain worker (page 328).

   89 The epidermis does not afford complete protection against chemicals,
      many of them being able to destroy it quickly. The rule of washing
      the skin immediately after contact with strong chemical agents
      should always be followed.

   90 "Rough calculations have placed the number of sweat glands on the
      entire body at about 2,000,000." Rettger, _Studies in Advanced
      Physiology_.

   91 Heat also leaves the body by the lungs, partly by the respired air
      and partly through the evaporation of moisture from the lung
      surfaces. Respiration in some animals, as the dog, is the chief
      means of cooling the body.

   92 "The story is told of some woodsmen who were overtaken by a severe
      snowstorm and had to spend the night away from camp; they had a
      bottle of whisky, and, chilled to the bone, some imbibed freely
      while others refused to drink. Those who drank soon felt comfortable
      and went to sleep in their improvised shelter; those who did not
      drink felt very uncomfortable throughout the night and could get no
      sleep, but in the morning they were alive and able to struggle back
      to camp, while their companions who had used alcohol were frozen to
      death.... This, if true, was of course an extreme case; but it
      accords with the universal experience of arctic travelers and of
      lumbermen and hunters in the northern woods, that the use of alcohol
      during exposure to cold, although contributing greatly to one's
      comfort for the time being, is generally followed by undesirable or
      dangerous results."--HOUGH AND SEDGWICK: _The Elements of Hygiene and
      Sanitation_.

   93 Foods that are difficult to digest, or which cause disturbances of
      the digestive organs (a coated tongue being one indication), have a
      bad effect upon the skin. It is in this way that the use of tea and
      coffee by some people induces a sallow or "muddy" condition of the
      complexion.

   94 A most valuable antiseptic ointment is prepared by the druggist from
      the following formula:


          Lanolin, 25 grams.
          Ichthyol, 6 grams.
          Yellow vaseline, 20 grams.


      This is applied as a thin layer on the surface, except in the case
      of boils or abscesses. In treating these a heavy layer is spread
      over the affected part and then covered with absorbent cotton or a
      thin piece of clean cotton cloth.

   95 In a larger sense adjustment includes all those activities by means
      of which the body is brought into proper relations with its
      environment, including the changes which the body makes in its
      surroundings to _adapt them_ to its purposes.

   96 Almost to the present time, physiologists have described the nervous
      system as being made up of two kinds of structural elements which
      were called _nerve cells_ and _nerve fibers_. The nerve cells were
      supposed to form the ganglia and the fibers to form the nerves.
      Recent investigators, however, employing new methods of microscopic
      study, have established the fact that the so-called nerve cell and
      nerve fiber are but two divisions of the same thing and that the
      nervous system is made up of, not two, but one kind of structural
      element. The term "neuron" is used to denote this structural
      element, or _complete nerve cell_.

   97 Many of the axons in the brain and spinal cord have no primitive
      sheath. Axons without the medullary sheath are found in the
      sympathetic nerves. These are known as non-medullated axons and they
      have a gray instead of a white color.

   98 The difference in weight between the brain of man and that of woman
      is due mainly to the fact that man's body is, as a rule,
      considerably larger than that of woman's.

   99 The nervous tissues present, at different places, two colors--one
      white, and the other a light gray. Great significance was formerly
      attached to these colors, because it was supposed that they
      represented two essentially different kinds of nervous matter. It is
      now known that the protoplasm in all parts of the neuron
      proper--cell-body, axis cylinder, and dendrites--has a grayish color,
      while the coverings of most of the fibers are white. Hence gray
      matter in any part of the nervous system indicates the presence of
      cell-bodies, and white matter the presence of nerve fibers.

  100 In very early life the spinal cord entirely fills the spinal cavity,
      but as the body develops the cord grows less rapidly than the spinal
      column, and, as a consequence, separates at the lower end from the
      inclosing bony column.

  101 Fibers passing between the spinal cord and the cerebrum cross to
      opposite sides--most of them at the bulb, but many within the cord--so
      that the right side of the cerebrum is connected with the left side
      of the body, and _vice versa_. This accounts for the observed fact
      that disease or accidental injury of one side of the cerebrum causes
      loss of motion or of feeling in the opposite side of the body.

  102 In general, _afferent_ neurons or fibers are those that convey
      impulses _toward_ the central nervous system (brain and cord), while
      _efferent_ neurons or fibers are those that convey impulses _from_
      the central system.

  103 At different times the nervous impulse has been regarded as a
      current of electricity; as a progressive chemical change, likened to
      that in a burning fuse; as a mechanical vibration, such as may be
      passed over a stretched rope; and as a molecular disturbance
      accompanied by an electrical discharge. The velocity of the nervous
      impulse, which is only about one hundred feet per second, proves
      that it is not a current of electricity. It takes place with little
      or no exhaustion of the cell protoplasm and consequently is not due
      to chemical action. And the loose, relaxed condition of the nerves
      prevents their transmission of physical vibrations, like those on a
      stretched rope. The view that the impulse is a progressive molecular
      disturbance, accompanied by an electrical discharge, has much
      evidence in its favor, but it has only recently been proposed and is
      likely to be modified upon fuller investigation.

  104 The surface of the body includes the linings of the air passages,
      food canal, and certain cavities, as well as the external covering
      or skin.

  105 Derived from the Latin _re_, back, and _flectere_, to turn or bend.

  106 A frog from which the brain has been removed is suspended with its
      feet downward and free to move. If a toe is pinched, the foot is
      drawn away, and if dilute acid, or a strong solution of salt, is
      placed on the tender skin, the feet are moved as if to take away the
      irritating substance. This of course shows that reflex action can
      take place independently of the brain.

      Now if the spinal cord is also destroyed, there is no response when
      the irritation of the skin is repeated. The animal remains perfectly
      quiet, because the destruction of the cord has interrupted the
      reflex action pathway. This shows that some part of the central
      nervous system is necessary to reflex action.

  107 Review description of the spinal nerves, page 295.

  108 Where a deep-seated cause for worry exists, there may be occasion
      for grave concern. Many people have become insane through continued
      worry about some _one_ thing. In cases of this kind the sufferer
      needs the aid of sympathetic friends, and sometimes of the
      physician, in getting the mind away from the exciting cause. A
      change of scene, a visit, or some new employment is frequently
      recommended, where the actual cause for the worry cannot be removed.

  109 Any part of the body which is overworked or which works at a
      disadvantage tends to disturb, more or less, the entire nervous
      system and to produce nervousness. Especially is this true of such
      delicate and highly sensitive structures as the eyes. If the eyes do
      not focus properly or if the muscles that move the eyeballs are out
      of their natural adjustment, extra work is thrown upon these
      delicate parts. One of the first and sometimes the only indication
      of eye strain is that of some disturbance of the nervous system. For
      this reason it is important to carefully test the eyes in
      determining the cause of nervousness (page 385).

  110 One form of neck exercise recommended for this purpose is easily
      taken on retiring at night. Lying flat on the back, without a
      pillow, lift the head slowly from the bed and let it as slowly
      settle back to the level of the body. Repeat several times, lying on
      the back, and then again on the face and again on each side.
      Practice these exercises every night during an interval of a month
      or until relief is secured.

  111 Insurance statistics show that habitual _moderate drinkers_ do not
      live so long as abstainers.

  112 Organs very frequently affected by tobacco are the heart and the
      eyes. It induces, as already stated (page 56), a dangerous nervous
      derangement called "tobacco heart," and it causes a serious disorder
      of the retina (retinitis) which leads in some instances to loss of
      vision. Tobacco smoke also acts as an irritant to the delicate
      lining of the eyes, especially when the tobacco is smoked indoors.

  113 Of 4117 boys in the Illinois State Reformatory, 4000 used tobacco,
      and over 3000 were cigarette smokers. Dr. Hutchison, of the Kansas
      State Reformatory, says: "Using cigarettes is the cause of the
      downfall of more of the inmates of this institution than all other
      vicious habits combined."

  114 The term "mind" is used in this and preceding chapters in its
      popular, not technical, sense.

  115 The problem of social adjustment is but a phase of the general
      problem of establishing proper relations between the body and its
      surroundings.

  116 A vibrating body is one having a to-and-fro movement, like that of a
      clock pendulum or the string of a violin on sounding. Bodies to give
      out sound waves must vibrate rapidly, making not less than sixteen
      vibrations per second. The upper limit of hearing being about 40,000
      vibrations per second, certain bodies may even vibrate too rapidly
      to be heard.

  117 Somewhat as the waves on a body of water impart motion to the sticks
      and weeds along the shore, sound waves are able to cause bodies that
      are small or that are delicately poised to vibrate.

  118 Some idea of how the movements of the cartilages change the tension
      of the cords may be obtained by holding the fingers on the larynx,
      between the thyroid and cricoid cartilages, and making tones first
      of low and then of high pitch. For the high tones the cartilages are
      pulled together in front, and for the low tones they separate. As
      they pull together in front, they of course separate behind and
      above, where the cords are attached.

  119 It is only the central portion of the pinna that aids the entrance
      of sound into the auditory canal. If by accident the outer portion
      of the pinna is removed, there is no impairment of the hearing.

  120 The middle ear is also called the _ear drum_, and, by the same
      system of naming, the membrana tympani is referred to as the _drum
      membrane_.

  121 The inner projection of the temporal bone is known as the petrous
      process.

  122 A small opening in the bone at this place is called the _fenestra
      rotunda_.

  123 Consult some work on physics on the different kinds of lenses and
      their uses.

  124 With respect to its adjustments the eye does not differ in principle
      from various other optical instruments, such as the microscope,
      telescope, photographer's camera, etc., which, in their use, form
      images of objects. These all require some adjustment of their parts,
      called focusing, which adapts them to the distance. The eye's method
      of focusing, however, differs from that of most optical instruments,
      in that the adjustment is brought about through changes in the
      curvature of a lens.

  125 The converging power of convex lenses varies as the curvature--the
      greater the curvature, the greater the converging power.

  126 An oculist is a physician who specializes in diseases of the eye.

  127 Some of the more common symptoms of eye strain are nervousness,
      headache, insomnia, irritations of the eyelids, sensitiveness to
      bright light, and pain in the use of the eyes.
