responsible for space policy, and to define the
fundamental rights and freedoms of those who
might some day migrate to space.

I wrote to the article's author, told him I was
working on this story and included a draft of
'core principles' I had drafted. I asked for more
information on the Smithsonian's study. The
author's reply included a copy of the Declaration
and permission to quote from it. It follows:


 Astrolaw: Carrying Human Rights into Outer Space

On the occasion of the Bicentennial of the
Constitution of the United States of America and
in commemoration and furtherance of its values,
we the undersigned petitioners,

Bearing witness to the exploration and inevitable
settlement of outer space;

Recognizing the universal longing for life,
liberty, equality, peace and security;

Expressing our unshakable belief in the dignity
of the individual;

Placing our trust in societies that guarantee their
members full protection of the law, due process
and equal protection under the law;

Reaffirm our faith in fundamental freedoms;

Mindful, as were our nation's founders, of the
self-evident truth that we are endowed by our
Creator with certain inalienable rights;

Recognizing the responsibility of a government
to protect the rights of the governed to exist
and evolve;

Do assert and declare in this petition the
intrinsic value of a set of First Principles for
the Governance of Outer Space Societies and,
at the beginning of this third century of nationhood
under our Constitution, resolutely urge all people
of the United Sates of America to acknowledge,
accept and apply such First Principles as hereinafter
set forth.


 ARTICLE I

The rule of law and the fundamental values embodied
in the United States Constitution shall apply to
all individuals living in outer space societies under
United States jurisdiction.

Appropriate constraints upon and limitations of
authority shall be defined so as to protect the
personal freedom of each individual, such as
the right to reasonable privacy, freedom from
self-incrimination, freedom from unreasonable
intrusion, search and seizure, and freedom from
cruel and unusual punishment.

Toward this end, the imperatives of community
safety and individual survival within the unique
environment of outer space shall be guaranteed
in harmony with the exercise of such fundamental
individual rights of speech, religion, association,
assembly, contract, travel to, in and from outer
space, media and communications, as well as the
rights of petition, informed consent and private
ownership of property.

The principles set forth here should not be
construed to exclude any other such rights
possessed by individuals.


 ARTICLE II

Authority in outer space societies, exercised under
principles of representative government appropriate
to the circumstances and degree of community
development, shall reflect the will of the people
of those societies.

All petitions to the United States Government from
outer space societies under its jurisdiction shall
be accepted and receive prompt consideration.

The United States shall provide for an orderly and
peaceful transition to self-governance by outer
space societies under its jurisdiction at such
times as their inhabitants shall manifest clearly
a belief that such transition is both necessary
and appropriate.

In response to aggression, threats of aggression
or hostile actions, outer space societies may provide
for their common defense and for the maintenance
of essential public order.

Outer space societies shall assume all rights and
obligations set forth in treaties and international
agreements, relevant to the activities of such
societies, to which the United States is a party
and which further freedom, peace and security.

The advancement of science and technology shall be
encouraged in outer space societies for the benefit
of all humanity.

Outer space societies shall protect from abuse the
environment and natural resources of Earth and
space.

End quote.

 ##

Core Principles drafted at the First Solar
Conference on the Relationships between the United
Inner Planetary System (UIPS) and the Independent
Nations of the Outer Region (INOR)

 Preamble

In order to:

Create and foster political, societal, economic,
and cultural environments throughout the Solar
System which will preclude or minimize acts
of international and inter-regional aggression,
economic warfare, cultural disruption, and other
forms of active hostility between the United
Inner Planetary System (UIPS) and, separately
and collectively, Independent Nations of the Outer
Region (INOR);

Establish the framework for peaceful coexistence
within which all Nations respect the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, and political independence
of each other;

Recognize the mutuality of interests among all
peoples and Governments of the Solar System in
sharing the benefits of The Interstellar Mining and
Teleport System; and

Prepare for and extend the human experience
into interstellar space and toward the coming
Interstellar Era.

We agree to the following:


 ARTICLE ONE

We reject and renounce economic, cultural and
military warfare, and the threat of warfare to
attain national and regional objectives. We will
settle all disagreements and disputes through
peaceful means.


 ARTICLE TWO

We affirm that the peoples of all nations, states,
colonies, settlements, communities, howsoever they
may be designated now and in the future throughout
the Solar System and, eventually throughout the
Interstellar Realm, have ecological unity. Their
harmony is such that none are truly independent
of the others.


 ARTICLE THREE

We affirm that the Solar System is the common
heritage of humankind, and all the resources of the
Solar System, now and in perpetuity, are part of
that common heritage. We agree that each Government
representing the people of a planet, satellite,
independent space entity or a legally constituted
part and collective thereof, is entitled to its
fair share of the natural resources originating
within the Solar System or acquired from other
star systems. Such resources will be available,
proportionately, from the Common Reserve in
conformance with a nation's or government's
verified needs and technological capabilities to
utilize the resources for peaceful and beneficial
purposes.


 ARTICLE FOUR

In furtherance of ARTICLE ONE, we most solemnly
declare that continuance of organized military
forces by any Government of the Solar System can
serve no useful purpose. We manifestly recognize
that the existence of military mass destruction
weapons and their supporting agencies and
facilities increase the likelihood of their
utilization to resolve differences or
jurisdictional disputes, with consequent harm
to human life, properties, and civilizations. We,
independently and collectively, agree, without
reservations except for the EXCLUSION stated
in this ARTICLE, to the phased reduction of all
military spacecraft, weapons, facilities, personnel
training and other support systems and technologies
to the point of their complete elimination not more
than five Solar Standard Years from the date affixed
to this Declaration of Principles.


 EXCLUSION

We exclude from this ARTICLE specified accords
which are, or will be, required by a legally
constituted Government to exercise normal internal
constabulary powers and authority on, and in space
contiguous to, their planet, satellite, independent
community or zone, and between and among
Governments, as mutually agreed to among the
Parties concerned. The UIPS and INOR will be kept
informed of such constabulary agreements prior
to implementation and their views considered.


 ARTICLE FIVE

We recognize that precise delineation's of
spatial jurisdictions are essential for the
orderly processes of government. We agree that
jurisdictions to be defined and delineated include:

a. the outer limits of any one nation's spatial
control and administration. Such delineation
shall take into account the irrevocable right
and obligation of any Government which
exercises legitimate influence or control over
a non-hazardous natural or artificial planet,
satellite, planetoid, space station, outpost,
spunnel node, link, net or booster; transiting
comet, asteroid, meteor swarm, planetary or
satellite ring, or other astrophysical body to
ensure absence of human interference to that body's
or phenomenon's free and unencumbered passage
through that Government's spatial jurisdiction.

b. control and operation of space communications
booster, relay, and terminal stations and their
supporting research, development, manufacturing,
and logistics systems and technologies. The
intent of this delineation is standardized and
economically operated and serviced conventional
and hyperspace communications systems throughout
the Solar System and in interstellar space.

c. traffic control, flight safety, and management
of UIPS and INOR approved inter-regional,
interplanetary, inter-satellite and other
space-ways. Acceptance of responsibilities shall
not exceed the Party's existing technologies,
resources and capabilities.


 ARTICLE SIX

We commit our Governments to accept financial,
fiduciary, material and technological assessments
for our utilization of the common space-ways. We
agree that these assessments are for the purpose
of defraying the expenditures of any one Government
toward maintaining and upgrading those common
space and traffic management systems that fall
within their borders, or other mutually agreed upon
jurisdictions, and for performing such services for
the common good as:

a. removal of hazards to innocent passage;

b. traffic control;

c. search and rescue;

d. acquisition, deployment, operation and servicing
of communications and navigational aids;

e. construction, operation and maintenance of space
and surface ports of entry and departure for the
common use of all spacecraft;

f. trained, equipped and ready investigation teams
to assist Governments of Primary Concern in
determining the facts of "incidents-in-space"
which occur in proximate international areas, and

g. emergency logistical support capabilities for
performing urgent essential repairs to damaged
spacecraft of other Nations in peaceful transit.
Such repairs shall be to internationally accepted
standards that will permit the craft to continue
its flight to a location designated by the
Government having legal ownership, or authority
to repair or dispose of the spacecraft.

h. We agree that spacecraft, spacecraft parts,
otherwise man-made artificial bodies and parts
thereof, wreckage, and human-generated excess
materials and human waste, will NOT be discarded or
abandoned in space. Derelicts and unattached parts
thereof, rubbish, waste matter, and all man-made
objects in space are considered to be hazards
to traffic or are pollutants. They will be collected
or tagged with an active signal and towed or
transported to where they will not be a hazard
to traffic or pollute the space environment. The
Government of the nearest surface or colony habitat
will be notified immediately and institute actions
for the objects' reduction to harmless residue
or its temporary or permanent removal to a safe
location.


 ARTICLE SEVEN

We announce the formation of an international
apparatus, with representation from all
Governments, to assemble within three Solar
Standard months from the date affixed hereto. The
primary purpose of this Assembly is to facilitate
implementation of this Declaration. They shall also
create and ensure support for an interplanetary
citizen's volunteer group to review and resolve
complaints and suggestions from the populace that
may lead to recommendations toward improvements
to this Declaration that will:

a. promote the free and unencumbered passage of
vessels, people and commerce between and among
the Nations of the Solar System;

b. encourage cultural, economic, and scientific
research, and exchanges of scholars, students,
and information for the benefit and betterment
of humankind;

c. enhance the understanding of all peoples
regarding the positive values which have evolved
over the millennia since the beginning of the Great
Migration from Planet Earth, and,

d. organize and begin the planning for humankind's
exploration and migration into the Interstellar
Realm.


 ARTICLE EIGHT

We declare and affirm we act in concert with the
spirit and letter of this Declaration of Principles
in the interests of international cooperation,
interplanetary peace and security, mutual
understanding among our far-flung peoples,
and the survival of our species.


 ARTICLE NINE

We encourage all Parties to expand on these accords
through their initiatives and agreements for mutual
benefits to themselves and to all Governments and
peoples in the peaceful use of space.





 The References


ASTROLAW. Carrying Human Rights into Outer Space.
George S. Robinson, The Futurist, May-June 1990.

BIOSPHERE. A New Consciousness for a New
Century. Jeremy Rifkin, 1991, Crown Publishers.
(How industrialized nations exploit the sea beds
of the world for industrial minerals, especially as
land-based minerals are depleted.)

COSMIC WORMHOLES. The Search for Interstellar
Shortcuts. Paul Halpern, 1992, Dutton, Penguin Group,
New York, NY.

MINING THE SKY. Untold Riches from the Asteroids,
Comets, and Planets. John S. Lewis, 1997, Helix
Books, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. (Foreseeable
technologies may reveal huge quantities of raw
materials from space.)

MONITORING AND CONTROLLING DEBRIS IN SPACE.
Nicholas Johnson. August, 1998, Scientific American.

OPENING THE DOOR ON TIME MACHINES. Caltech
physicist Kip Thorne explores the limits of
Einstein's theory of gravity, where spunnels
-- or tunnels through space -- lurk. (K. C. Cole,
Times Science Writer, The Los Angeles Times,
February 13, 1998.)

RE-EXAMINING OUR CONSTITUTIONAL HERITAGE.
A Declaration of First Principles for the
Governance of Outer Space Societies.
(An Essay by George S. Robinson, 1989,
High Technology Law Journal, School of Law,
University of California, Berkeley.)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THIRD UNITED NATIONS
CONFERENCE ON THE EXPLORATION AND
THE PEACEFUL USES OF OUTER SPACE.
The Space Millennium: Vienna Declaration
on Space and Human Development.
http://www.oosa.unvienna.org/unisp-3/ or
http://nuclearfree.lynx.co.nz/canadatreaty.htm

THE LIMITS TO GROWTH. A Report to the Club
of Rome (Depletion of the world's non-renewable
natural resources). http://dieoff.com/page25.htm

CHINA PLANS MOON LANDING, October 5, 2000,
by Charles Hutzler, Associated Press.

QUANTUM TELEPORTATION, Anton Zeilinger,
Scientific American, April 2000. (Abstract:
The "spooky action at a distance" of quantum
mechanics makes possible the science-fiction
dream of teleportation -- a way to make objects
disappear from one place and reappear at another.
It has already been demonstrated with photons.)

QUANTUM TELEPORTATION, an IBM Research article.
http://www.research.ibm.com/quantuminfo/teleportation/

TERRITORIAL SEA AND CONTIGUOUS ZONE, Part
Two, United Nations Law of the Sea Convention.
http://www.un.org/depts/los/index.htm
(Precedents.)

THE CLASH OF CIVILIZATIONS AND THE REMAKING
