CHAPTER XL

THE ADVENTURERS' RETURN


The Banker, lying huddled in his chair in the clubroom, awoke with a
start. The ring lay at his feet--a shining, golden band gleaming
brightly in the light as it lay upon the black silk handkerchief. The
Banker shivered a little for the room was cold. Then he realized he had
been asleep and looked at his watch. Three o'clock! They had been gone
seven hours, and he had not taken the ring back to the Museum as they
had told him to. He rose hastily to his feet; then as another thought
struck him, he sat down again, staring at the ring.

The honk of an automobile horn in the street outside aroused him from
his reverie. He got to his feet and mechanically began straightening up
the room, packing up the several suit-cases. Then with obvious awe, and
a caution that was almost ludicrous, he fixed the ring in its frame
within the valise prepared for it. He lighted the little light in the
valise, and, every moment or two, went back to look searchingly down at
the ring inside.

When everything was packed the Banker left the room, returning in a
moment with two of the club attendants. They carried the suit-cases
outside, the Banker himself gingerly holding the bag containing the
ring.

"A taxi," he ordered when they were at the door. Then he went to the
desk, explaining that his friends had left earlier in the evening and
that they had finished with the room.

To the taxi-driver he gave a number that was not the Museum address, but
that of his own bachelor apartment on Park Avenue. It was still raining
as he got into the taxi; he held the valise tightly on his lap, looking
into it occasionally and gruffly ordering the chauffeur to drive slowly.

In the sumptuous living-room of his apartment he spread the handkerchief
on the floor under the center electrolier and laid the ring upon it.
Dismissing the astonished and only half-awake butler with a growl, he
sat down in an easy-chair facing the ring, and in a few minutes more was
again fast asleep.

In the morning when the maid entered he was still sleeping. Two hours
later he rang for her, and gave tersely a variety of orders. These she
and the butler obeyed with an air that plainly showed they thought their
master had taken leave of his senses.

They brought him his breakfast and a bath-robe and slippers. And the
butler carried in a mattress and a pair of blankets, laying them with a
sigh on the hardwood floor in a corner of the room.

Then the Banker waved them away. He undressed, put on his bath-robe and
slippers and sat down calmly to eat his breakfast. When he had finished
he lighted a cigar and sat again in his easy-chair, staring at the ring,
engrossed with his thoughts. Three days he would give them. Three days,
to be sure they had made the trip successfully. Then he would take the
ring to the Museum. And every Sunday he would visit it; until they came
back--if they ever did.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Banker's living-room with its usually perfect appointments was in
thorough disorder. His meals were still being served him there by his
dismayed servants. The mattress still lay in the corner; on it the
rumpled blankets showed where he had been sleeping. For the hundredth
time during his long vigil the Banker, still wearing his dressing-gown
and slippers and needing a shave badly, put his face down close to the
ring. His heart leaped into his throat; his breath came fast; for along
the edge of the ring a tiny little line of figures was slowly moving.

He looked closer, careful lest his laboured breathing blow them away. He
saw they were human forms--little upright figures, an eighth of an inch
or less in height--moving slowly along one behind the other. He counted
nine of them. Nine! he thought, with a shock of surprise. Why, only
three had gone in! Then they had found Rogers, and were bringing him and
others back with him!

Relief from the strain of many hours surged over the Banker. His eyes
filled with tears; he dashed them away--and thought how ridiculous a
feeling it was that possessed him. Then suddenly his head felt queer; he
was afraid he was going to faint. He rose unsteadily to his feet, and
threw himself full-length upon the mattress in the corner of the room.
Then his senses faded. He seemed hardly to faint, but rather to drift
off into an involuntary but pleasant slumber.

       *       *       *       *       *

With returning consciousness the Banker heard in the room a confusion of
many voices. He opened his eyes; the Doctor was sitting on the mattress
beside him. The Banker smiled and parted his lips to speak, but the
Doctor interrupted him.

"Well, old friend!" he cried heartily. "What happened to you? Here we
are back all safely."

The Banker shook his friend's hand with emotion; then after a moment he
sat up and looked about him. The room seemed full of people--strange
looking figures, in extraordinary costumes, dirty and torn. The Very
Young Man crowded forward.

"We got back, sir, didn't we?" he said.

The Banker saw he was holding a young girl by the hand--the most
remarkable-looking girl, the Banker thought, that he had ever beheld.
Her single garment, hanging short of her bare knees, was ragged and
dirty; her jet black hair fell in tangled masses over her shoulders.

"This is Aura," said the Very Young Man. His voice was full of pride;
his manner ingenuous as a child's.

Without a trace of embarrassment the girl smiled and with a pretty
little bending of her head, held down her hand to the astonished Banker,
who sat speechless upon his mattress.

Loto pushed forward. "That's _mamita_ over there," he said, pointing.
"Her name is Lylda; she's Aura's sister."

The Banker recovered his wits. "Well, and who are you, little man?" he
asked with a smile.

"My name is Loto," the little boy answered earnestly. "That's my
father." And he pointed across the room to where the Chemist was coming
forward to join them.




CHAPTER XLI

THE FIRST CHRISTMAS


Christmas Eve in a little village of Northern New York--a white
Christmas, clear and cold. In the dark, blue-black of the sky the
glittering stars were spread thick; the brilliant moon poured down its
silver light over the whiteness of the sloping roof-tops, and upon the
ghostly white, silently drooping trees. A heaviness hung in the frosty
air--a stillness broken only by the tinkling of sleigh-bells or
sometimes by the merry laughter of the passers-by.

At the outskirts of the village, a little back from the road, a
farmhouse lay snuggled up between two huge apple-trees--an
old-fashioned, rambling farmhouse with a steeply pitched roof, piled
high now, with snow. It was brilliantly lighted this Christmas Eve, its
lower windows sending forth broad yellow beams of light over the
whiteness of the ground outside.

In one of the lower rooms of the house, before a huge, blazing log-fire,
a woman and four men sat talking. Across the room, at a table, a little
boy was looking at a picture-book by the light of an oil-lamp.

The woman made a striking picture as she sat back at ease before the
fire. She was dressed in a simple black evening-dress such as a lady of
the city would wear. It covered her shoulders, but left her throat bare.
Her features, particularly her eyes, had a slight Oriental cast, which
the mass of very black hair coiled on her head accentuated. Yet she did
not look like an Oriental, nor indeed like a woman of any race of this
earth. Her cheeks were red--the delicate diffused red of perfect health.
But underneath the red there lay a curious mixture of other colours, not
only on her cheeks but particularly noticeable on her neck and arms. Her
skin was smooth as a pearl; in the mellow firelight it glowed, with the
iridescence of a shell.

The four men were dressed in the careless negligee of city men in the
country. They were talking gaily now among themselves. The woman spoke
seldom, staring dreamily into the fire.

A clock in another room struck eight; the woman glanced over to where
the child sat, absorbed with the pictures in his book. The page at which
he was looking showed a sleigh loaded with toys, with a team of
reindeers and a jolly, fat, white-bearded, red-jacketed old man driving
the sleigh over the chimney tops.

"Come Loto, little son," the woman said. "You hear--it is the time of
sleep for you."

The boy put down his book reluctantly and went over to the fireplace,
standing beside his mother with an arm about her neck.

"Oh, _mamita_ dear, will he surely come, this Santa Claus? He never knew
about me before; will he surely come?"

Lylda kissed him tenderly. "He will come, Loto, every Christmas Eve; to
you and to all the other children of this great world, will he always
come."

"But you must be asleep when he comes, Loto," one of the men admonished.

"Yes, my father, that I know," the boy answered gravely. "I will go
now."

"Come back Loto, when you have undressed," the Chemist called after him,
as he left the room. "Remember you must hang your stocking."

When they were left alone Lylda looked at her companions and smiled.

"His first Christmas," she said. "How wonderful we are going to make it
for him."

"I can remember so well," the Big Business Man remarked thoughtfully,
"when they first told me there was no Santa Claus. I cried, for I knew
Christmas would never be the same to me."

"Loto is nearly twelve years old," the Doctor said. "Just
imagine--having his first Christmas."

"We're going to make it a corker," said the Banker. "Where's the tree?
We got one."

"In the wood-shed," Lylda answered. "He has not seen it; I was so very
careful."

They were silent a moment. Then: "My room is chock full of toys," the
Banker said reflectively. "But this is a rotten town for candy
canes--they only had little ones." And they all laughed.

"I have a present for you, Lylda," the Chemist said after a moment.

"Oh, but you must not give it until to-morrow; you yourself have told me
that."

The Chemist rose. "I want to give it now," he said, and left the room.
In a moment he returned, carrying a mahogany pedestal under one arm and
a square parcel in the other. He set the pedestal upright on the floor
in a corner of the room and began opening the package. It was a mahogany
case, cubical in shape. He lifted its cover, disclosing a glass-bell set
upon a flat, mahogany slab. Fastened to the center of this was a
handsome black plush case, in which lay a gold wedding-ring.

Lylda drew in her breath sharply and held it; the three other men stared
at the ring in amazement. The Chemist was saying: "And I decided not to
destroy it, Lylda, for your sake. There is no air under this glass
cover; the ring is lying in a vacuum, so that nothing can come out of it
and live. It is quite safe for us to keep it--this way. I thought of
this plan, afterwards, and decided to keep the ring--for you." He set
the glass bell on the pedestal.

Lylda stood before it, bending down close over the glass.

"You give me back--my world," she breathed; then she straightened up,
holding out her arms toward the ring. "My birthplace--my people--they
are safe." And then abruptly she sank to her knees and began softly
sobbing.

Loto called from upstairs and they heard him coming down. Lylda went
back hastily to the fire; the Chemist pushed a large chair in front of
the pedestal, hiding it from sight.

The boy, in his night clothes, stood on the hearth beside his mother.

"There is the stocking, _mamita_. Where shall I hang it?"

"First the prayer, Loto. Can you remember?"

The child knelt on the hearth, with his head in his mother's lap.

"Now I lay me----" he began softly, halting over the unfamiliar words.
Lylda's fingers stroked his brown curly head as it nestled against her
knees; the firelight shone golden in his tousled curls.

The Chemist was watching them with moist eyes. "His first Christmas," he
murmured, and smiled a little tender smile. "His first Christmas."

The child was finishing.

"And God bless Aura, and Jack, and----"

"And Grandfather Reoh," his mother prompted softly.

"And Grandfather Reoh--and _mamita_, and----" The boy ended with a
rush--"and me too. Amen. Now where do I hang the stocking, mother?"

In a moment the little stocking dangled from a mantel over the
fireplace.

"You are sure he will come?" the child asked anxiously again.

"It is certain, Loto--if you are asleep."

Loto kissed his mother and shook hands solemnly with the men--a grave,
dignified little figure.

"Good night, Loto," said the Big Business Man.

"Good night, sir. Good night, my father--good night, _mamita_; I shall
be asleep very soon." And with a last look at the stocking he ran out of
the room.

"What a Christmas he will have," said the Banker, a little huskily.

A girl stood in the doorway that led into the dining-room adjoining--a
curious-looking girl in a gingham apron and cap. Lylda looked up.

"Oh, Eena, please will you say to Oteo we want the tree from the
wood-shed--in the dining-room."

The little maid hesitated. Her mistress smiled and added a few words in
foreign tongue. The girl disappeared.

"Every window gets a holly wreath," the Doctor said. "They're in a box
outside in the wood-shed."

"Look what I've got," said the Big Business Man, and produced from his
pocket a little folded object which he opened triumphantly into a long
serpent of filigree red paper on a string with little red and green
paper bells hanging from it. "Across the doorway," he added, waving his
hand.

A moment after there came a stamping of feet on the porch outside, and
then the banging of an outer door. A young man and girl burst into the
room, kicking the snow from their feet and laughing. The youth carried
two pairs of ice-skates slung over his shoulder; as he entered the room
he flung them clattering to the floor.

The girl, even at first glance, was extraordinarily pretty. She was
small and very slender of build. She wore stout high-laced tan shoes, a
heavy woollen skirt that fell to her shoe-tops and a short, belted coat,
with a high collar buttoned tight about her throat. She was covered now
with snow. Her face and the locks of hair that strayed from under her
knitted cap were soaking wet.

"He threw me down," she appealed to the others.

"I didn't--she fell."

"You did; into the snow you threw me--off the road." She laughed. "But I
am learning to skate."

"She fell three times," said her companion accusingly.

"Twice only, it was," the girl corrected. She pulled off her cap, and a
great mass of black hair came tumbling down about her shoulders.

Lylda, from her chair before the fire, smiled mischievously.

"Aura, my sister," she said in a tone of gentle reproof. "So immodest it
is to show all that hair."

The girl in confusion began gathering it up.

"Don't you let her tease you, Aura," said the Big Business Man. "It's
very beautiful hair."

"Where's Loto?" asked the Very Young Man, pulling off his hat and coat.

"In bed--see his stocking there."

A childish treble voice was calling from upstairs. "Good night,
Aura--good night, my friend Jack."

"Good night, old man--see you to-morrow," the Very Young Man called back
in answer.

"You mustn't make so much noise," the Doctor said reprovingly. "He'll
never get to sleep."

"No, you mustn't," the Big Business Man agreed. "To-morrow's a very very
big day for him."

"Some Christmas," commented the Very Young Man looking around. "Where's
the holly and stuff?"

"Oh, we've got it all right, don't you worry," said the Banker.

"And mistletoe," said Lylda, twinkling. "For you, Jack."

Eena again stood in the doorway and said something to her mistress. "The
tree is ready," said Lylda.

The Chemist rose to his feet. "Come on, everybody; let's go trim it."

They crowded gaily into the dining-room, leaving the Very Young Man and
Aura sitting alone by the fire. For some time they sat silent, listening
to the laughter of the others trimming the tree.

The Very Young Man looked at the girl beside him as she sat staring into
the fire. She had taken off her heavy coat, and her figure seemed long
and very slim in the clothes she was wearing now. She sat bending
forward, with her hands clasped over her knees. The long line of her
slender arm and shoulder, and the delicacy of her profile turned towards
him, made the Very Young Man realize anew how fragile she was, and how
beautiful.

Her mass of hair was coiled in a great black pile on her head, with a
big, loose knot low at the neck. The iridescence of her skin gleamed
under the flaming red of her cheeks. Her lips, too, were red, with the
smooth, rich red of coral. The Very Young Man thought with a shock of
surprise that he had never noticed before that they were red; in the
ring there had been no such color.

In the room adjoining, his friends were proposing a toast over the
Christmas punch bowl. The Chemist's voice floated in through the
doorway.

"To the Oroids--happiness to them." Then for an instant there was
silence as they drank the toast.

Aura met the Very Young Man's eyes and smiled a little wanly.
"Happiness--to them! I wonder. We who are so happy to-night--I wonder,
are they?"

