
"From outside the galaxy!" Pilch said thoughtfully. She cleared her
throat. "What's this business about they might be back again?"

"Well," Trigger said, "he thought they might be. Just might. Actually he
believed the Jesters got wiped out too."

"Eh?" Pilch said. "How's that?"

"Quite a lot of the Old Galactics went along with them like Repulsive
went along with me. And one of the things they did know," Trigger said,
"was how to spread diseases like nobody's business. About like we use
weed-killers. Wholesale. They could clean out the average planet of any
particular thing they didn't want there in about a week. So it's not
really too likely the Jesters will be back."

"Oh!" said Pilch.

"But if they are coming, Repulsive thought they'd be due in this area
in about another eight centuries. That looked like a very short time to
him, of course. He thought it would be best to pass on a warning."

"You know," Pilch said after a brief pause, "I find myself agreeing with
him there, Trigger! I might turn in a short report on this, after all."

"I think you should, really," Trigger said. She smiled suddenly. "Of
course, it might wind up with people thinking both of us are ta-ta!"

"I'll risk that," said Pilch. "It's been thought of me before."

"If they did come," Trigger said, "I guess we'd take them anyway. We've
taken everything else like that that came long. And besides--"

Her voice trailed off thoughtfully. She studied the table top for a
moment. Then she looked up at Pilch.

"Well," she said, smiling, "any other questions?"

"A few," said Pilch, passing up the "and besides--" She considered. "Did
you ever actually see him make contact with you?"

"No," Trigger said. "I was always asleep, and I suppose he made sure I'd
stay asleep. They're built sort of like a leech, you know. I guess he
knew I wouldn't feel comfortable about having something like that go
oozing into the side of my neck or start oozing out again. Anyway, he
never did let me see it."

"Considerate little fellow!" said Pilch. She sighed. "Well, everything
came out very satisfactorily--much more so than anyone could have dared
hope at one time. All that's left is a very intriguing mystery which the
Hub will be chatting about for years.... What happened aboard Doctor
Fayle's vanished ship that caused the king plasmoid to awaken to awful
life?" she cried. "What equally mysterious event brought about its death
on that strangely hideous structure it had built in subspace? _What was
it planning to do there?_ Etcetera." She smiled at Trigger. "Yes, very
good!"

"I saw they camouflaged out what was still visible of the original
substation before they let in the news viewers," Trigger remarked.
"Bright idea somebody had there!"

"Yes. It was I. And the Devagas hierarchy is broken, and the Ermetynes
run out of Tranest. Two very bad spots, those were! I don't recall
having heard what they did to your friend, Pluly."

"_I_ heard," Trigger said. "He just got black-listed by Grand Commerce
finally and lost all his shipping concessions. However, his daughter is
married to an up and coming young businessman who happened to be on hand
and have the money and other qualifications to pick up those
concessions." She laughed. "It's the Inger Lines now. They're smart
characters, in a way!"

"Yes," said Pilch. "In a way. Did you know Lyad Ermetyne put in for
voluntary rehabilitation with us, and then changed her mind and joined
the Service?"

"I'd heard of it." Trigger hesitated. "Did you know Lyad paid me a short
visit about an hour before you got here this morning?"

"I thought she would," Pilch said. "We came in to Maccadon together."

Trigger had been a little startled when she answered the doorchime and
saw Lyad standing there. She invited the Ermetyne in.

"I thought I'd thank you personally," Lyad said casually, "for a
recording which was delivered to me some months ago."

"That's quite all right," Trigger said, also casually. "I was sure I
wasn't going to have any use for it."

Lyad studied her face for a moment. "To be honest about it, Trigger
Argee," she said, "I still don't feel entirely cordial toward you!
However, I did appreciate the gesture of letting me have the recording.
So I decided to drop by to tell you there isn't really too much left in
the way of hard feelings, on my part."

They shook hands restrainedly, and the Ermetyne sauntered out again.

"The other reason she came here," Pilch said, "is to take care of the
financing of Mantelish's expedition."

"I didn't know that!" Trigger said, surprised.

"It's her way of making amends. Her legitimate Hub holdings are still
enormous, of course. She can afford it."

"Well," Trigger said, "that's one thing about Lyad--she's wholehearted!"

"She's that," said Pilch. "Rarely have I seen anyone rip into total
therapy with the verve displayed by the Ermetyne. She mentioned on one
occasion that there simply had to be some way of getting ahead of you
again."

"Oh," said Trigger.

"Yes," said Pilch. "By the way, what are your own plans nowadays? Aside
from getting married."

Trigger stretched slim tanned arms over her head and grinned. "No
immediate plans!" she said. "I've resigned from Precol. Got a couple of
checks from the Federation. One to cover my expenses on that plasmoid
business--that was the Dawn City fare mainly--and the other for the five
weeks special duty they figured I was on for them. So I'm up to five
thousand crowns again, and I thought I'd just loaf around and sort of
think things over till Quillan gets back from his current assignment."

"I see. When is Major Quillan returning?"

"In about a month. It's Captain Quillan at present, by the way."

"Oh?" said Pilch. "What happened?"

"That unwarranted interference with a political situation business.
They'd broadcast a warning against taking individual action of any kind
against the plasmoid station. But when he got there and heard the
Commissioner was in a kind of coma, and I wasn't even on board, he lost
his head and came charging into the station after me, flinging grenades
and so on around. The plasmoids would have finished him off pretty
quick, except most of them had started slowing down as soon as Repulsive
turned off the main one. The lunatic was lucky the termites didn't get
to him before he even reached the station!"

Pilch said, "Termites?"

Trigger told her about the termites.

"Ugh!" said Pilch. "I hadn't heard about those. So they broke him for
that. It hardly seems right."

"Well, you have to have discipline," Trigger said tolerantly. "Ape's a
bit short on that end anyway. They'll be upgrading him again fairly
soon, I imagine. I might just be going into Space Scout Intelligence
myself, by the way. They said they'd be glad to have me."

"Not at all incidentally," remarked Pilch, "my Service also would be
glad to have you."

"Would they?" Trigger looked at her thoughtfully. "That includes that
total therapy process, doesn't it?"

"Usually," said Pilch.

"Well, I might some day. But not just yet." She smiled. "Let's let Lyad
get a head start! Actually, it's just I've found out there are so many
interesting things going on all around that I'd like to look them over a
bit before I go charging seriously into a career again." She reached
across the table and tapped Pilch's wrist. "And I'll show you one
interesting thing that's going on right here! Take Mantelish's big tree
out there!"

"The sequoia?"

"Yes. Now just last year it was looking so bad they almost talked the
professor into having it taken away. Hardly a green branch left on it."

Pilch shaded her eyes and looked at the sequoia's crown far above them.
"It looks," she observed reflectively, "in fairly good shape at the
moment, I'd say!"

"Yes, and it's getting greener every week. Mantelish brags about a new
solvent he's been dosing its roots with. You see that great big branch
like an L turned upward, just a little above the center?"

Pilch looked again. "Yes," she said after a moment, "I think so."

"Just before the L turns upward, there's a little cluster of green
branches," Trigger said.

"I see those, yes."

Trigger picked up the field glasses and handed them to her. "Get those
little branches in the glasses," she said.

Pilch said presently, "Got them."

Trigger stood up and faced up to the sequoia. She cupped her hands to
her mouth, took a deep breath, and yelled. "Yoo-hoo! Reee-pul-sive!"

Down in the garden, Mantelish straightened and looked about angrily.
Then he saw Trigger and smiled.

"Yoo-hoo yourself, Trigger!" he shouted, and turned back to his spading.

Trigger watched Pilch's face from the side. She saw her give a sudden
start.

"Great Galaxies!" Pilch breathed. She kept on looking. "That's one for
the book, isn't it?" Finally she put the glasses down. She appeared
somewhat stunned. "He really is a little green man!"

"Only when he's trying to be. It's a sort of sign of friendliness."

"What's he doing up there?"

"He moved over into the sequoia right after we got back," Trigger said.
"And that's where he'll probably stay indefinitely now. It's just the
right kind of place for Repulsive."

"Have you been doing any more--well, talking?"

"No. Too strenuous both ways. Until a few days before we got back here,
there wasn't even a sign from him. He just about knocked himself out on
that big plasmoid."

"Who else knows about this?" asked Pilch.

"Nobody. I would have told Holati, except he's still mad enough about
having been put into a coma, he might go out and chop the sequoia down."

"Well, it won't go into the report then," Pilch said. "They'd just want
to bother Repulsive!"

"I knew it would be all right to tell you. And here's something else
very interesting that's going on at present."

"What's that?"

"The real hush-hush reason for Mantelish's expedition," Trigger
explained, "is, of course, to scout around this whole area of space with
planetary plasmoid detectors. They don't want anybody stumbling on
another setup like Harvest Moon and accidentally activating another king
plasmoid."

"Yes," Pilch said. "I'd heard that."

"It was Mantelish's idea," said Trigger. "Now Mantelish is very fond of
that sequoia tree. He's got a big, comfortable bench right among its
roots, where he likes to sit down around noon and have a little nap
when he's out here."

"Oh!" said Pilch. "Repulsive's been up to his old tricks, eh?"

"Sure. He's given Mantelish very exact instructions. So they're going to
find one of those setups, all right. And they won't come back with any
plasmoids. But they will come back with something they don't know
about."

Pilch looked at her for a moment. "_You_ say it!"

Trigger's grin widened. "A little green woman," she said.




CONSIDER THE PLASMOIDS....

Ancient living machines that after millennia of stillness suddenly begin
to move under their own power, for reasons that remain a mystery to men.
Holati Tate discovered them--then disappeared. Trigger Argee was his
closest associate--she means to find him. She's brilliant, beautiful,
and skilled in every known martial art. She's worth plenty--dead or
alive--to more than one faction in this obscure battle. And she's
beginning to have a chilling notion that the long-vanished Masters of
the Old Galaxy were wise when they exiled the plasmoids to the most
distant and isolated world they knew....


Printed in U.S.A.




Transcriber's Note:

The following typographical errors in the original text have been
corrected in this eBook:

Chapter 1: "activites" changed to "activities"

Chapter 2: "maker" changed to "make"

Chapter 3: "O. G." changed to "O.G." for consistency

"sufficienty" changed to "sufficiently"

Chapter 4: "Commission" changed to "Commissioner"

Chapter 6: "glass" changed to "glasses"

Chapter 8: missing period added after "faintly"

Chapter 9: "rekembered" changed to "remembered"

missing comma added after "leaves"

"foward" changed to "forward"

"taking" changed to "talking"

"dignifed" changed to "dignified"

Chapter 10: "ogirinal" changed to "original"

Chapter 11: "Whatzzitt" changed to "Whatzzit"

Chapter 12: "buiness" changed to "business"

Chapter 13: "tycoonness" changed to "tycooness"

Chapter 14: "soo" changed to "so"

Chapter 15: "Amplifed" changed to "Amplified"

Chapter 16: missing thought break added

"specailty" changed to "specialty"

Chapter 19: missing end quotation mark added to "Our escort.
Commissioner Tate made very sure we had one, too!"

"you" changed to "your"

Chapter 20: "amensia" changed to "amnesia" (3 times)

missing end quotation mark added to "All right--what's this?"

"unmollifed" changed to "unmollified"

Chapter 21: missing period added after "Pluly's"

Chapter 22: period changed to comma after "Lyad said"

"agin" changed to "again"

missing period added after "Lyad"

Chapter 24: "appologizing" changed to "apologizing"

"Blamordan" changed to "Balmordan"

"OradoComWeb" changed to "Orado ComWeb"

Chapter 25: period changed to question mark after "Who'd hesitate"

missing comma added after "jerk"

Chapter 26: "Lusscious" changed to "Luscious"

"then" changed to "than"

"like" changed to "liked"

"plasmoids's" changed to "plasmoid's"

"turbulance" changed to "turbulence"

Chapter 27: "suprisingly" changed to "surprisingly"

"Commisioner" changed to "Commissioner"

