This liquid forms the moulding mixture, and it is allowed to flow
round the object to be copied, contained in a suitable box, whose
sides have been slightly oiled.  The object to be copied should also
be oiled.  After some hours, when the glue mixture has set, it will be
found to be highly elastic, so that it may be pulled away from the
mould, and afterwards resume very nearly its original form.

One drawback to the use of these moulds lies in the fact that the
gelatine will rarely stand the plating solution without undergoing
change, but this may be partially obviated by dipping it for a few
seconds in a 10 per cent solution of bichromate of potash, exposing it
to the sunlight for a few minutes, and then rinsing it.

In order to render the surface conducting, it is washed over with a
solution of a gold or silver salt, and the latter reduced in situ to
metal by a suitable reagent.  A solution of phosphorus is the most
usual one (see Gore, Electro-metallurgy, p.  216).  Such a mould may
be copper-plated in the sulphate bath, connection being made by wires
suitably thrust into the material.

Plaster of Paris moulds require to be dried and waxed by standing on a
hot plate in melted wax before they are immersed in the plating bath.
In this case the surface is best made conducting either by silvering
it by the silvering process used for mirrors, or by brushing it over
with good black lead rendered more conducting by moistening with an
ethereal solution of chloride of gold and then drying in the sun.

The brushing requires a stiff camel's-hair pencil of large size cut so
that the hairs project to a distance of about a quarter of an inch
from the holder.  The brushing must continue till the surface is
bright, and is often a lengthy process.

The same process of blackleading may be employed to get a coat of
deposited metal which will strip easily from the cathode.

In all cases where extensive deposits of copper are required, the
growth takes place too rapidly at the corners.  Consequently it is
often desirable to localise the action of the deposit.  A "stopping"
of ordinary copal varnish seems to be the usual thing, but a thin coat
of wax or paraffin or photographic (black) varnish does practically as
well.

I do not propose to deal with the subject of electrotyping to any
extent, for if practised as an art, a good many little precautions are
required, as the student may read in Gore's Electro-metallurgy.  The
above instructions will be found sufficient for the occasional use of
the process in the construction of apparatus, etc.  There is no
advantage in attempting to hurry the process, a current density of
about ten amperes per square foot being quite suitable and
sufficiently low to ensure a solid deposit.

Sec. 143.  Blacking Brass Surfaces.

A really uniform dead-black surface is difficult to produce on brass
by chemical means.  A paste of nitrate of copper and nitrate of silver
heated on the brass is said to give a dead-black surface, but I have
not succeeded in making it act uniformly.  For optical purposes the
best plan is to use a paint made up of  "drop" black, ground very fine
with a little shellac varnish, and diluted for use with alcohol.  No
more varnish than is necessary to cause the black to hold together
should be employed.

In general, if the paint be ground to the consistency of very thick
cream with ordinary shellac varnish it will be found to work well when
reduced by alcohol to a free painting consistency.

A very fine gray and black finish, with a rather metallic lustre, may
be easily given to brass work.  For this purpose a dilute solution of
platinum tetrachloride (not stronger than 1 per cent) is prepared by
dissolving the salt in distilled water.  The polished brass work is
cleaned by rubbing with a cork and strong potash till all grease has
disappeared, as shown by water standing uniformly on the metal and
draining away without gathering into drops.

After copious washing the work is wholly immersed in a considerable
volume of the platinum tetrachloride solution at the ordinary
temperature.  After about a quarter of an hour the brass may be taken
out and washed.  The surface will be found to be nicely and uniformly
coated if the above instructions have been carried out, but any
finger-marks or otherwise dirty places will cause irregularity of
deposit.  If the process has been successful it will be found that the
deposit adheres perfectly, hardly any of it being removed by vigorous
rubbing with a cloth.  If the deposit is allowed to thicken--either
by leaving the articles in the solution too long or heating the
solution, or having it too strong--it will merely rub off and leave
an irregular surface.

This process succeeds well with yellow brass and Muntz metal, either
cast or rolled, but it does not give quite such uniform (though still
good) results with gun-metal, on which, however, the deposit is darker
and deader in appearance.

A book might be written (several have been written) on the art of
metal colouring, but though doubtless a beautiful and delicate art, it
is of little service in the laboratory.  For further information the
reader may consult a work by Hiorns.

Sec. 144.  Sieves.

Properly graded sieves with meshes of a reliable size are often of
great use.  They should be made out of proper "bolting" cloth, a
beautiful material made for flour-millers.  Messrs. Henry Simon and
Company of Manchester have kindly furnished me with the following
table of materials used in flour-milling.

Sieves made of these materials will be found to work much more quickly
and satisfactorily than those made from ordinary muslin or wire gauze.

Relative Bolting Value of Silk, Wire, and Grit Gauze

Threads per inch   Trade  No.   Trade  No.  Trade No. of
Approximate.        of Silk.     of Wire.    Grit Gauze.

18                  0000            18            16

22                   000            20            20

28                    00            26            26

38                     0            32            34

48                     1            40            44

52                     2            45            50

56                     3            50            54

60                     4            56            58

64                     5            60            60

72                     6            64            66

80                     7            70            70

84                     8            80            80

94                     9

106                   10

114                   11

124                   12

130                   13

139                   14

148                   15

156                   16

163                   17

167                   18

170                   19

173                   20


Sec. 145.  Pottery making in the Laboratory.

When large pieces of earthenware of any special design are required,
recourse must be had to a pottery.  Small vessels, plates, parts of
machines, etc, can often be made in the laboratory in less time than
it would take to explain to the potter what is required.  For this
purpose any good pipeclay may be employed.  I have used a white
pipe-clay dug up in the laboratory garden with complete success.

The clay should be kneaded with water and squeezed through a cloth to
separate grit.  It is then mixed with its own volume or thereabouts of
powdered porcelain evaporating basins, broken basins being kept for
this purpose.  The smoothness of the resulting earthenware will depend
on the fineness to which the porcelain fragments have been reduced.  I
have found that fragments passing a sieve of sixty threads to the inch
run, do very well, though the resulting earthenware is decidedly
rough.

The porcelain and clay being thoroughly incorporated by kneading, the
articles are moulded, it being borne in mind that they will contract
somewhat on firing. [Footnote: The contraction depends on the
temperature attained as well as on the time.  An allowance of one part
in twelve will be suitable in the case considered.]  The clay should
be as stiff as is convenient to work, and after moulding must be
allowed to get thoroughly dry by standing in an airy place;  the
drying must not be forced, especially at first, or the clay will
crack.

Small articles are readily fired in a Fletcher's crucible furnace
supplied with a gas blow-pipe;  the furnace is heated gradually to
begin with.  When a dull red heat is attained, the full power of the
blast may be turned on, and the furnace kept at its maximum
temperature for three or four hours at least, though on an emergency
shorter periods may be made to do.

The articles are supported on a bed of white sand;  after firing, the
crucible furnace must be allowed to cool slowly.  It must be
remembered that the furnace walls will get hot externally after the
first few hours, consequently the furnace must be supported on bricks,
to protect the bench.

The pottery when cold may be dressed on a grindstone if necessary.
This amateur pottery will be found of service in making small fittings
for switch-boards, commutators, and in electrical work generally.

Pottery made as described is very hard and strong, the hardness and
strength depending in a great degree  on the proportion of powdered
porcelain added to the clay, as well, of course, as on the quality of
both of these materials.

It is a good plan to knead a considerable quantity of the mixture,
which may then be placed in a well-covered jar, and kept damp by the
addition of a little water.

Pottery thus made does not require to be glazed, but, of course, a
glaze can be obtained by any of the methods described in works on
pottery manufacture.  The following glaze has been recommended to me
by a very competent potter:-

Litharge

7 parts by weight

Ground flint

2 parts by weight

Cornish stone or felspar

1 parts by weight

These ingredients are to be ground up till they will pass the finest
sieve--say 180 threads to the inch.  They are then mixed with water
till they form a paste of the consistency of cream. They must, of
course, be mixed together perfectly.  The ware to be glazed is dipped
into the cream after the first firing; it is then dried as before and
refired.  The glaze will melt at a bright red heat, but it will crack
if not fired harder;  the harder it is fired the less likely is it to
crack.

If colouring matters are added they must be ground in a mill free from
iron till they are so fine that a thick blanket filter will not filter
them when suspended in water.  This remark applies particularly to
oxide of cobalt.

APPENDIX

PLATINISING GLASS

IN the Philosophical Magazine for July 1888 (vol.  xxvi.  p.  1) there
is a paper by Professor Kundt translated from the Sitzungsberichte of
the Prussian Academy.  This paper deals with the indices of refraction
of metals.  Thin prisms were obtained by depositing metals
electrolytically on glass surfaces coated with platinum. The
preparation of these surfaces is troublesome.  Kundt recounts that no
less than two thousand trials were made before success was attained.
A detailed account of the preparation of these surfaces is not given
by Kundt, but one is promised--a promise unfortunately unfulfilled so
far as I am able to discover.  A hunt through the literature led to
the discovery of the following references:  Central Zeitung fuer Optik
und Mechanik, p.  142 (1888); Dingler's Polytechnik Journal, Vol.
cxcv.  p.  464; Comptes Rendus, vol.  lxx.  (1870).

The original communication is a paper by Jouglet in the Comptes
Rendus, of which the other references are abstracts.  The account in
Dingier is a literal translation of the original paper, and the note
in the Central Zeitung is abbreviated sufficiently to be of no value.
The details are briefly as follows:-

One hundred grams of platinum are dissolved in aqua regia and the
solution is dried on the sand bath, without, however, producing
decomposition.  Though the instructions are not definite, I presume
that the formation of PtCl4 is contemplated.

The dried salt is added little by little to rectified oil of lavender,
placed on a glass paint-grinding plate, and the salt and oil are
ground together with a muller.  Care is required to prevent any
appreciable rise of temperature which would decompose the compound
aimed at, and it is for this reason that the salt is to be added
gradually.  Of course the absorption of water from the air must be
prevented from taking place as far as possible.  Finally, the compound
is diluted by adding oil of lavender up to a total weight of 1400
grams (of oil).

The liquid is poured into a porcelain dish and left absolutely at rest
for eight days.  It is then decanted and filtered, left six days at
rest, and again decanted (if necessary).  The liquid should have a
specific gravity of 5 deg. on the acid hydrometer.  (If by this the Baume
scale is intended, the corresponding specific gravity would be 1.037.)
A second liquid is prepared by grinding up 25 grams of litharge with
25 grams of borate of lead and 8 to 10 grams of oil of lavender.  The
grinding must be thoroughly carried out.

This liquid is to be added to the one first described, and the whole
well mixed.  The resulting fluid constitutes the platinising liquid,
and is applied as follows:-

A sheet of clean glass is held vertically, and the liquid is painted
over it, carrying the brush from the lower to the upper edge.  The
layer of oil dries slowly, and when it is dry the painting is again
proceeded with, moving the brush this time from right to left; and
similarly the process is repeated twice, the brush being carried from
top to bottom and left to right.  This is with the object of securing
great uniformity in the coating.  Nothing is said as to the manner in
which the glass is to be dried.

The dried glass is finally heated to a temperature of dull redness in
a muffle furnace.  The resinous layer burns away without running or
bubbling, and leaves a dull metallic surface.  As the temperature
rises this suddenly brightens, and we obtain the desired surface
(which probably consists of an alloy of lead and platinum).  It is
bright only on the surface away from the glass.

I have not had an opportunity of trying this process since I
discovered the detailed account given by Jouglet;  but many
modifications have been tried in the laboratory of the Sydney
University by Mr. Pollock, starting from the imperfect note in the
Central Zeitung, which led to no real success.

It was found that it is perfectly easy to obtain brilliant films of
platinum by the following process, provided that the presence of a few
pin-holes does not matter.

The platinum salt employed is what is bought under the name of
platinic chloride;  it is, however, probably a mixture of this salt
and hydro-chloro-platinic acid, and has all the appearance of having
been obtained by evaporating a solution of platinum in aqua regia to
dryness on the water bath.  A solution of this salt in distilled water
is prepared;  the strength does not seem to matter very much, but
perhaps one of salt to ninety-nine water may be regarded as a standard
proportion.  To this solution is added a few drops of ordinary gum
water (i.e.  a solution of dextrin).  The exact quantity does not
matter, but perhaps about 2 per cent may be mentioned as giving good
results.

The glass is painted over with this solution and dried slowly on the
water bath.  When the glass is dry, and covered with a uniform hard
film of gum and platinum salt free from bubble holes, it is heated to
redness in a muffle furnace.  The necessary and sufficient temperature
is reached as soon as the glass is just sensibly red-hot.

The mirrors obtained in this way are very brilliant on the free
platinum surface.  If the gum be omitted, the platinum will have a mat
surface;  and if too much gum be used, the platinum will get spotty by
bubbles bursting.  There does not appear to be any advantage in using
lead.

It is quite essential that the film be dry and hard before the glass
is fired.
