the winds will take that contrivance, into whose hands it may fall?
Can't you find something better?  Can't you or one of your men--"

"Never, sir," the captain said, swiftly interrupting me.

"But my companions and I would be willing to safeguard this manuscript,
and if you give us back our freedom--"

"Your freedom!"  Captain Nemo put in, standing up.

"Yes, sir, and that's the subject on which I wanted to confer with you.
For seven months we've been aboard your vessel, and I ask you today,
in the name of my companions as well as myself, if you intend
to keep us here forever."

"Professor Aronnax," Captain Nemo said, "I'll answer you today
just as I did seven months ago:  whoever boards the Nautilus must
never leave it."

"What you're inflicting on us is outright slavery!"

"Call it anything you like."

"But every slave has the right to recover his freedom!
By any worthwhile, available means!"

"Who has denied you that right?"  Captain Nemo replied.
"Did I ever try to bind you with your word of honor?"

The captain stared at me, crossing his arms.

"Sir," I told him, "to take up this subject a second time would
be distasteful to both of us.  So let's finish what we've started.
I repeat:  it isn't just for myself that I raise this issue.
To me, research is a relief, a potent diversion, an enticement,
a passion that can make me forget everything else.  Like you, I'm a man
neglected and unknown, living in the faint hope that someday I can pass
on to future generations the fruits of my labors--figuratively speaking,
by means of some contrivance left to the luck of winds and waves.
In short, I can admire you and comfortably go with you while playing
a role I only partly understand; but I still catch glimpses
of other aspects of your life that are surrounded by involvements
and secrets that, alone on board, my companions and I can't share.
And even when our hearts could beat with yours, moved by some of your
griefs or stirred by your deeds of courage and genius, we've had to stifle
even the slightest token of that sympathy that arises at the sight
of something fine and good, whether it comes from friend or enemy.
All right then!  It's this feeling of being alien to your deepest
concerns that makes our situation unacceptable, impossible,
even impossible for me but especially for Ned Land.  Every man,
by virtue of his very humanity, deserves fair treatment.
Have you considered how a love of freedom and hatred of slavery could
lead to plans of vengeance in a temperament like the Canadian's,
what he might think, attempt, endeavor . . . ?"

I fell silent.  Captain Nemo stood up.

"Ned Land can think, attempt, or endeavor anything he wants,
what difference is it to me?  I didn't go looking for him!
I don't keep him on board for my pleasure!  As for you, Professor Aronnax,
you're a man able to understand anything, even silence.
I have nothing more to say to you.  Let this first time you've come
to discuss this subject also be the last, because a second time I
won't even listen."

I withdrew.  From that day forward our position was very strained.
I reported this conversation to my two companions.

"Now we know," Ned said, "that we can't expect a thing from this man.
The Nautilus is nearing Long Island.  We'll escape, no matter
what the weather."

But the skies became more and more threatening.  There were
conspicuous signs of a hurricane on the way.  The atmosphere was
turning white and milky.  Slender sheaves of cirrus clouds were
followed on the horizon by layers of nimbocumulus.  Other low clouds
fled swiftly.  The sea grew towering, inflated by long swells.
Every bird had disappeared except a few petrels, friends of the storms.
The barometer fell significantly, indicating a tremendous tension
in the surrounding haze.  The mixture in our stormglass decomposed
under the influence of the electricity charging the air.
A struggle of the elements was approaching.

The storm burst during the daytime of May 13, just as the Nautilus
was cruising abreast of Long Island, a few miles from the narrows
to Upper New York Bay.  I'm able to describe this struggle of
the elements because Captain Nemo didn't flee into the ocean depths;
instead, from some inexplicable whim, he decided to brave it out
on the surface.

The wind was blowing from the southwest, initially a stiff breeze,
in other words, with a speed of fifteen meters per second,
which built to twenty-five meters near three o'clock in the afternoon.
This is the figure for major storms.

Unshaken by these squalls, Captain Nemo stationed himself
on the platform.  He was lashed around the waist to withstand
the monstrous breakers foaming over the deck.  I hoisted and attached
myself to the same place, dividing my wonderment between the storm
and this incomparable man who faced it head-on.

The raging sea was swept with huge tattered clouds drenched
by the waves.  I saw no more of the small intervening billows
that form in the troughs of the big crests.  Just long,
soot-colored undulations with crests so compact they didn't foam.
They kept growing taller.  They were spurring each other on.
The Nautilus, sometimes lying on its side, sometimes standing on end
like a mast, rolled and pitched frightfully.

Near five o'clock a torrential rain fell, but it lulled neither
wind nor sea.  The hurricane was unleashed at a speed of forty-five
meters per second, hence almost forty leagues per hour.
Under these conditions houses topple, roof tiles puncture doors,
iron railings snap in two, and twenty-four-pounder cannons relocate.
And yet in the midst of this turmoil, the Nautilus lived up to that saying
of an expert engineer:  "A well-constructed hull can defy any sea!"
This submersible was no resisting rock that waves could demolish;
it was a steel spindle, obediently in motion, without rigging
or masting, and able to brave their fury with impunity.

Meanwhile I was carefully examining these unleashed breakers.
They measured up to fifteen meters in height over a length
of 150 to 175 meters, and the speed of their propagation
(half that of the wind) was fifteen meters per second.
Their volume and power increased with the depth of the waters.
I then understood the role played by these waves, which trap air
in their flanks and release it in the depths of the sea where its
oxygen brings life.  Their utmost pressure--it has been calculated--
can build to 3,000 kilograms on every square foot of surface they strike.
It was such waves in the Hebrides that repositioned a stone block
weighing 84,000 pounds.  It was their relatives in the tidal wave
on December 23, 1854, that toppled part of the Japanese city of Tokyo,
then went that same day at 700 kilometers per hour to break on
the beaches of America.

After nightfall the storm grew in intensity.  As in the 1860 cyclone
on Réunion Island, the barometer fell to 710 millimeters.  At the close
of day, I saw a big ship passing on the horizon, struggling painfully.
It lay to at half steam in an effort to hold steady on the waves.
It must have been a steamer on one of those lines out of New York
to Liverpool or Le Havre.  It soon vanished into the shadows.

At ten o'clock in the evening, the skies caught on fire.
The air was streaked with violent flashes of lightning.
I couldn't stand this brightness, but Captain Nemo stared
straight at it, as if to inhale the spirit of the storm.
A dreadful noise filled the air, a complicated noise made up of the roar
of crashing breakers, the howl of the wind, claps of thunder.
The wind shifted to every point of the horizon, and the cyclone
left the east to return there after passing through north, west,
and south, moving in the opposite direction of revolving storms
in the southern hemisphere.

Oh, that Gulf Stream!  It truly lives up to its nickname,
the Lord of Storms!  All by itself it creates these fearsome
cyclones through the difference in temperature between its currents
and the superimposed layers of air.

The rain was followed by a downpour of fire.  Droplets of water
changed into exploding tufts.  You would have thought Captain Nemo was
courting a death worthy of himself, seeking to be struck by lightning.
In one hideous pitching movement, the Nautilus reared its steel
spur into the air like a lightning rod, and I saw long sparks
shoot down it.

Shattered, at the end of my strength, I slid flat on my belly
to the hatch.  I opened it and went below to the lounge.
By then the storm had reached its maximum intensity.
It was impossible to stand upright inside the Nautilus.

Captain Nemo reentered near midnight.  I could hear the ballast
tanks filling little by little, and the Nautilus sank gently beneath
the surface of the waves.

Through the lounge's open windows, I saw large, frightened fish
passing like phantoms in the fiery waters.  Some were struck
by lightning right before my eyes!

The Nautilus kept descending.  I thought it would find calm again at
fifteen meters down.  No. The upper strata were too violently agitated.
It needed to sink to fifty meters, searching for a resting place
in the bowels of the sea.

But once there, what tranquility we found, what silence, what peace
all around us!  Who would have known that a dreadful hurricane
was then unleashed on the surface of this ocean?



















CHAPTER 20

In Latitude 47 degrees 24' and Longitude 17 degrees 28'


IN THE AFTERMATH of this storm, we were thrown back to the east.
Away went any hope of

escaping to the landing places of New York or the St. Lawrence.
In despair, poor Ned went into seclusion like Captain Nemo.  Conseil and
I no longer left each other.

As I said, the Nautilus veered to the east.  To be more accurate,
I should have said to the northeast.  Sometimes on the surface
of the waves, sometimes beneath them, the ship wandered for days
amid these mists so feared by navigators.  These are caused
chiefly by melting ice, which keeps the air extremely damp.
How many ships have perished in these waterways as they
tried to get directions from the hazy lights on the coast!
How many casualties have been caused by these opaque mists!
How many collisions have occurred with these reefs,
where the breaking surf is covered by the noise of the wind!
How many vessels have rammed each other, despite their running lights,
despite the warnings given by their bosun's pipes and alarm bells!

So the floor of this sea had the appearance of a battlefield where every
ship defeated by the ocean still lay, some already old and encrusted,
others newer and reflecting our beacon light on their ironwork
and copper undersides.  Among these vessels, how many went down with
all hands, with their crews and hosts of immigrants, at these trouble
spots so prominent in the statistics:  Cape Race, St. Paul Island,
the Strait of Belle Isle, the St. Lawrence estuary!
And in only a few years, how many victims have been furnished to
the obituary notices by the Royal Mail, Inman, and Montreal lines;
by vessels named the Solway, the Isis, the Paramatta, the Hungarian,
the Canadian, the Anglo-Saxon, the Humboldt, and the United States,
all run aground; by the Arctic and the Lyonnais, sunk in collisions;
by the President, the Pacific, and the City of Glasgow,
lost for reasons unknown; in the midst of their gloomy rubble,
the Nautilus navigated as if passing the dead in review!

By May 15 we were off the southern tip of the Grand Banks
of Newfoundland.  These banks are the result of marine sedimentation,
an extensive accumulation of organic waste brought either from
the equator by the Gulf Stream's current, or from the North Pole
by the countercurrent of cold water that skirts the American coast.
Here, too, erratically drifting chunks collect from the ice breakup.
Here a huge boneyard forms from fish, mollusks, and zoophytes dying
over it by the billions.

The sea is of no great depth at the Grand Banks.  A few hundred
fathoms at best.  But to the south there is a deep, suddenly occurring
depression, a 3,000-meter pit.  Here the Gulf Stream widens.
Its waters come to full bloom.  It loses its speed and temperature,
but it turns into a sea.

Among the fish that the Nautilus startled on its way, I'll mention
a one-meter lumpfish, blackish on top with orange on the belly
and rare among its brethren in that it practices monogamy,
a good-sized eelpout, a type of emerald moray whose flavor is excellent,
wolffish with big eyes in a head somewhat resembling a canine's,
viviparous blennies whose eggs hatch inside their bodies like those
of snakes, bloated gobio (or black gudgeon) measuring two decimeters,
grenadiers with long tails and gleaming with a silvery glow,
speedy fish venturing far from their High Arctic seas.

Our nets also hauled in a bold, daring, vigorous, and muscular
fish armed with prickles on its head and stings on its fins,
a real scorpion measuring two to three meters, the ruthless enemy
of cod, blennies, and salmon; it was the bullhead of the northerly seas,
a fish with red fins and a brown body covered with nodules.
The Nautilus's fishermen had some trouble getting a grip on
this animal, which, thanks to the formation of its gill covers,
can protect its respiratory organs from any parching contact
with the air and can live out of water for a good while.

And I'll mention--for the record--some little banded blennies that
follow ships into the northernmost seas, sharp-snouted carp exclusive
to the north Atlantic, scorpionfish, and lastly the gadoid family,
chiefly the cod species, which I detected in their waters of choice
over these inexhaustible Grand Banks.

Because Newfoundland is simply an underwater peak, you could
call these cod mountain fish.  While the Nautilus was clearing
a path through their tight ranks, Conseil couldn't refrain from
making this comment:

"Mercy, look at these cod!" he said.  "Why, I thought cod were flat,
like dab or sole!"

"Innocent boy!"  I exclaimed.  "Cod are flat only at the
grocery store, where they're cut open and spread out on display.
But in the water they're like mullet, spindle-shaped and perfectly
built for speed."

"I can easily believe master," Conseil replied.  "But what crowds
of them!  What swarms!"

"Bah!  My friend, there'd be many more without their enemies,
scorpionfish and human beings!  Do you know how many eggs have been
counted in a single female?"

"I'll go all out," Conseil replied.  "500,000."

"11,000,000, my friend."

"11,000,000! I refuse to accept that until I count them myself."

"So count them, Conseil.  But it would be less work to believe me.
Besides, Frenchmen, Englishmen, Americans, Danes, and Norwegians catch
these cod by the thousands.  They're eaten in prodigious quantities,
and without the astonishing fertility of these fish, the seas
would soon be depopulated of them.  Accordingly, in England and
America alone, 5,000 ships manned by 75,000 seamen go after cod.
Each ship brings back an average catch of 4,400 fish, making 22,000,000.
Off the coast of Norway, the total is the same."

"Fine," Conseil replied, "I'll take master's word for it.
I won't count them."

"Count what?"

"Those 11,000,000 eggs.  But I'll make one comment."

"What's that?"

"If all their eggs hatched, just four codfish could feed
England, America, and Norway."

As we skimmed the depths of the Grand Banks, I could see perfectly
those long fishing lines, each armed with 200 hooks, that every
boat dangled by the dozens.  The lower end of each line dragged
the bottom by means of a small grappling iron, and at the surface
it was secured to the buoy-rope of a cork float.  The Nautilus had
to maneuver shrewdly in the midst of this underwater spiderweb.

But the ship didn't stay long in these heavily traveled waterways.
It went up to about latitude 42 degrees.  This brought it
abreast of St. John's in Newfoundland and Heart's Content,
where the Atlantic Cable reaches its end point.

Instead of continuing north, the Nautilus took an easterly heading,
as if to go along this plateau on which the telegraph cable rests,
where multiple soundings have given the contours of the terrain
with the utmost accuracy.

It was on May 17, about 500 miles from Heart's Content and 2,800
meters down, that I spotted this cable lying on the seafloor.
Conseil, whom I hadn't alerted, mistook it at first for a gigantic
sea snake and was gearing up to classify it in his best manner.
But I enlightened the fine lad and let him down gently by giving
him various details on the laying of this cable.

The first cable was put down during the years 1857-1858;
but after transmitting about 400 telegrams, it went dead.
In 1863 engineers built a new cable that measured 3,400 kilometers,
weighed 4,500 metric tons, and was shipped aboard the Great Eastern.
This attempt also failed.

Now then, on May 25 while submerged to a depth of 3,836 meters,
the Nautilus lay in precisely the locality where this second
cable suffered the rupture that ruined the undertaking.
It happened 638 miles from the coast of Ireland.  At around two
o'clock in the afternoon, all contact with Europe broke off.
The electricians on board decided to cut the cable before fishing it up,
and by eleven o'clock that evening they had retrieved the damaged part.
They repaired the joint and its splice; then the cable was resubmerged.
But a few days later it snapped again and couldn't be recovered
from the ocean depths.

These Americans refused to give up.  The daring Cyrus Field,
who had risked his whole fortune to promote this undertaking,
called for a new bond issue.  It sold out immediately.  Another cable
was put down under better conditions.  Its sheaves of conducting wire
were insulated within a gutta-percha covering, which was protected
by a padding of textile material enclosed in a metal sheath.
The Great Eastern put back to sea on July 13, 1866.

The operation proceeded apace.  Yet there was one hitch.
As they gradually unrolled this third cable, the electricians observed
on several occasions that someone had recently driven nails into it,
trying to damage its core.  Captain Anderson, his officers,
and the engineers put their heads together, then posted a warning that if
the culprit were detected, he would be thrown overboard without a trial.
After that, these villainous attempts were not repeated.

By July 23 the Great Eastern was lying no farther than 800
kilometers from Newfoundland when it received telegraphed news from
Ireland of an armistice signed between Prussia and Austria after
the Battle of Sadova.  Through the mists on the 27th, it sighted
the port of Heart's Content.  The undertaking had ended happily,
and in its first dispatch, young America addressed old Europe with
these wise words so rarely understood:  "Glory to God in the highest,
and peace on earth to men of good will."

I didn't expect to find this electric cable in mint condition,
as it looked on leaving its place of manufacture.  The long snake
was covered with seashell rubble and bristling with foraminifera;
a crust of caked gravel protected it from any mollusks that might
bore into it.  It rested serenely, sheltered from the sea's motions,
under a pressure favorable to the transmission of that electric
spark that goes from America to Europe in 32/100 of a second.
This cable will no doubt last indefinitely because, as observers note,
its gutta-percha casing is improved by a stay in salt water.

Besides, on this well-chosen plateau, the cable never lies at
depths that could cause a break.  The Nautilus followed it to its
lowest reaches, located 4,431 meters down, and even there it rested
without any stress or strain.  Then we returned to the locality
where the 1863 accident had taken place.

There the ocean floor formed a valley 120 kilometers wide,
into which you could fit Mt.  Blanc without its summit poking above
the surface of the waves.  This valley is closed off to the east
by a sheer wall 2,000 meters high.  We arrived there on May 28,
and the Nautilus lay no farther than 150 kilometers from Ireland.

Would Captain Nemo head up north and beach us on the British Isles?
No. Much to my surprise, he went back down south and returned
to European seas.  As we swung around the Emerald Isle, I spotted
Cape Clear for an instant, plus the lighthouse on Fastnet Rock
that guides all those thousands of ships setting out from
Glasgow or Liverpool.

An important question then popped into my head.  Would the Nautilus
dare to tackle the English Channel?  Ned Land (who promptly
reappeared after we hugged shore) never stopped questioning me.
What could I answer him?  Captain Nemo remained invisible.
After giving the Canadian a glimpse of American shores, was he about
to show me the coast of France?

But the Nautilus kept gravitating southward.  On May 30, in sight
of Land's End, it passed between the lowermost tip of England
and the Scilly Islands, which it left behind to starboard.

If it was going to enter the English Channel, it clearly needed
to head east.  It did not.

All day long on May 31, the Nautilus swept around the sea
in a series of circles that had me deeply puzzled.  It seemed
to be searching for a locality that it had some trouble finding.
At noon Captain Nemo himself came to take our bearings.
He didn't address a word to me.  He looked gloomier than ever.
What was filling him with such sadness?  Was it our proximity to
these European shores?  Was he reliving his memories of that country
he had left behind?  If so, what did he feel?  Remorse or regret?
For a good while these thoughts occupied my mind, and I had a hunch
that fate would soon give away the captain's secrets.

The next day, June 1, the Nautilus kept to the same tack.
It was obviously trying to locate some precise spot in the ocean.
Just as on the day before, Captain Nemo came to take the altitude
of the sun.  The sea was smooth, the skies clear.  Eight miles
to the east, a big steamship was visible on the horizon line.
No flag was flapping from the gaff of its fore-and-aft sail,
and I couldn't tell its nationality.

A few minutes before the sun passed its zenith, Captain Nemo
raised his sextant and took his sights with the utmost precision.
The absolute calm of the waves facilitated this operation.
The Nautilus lay motionless, neither rolling nor pitching.

I was on the platform just then.  After determining our position,
the captain pronounced only these words:

"It's right here!"

He went down the hatch.  Had he seen that vessel change course
and seemingly head toward us?  I'm unable to say.

I returned to the lounge.  The hatch closed, and I heard water hissing
in the ballast tanks.  The Nautilus began to sink on a vertical line,
because its propeller was in check and no longer furnished
any forward motion.

Some minutes later it stopped at a depth of 833 meters and came
to rest on the seafloor.

The ceiling lights in the lounge then went out, the panels opened,
and through the windows I saw, for a half-mile radius, the sea
brightly lit by the beacon's rays.

I looked to port and saw nothing but the immenseness of
these tranquil waters.

To starboard, a prominent bulge on the sea bottom caught my attention.
You would have thought it was some ruin enshrouded in a crust
of whitened seashells, as if under a mantle of snow.
Carefully examining this mass, I could identify the swollen outlines
of a ship shorn of its masts, which must have sunk bow first.
This casualty certainly dated from some far-off time.
To be so caked with the limestone of these waters, this wreckage
must have spent many a year on the ocean floor.

What ship was this?  Why had the Nautilus come to visit its grave?
Was it something other than a maritime accident that had dragged
this craft under the waters?

I wasn't sure what to think, but next to me I heard Captain Nemo's
voice slowly say:

"Originally this ship was christened the Marseillais.  It carried
seventy-four cannons and was launched in 1762.  On August 13,
1778, commanded by La Poype-Vertrieux, it fought valiantly
against the Preston.  On July 4, 1779, as a member of the squadron
under Admiral d'Estaing, it assisted in the capture of the island
of Grenada.  On September 5, 1781, under the Count de Grasse,
it took part in the Battle of Chesapeake Bay.  In 1794 the new Republic
of France changed the name of this ship.  On April 16 of that same year,
it joined the squadron at Brest under Rear Admiral Villaret de Joyeuse,
who was entrusted with escorting a convoy of wheat coming from
America under the command of Admiral Van Stabel.  In this second
year of the French Revolutionary Calendar, on the 11th and 12th
days in the Month of Pasture, this squadron fought an encounter
with English vessels.  Sir, today is June 1, 1868, or the 13th
day in the Month of Pasture.  Seventy-four years ago to the day,
at this very spot in latitude 47 degrees 24' and longitude 17 degrees
28', this ship sank after a heroic battle; its three masts gone,
water in its hold, a third of its crew out of action, it preferred
to go to the bottom with its 356 seamen rather than surrender;
and with its flag nailed up on the afterdeck, it disappeared beneath
the waves to shouts of 'Long live the Republic!'"

"This is the Avenger!" I exclaimed.

"Yes, sir!  The Avenger!  A splendid name!"  Captain Nemo murmured,
crossing his arms.







CHAPTER 21

A Mass Execution


THE WAY HE SAID THIS, the unexpectedness of this scene, first the
biography of this patriotic ship, then the excitement with which this
eccentric individual pronounced these last words--the name Avenger
whose significance could not escape me--all this, taken together,
had a profound impact on my mind.  My eyes never left the captain.
Hands outstretched toward the sea, he contemplated the proud
wreck with blazing eyes.  Perhaps I would never learn who he was,
where he came from or where he was heading, but more and more I
could see a distinction between the man and the scientist.
It was no ordinary misanthropy that kept Captain Nemo and his companions
sequestered inside the Nautilus's plating, but a hate so monstrous
or so sublime that the passing years could never weaken it.

Did this hate also hunger for vengeance?  Time would soon tell.

Meanwhile the Nautilus rose slowly to the surface of the sea, and I
watched the Avenger's murky shape disappearing little by little.
Soon a gentle rolling told me that we were afloat in the open air.

Just then a hollow explosion was audible.  I looked at the captain.
The captain did not stir.

"Captain?"  I said.

He didn't reply.

I left him and climbed onto the platform.  Conseil and the Canadian
were already there.

"What caused that explosion?"  I asked.

"A cannon going off," Ned Land replied.

I stared in the direction of the ship I had spotted.  It was heading
toward the Nautilus, and you could tell it had put on steam.
Six miles separated it from us.

"What sort of craft is it, Ned?"

"From its rigging and its low masts," the Canadian replied,
"I bet it's a warship.  Here's hoping it pulls up and sinks this
damned Nautilus!"

"Ned my friend," Conseil replied, "what harm could it do
the Nautilus?  Will it attack us under the waves?  Will it cannonade
us at the bottom of the sea?"

"Tell me, Ned," I asked, "can you make out the nationality
of that craft?"

Creasing his brow, lowering his lids, and puckering the corners
of his eyes, the Canadian focused the full power of his gaze on
the ship for a short while.

"No, sir," he replied.  "I can't make out what nation it's from.
It's flying no flag.  But I'll swear it's a warship, because there's
a long pennant streaming from the peak of its mainmast."

For a quarter of an hour, we continued to watch the craft bearing
down on us.  But it was inconceivable to me that it had discovered
the Nautilus at such a distance, still less that it knew what this
underwater machine really was.

Soon the Canadian announced that the craft was a big battleship,
a double-decker ironclad complete with ram.  Dark, dense smoke
burst from its two funnels.  Its furled sails merged with the lines
of its yardarms.  The gaff of its fore-and-aft sail flew no flag.
Its distance still kept us from distinguishing the colors of its pennant,
which was fluttering like a thin ribbon.

It was coming on fast.  If Captain Nemo let it approach, a chance
for salvation might be available to us.

"Sir," Ned Land told me, "if that boat gets within a mile of us,
I'm jumping overboard, and I suggest you follow suit."

I didn't reply to the Canadian's proposition but kept watching
the ship, which was looming larger on the horizon.  Whether it
was English, French, American, or Russian, it would surely welcome
us aboard if we could just get to it.

"Master may recall," Conseil then said, "that we have some experience
with swimming.  He can rely on me to tow him to that vessel,
if he's agreeable to going with our friend Ned."

Before I could reply, white smoke streamed from the battleship's bow.
Then, a few seconds later, the waters splashed astern of the Nautilus,
disturbed by the fall of a heavy object.  Soon after, an explosion
struck my ears.

"What's this?  They're firing at us!"  I exclaimed.

"Good lads!" the Canadian muttered.

"That means they don't see us as castaways clinging to some wreckage!"

"With all due respect to master--gracious!"  Conseil put in,
shaking off the water that had sprayed over him from another shell.
"With all due respect to master, they've discovered the narwhale
and they're cannonading the same."

"But it must be clear to them," I exclaimed, "that they're dealing
with human beings."

"Maybe that's why!"  Ned Land replied, staring hard at me.
