     Darrow, I prefer the artist Gould, to Wesso, for interior
     illustrations, though Wesso is best for mechanical
     illustrations. Incidentally, give us the name of the artist
     for each story, especially when the illustrations are
     unsigned, as in the April issue. Wesso's best cover for you
     has been that for April, illustrating "Monsters of Moyen."
     It shows his best style very well.

     As to my favorite type of Science Fiction, any kind, if well
     written, will do. As it happens, the king of authors, A.
     Merritt, has a type all his own, as Mr. Bryant notes, which
     is unbeatable, and my favorite. However, at times, a good
     writer may fall down in his fundamental assumptions. I don't
     care where or how far he goes, so long as he starts with
     something that present-day science does not deny. Here is
     where "The Soul Master" fell down, and, even more so, "The
     Soul Snatcher." Better leave souls and astrals and egos
     alone, except in very, very rare cases, when an author turns
     up who can make you believe in them as mechanical entities.

     As a Science Fiction fan, a student of chemistry, and a
     hopeful author, I will probably write to "The Readers'
     Corner" as often as I want to blow off steam regarding
     science or fiction or the way in which you are running the
     magazine. I hope I won't be considered an utter nuisance,
     and will be given a trial by jury--a jury of readers.--P.
     Schuyler Miller, 302 So. Ten Broeck St., Scotia, New York.


"_Handy to Hold_"

     Dear Editor:

     I wish to say that I have the seven numbers of Astounding
     Stories that have been issued thus far and I have read them
     through ever word. It is wonderful, and there is no word of
     fault to be uttered concerning any of them. I think "Murder
     Madness" is the best story you have printed so far, but they
     are all good in different ways.

     You received some letters that surprise me. How anyone can
     ask you to change the make-up to the blanket sheet form is
     more than I can see. It is so handy to hold and to read as
     it is now. I do hope you will not change it.

     No, there is so much that one wants to read these days that
     I do not advocate issuing twice a month. One issue each
     month is just right. But I do wish you would increase the
     number of pages to at least the number in Five Novels
     magazine. Of course, you would want 25c. for it then, and
     that is all right.

     Am glad that you refuse to give us reprints. We do not want
     them.

     Astounding Stories is a gem, and I hope to read it for the
     remainder of my life. Keep right on with the good
     work.--Will S. Cushing, 21 Cottage St., Abington,
     Massachusetts.


_We Hope So, Too_!

     Dear Editor:

     Your July issue of Astounding Stories was wonderful. Your
     magazine is improving greatly. "Murder Madness" is a great
     story, and "Earth, the Marauder," is one of the best stories
     I have ever read. I hope the other parts of it are just as
     interesting as the first part.--Mick Scotts, 115 W. 16th
     Ave., Gary, Indiana.


_Another Sequel_

     Dear Editor:

     Well, I have so much to say, or rather would like to say for
     your magazine. I like it in every detail but one, which is
     waiting a whole month for the rest of my stories.

     I wish you would give us the third sequel of "Out of the
     Ocean's Depths." Let the young scientist discover a way to
     perform matrimony between the girl of the ocean and the man,
     and then let their child live either in or out of water.
     There could be two more good stories or sequels of "Out of
     the Ocean's Depths." I like them all.

     I liked "Murder Madness," too. It seems as though it is
     really real, and not fiction. I wish you would get the book
     out twice a month.--Mrs. B. R. Woods, Cotte, Arkansas.


_From Author to Author_

     Dear Editor:

     Since Astounding Stories began you have published a goodly
     number of really remarkable stories, chief among which, in
     my estimation, are the following: "Spawn of the Stars," by
     C. W. Diffin; "Brigands of the Moon," by Ray Cummings;
     "Monsters of Moyen," by Arthur J. Burks; "The Atom Smasher,"
     by Victor Rousseau; and "The Moon Master," C. W. Diffin.

     But none of these can compare with Diffin's last short
     story, "The Power and the Glory," which appeared in the last
     (July) issue. For originality of theme, clever phraseology
     and excellent literary craftsmanship it stands alone--a
     little masterpiece. Its author should be congratulated.

     To the best of my knowledge, Mr. Diffin is a newcomer in
     Science Fiction. The first story of his that I read was
     "Spawn of the Stars." Keep his pen busy, Mr. Editor; he's
     valuable--an' I don't mean maybe!

     If I could write a story like "The Power and the Glory," I'd
     certainly congratulate myself!--L. A. Eshbach, 225 Chestnut
     St., Reading, Pa.


"_Held Me Spellbound_"

     Dear Editor:

     I happened to read one of your books the other
     day--Astounding Stories is the one--and I was very much
     taken up with it. I found that it was a very interesting
     book, indeed. I have no fear in saying that it held me
     spellbound from the start till the finish. The one that I
     happened to buy was the issue of May, 1930, and the story
     that gripped me most was "Brigands of the Moon." It was very
     thrilling, indeed, and I am very sorry I could not obtain
     the previous copies so as to start at the beginning. But,
     however, I am able to obtain a copy every month and am very
     pleased, as I would hate to miss a copy again.

     Well, I hope this letter will reach you safely. Remember me
     as a contented reader of your magazine.--Geo. Young, 447
     Canning St., Nth. Carlton N. 4, Melbourne, Australia.


_We Are Printing It_!

     Dear Editor:

     It seems that you have taken a wrong slant on my letter
     which you published recently. True, I did give you a long
     list of stories which I wanted to see, but I didn't mean
     that you should publish only reprints, no new stories. Far
     from it. Instead, I'd suggest that you give us a classic,
     say, every six months. This arrangement ought to be okay
     with everyone. That's that for reprints.

     About the stories and the authors, they're all right.
     There's one thing that I like about you that I don't find in
     the other Science Fiction magazines. With the very first
     issue you started off with the authors that are wanted by
     everyone who reads this type of literature. You began with
     Cummings, Rousseau, Meek and Leinster. Hm-m, let's see. And
     you're keeping up the good system by having added Vincent,
     Starzl, Burks, Curry, Miss Lorraine, Hamilton, etc. But you
     don't escape entirely unscathed, for the other magazines
     give us stories from authors which haven't as yet written a
     story which appeared in your columns. Let's see; besides the
     stars above, let's add to the galaxy Keller (three cheers),
     Breuer, Smith (his story, "The Skylark of Space," ought to
     have about six sequels), the late Mr. Serviss, Verrill, Poe,
     Wells, Verne, Flint (o-o-oh, for that "Blind Spot"), Hall,
     England, Hasta (one story by him is all I've read, but it
     only whetted my appetite), and Simmons. Oh, yes, the two
     Taines, the detective of Dr. Keller's and the author. But
     there's something missing. Hm-m--ah, A. Merritt! What a
     writer! How could I have forgotten him? Which reminds me of
     Burroughs who has been left out in the rain for quite a
     while. He belongs back in the fold.

     Mr. Editor, do you remember way back when you said we should
     write in to you to tell you of the stories we want and that
     you would get them for us? Of course, you do. Stories and
     authors cannot be parted, so get those authors I've listed
     above and forget about the stories, for they'll all be good.

     I do not kick about any particular author for the reason
     that if I tried to write on the same subject they picked out
     and are picking, my work would be pretty different from what
     they'd produce, and their works would be the ones that would
     be published. Please don't read that twice; I hope to be a
     contributor very soon.

     In my opinion you should enlarge the size of the magazine,
     but for heaven's sake don't increase the departments. Every
     day that we read a paper we learn of what science is doing.
     And, at the end of the month we read the same thing in a
     magazine which should give us a story instead. The price is
     just right. But, even if the magazine were enlarged and the
     price boosted to a quarter, do you really think that we get
     enough material to devour? No! Then what? Get out a
     Quarterly! And please don't wait about that for the next ten
     years.

     This is a pretty lengthy letter and I don't expect you to
     print it but I want you to get the views of at least one
     devoted reader--Isidore Mansen, 544 Myrtle Ave., Brooklyn,
     N. Y.


_Every Single One_

     Dear Editor:

     I certainly received a pleasant surprise when I glanced at
     the table of contents for the August issue. When one sees
     Victor Rousseau, R. F. Starzl, Murray Leinster, Harl
     Vincent, and Edmond Hamilton, one knows that the issue is
     bound to be a good one. I wish to congratulate you on the
     way you have been running Astounding Stories. If you intend
     to keep giving us the authors you are now, throughout your
     whole career, you are a law-breaker. What I mean by that is
     that no other magazine has kept a high grade of authors very
     long. The old magazines on the market have once had stories
     by the authors you are giving us now, but they never kept
     those authors long. If you keep the authors you have now you
     may well be assured of success.

     "Silver Dome" undoubtedly copped the prize for this issue.
     It could not have been better. "The Lord of Space" was a
     very good story. "The Planet of Dread" was another very good
     story. "The Second Satellite," by Hamilton, was excellent.
     For once in his life Hamilton has written a story that has
     not the same old plot all his other stories have! I wish to
     congratulate him on the best story he has ever written! "The
     Flying City" was the same thing all over again. The world in
     danger and suddenly our magnificent hero comes along, takes
     a hand, and presto the danger is all over. Of course, he has
     to meet the beautiful girl and fall in love with her, and at
     the end of the story marry her! Remember, history repeats
     itself. Have you ever heard of the world being saved by one
     man? No! Neither have I. The world will never be saved by
     one man. Therefore, all those stories are "the bunk."
     "Murder Madness" was wonderful. I expect to see it in the
     talkies before long. It could be filmed easily enough,
     couldn't it! I know it certainly would make a wonderful
     picture. I expect to see you publish "Murder Madness" and
     "Brigands of the Moon" in book form. If you do, I will try
     my darnedest to get a copy. Also in my list of good authors
     up there I forgot to mention Arthur J. Burks.

     Now I wish to broach the subject of a Quarterly to you. I
     think Astounding Stories should have one. Every other
     Science Fiction magazine has, so let us have one, too. Won't
     you? You can give us over twice as much as you do in the
     monthly and charge about 50c. a copy. Have one good book and
     several short stories in each issue; no serials. How about
     it?

     And now let's talk a little about Astounding Stories! Why
     not cut the paper smooth, the way you do in Five Novels
     Monthly? It would make the magazine look a lot better. It
     would also be a lot easier to find one's place when one has
     to lay the book down for a moment. The last reason may sound
     trivial, but it's really annoying to try to find one's place
     among those bulky pages. The paper you use now gives the
     magazine an inferior appearance when compared to others of
     its kind. It certainly would be a relief to see you use
     better paper. Won't you please consider the points I have
     brought out in my letter?--Gabriel Kirschner, Box 301,
     Temple, Texas.


"_What Authors_!"

     Dear Editor:

     Astounding Stories is improving with every issue. However,
     you would have to go far to beat the August issue. It can
     be called an "all star" number. What authors! Hamilton,
     Rousseau, Starzl, Burks, and others, all of whom are among
     my favorite authors. The stories were so good that it is
     almost impossible to pick out the best one. However, after
     some thought I have finally chosen Hamilton's "The Second
     Satellite." "Earth, the Marauder," is a close second. I hope
     you have many more stories by Edmond Hamilton.

     I see that the cover is the first one to be of a different
     color. Please have a new color each month.

     There are a few ways in which Astounding Stories may be
     improved. Enough of the readers have mentioned improving the
     quality of the paper so that I do not have to comment on
     this. An editorial each month would improve the magazine
     greatly.

     Here's hoping that Astounding Stories becomes a semi-monthly
     soon--very soon--Michael Fogaris, 157 Fourth St., Passiac,
     N. J.


_Stands Pat_

     Dear Editor:

     I have been a reader of your magazine for some time. I hope
     to continue reading it in the future.

     I notice in "The Readers' Corner" that some want reprints.
     Others want the size of the magazine changed. I say, give us
     "fresh" stories and leave the size of the magazine alone.

     In my opinion, the best stories in your July issue were
     "Beyond the Heaviside Layer" and "Earth, the Marauder." They
     were both fine. Keep up the good work--Carlson Abernathy, P.
     O. Box 584, Clearwater, Florida.


"_The Readers' Corner_"

All Readers are extended a sincere and cordial invitation to "come
over in 'The Readers' Corner'" and join in our monthly discussion of
stories, authors, scientific principles and possibilities--everything
that's of common interest in connection with our Astounding Stories.

Although from time to time the Editor may make a comment or so, this
is a department primarily for Readers, and we want you to make full
use of it. Likes, dislikes, criticisms, explanations, roses,
brickbats, suggestions--everything's welcome here; so "come over in
'The Readers-Corner'" and discuss it with all of us!

--_The Editor._

       *       *       *       *       *







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Astounding Stories of Super-Science,
November, 1930, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTOUNDING STORIES, NOVEMBER 1930 ***

