     What prompted me to write this letter was an article, "A
     Robot Chemist," published in your March, 1931, issue. In the
     article it states that a mechanical robot performed several
     experiments without human supervision. But, I am sorry to
     say, I disagree. Nothing is automatic. Foolishly, after
     perfecting anything that performs its work afterwards by
     itself, man calls it an automaton. But it is not! Did he not
     have to work and slave hour after hour, day after day and
     month after month to perfect it? He did! Ever since man
     became civilized he has deceived himself by calling, for
     instance, machinery in a factory, automatons. The quest for
     automatic machinery is as hopeless as the quest for
     perpetual motion!

     What is my idea of an automaton? Well, take a robot for
     instance. Man calls it an automaton in spite of the fact
     that he had to slave to put it together before it did its
     work.

     My idea is this: the iron ore would come out itself, smelt
     itself, form itself in the various shapes and parts needed
     to construct a robot, then take its correct place and rivet
     itself. Then the radio brain, electrical eyes and magnet
     hands take their place; and when it has constructed itself
     it will conduct the experiments--if a chemical
     robot--without human supervision. Thus, the latter clause
     would be true! That's my conception of an automatic robot!
     Otherwise, its just some metal doing the bidding of a
     master's brain.

     Another thing: the novelette "Beyond the Vanishing Point,"
     by Ray Cummings, is preposterous. The flesh might shrink or
     grow, but the bone would not! If one shrunk as did George
     Randolph, one's bones would burst through the flesh.

     But in spite of all that, I like the stories that way.
     Science, in the years to come might discover how to shrink
     or grow both flesh and bones. I guess I'm taking too much of
     your time, so adios!--Jay Zee, Chicago, Illinois.


_Hot Times in the Fire-House_

     Dear Editor:

     The first Thursday in each month I make a bee-line for the
     newsstand--and Astounding Stories. It may interest you to
     know that I have every issue on file that you have put out.

     There have been some mighty good yarns in those issues, but
     the one just at hand contains the best story you have ever
     published--"Terrors Unseen," by Harl Vincent. There's an
     author for you; but evidently I don't have to tell you so,
     as you have given us quite a number of his splendid stories.
     "Vagabonds of Space" was a wow. Like some of the others who
     have written in, I would like to see a sequel to this. Harl
     Vincent is my favorite of all your authors.

     A close second is Charles W. Diffin. He is good, too. As
     your authors appeal to me, in order, I mean. I would line
     them up in this way: Harl Vincent, Charles W. Diffin, R. F.
     Starzl, Ray Cummings, Capt. S. P. Meek, Jack Williamson and
     Murray Leinster.

     I agree with Jim Nicholson of San Francisco that you should
     give us some stories by Francis Flagg. Here is an author you
     never have published, and, to my way of looking at things,
     he has more fresh material than most of the authors put
     together. Many of the things that have been copied widely
     and used extensively (I don't mean that whole stories have
     been stolen, or anything like that) were originated by this
     fine writer. By all means get Francis Flagg. [We have just
     bought a story--a good one--from him!--Ed]. He would stand
     about third in my list if you had used his work before. I
     made it up from those whose work has been used.

     Two or three things I notice, that I would have you correct.
     All your stories seem to be of standardized length, either
     around 10,000 words or 25,000 words. Eliminate all
     restrictions as to word length but make your writers boil
     down their work. Most stories are too long, and could be
     told better if cut down quite a bit. The paper and the page
     size of the magazine are okay, but why not smooth edges? And
     it is hard to keep the covers on. I wouldn't object to more
     pages or an extra nickel in price. Or if not that, how about
     publishing "our" magazine twice a month?

     After fighting a fire, there's nothing like Astounding
     Stories with which to "unlax." You're doing a fine job, and
     I only make these suggestions because I want a "perfect"
     magazine instead of one that bats 97% all the time. Hope
     you'll have room for all this. And, oh yes, keep on with
     your program of "No reprints." Your new yarns are better
     than the old ones. Let's have the new ones, and encourage
     our fine string of authors to do even better work.--Gayl
     Whitman, Fireman, Co. No. 11, Main at 22nd, Columbus, Ohio.


_Correspondents Wanted_

     Dear Editor:

     Another critic is going to take his pen in hand and give you
     a bouquet. I have just finished reading the March issue of
     A. S. and think it was fine.

     Of all the stories you have published I liked "The Gray
     Plague" the best. I don't care much for reprints because I
     like new stories the best.

     I would like to correspond with some of the Readers of A. S.
     I will answer any or all letters I receive.--L. B. Knutson,
     629--3rd Ave., So, Minneapolis, Minn.


_A Heroine a la Mode_

     Dear Editor:

     I'm with J. H. Nicholson, who advises those who are
     indifferent to the scientifically possible in order to give
     the author a broader field in which to lay his plot. As he
     says, they should feel right at home with their noses stuck
     into a volume of Anderson's Fairy Tales. However, this
     letter is more to express the science lovers' viewpoint than
     to sling mud at the authors. For us, the plot loses much of
     its kick if the science is not reasonable.

     Suppose for once that one of these Readers who waives
     scientific possibility aside as secondary should pick up a
     plot-distorted story in which the heroine should be
     described something as follows:

     "Hers was a tall superbly built figure combining the
     strength of a horse with the gentle curves of a hippo. When
     she spoke, her sweetly modulated voice was as pleasant to
     the ear as the bray of a Spanish jackass. Her hair hung to
     her waist and was the convenient nesting place for several
     English sparrows. She was slightly cockeyed from birth and
     had had her nose squashed in a saloon brawl. She carried
     herself with the graceful dignity of an African orang-utan
     and was always much sought after, having a quaint habit of
     slapping every new male she met a resounding whack on the
     back that loosened their bridge work. Being a veteran
     tobacco chewer and having high blood pressure she could spit
     one hundred feet against a fifty-mile wind. When she ate in
     company, she had an amusing way of gargling her soup in
     G-flat. Her--"

     It's unnecessary to go further. Such a character would be
     every bit as reasonably possible as some of the science
     these science-conniving Readers are willing to sanction.

     Here are some of the seemingly impossible feats of a recent
     story: 1--a diver in an ordinary diving dress is able to
     stand the pressure at three miles down; 2--(granting the
     above is possible) a diver shoots up three miles without
     stopping and still does not become a victim of the bends;
     3--(granting the above two possible) a diver after shooting
     from such a great depth and pressure to a depth of
     comparatively low pressure would not be able to lower the
     pressure inside his dress, since it would be held so rigid
     that he would not be able to bend his arms; 4--a man or
     animal suddenly released from the enormous pressure of about
     three hundred tons to the square inch to atmospheric
     pressure, it seems, would most certainly burst before the
     internal pressure could equalize itself.

     Please notice that I said seemingly wrong. I'm for A. S.
     just one hundred per cent and would prefer to have it as
     right as possible. I don't like crank letter writing and
     would never have written this now if it hadn't been for
     several of the letters in the March issue that gave me a
     touch of hades under the collar. S'long. Maybe I'll write
     again sometime when I get some more "ham science"
     ideas.--William S. Lotsch, 1 Morrison Ave., Troy, N. Y.


_You Make Them Adequate_

     Dear Editor:

     Thanks. Of course I accept your invitation to "The Readers'
     Corner." I have been a constant Reader of your magazine
     since its appearance on the Science Fiction horizon, and I
     have yet to meet a story that I failed to read in its
     entirety or that I didn't like.

     To merely write a letter and say that this story was good,
     the other story was fair, and oh my! how poor the third
     story was, is futile. But as it is the usual custom to do so
     here goes:

     Excellent stories--all of the first five volumes; good
     stories--who's interested?; poor stories--where are they?;
     good authors--takes up too much room and time; poor
     authors--got tired looking for them.

     All I want to say is, Astounding Stories is the best or one
     of the best magazines on the market. Gee, but aren't words
     futile when you describe something great and
     wonderful!--Herbert Goodket, 707 Jackson Avenue, New York,
     N. Y.


_Ain't It Too Awful!_

     Dear Editor:

     I knew it. It was bound to come. At last my efforts have
     been rewarded. Fame has sought me out--even in Brooklyn. It
     was suggested in the March issue of Astounding Stories that
     I, Louis Wentzler, as one of the active contributors to "The
     Readers' Corner," regale your Readers with a description of
     myself, my interest in Science Fiction and how I got that
     way. A picture was also requested, but this had better be
     omitted. As for my personal history, bend an ear:

     At the tender age of four, while making mud pies on the
     doorstep of my home, I was beaned by a brick hurled by an
     uncouth ruffian across the street. The results were not
     fatal--who said "unfortunately?"--but from that moment I
     developed a taste for Science Fiction. Had it not been for
     that incident I might have grown up a normal lad; but the
     caress of that brick on my cranium did things to me, and I
     have been a Science Fiction addict since.

     Of course, I do not contend that all Science Fiction fans
     were hit by bricks, though a lot of them should be. I do
     believe, however, that a slight concussion of the brain
     helps one appreciate Science Fiction the more. Anyway, once
     imbued with the urge I took to Science Fiction like a Hindu
     to hashish. Such stories were rare in those days, but I
     started to collect all I could find.

     Then came the war. I was too young to fight, but I did my
     bit making canteens out of old sieves. That was how my mind
     worked, you see. Well, the war ended--I forgot who won--and
     I went back to my beloved Science Fiction. Years have passed
     since then, and I have a fine collection of stories now.
     Should any of you care to see them, come around to the local
     booby-hatch some time: you'll find me in Padded Cell No.
     17.--Louis Wentzler, 1935 Woodbine St., Brooklyn, N. Y.


_Hurrah!_

     Dear Editor:

     Except for a brief letter of criticism in the August, 1930,
     number of Astounding Stories, I have been a silent but loyal
     follower of the magazine since its first issue. My silence
     was that of profound satisfaction. Almost all the stories
     suited me to perfection; and the few I did not like were
     hardly worth commenting on. Since the magazine has grown
     better with every issue I would probably have kept my peace;
     but there is one disturbing factor which impels me to write
     again.

     I refer to the irresponsible outbursts of certain ----
     [censored] who squeeze into "The Readers' Corner" and
     sputter out senseless denunciations of the magazine, its
     appearance, its policies, and so on. I do not object to
     logical, well-founded criticism, but I most decidedly do
     object to the ---- [censored] remarks and invidious
     comparisons indulged in by various ---- [censored] Readers.
     It's about time someone told them where to head in, and, by
     your leave, I'll do it.

     The most recent offender is J. Vernon Shea, Jr., a
     Pittsburgh lad of eighteen who, in the March issue, ventures
     to criticize the grammar of Ray Cummings, call the Editor
     harsh names, and demand that the magazine conform to his own
     dizzy notions. He concedes that Astounding Stories prints
     consistently interesting tales, but charges that the Editor
     is indifferent to "the advancement of Science Fiction." Mr.
     Shea, can't you see that the publication of first-class
     stories, as in this magazine, is the best possible way to
     popularize Science Fiction? Or do you simply prefer inferior
     stuff?

     Then there's D. R. Guthrie, from way back in Idaho, who
     liked a yarn in another magazine so much he had to tell us
     all about it--as if we didn't have the best Science Fiction
     ever written right here in Astounding Stories. Guthrie's
     another who seems to prefer brass to gold.

     Going back an issue or two, we note a letter from Edwin
     Magnuson, a deluded denizen of Duluth, who says he's plumb
     disgusted because Astounding Stories receives far more
     bouquets than brickbats, when according to him the mag
     deserves to be panned plenty. Get in step, Edwin, you're
     falling way behind!

     And I mustn't forget M. Clifford Johnston of the Newark
     Johnstons, who calls Astounding Stories trash and its
     Readers morons. Well, there are various degrees of mental
     incompetence, and the moron is far above the idiot, Mr.
     Johnston!

     Now that I've taken a few hasty pokes at those who most
     deserved them, I'll give my own comments on some of your
     latest stories--and anyone who feels like telling me where I
     get off is welcome to do so.

     First, let me take my hat off to Jack Williamson. I never
     thought much of his stuff in other mags, but his "The Meteor
     Girl" was a mighty fine piece of work. Evidently you've got
     to be good to crash Astounding Stories. Interesting as it
     was, though, Williamson's yarn contained a noticeable error.
     In the story, the narrator and his friend witness an event
     occurring twelve hours in the future at a distant place.
     They then travel to that place, reaching it at a time
     exactly corresponding to the time of the event witnessed.
     Therefore, they should have seen themselves in the future
     scene--an obvious fact which the author either failed to
     consider or conveniently ignored. [But--by the story, they
     did not arrive at the rock until just AFTER the events they
     witnessed by means of the fourth dimension. Thus, everything
     is O. K. Take another look.--Ed.] Despite this flaw the
     story embodied several original ideas, had plenty of action,
     and was well told. We can stand more of Williamson.

     "Phalanxes of Atlans," by F. V. W. Mason, was a corker. When
     writers of Mason's standing turn to Science Fiction, we fans
     have much to be thankful for. Is there any chance of our
     getting a story by Fred MacIsaac, Theodore Roscoe, or Erle
     Stanley Gardner? All of them are first-class writers, and
     they can handle Science Fiction better than many who have
     specialized in that field. The only other suggestion I can
     offer for improving the magazine is to have additional
     illustrations within the stories, such as Wide World
     Adventures used to have.

     Satisfied as I am with Astounding Stories it will probably
     be a long time before I write again--unless I feel called
     upon to administer a few more verbal spankings to certain
     obstreperous individuals!--Sears Langell, 1214 Boston Road,
     New York, N. Y.


"_The Readers' Corner_"

All Readers are extended a sincere and cordial invitation to "come
over in 'The Readers' Corner'" and join in our monthly discussion of
stories, authors, scientific principles and possibilities--everything
that's of common interest in connection with our Astounding Stories.

Although from time to time the Editor may make a comment or so, this
is a department primarily for Readers, and we want you to make full
use of it. Likes, dislikes, criticisms, explanations, roses,
brickbats, suggestions--everything's welcome here: so "come over in
'The Readers' Corner'" and discuss it with all of us!

_The Editor._

