_A Wesso Fan_

Dear Editor:

Let me congratulate you on the September issue of Astounding Stories.
It is the best issue you have published yet. I noticed in this issue
that you had four illustrations by Wesso. Though that is the most you
have ever had, I think it would be much better if all the
illustrations were by him.

However, getting down to brass tacks, the reason I'm typing this
letter is to ask you to publish an Astounding Stories Quarterly. You
could have it contain twice as much reading material as in the monthly
and charge forty cents a copy for it. It would be much better than a
semi-monthly and I am quite sure it would "go over" big.--Thomas L.
Kratzer, 3593 Tullamore Rd., University Heights, Ohio.


_Bang--Bang--Bang_

Dear Editor:

I have read the August Astounding Stories and greatly enjoyed the
fiction, but "The Readers' Corner" gave me a good deal of amusement.
Some of your readers take their fiction so seriously!

Take the "Brick or Two" from George L. Williams and Harry Heillisan,
for instance. They want Astounding Stories filled with material from
authors that appear in other magazines--because your readers "are used
to the standards set by those publications," etc. And again, "you
should have some one who is well qualified to pass upon the science in
the stories." For the love of Pete, if people want scientific
treatises, why don't they buy books and magazines dealing with the
subject? There are many on the market--serious and dull enough for
anyone. But for our fiction magazines, let's have it pure and
unadulterated, the more improbably the better.

What possible difference does it make if, in a story, the moon has a
crater every ten feet, or the black sky of outer space were blazing
with moons and aurora borealises, or the sun were in a double eclipse!

We read stories to be amused, not for technical information, so we
certainly don't want "a scientific editorial in each issue by some
'eminent scientist.'"

As for a department in which readers could write their opinions of the
stories and suggest improvements in the conduct of the magazine, what
else is "The Readers' Corner?"

Why not adopt a tolerant attitude, and instead of howling about petty
faults and mistakes get a good laugh over them? As for telling writers
and editors "how to do it," we would only expose our ignorance and
inability and make ourselves ridiculous.

If we think we could do so much better, let's try it. Write a story
ourselves or start running a magazine!

Astounding Stories is all right as is. We like it "different." We want
different authors from those of other magazines. What is the use of
having various publications if they must all be conducted along
identical lines?

Now for your writers: Mr. R.F. Starzl is easily the best. His story,
"The Planet of Dread," is full of thrills and imagination and clever
situations that are well developed and surmounted. One thing that is
rather remarkable in this class of story, the hero gets himself and
his companion out of every difficulty by his own ingenuity. The story
moves along with interest and thrills in every paragraph, and is
really my ideal of a "super-scientific" yarn; i.e., not stuffed with
tiresome technical data. Let's have more from this interesting
author.--C.E. Bush, Decatur, Ark.


_Assorted Bouquets_

Dear Editor:

Before commenting upon the September issue of your wonderful magazine,
I would like to personally thank Mr. Bates for the kind reply to my
former letter. It shows that at least one editor glanced over my
literary ramblings.

Now for comments on the September issue. I placed the stories in the
following order, which is based upon their merit:

"Marooned Under the Sea"; "Terrible Tentacles of L-472"; "Jetta of the
Lowlands"; "The Attack from Space"; "A Problem in Communication";
"Earth the Marauder," and "The Murder Machine."

Your serials are the best I have ever read in any magazine; your
latest one, "Jetta of the Lowlands," promises to be an A-1
top-notcher.

Your artists, H.W. Wessolowski and J. Fleming Gould, draw the finest
illustrations I have ever seen anywhere.

"The Readers' Corner" is a fine corner which can only be improved by
making it larger.

The stories scheduled for the October issue look good to me. Am glad
to see that Dr. Bird is returning. Will sign off now wishing
Astounding Stories all the luck it deserves.--Edwin Anderson, 1765
Southern Boulevard, Bronx, N.Y.C., N.Y.


_A Request_

Dear Editor:

I thought I would drop you just a line to comment on the authors now
writing for "our" magazine.

Among the best are: R. F. Starzl, Edmond Hamilton, Harl Vincent, Ray
Cummings and Captain S. P. Meek. However, there is one brilliant
author whose fascinating stories have, to date, failed to appear in
our magazine. The man I am referring to is Ed Earl Repp. Please have a
story by him in our magazine as soon as possible.

I am sure other readers will agree with me when I say that Mr. Repp
writes exceedingly thrilling and exciting Science Fiction tales. Let's
see many stories by him in the forthcoming issues of Astounding
Stories.--Forrest J. Ackerman, 530 Staples Avenue, San Francisco,
California.


_Thank You, Mr. Lorenzo_

Dear Editor:

Several Science Fiction magazines will have to struggle along without
my patronage. Why? Because they flew (literally speaking) over my head
with all kinds of science. I want some science, but mostly fiction. I
couldn't understand what they were writing about, so I lost interest.
I can read a single copy of a good magazine from cover to cover in one
day, but let me lose interest in it by having too much dry matter and
I just don't buy that book again.

Your magazine is the best of all Science Fiction magazines, which
means that I can read and understand the tales in Astounding Stories.
So you get my trade. You're trying your best to supply me with
interesting stories so if there is an occasional dry story (to me), I
just remember one thing: you, as Editor, are a human being like
myself; so, neither one of us being perfect, I just forgive and go on
buying.--Jas Lorenzo, 644 Hanover St., San Francisco, Cal.


_Suggestions_

Dear Editor:

"Earth, the Marauder," by Arthur J. Burks, gets four stars. It is one
of the most astounding stories I have ever read. I hope you have more
stories by Arthur J. Burks on schedule for early issues. "Jetta of the
Lowlands," by Ray Cummings, "Marooned Under the Sea," by Paul Ernst (a
sequel soon, I hope). "The Terrible Tentacles of L-472," by S.P.
Wright and "The Attack from Space," by S.P. Meek (let's have another
sequel), all get three stars. I hope that S.P. Wright will write more
stories of strange planets.

I think that your serials should all be book-length novels with the
installments from thirty-five to fifty pages in length. Don't publish
novelettes (thirty to sixty-five pages) as serials.

In your August issue you mention that you may some day publish
Astounding Stories twice a month. I would rather have you increase the
price to twenty-five cents, give us as much material as Five Novels
Monthly, and smooth cut edges.

Wesso's cover illustrations are improving each month. I am glad to see
more of his illustrations inside.

Since so many readers ask for reprints, why not give us an occasional
one?--Jack Darrow, 4225 N. Spaulding Ave., Chicago, Illinois.


"_A Flop_"

Dear Editor:

I have read Astounding Stories since its first issue, and I am
convinced that it is without a peer in the field of Science Fiction.
This preeminence is due to the fact that the magazine regularly
contains the work of the best contemporary writers of scientific
fantasy, such as Cummings, Rousseau, Leinster, Burks and Hamilton.

Certain readers, unaccustomed to such rich fare, ask for stories by
lesser lights. For a time these requests went unheeded; but of late it
seems they are getting results--more's the pity.

Your September issue contained a story called "A Problem in
Communication" by Miles J. Breuer, M.D. Now, the good doctor may be a
"wow" in other magazines, but his stuff is not up to the standard of
Astounding Stories. His initial effort in this magazine was dull and
uninspired. It lacked the sustained interest and gripping action of
your other stories. It was, to put it bluntly, a flop.

In spite of this sad example, several readers are still clamoring for
more stuff from the small-timers. If they get their way--which Allah
forbid!--it will mean the downfall of Astounding Stories. Why ruin a
truly great magazine by catering to a misguided minority?--George K.
Addison, 94 Brandt Place, Bronx, New York.


"_No Favorites_"

Dear Editor:

I found your magazine on the newsstand while looking for another kind.
The cover picture looked interesting so I bought Astounding Stories
instead of the other. Since that moment I have been a steady reader.

I can see no way to improve your magazine unless it is to enlarge it
or to publish it oftener. I am satisfied with it as it is. It is the
best magazine on the newsstands now.

I have no favorites among your stories as I like them all equally
well.--Robert L. King, Melbourne, Florida.


_Pride of the Regiment_

Dear Editor:

I have just finished reading the September issue of Astounding Stories
and want to congratulate you on your staff of writers. Although this
is the first copy I have read, I can assure you that it will not be
the last, by any means.

I think the story called "Marooned Under the Sea," by Paul Ernst, a
story that no one could have passed without reading it. The way the
author explains the story to have come to life has really got me
guessing.

The only thing that I regretted was that I didn't get the copies
previous to the story called, "Earth, the Marauder," by Arthur J.
Burks. Please give us more stories by Paul Ernst. (I say us because I
am a soldier, and where you find one soldier you find plenty
soldiers.)

So keep the good work up, as we are looking forward to a good time
when the next issues come around.--Co. "I," 26th Inf. Plattsburgh
Barracks, Plattsburgh, New York.


_Covers Not Too Vivid_

Dear Editor:

I can't help joining the great number of admirers of your wonderful
magazine.

A great many readers ask for interplanetary stories. As for me, I like
any kind, stories of other worlds, under the earth, under the sea, on
other planets, dimensional stories, anything. So far I have not had
the slightest excuse to complain.

When I finish reading a story I write after the title, "good," "very
good," "fair," etc. Then I read the best ones over again while waiting
for the next issue. The following two and the only stories I didn't
like so far are: "The Stolen Mind" and "Creatures of the Light."

One critic stated that he considered the illustrations of Astounding
Stories too vivid. Illustrations for stories such as are contained in
this magazine cannot be too vivid. Readers have plenty of opportunity
to use their imaginations. Many scenes which the authors try to
portray are hard to visualize, and I think that a number of good
illustrations would help the readers enjoy the stories more.

As long as you keep your magazine up to the standard you have set thus
far, I will remain an eager reader.--Sam Castellina, 104 E. Railroad
St. Pittston, Penn.


_Quite True_

Dear Editor:

I have enjoyed every one of your Astounding Stories magazines from the
first.

However, in the story, "The Murder Machine," by Hugh B. Cave, a man,
Sir John Harman, was made to kill a man by meccano-telepathically
projected hypnotic suggestions. Some people think it is entirely
possible to make a man do such a thing by hypnotism, but it is not
possible because no person under hypnotic influence will do anything
that his subconscious mind knows is immoral. Neither a thief nor a
murderer can be made to confess their crime while under hypnotic
influence.

I am merely writing this so that the others who have read the story
will not get the wrong idea of hypnotism. A man under hypnotic
influence can be made to think he is murdering or robbing, but he will
not do it really, no matter how hard the hypnotist tries to make
him.--Henry Booth, 916 Federal St., N. S. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.


"_Paper Correct Kind_"

Dear Editor:

I am a reader of four other Science Fiction magazines but like
Astounding Stories the best for two main reasons. First, the size is
just right, second, the paper is the correct kind. It does not glare
at you when you read.

I have every issue of Astounding Stories since it came out. The
stories are all good and are becoming better each month. I prefer
stories of space traveling and of the fourth dimension.

About reprints, I think that if you want to give reprints, why not
publish them in booklet form. I'm sure many of the readers will prefer
to have reprints that way.--Frank Wogavoda, Water Mill, New York.


_Bouquets_

Dear Editor:

"The Planet of Dread" was a classic in the full meaning of the word.
Not only was the story a masterpiece of fantastic adventure but also
of short story craft. By all means secure more of Mr. Starzl's fine
tales.

Your stories by Ray Cummings are great. It would be a good policy upon
your part to continue to present stories of his at the most not more
than two issues apart.

Continue up to your present standard and you'll continue to stand
above all other Science Fiction magazines where stories of
super-science are concerned, now and forever.--Jerome Siegel, 10622
Kimberley Ave., Cleveland, Ohio.


"_The Readers' Corner_"

All Readers are extended a sincere and cordial invitation to "come
over in 'The Readers' Corner'" and join in our monthly discussion of
stories, authors, scientific principles and possibilities--everything
that's of common interest in connection with our Astounding Stories.

Although from time to time the Editor may make a comment or so, this
is a department primarily for _Readers_, and we want you to make full
use of it. Likes, dislikes, criticisms, explanations, roses,
brickbats, suggestions--everything's welcome here; so "come over in
'The Readers' Corner'" and discuss it will all of us!

                                                   --_The Editor._




                          ASTOUNDING STORIES
                       _Appears on Newsstands_
                   THE FIRST THURSDAY IN EACH MONTH





