     I wish the best of luck for Astounding Stories.--Bill
     Bailey, 1404 Wightman St., Pittsburgh, Pa.


_Come Again_

     Dear Editor:

     Although I have been an interested Reader of Astounding
     Stories since its inception, this is the first time that I
     have written; but "our" magazine has been so good lately
     that I just had to write and compliment you on your good
     work.

     There are just two criticisms I have of Astounding Stories.
     The first is that the binding sometimes comes off; the
     second is the rough edges. I join with many other Readers in
     complaining that uneven edges make it hard to find a certain
     page and also give the mag a cheap looking appearance.

     In my opinion the two best serials you have printed are
     "Brigands of the Moon" and "The Pirate Planet." The four
     best novelettes are: "Marooned Under the Sea," "The
     Fifth-Dimension Catapult," "Beyond the Vanishing Point" and
     "Vagabonds of Space."--Eugene Bray, Campbell, Mo.


_How Simple!_

     Dear Editor:

     Just a few lines to set Mr. Greenfeld right on that question
     of how a man could be disintegrated and then reintegrated as
     two (or more) similar men.

     Briefly, the atomic or molecular structure of the original
     man could serve as a pattern to be set up in the
     reintegrating machine or machines while he is being
     dissolved by the disintegrating machine. Thus, the
     reintegrators could reconstruct any number of similar men by
     following the pattern of his molecular structure and drawing
     on a prearranged supply of the basic elements.

     As for the "soul," that is merely the manifestation of the
     chemical combinations in the man's body, and when said
     chemical combinations are duplicated, the "soul" simply
     follows suit.--Joseph N. Mosleh, 4002 Sixth Ave., Brooklyn,
     N. Y.


_Both in One Issue_

     Dear Editor:

     I think it's about time to let you know what I think of your
     wonderful magazine. Of course, I have my dislikes but they
     are very few. I wish you would make up your magazine larger
     and even the pages up. The best complete novelettes I have
     read were both in the same issue. They were "Monsters of
     Mars," by Edmond Hamilton and "Four Miles Within," by
     Anthony Gilmore. Wesso is by far your best artist. Please
     keep him. All the other Science Fiction magazines have
     quarterlies. Why don't you have one?

     Good-by, and keep Astounding Stories up to its present
     standard.--Frederick Morrison, Long Beach, Calif.


"_Good As Is_"

     Dear Editor:

     I have been reading your mag for about five months and I
     like it very much. I don't see what those guys want a
     quarterly for. This mag is good as it is and there is no use
     to spoil it. Wesso is a swell artist, and the best story I
     read was "The Wall of Death."

     I'd like to get acquainted with some of your Readers. How
     about it, boys?

     I'll sign off.--L. Sloan, Box 101, Onset, Mass.


_Just Imagine!_

     Dear Editor:

     To begin, I am a mechanic more or less skilled in the
     handling of tools. Now, while I have seen many builders with
     tools who were dubbed "spineless," "poor fish," etc., it was
     not because they remotely resembled the piscatorial or
     Crustacea families.

     It seems to me that when an author endows reptiles,
     cuttlefish, etc., with superhuman intelligence, and paints a
     few pictures of them as master-mechanics in the use of
     tools, then I want to take the magazine I am reading, that
     allows such silly slush in its pages, and feed it to my
     billy-goat; he may be able to digest such silliness, but I
     can't!

     However, there is a redeeming feature of this sort of story:
     although not written as comedy, they have a comic effect,
     when one uses his imagination. Imagine, for instance, a
     giant sea crab as a traffic cop! He could direct four
     streams of traffic at once while making a date with the
     sweet young thing whom he had held up for a traffic
     violation! Then think what a great, intelligent reptile,
     crocodile, or what have you, could do in our Prohibition
     Enforcement Service! He could place his armored body across
     the road, and when rum runners bumped into him he could take
     his handy disintegrator and turn their load of white
     lightning back into the original corn patch! And suppose a
     giant, humanly-intelligent centipede should make too much
     whoopee some night, and endeavor to slip upstairs without
     waking the wife. Even if he succeeded in getting off his
     thousand pairs of shoes, which is doubtful, he would have a
     sweet time keeping his myriad of legs under control after
     partaking of some of the tangle-foot dispensed nowadays!

     I hope your Authors will read and heed the delicate sarcasm
     contained in the letter of Robert R. Young in your April
     issue.--Carl F. Morgan, 427 E. Columbia Ave., College Park,
     Ga.


"_Craves Excitement_"

     Dear Editor:

     I have been a silent Reader of your magazine for quite a
     long while, but have finally decided to come forth with my
     own little contribution to "The Readers' Corner." So far I
     have seen only two other women Readers' letters. I suppose
     most women are interested in love stories, though I fail to
     see anything very exciting in any that are written nowadays;
     and I crave excitement in my reading. I've read about most
     everything there is about this old earth, so I've decided to
     wander into new fields.

     Now for a little discussion about Astounding Stories. I
     haven't any brickbats to throw. You seem to get more of them
     than is necessary. I like the size, the price, the cover,
     the illustrator, the authors, etc. Some stories don't
     exactly take my fancy but the average is 100% with me.

     Some that particularly pleased me were "Marooned Under the
     Sea," way back in the September issue, "Jetta of the
     Low-lands" and "Beyond the Vanishing Point." "Gray Denim"
     and "Ape-men of Xloti" in the December issue rite A-1, too.

     I congratulate Ray Cummings on his new story, even though I
     haven't started to read it yet. I always know I'll enjoy his
     work, no matter what it is. Time-traveling is one of my
     special dishes, too.

     Here's a little dig. I'm sorry, I didn't think I'd have any,
     but I just thought of this. It seems to me that I never see
     any stories written by two authors. Of course the stories by
     single authors are O. K., but the particular two I am
     thinking of are Edgar A. Manley and Walter Thode. They wrote
     "The Time Annihilator," as you probably know. That was one
     of the best time-traveling stories I have ever read. I'm
     only sorry that it couldn't have been published by
     Astounding Stories.

     Well, I don't want to make myself tiresome the very first
     time, so I'll sign off. Please excuse the rather
     unconventional stationary, but I'm writing this at the
     office in my spare time. Hope I haven't worn my welcome out,
     but I had so much stored up to say.

     I'm waiting for the April issue, so please hurry it
     up.--Betty Mulharen, 50 E. Philadelphia Ave, Detroit, Mich.


_A Daisy for S. P. Wright_

     Dear Editor:

     Were good old President George Washington himself to travel
     through time to the present and look upon the April issue of
     Astounding Stories, I am certain he would only repeat what I
     say: "Editor, I cannot tell a lie. This is the best issue
     yet!"

     The cover on this issue is unique in that Astounding Stories
     is written in red and white letters. I do not recall of ever
     having seen this done to any Science Fiction magazine
     before. Wesso's illustration leaves nothing to be desired.

     Going straight through the book: "The Monsters of Mars."
     Good old Edmond Hamilton saves the world for us again in the
     very nick of time--and we like it, too! Here's hoping
     there's a million more dangers threatening Terra for Mr.
     Hamilton to save us from! By the way, I wonder who drew the
     illustration for this story? I can't make out his name.
     Next: "The Exile of Time," by Cummings. Exciting and well
     illustrated. "Hell's Dimension" is well-written and very
     interesting. Would have liked it longer. "The World Behind
     the Moon" is splendid. More by Mr. Ernst, please. More from
     Mr. Gilmore, too, because of his novelette, "Four Miles
     Within." "The Lake of Light" by that popular author Jack
     Williamson surpasses his "The Meteor Girl" in a recent issue
     of "our" magazine. And now I come to the last and perhaps
     most interesting story of the issue: Mr. Sewell Peaslee
     Wright's record of the interplanetary adventures of the
     Special Patrol as told by Commander John Hanson. This series
     is unsurpassable in its vivid realness. I can't help but
     believe that these tales really occurred, or will occur in
     the distant future. And Mr. Wright is as expert at
     conceiving new forms of life as Edmond Hamilton is at saving
     our Earth.

     "The Readers' Corner" is an interesting feature, and I am
     glad to hear that "Murder Madness" and "Brigands of the
     Moon" are now in book form.--Forrest J. Ackerman, 530
     Staples Ave., San Francisco, Calif.


_Mass Production_

     Dear Editor:

     After reading Mr. Greenfield's letter in your April issue
     regarding my story, "An Extra Man," I feel that I should
     like to call his attention to a point which, it seems to me,
     he has overlooked, namely, that the reconstructed men were
     not composed of the original physical matter of the
     disintegrated man but of identical elements, all of which
     are at present known and available to science.

     According to the hypothesis, Drayle could have produced as
     many entities as he desired and provided for, just as a
     radio broadcast is reproduced in as many places as are
     prepared for its reception. The vibrations alone are
     transmitted, and the reproduction is the result of a
     reciprocal mechanical action by physical matter at the
     receiving end. Any radio engineer knows that the original
     sound waves are not transported, but merely their impress
     upon the electrical radio wave. So, Drayle's disintegrating
     and sending apparatus only transmitted the vibrations which
     enabled his machines at the receiving end to select from a
     more than adequate supply of raw material, in due proportion
     and quantities, as much as was required for the reproduction
     of the disintegrated entities.

     I think that if Mr. Greenfield will reread the story, noting
     the following references, he will agree that if the
     hypothesis is accepted the conclusion is logical:

     1--It is only Jackson Gee and not Drayle who speaks of
     transmitting the constituent elements by radio (page 120).

     2--The scientist, Drayle, says, (page 129) "We already know
     the elements that make the human body, and we can put them
     together in the their proper proportions and arrangements;
     but we have not been able to introduce the vitalizing spark,
     the key vibrations, to start it going." He does not say that
     tangible matter can be transmitted by radio.

     3--In the account of Drayle's preliminary experiments (page
     122) there is no statement to the effect that the original
     material composing the disintegrated glass was used in its
     recreation.

     4--There is nothing in the story to indicate that the
     original physical composition of the disintegrated man was
     transported, in any manner to any outside location. The
     process of disintegration was necessary to obtain the
     vibrations that would make possible their repetition, which
     under proper conditions would induce a reproduction of the
     original, just as a song must be sung before it can be
     reproduced upon a phonograph disc, but which, once recorded
     can be repeated times without number.

     5--Drayle's question (page 124) "Have you arranged the
     elements?" refers to the elements out of which all mankind
     is composed and which Drayle has previously mentioned (page
     120).

     6--The narrator emphasizes this aspect of the discovery when
     he says, on page 124, "I seemed to see man's (not the man's)
     elementary dust and vapors whirled from great containers
     upward into a stratum of shimmering air and gradually assume
     the outlines of a human form that became first opaque, then
     solid, and then a sentient being." And again (page 126),
     "The best of the race could be multiplied indefinitely and
     man could make man literally out of the dust of the earth."
     This does not imply a split-up of one individual into
     several smaller sizes or fractional parts, but rather the
     production of identical entities exactly as thousands of
     phonograph records can be created from the master matrix.

     7--As to the question of soul, I suggest that inasmuch as
     what we call the soul of an individual is always judged by
     that individual's behavior, and that medical science now
     maintains that behavior is largely dependent upon our
     physical mechanism, it would follow that the identical human
     mechanisms would have identical souls.--Jackson Gee.


"_The Readers' Corner_"

All Readers are extended a sincere and cordial invitation to "come
over in 'The Readers' Corner'" and join in our monthly discussion of
stories, authors, scientific principles and possibilities--everything
that's of common interest in connection with our Astounding Stories.

Although from time to time the Editor may make a comment or so, this
is a department primarily for _Readers_, and we want you to make full
use of it. Likes, dislikes, criticisms, explanations, roses,
brickbats, suggestions--everything's welcome here: so "come over in
'The Readers' Corner'" and discuss it with all of us!

_The Editor._

       *       *       *       *       *






End of Project Gutenberg's Astounding Stories, June, 1931, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTOUNDING STORIES, JUNE, 1931 ***

