when they accepted it on faith; now it is an intellectual conviction
with every last one of them. And one and all look forward to a new and
glorious life beyond the Spot--in the occult world--our world!

"Now, the ticklish part of the job will be to open the Spot just long
enough to permit us to get through, yet prevent the whole Prophecy from
coming to pass. We've got to get through, together with that black case
of mine, and then shut the door in the face of all Thomahlia!"

Nothing more was said on the subject until late the following afternoon,
as the doctor, Harry, and Chick sat down to a light meal. They ate much
as if nothing whatever was in the wind. From where they sat, in one part
of a wing of the temple, they could look out into the crowded streets,
in which were packed untold numbers of pilgrims, all pressing towards
the great square plaza in front of the temple. No guards were to be
seen; the solemnity of the occasion was sufficient to keep order. But
the terrific potentiality of that semi-fanatical host did not cause the
doctor's voice to change one iota.

"There is no telling what may happen," he said. "For my own part I shall
not venture near the Spot of Life until just at the end. I shall remain
in the chamber underneath.

"But you two ought to show yourselves immediately after sundown. Certain
ancient writings indicate it. You, and the Nervina, will have to mount
the stair to the Spot, and remain in sight until midnight--until the
end.

"So we must be prepared for accidents." He took some papers from his
pocket, and selected two, and gave one to each of his pupils. "Here are
the details of what must be done. In case only one of us gets through,
it will be enough."

"But--how can these be of any use, on such short notice?" Harry asked.

"Cudgel your brains a bit, gentlemen," he chided good-humouredly. "You
will soon see my drift. This is one of those occasions when the psychic
elements involved are such that, without doubt, it were best if you
reacted naturally to whatever may happen.

"Now you will note that I have made a drawing of the Blind Spot region;
also certain calculations which will explain themselves.

"Moreover, I have written out the combination to my laboratory safe in
my house in Berkeley. The green stone is there. Bertha will help, as
soon as she understands that it is my wish; no explanation will be
needed.

"You may leave the rest to me, young gentlemen. Act as through you
had no notion that I was down below the Spot. I shall be merely
experimenting a bit with that circle of jewels, to see if the phenomena
which affected the Aradna cannot be repeated. I fancy it was not mere
accident, but rather the working of a 'period.'"

He said no more about this, except to comment that he hoped to get into
direct communication with Hobart Fenton before midnight should arrive.
However, he did say, in an irrelevant sort of manner:

"Oh, by the way--do either of you happen to recall which direction the
house at Chatterton Place faces?"

"North," replied Harry and Chick, almost in the same breath.

"Ah yes. Well, the temple faces south. Can you remember that?"

They thought they could. The rest of the meal was eaten without any
discussion. Just as they arose, however, the doctor observed:

"It may be that Hobart Fenton has got to come through. I wish I
knew more about his mentality; it's largely a question of psychic
influence--the combined, resultant force of the three material gems, and
the three degrees of psychic vibration as put forth by him and you two.
We shall see.

"Something happened today--the Geos told me about it--which may link up
Hobart very definitely. It was about one o'clock when one of the temple
pheasants began to behave very queerly up on the great stair. It had
been walking around on the snow-stone, and flying a bit; then it started
to hop down the steps.

"About sixteen steps down, Geos says the pheasant stopped and began
to flutter frantically, as though some unseen person were holding it.
Suddenly it vanished, and as suddenly reappeared again. It flew off,
unharmed. I can't quite account for it, but--well, we'll see!"

He spoke no more, but led the way out into the entrance to the wing.
There they waited only a moment or two, before the Nervina and her
retinue arrived. Without delay a start was made for the great black
stairway.

The doctor alone remained behind.

There was a guard-lined lane through the crowd, allowing the Nervina and
the rest access to the foot of the steps. Reaching that point she paused
for a look around.

The sun had just gone down; the artificial lights of the temple had not
yet been turned on. Overhead, the great storm-cloud hung portentously,
even more ominous than in the brighter light. The huge waterspout
columns, the terrific size of the auditorium, were none the less
impressive for the incalculable horde that filled every bit of floor
space. At the front of the building the archway gave a glimpse of the
vastly greater throng waiting outside.

But all was quiet, with the silence of reverence and supreme
expectation.

The long flight of stairs was lined on either side, from bottom to
top, with the Rhamdas. On the landing there stood only two of the three
chairs that Chick had seen on the previous occasion. The green one had
been brought down and placed in the centre of an open spot just at the
foot of the stairs.

In this chair sat the Bar Senestro. Deployed about him, at a respectful
distance, was a semi-circle of the Bars, many hundreds in number. Behind
the Bars, separating them from the crowds at their backs, were grouped
the crimson and blue guardsmen. Among them, no doubt, were the Jan Lucar
and the MacPherson, but Chick could locate neither.

The Nervina, taking Harry's arm, ascended the steps. Chick followed,
with the Rhamda Geos at his side. At the top of the flight the Nervina
was escorted to one of the chairs, while Chick placed the Geos in the
other.

It left the two Californians on their feet, to move around to whatever
extent seemed commensurate with dignity. Chick drew Harry aside.

"What do you suppose," said Chick, indicating the handsome, confident
figure in the chair at the base of the stairs--"what do you suppose
friend Senestro is thinking about?"

Harry frowned. "You know him better than I do. You don't think he has
reformed?"

"Not on your life; not the Bar. He's merely adjusted his plans to the
new situation. He sees that the Prophecy is likely to be fulfilled; so,
he counts on being the first to get through, after the Nervina. Then,
whether the rest of the Thomahlia follows or not--he calls himself the
divinely appointed leader now, I understand--he will get through and
marry the two Queens anyhow!"

Perhaps it was because the crowd was so terrifically large. Or, there
may have been something in the destiny of things that would not permit
the chief actors to feel nervous. Certain it is that neither of the two
men experienced the least stage fright. Had they been on display before
a crowd one-tenth the size, anywhere else, both would have been ill at
ease. This was different--enormously so.

No longer was there any circulation in the crowd. People remained in
their places now, just as they expected the end to find them. Chick
and Harry marvelled at their composure, strangely in contrast with
the ceaseless activities of the temple pheasants darting everywhere
overhead.

Suddenly Harry remarked:

"I've got an idea, Chick! It's this: How does the professor expect to
send a message to Hobart?" Chick could not guess.

But already Harry had taken his sheet of instructions from his pocket,
and was rolling it into a compact pellet. Then he went to Queen, and
with a ribbon borrowed from the Nervina, tied the message tightly to the
dog's collar.

"Hobart will be certain to see it," said he. "I wonder if the doctor's
figured it out yet?"

"He's playing with a tremendous force," observed Chick, thoughtfully.
He reached out and touched the snow-stone with his foot, just as he had
done before, and fancied that he could feel that electric thrill even
through the leather of his shoes. "Still, it's worth any risk he may
be taking down in that chamber. If only he could send Queen through!
Hobart--"

He never finished the sentence. He staggered, thrown off his balance by
reason of the fact that he had been resting the weight of one foot on
the stone and--it moved!

Moved--shifted about its axis, just as it had done forty-eight hours
previously, when the Aradna had dropped through.

And Chick had only a flash of a second for a glimpse of the startled
faces of Harry, the Nervina and the Geos, the huge multitude below the
stair, Queen on the other side, and the fateful Prophecy on the walls
above him, before--

A figure came into existence at his side. It was that of a powerfully
built man, on whose wrists were curious red circles. And Chick shouted
in a great voice:

"Hobart!"

And then came blackness.




XLVII

THE LAST LEAF


Watson's story was now completed. During the entire recital his auditors
had spoken scarcely a word. It had been marvellous--almost a revelation.
With the possible exception of Sir Henry Hodges, not one had expected
that it would measure up to this. For the whole thing backed up
Holcomb's original proposition:

"The Occult is concrete."

Certainly, if what Watson had told them was true, then Infinity had been
squared by itself. Not only was there an infinity that we might look up
to through the stars, but there was another just as great, co-existent,
here upon the earth. The occult became not only possible, but unlimited.

The next few minutes would prove whether or not he had told the truth.

It was now close to midnight.

Jerome and General Hume had returned from Berkeley. Their quest had been
successful; Watson now had the missing green stone. A number of soldiers
were stationed about the house. Watson noted these men when he had
finished his account, and said:

"Good. We may need them, although I hope not. Fortunately the Spot is
small, and a few of us can hold it against a good many. What we must do
is to extricate our friends and close it. Afterward we may have time for
more leisurely investigation. But we must remember, above all things,
that black case of Professor Holcomb's! It holds the secrets.

"Now I must ask you all to step out of this room. This library, you
know, is the Blind Spot."

He directed them to take positions along the balustrade of the stairway,
out in the hall--through the wide archway, where they could have a clear
view, yet be safe.

It was a curious test. With nothing but his mathematics and his drawing
to go by, Watson was about to set the three stones in their invisible
sockets. He spread the map out carefully, likewise his calculations;
they gave him, on this floor, the precise positions that he charted
on the earth of the cellar. A glance toward the front of the
house--north--then a little measuring, three chalk-marks on the carpet,
and he was ready for the final move.

He took the fateful ring and with a penknife pried up the prongs that
held the stone. As it popped out he caught it with one hand. Then he
looked at the row of wondering faces along the stair.

"I think it will work," he said. "But, remember--don't come near! I
shall get out as best I can myself; don't try to save me."

With that he held the jewel on the first of the three chalk-marks on the
circumference of the great circle. He held it tight against the carpet
and then let go. Up it flashed about one foot--and disappeared.

There was no sound. Next Watson took the red stone. With it, the process
was inverted. Instead of holding it to the floor he raised it as high as
he could reach, directly above the second mark. Then he let it drop.

It did not reach the floor. It fell a little more than halfway, and
vanished.

The third stone, the green one, was still remaining. Watson took it to
the third and final mark on the circle, taking care to keep outside the
circumference that marked the Spot. This mark was directly in front of
the archway. He turned to them.

"Watch carefully," he spoke. "I do not know what has transpired in the
temple during the past few hours. Be ready for ANYTHING. All of you!"

He dropped the stone.

With the same motion he dodged out into the hall.

Though there was no sound there was something that every one felt--a
sibilant undertone and cold vibration--a tense flash of magnetism. Then
the dot of blue--a string of incandescence; just as had been spoken.

The Blind Spot was opening.

Watson silently warned the others to remain where they were and
himself crowded back against the stair. And as he did so, someone came
noiselessly down the steps from the floor above, passed unnoticed behind
the watchers and thence across into the hall.

It was a slender, frail figure in white--the Aradna, walking like one in
the grip of a higher will. Before they could make a move she had stepped
into the Blind Spot, under the dot of blue, and into a string of light.
And then--she was gone.

It was as swift as a guess. It was inexorable and unseen; and being
unseen, close akin to terror. The group watched and waited, scarcely
breathing. What would happen next?

There came a sudden, jarring click--like the tapping of iron. And next
instant--

The Spot opened to human sight.

The library at 288 Chatterton Place was gone. Instead, the people on
the stairs were gazing down from the Spot of Life, straight into the
colossal Temple of the Jarados.

It was as Chick had described it--immense--beyond conception. Through
the great doors and out into the plaza beyond was gathered all
Thomahlia, reverent, like those waiting for the crack of doom.

Above the horde, high on the opposite wall, stood out the monster Clover
Leaf of the Jarados; three-coloured--blazing like liquid fire; it was
ominous with real life.

At that moment the whole concourse rippled with commotion. Arms were
uplifted; one and all pointed towards the dais. They, too were looking
through the Spot. Then the multitude began to move.

It heaved and surged and rolled toward the centre. The guards were
pressed in upon the Bars, the Bars upon the Rhamda-lined stair. There
was no resisting that flood of humanity. On and up it came, sweeping
everything before it.

Directly in the foreground lay the snow-stone. On its centre stood
the dog Queen, crouching, waiting, bristling. By her side Harry Wendel
crouched on one knee, as if awaiting the signal. Behind him, the
Nervina, supporting the awakening Aradna. And in front of all, the
powerful bulk of Hobart Fenton, standing squarely at the head of the
stair, ready to grapple the first to reach the landing.

But most important of all, there stood the doctor himself. He was at the
Nervina's side; in his hand, the case of priceless data. He was gazing
through the Spot and making a signal of some kind to Watson, whereupon
the latter leaped to the edge of the unseen circle.

Something had gone wrong. The Spot was not fully open. Nothing but sight
could get through.

Yet there was no time for anything. Up the stairs came the Bars, leading
and being pressed forward by the horde. At their head dashed the Bar
Senestro, handsome as Alexander. Hobart stepped forward to meet him, but
the doctor stopped him with a word.

Only a few seconds elapsed between death and salvation. Again Dr.
Holcomb signed to Watson; not a sound came through. Watson hesitated.

The dog Queen shot to her feet. Then the Senestro, out-distancing all
the rest and dodging Hobart, had leaped upon the dais.

Upon the wall across the temple the great Leaf of the Jarados stood out
like sinister fire. It pulsed and vibrated--alive. The top petal--the
blue one--suddenly broke into a seething wave of flame.

Still Watson held back. He could not understand what Holcomb meant.

Queen waited only until the Senestro set foot on the dais. She crouched,
then leaped.

It was done.

With a lightning shift of his nimble feet, the high-tempered Bar
kicked the shepherd in the side. Caught at full leap, she was knocked
completely over and fell upon the snow-stone.

It was the Sacrilege!

Even the Bars beyond the Senestro stopped in horror. The Four-Footed
One--sacred to the Jarados--it was she who had been touched! Had the
Senestro undone all on the Spot of Judgment, What would be the end?

Fenton acted. He caught the Senestro before he could get his balance and
with a mighty heave hurled him over the side of the stair. A second, and
it was over.

Another second was the last. For the great Leaf of the Jarados had
opened.

The green and red stood still; but out of the blue came a dazzling
light, a powerful beam; so brilliant, it seemed solid. It shot across
the whole sweep of the temple and touched the Prophecy. Over the golden
scrolls it traced its marvellous colour, until it came to the lines:

  Beware ye of sacrilege! Lest I take from ye all that I
  have given ye, and the day be postponed--beware ye of
  sacrilege!

For a moment the strange light stood still, so that the checked millions
might read. Then it turned upon the dais.

There it spread, and hovered over the group, until it seemed to work
them together--the Nervina to Harry, the Aradna to Hobart. Not one of
them knew what it was; they obeyed by impulse--it was their destiny; the
Chosen, and the queens.

The light stopped at the foot of Dr. Holcomb. Then the strangest thing
happened.

Out of the light--or rather, from where it bathed the snowstone--came a
man; a man much like Holcomb, bearded and short and kindly.

He was the real Jarados!

Unhesitatingly the professor stepped up beside him. Then followed Hobart
and the Aradna, Harry and the Nervina, and lastly, from the crowd of
Bars, MacPherson. The whole concourse in the temple stopped in awe and
terror.

Only for a second. Then the Jarados and all at his side--were gone.

And upon the snow-stone there stood a sword of living flame.

It stood there for just a breath, exactly where the group had been.

And it was gone.

That was all.

No; not quite all. For when the Blind Spot closed that night at 288
Chatterton Place, there came once more the deep, solemn peal of the Bell
of the Jarados.




XLVIII

THE UNACCOUNTABLE


Were this account merely a work of fiction, it would harmonise things so
as to have no unaccountables in it. As it is, the present writers will
have to make this quite clear:

It is not known why the Rhamda Avec failed to show himself at the
crucial moment. Perhaps he could have changed everything. We can only
surmise; he has not been seen or heard from since.

Which also is true of Mr. Chick Watson. He disappeared immediately after
the closing of the Spot, saying that he was going to Bertha Holcomb's
home. No trace has been found of either to date. Doubtless the reader
has noted advertisement in the papers, appealing to the authorities to
report any one of Watson's description applying for a marriage licence.

As for his two friends, Wendel and Fenton, together with the Aradna and
the Nervina, they and MacPherson and the doctor absolutely vanished from
all the knowledge, either of the Thomahlia or the earth. The Jarados
alone can tell of them.

Mme. Le Fabre, however, feels that she can explain the matter
satisfactorily. Abridged, her theory runs:

"There is but one way to explore the Occult. That way is to die.

"For all that we were so strongly impressed with the reality of
Mr. Watson, I am firmly convinced that he was simply a spirit; that
everything we saw was spirit manifestation.

"Dr. Holcomb and all the rest have simply gone on to another plane. We
