proper motions to the feed arms, S, from lever, K.

23d, The combination with a loom for weaving palm-leaf of mechanism
substantially such as shown and described for stopping the loom, as set
forth.


71,853.--PITMAN COUPLING.--G. W. Clark, Manchester, Ind.

I claim the arrangement of forked pitman, A G G', bolt, H, screw shanked
hook, D, and nuts, F F', or their equivalents, substantially as and for
the purpose set forth.


71,854.--MACHINE FOR MAKING LEVEES.--Ernest Comeaux, Bayou Goula, La.

I claim 1st, The endless apron in combination with the hinged adjustable
frame, K, operating as described for elevating the earth used in making
levees, in the manner and for the purpose set forth.

2d, The combination of the endless apron, F, chains, H, slats, J, and
adjustable supporting-frame, K, and standards, L, as herein described
for the purpose set forth.

3d, The above in combination with the spur-wheels, C and B, and the
endless chain, D, as herein described for the purpose set forth.


72,855.--CONSTRUCTION OF ROOF.--M. De K. Cutts, Richmond, Va.

I claim 1st, A tobacco drying house which is provided with a sectional
hinged roof in combination with frames, A, which support the tobacco
leaves while being dried and cured substantially as described,

2d, The supporting posts, G, in combination with hinged sections, B B',
elevating devices, and supporting frames, constructed and arranged in
such manner that the leaves of tobacco upon said frames can be exposed
to the action of the sun and air at pleasure substantially as described.


71,856.--CAR BRAKE.--Shadrach Davis, Dartmouth, Mass.

I claim a car brake, consisting of the broad connecting bar, C1, which
rests on pivots, F1, working in slots, and has the brake-shoes movable
fixed to it, the whole combined as described, operated by the bar,
I2, and screw rod, H2, and by contact with the wheels as and for the
purposes set forth.


71,857.--FEEDER FOR GRAIN MILL.--Michael Decamp, South Bend, Ind.

I claim 1st, The combination of the device, D, bridge ring-bearing, a b,
feeder, c, and collar, e, substantially as described,

2d, The toothed eccentric, J, in combination with lever, G, and collar,
e, substantially as described.


71,858.--PAINTER'S EASEL.--Paul Deschause, New York city.

I claim 1st, The extensible legs, consisting of the hinged legs, a, and
their extension sliding parts, b, made and arranged substantially as
described.

2d, Also the combination of the legs with the toggle-brace, c c,
substantially as described.

3d, Also, the extensible rest, composed of the fixed part, e, and the
sliding part, d, in combination with the fixed and movable clamps, f g,
substantially as described.


71,859.--GUIDE FOR SAW IN SAW MILLS.--Hiram P. Dillingham, Norwalk,
Ohio.

I claim the plates, A and A', guides, B B', and C and C', the whole
constructed substantially as described, and operating as and for the
purposes set forth.


71,860.--PRODUCING CALCIUM MAGNESIUM LIGHT.--Chas. A. Dresser, New York
city. George A. Dresser, Trustee;

I claim the preparation of dolomite, native or artificial substantially
as and for the purpose described.


71,861.--CALENDAR ATTACHMENT TO INKSTAND.--Sam'l. R. Dummer, New York
city.

I claim 1st, An inkstand, etc., constructed with a series of shoulders
or rests, B, whether one or more and one above another, in combination
with the rings, C, and plate or frame, D, or their respective
equivalents substantially as and for the purpose described.

2d, In combination with the above, the two tubes, H M, and plunger, O,
as herein set forth for the purpose specified.


71,862.--PLANING MACHINE FOR WOOD.--G. B. Durkee and W. H. Murray,
(assignor to themselves and I. T. Safford), Chicago, Ill.

We claim 1st, The employment of two separately adjustable cutter heads
in a single machine, so that the axis of one cutter may be at the angle
of the other at a different angle, and both cutters operating at the
same time upon the same board, substantially as specified.

2d, The crossheads, C, cutter-heads, E, screws, D and G, in combination
with the standards, B, constructed and operating substantially as
specified.


71,863.--SELF-ADJUSTING RELAY MAGNET.--J. M. Fairchild, (assignor to
himself, J. K. Bundy, and J. M. Townsend), New Haven, Ct.

I claim the arrangement of the head, C, combined with the magnet so
as to be self-adjusting in relation to the armature, substantially as
herein set forth.


71,864.--CORN CAKE CUTTER.--Leonard Felker, Tewksbury, Mass.

I claim the rotating cylinder i, with its cutters, i'i', in combination
with the rotating cylinder, f, with the stationary knives, f'f', and
adjustable finishers, g g, when arranged to operate substantially as
described and set

2d, The pressure rotating cylinder, f, with stationary knives, f'f', and
adjustable finishers, g g, substantially as described and set forth.

3d, The clearer, m, in combination with the rotating cutters, i'i', as
described.

4th, The adjustable stands, d d, and lever, p, in combination with the
table, b', and weight, o, when arranged to operate substantially as
described.


71,865.--MEASURING FAUCET.--Elisha Fitzgerald, N. Y. city.

I claim the combination of a four way cock with a receptacle having a
movable partition operated by the water, substantially as described,
for the purpose of limiting and determining the amount of water to be
discharged, as specified.

Also, in combination with the above, the dial and pointer, to indicate
the amount of water discharged, as described.


71,866.--TWEER.--Charles C. Forncrook, Hermitage, N. Y.

I claim the combination of the valve, d, adjustable bridge, g, chamber,
B, and tweer, A, arranged and operating substantially in the manner and
for the purpose set forth.


71,867.--COTTON TIE.--John H. Fraley, New Orleans, La.

I claim the combination of the buckles, A and B, when they are
constructed and united as described, with the ends of hoop iron, when
bent into the form of hooks, as and for the purpose set forth.


71,868.--BRIDGE.--John Glass, George P. Schneider, and William B.
Rezner, Cleveland. Ohio.

We claim, 1st, The tubular flanged sections, A B, as arranged in
combination with the diaphragm, C, for the purpose and in the manner
substantially as set forth.

2d, The tubular arch, as constructed, with sections, A B C, in
combination with the foot block, I, provided with a flange or boss, K,
when arranged in the manner as and for the purpose set forth.


71,869.--OIL CUP.--John H. Gomer, New York city.

I claim the combination of the cap, B, with its screw flange, b, and
case, A, provided with suitable tube, C, in the manner and for the
purpose herein specified.


71,870.--PEAT MACHINE.--George D. Goodrich, Chicago, Ill.

I claim, 1st, The adjustable bearing for the shaft, B, composed of
two or more segments, r, constructed and operating substantially as
described.

2d, The separate troughs, I, located below the tempering mill, when
more than one expelling screw is employed, so as to give each screw a
separate and independent action, substantially as specified.

3d, The cutter or knife, F, for cutting the material into suitable
lengths in a peat machine having a continuous discharge from the
expelling mill, substantially as specified.

4th, Closing the mouth of the die by an adjustable intermittent stop or
knife, when so arranged that the movements can be varied with respect to
the movements of the other operating parts of the machine, substantially
as specified.

5th, The double slotted plate or wheel, K, provided with the sockets, h,
and pins, i, for the purpose of adjusting the movements of the cutter
stop or knife, F, substantially as described.

6th, The combination of the separate troughs, I, expelling screws, H,
and cutter stop, F, with a tempering mill, substantially as specified.


71,871.--RATCHET BED KEY.--William M. Gray, Brooklyn, N. Y.

I claim the bed key constructed and arranged as above described, as a
new article of manufacture.


71,872.--MODE OF PREVENTING THE EXPLOSION OF LAMPS.--Cyrus P. Grosvenor,
McGrawville, N.Y.

I claim the application to lamps or heaters, using coal oils, alcohol,
or other explosive substances, of such a burner as will supply the
vacuum made in the reservoir by the combustion with nitrogen gas, the
burner being constructed as herein described, or in any other form
substantially the same, and which will produce the intended effect.


71,873.--CAR-AXLE BOX.--Joseph Harris, Dorchester, Mass.

I claim, 1st, The roller guides, i, with detached radial joints,
substantially as described.

2d, In combination with the system of rollers and box, g, the
construction of the axle, with its extension, e, and shoulder, d, as and
for the purpose set forth.


71,874.--WASHING MACHINE.--Job H. Haskell (assignor to himself and
Horace Taplin), Lowell, Mass.

I claim the general construction and combination of all the parts,
consisting of the cylinder, G, series of yielding rollers, a, roller
stands, k, spring bars, f, levers or arms, m, spring bar, D, transverse
bar, R, rod, O, and the box, the whole arranged to operate substantially
as and for the purpose set forth.


71,875.--HORSE RAKE.--John V. Hawkey (assignor to himself and Israel T.
Sheffler), Greensburg, Pa.

I claim, 1st, A rake shaft or head, arranged outside of the periphery of
the wheels, projecting laterally beyond them, and so jointed that its
sections can be folded vertically upon the carrying frame without
detaching any of the parts of the rake, substantially as described.

2d, An axially turning rake-shaft, so jointed that its outer sections
can be folded inwards without detaching any of its parts.

3d, The combination of the inner fixed section of the rake shaft with
the outer vertically folding sections, projecting beyond the wheels,
substantially as and for the purpose described.

4th, The combination, substantially as described, with a jointed rake
shaft, of hinges allowing the sections to fold vertically, and a locking
device to hold them rigidly when unfolded.

5th, The arrangement as described, of the top pins, m, on the folding
sections, to secure them in position when folded up.

6th, The combination in a horse rake, of an axially turning folding rake
shaft, with a rock shaft controlled by a handle on the driver's platform
to raise and lower the teeth.

7th, The arrangement, in a horse rake, of an axially turning jointed
rake shaft, mounted on the rear end of the thills, and supported on two
wheels mounted on independent axles.


71,876.--APPARATUS FOR DRAINING SUGAR.--James B. Hill, Allegheny City,
Pa.

I claim the combination and arrangement of the hopper, C, provided with
valve, d, case, B, screen, R, distributing drum, P, distributor, f,
provided with valve, i, scraper, S, chute h, and pipe, t, the whole
being constructed, arranged, and operating substantially in the manner
herein described, and for the purpose set forth.


71,877.--CENTRIFUGAL MACHINE FOR DRAINING SUGAR.--James B. Hill,
Allegheny City, Pa.

I claim the use of a fan when used in combination with the shield,
m, distributor, f, screen, R, case, B, hopper, C, and scraper, S,
constructed, arranged, and operating, substantially in the manner herein
described, and for the purpose set forth.


71,878.--CARD HOLDER.--Samuel L. Hill, Brooklyn, N.Y.

I claim, in combination with a back or support, the use or employment
of any number of strips when the same shall be constructed and combined
substantially as shown for the purpose specified.


71,879.--FISHING LINE SWIVEL.--Martin Hiltz, Gloucester, Mass.

I claim the improved swivel, as made with the screw bolt, D, and the nut
chamber, e, arranged and combined, as explained, with the parts, A B C,
constructed and applied together as specified.


61,880.--IMPLEMENT FOR LIGHTING GAS.--Thomas W. Houchin, Morrisania,
N.Y.

I claim, 1st, Placing a receiver, A, at the lower end of a tube, B, for
the purposes fully described.

2d, The combination of a receiver, A, tubes, B, and wick chamber, C,
when the same shall be constructed substantially as described, for the
purposes set forth.


71,881.--CORN-POPPER.--J. W. Howe, and J. K. Barton, Worcester, Mass.
