
A. Lateral View. B. Plan. C. Section of the boiler room. D. Section of
the cabin.]

Mr. Pictet proposed the problem to himself in a different manner, and as
follows:

Determine by analysis, and verify experimentally, what form of keel will
allow of the quickest and most economical carriage of a given weight of
merchandise on water.

We know that for a given transverse or midship section, the tractive
stress necessary for the progression of the ship is proportional to the
_square_ of the velocity; and the motive power, as a consequence, to the
_cube_ of such velocity.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--Diagram of tractive stresses at different
speeds.]

The _friction_ of water against the polished surfaces of the vessel's
sides has not as yet been directly measured, but some indirect
experiments permit us to consider the resistances due thereto as small.
The entire power expended for the progress of the vessel is, then,
utilized solely in displacing certain masses of water and in giving them
a certain amount of acceleration. The masses of water set in motion
depend upon the surface submerged, and their acceleration depends upon
the speed of the vessel. Mr. Pictet has studied a form of vessel in
which the greatest part possible of the masses of water set in motion
shall be given a vertical acceleration, and the smallest part possible
a horizontal one; and this is the reason why: All those masses of water
which shall receive a vertical acceleration from the keel will tend to
move downward and produce a vertical reaction in an upward direction
applied to the very surface that gives rise to the motion. Such reaction
will have the effect of changing the level of the floating body; of
lifting it while relieving it of a weight exactly equal to the value
of the vertical thrust; and of diminishing the midship section, and,
consequently, the motive power.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.--Diagram of variations in tractive stresses and
tonnage taken as a function of the speed.]

All those masses of water which receive a horizontal acceleration from
the keel run counter, on the contrary, to the propulsive stress, and it
becomes of interest, therefore, to bring them to a minimum. The vertical
stress is limited by the weight of the boat, and, theoretically, with an
infinite degree of speed, the boat would graze the water without being
able to enter it.

The annexed diagram (Fig. 1) shows the form that calculation has led Mr.
Pictet to. The sides of the boat are two planes parallel with its axis,
and perfectly vertical. The keel (properly so called) is formed by
the joining of the two vertical planes. The surface thus formed is a
parabola whose apex is in front, the maximum ordinate behind, and the
concavity directed toward the bottom of the water. The stern is a
vertical plane intersecting at right angles the two lateral faces and
the parabolic curve, which thus terminates in a sharp edge. The prow of
the boat is connected with the apex of the parabola by a curve whose
concavity is directed upward.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.--Diagram of the variations in the power as a
function of the speed.]

When we trace the curve of the tractive stresses in a boat thus
constructed, by putting the speeds in abscisses and the tractive
stresses in ordinates, we obtain a curve (Fig. 2) which shows that the
same tractive stress applied to a boat may give it three different
speeds, M, M', and M'', only two of which, M and M'', are stable.

Experimental verifications of this study have been partially realized
(thanks to the financial aid of a number of persons who are interested
in the question) through the construction of a boat (Fig. 1) by the
Geneva Society for the Construction of Physical Instruments. The vessel
is 20.25 m. in length at the water line, has an everywhere equal width
of 3.9 m., and a length of 16 m. from the stern to the apex of the
parabola of the keel. The bottom of the boat is nearly absolutely flat.
The keel, which is 30 centimeters in width, contains the shaft of the
screw. The boiler, which is designed for running at twelve atmospheres,
furnishes steam to a two cylinder engine, which may be run at will,
either the two cylinders separately, or as a _compound_ engine. The
bronze screw is 1.3 m. in diameter, and has a pitch of 2.5 m. The vessel
has two rudders, one in front for slight speeds, and the other at the
stern. At rest, the total displacement is 52,300 kilogrammes.
This weight far exceeds what was first expected, by reason of the
superthickness given the iron plates of the vertical sides, of the
supplementary cross bracing, and of the superposition of the netting
necessary to resist the flexion of the whole. On another hand,
the tractive stress of the screw, which should reach about 4,000
kilogrammes, has never been able to exceed 1,800, because of the
numerous imperfections in the engine. It became necessary, therefore,
to steady the vessel by having her towed by the _Winkelried_, which was
chartered for such a purpose, to the General Navigation Company. It
became possible to thus carry on observations on speeds up to 27
kilometers per hour.

Fig. 3 shows how the tractive stress varies with each speed in a
theoretic case (dotted curve) in which the stress is proportional to the
square of the speed, in Madame Rothschild's boat, the _Gitana_ (curve
E), and in the Pictet high speed vessel (curve B).

The _Gitana_ was tried with speeds varying between 0 and 4 kilometers.
The corresponding tractive stresses have been reduced to the same
transverse section as in the Pictet model in order to render the
observations comparable. At slight speeds, and up to 19.5 kilometers per
hour, the _Gitana_, which is the sharper, runs easier and requires a
slighter tractive stress. At such a speed there is an equality; but,
beyond this, the Pictet boat presents the greater advantages, and, at a
speed of 27 kilometers, requires a stress about half less than does the
_Gitana_. Such results explain themselves when we reflect that at these
great speeds the _Gitana_ sinks to such a degree that the afterside
planks are at the level of the water, while the Pictet model rises
simultaneously fore and aft, thus considerably diminishing the submerged
section.

With low or moderate speeds there is a perceptible equality between the
theoretic curve and the curve of the fast boat; but, starting from 16
kilometers, the stress diminishes. The greater does the speed become,
the more considerable is the diminution in stress; and, starting from a
certain speed, the rise of the boat is such as to diminish its absolute
tractive stress--a fact of prime importance established by theory and
confirmed by experiment.

The curves in Fig. 4 show the power in horses necessary to effect
progression at different speeds. The curve, A, has reference to an
ordinary boat that preserves its water lines constant, and the curve,
B, to a swift boat of the same tonnage. Up to 16 kilometers, the swift
vessel presents no advantage; but beyond that speed, the advantage
becomes marked, and, at a speed of 27 kilometers, the power to be
expended is no more than half that which corresponds to the same speed
for an ordinary boat.

The water escapes in a thin and even sheet as soon as the tractive
stress exceeds 2,000 kilogrammes; and the intensity and size of
the eddies from the boat sensibly diminish in measure as the speed
increases.

The interesting experiments made by Mr. Pictet seem, then to clearly
establish the fact that the forms deduced by calculation are favorable
to high speeds, and will permit of realizing, in the future, important
saving in the power expended, and, consequently, in the fuel (much less
of which will need to be carried), in order to perform a given passage
within a given length of time. Thus is explained the great interest that
attaches to Mr. Pictet's labors, and the desire that we have to soon be
able to make known the results obtained with such great speeds, not when
the boat is towed, but when its propulsion is effected through its
own helix actuated by its own engine, which, up to the present,
unfortunately, has through its defects been powerless to furnish the
necessary amount of power for the purpose.--_La Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




INITIAL STABILITY INDICATOR FOR SHIPS.


For a vessel with a given displacement, the metacenter and center of
gravity being known, it is easy to lay off in the form of a diagram
its stability or power of righting for any given angle of heel. Such a
diagram is shown in Fig. 3, in which the abscissae are the angles of the
heel, and the ordinates the various lengths of the levers, at the end
of which the whole weight of the vessel is acting to right itself.
The curve may be constructed in the following manner: Having found by
calculation the position of the transverse metacenter, M, for a given
displacement--Figs. 1 and 2--the metacentric height, G M, is then
determined either by calculations, or more correctly by experiment, by
varying the position of weights of known magnitude, or by the stability
indicator itself. Suppose, now, the vessel to be listed over to various
angles of heel--say 20 deg., 40 deg., 60 deg., and 80 deg.--the water
lines will then be A C, D E, F K, and H J respectively, and the centers
of buoyancy, which must be found by calculation, will be B1, B2, B3, and
B4. If lines are drawn from these points at right angles to the water
levels at the respective heels, the righting power of the vessel in each
position is found by taking the perpendicular distances between these
lines and the center of gravity, G. This method of construction is shown
to an enlarged scale in Fig. 2, where G is the center of gravity, B1
Z1, B2 Z2, B3 Z3, and B4 Z4 the lines from centers of buoyancy to water
levels; and G N, G O, and G P the distances showing the righting power
at the angles of 20 deg., 40 deg., and 60 deg. respectively, and which
to any convenient scale are set off as the ordinates in the stability
curve shown in Fig 3.

[Illustration: STABILITY INDICATOR FOR SHIPS. Fig. 1.]

Having obtained the curve, A, in this manner for a given metacentric
height, we will suppose that on the next voyage, with the same
displacement, it is found that, owing to some difference in stowage,
the center of gravity is 6 in. higher than before. The ordinates of the
curve will then be G1 N1 and G1 O1--Fig.2--and the stability curve will
be as at C--Fig. 3--showing that at about 47 deg. all righting power
ceases. Similarly, if the center of gravity is lowered 6 in. on the
same displacement, the curve, B, will be found, and in this manner
comparative diagrams can be constructed giving at a glance the stability
of a vessel for any given draught of water and metacentric height.

[Illustration: STABILITY INDICATOR FOR SHIPS. Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: STABILITY INDICATOR FOR SHIPS. Fig. 3.]

The object of Mr. Alexander Taylor's indicator is to measure and show
by simple inspection the metacentric height under every condition of
loading, and therefore to make known the stability of the vessel. It
consists of a small reservoir, A, Fig. 4, placed at one side of the
ship, in the cabin, or other convenient locality, communicating by a
tube with the glass gauge, B, secured at the opposite side, the whole
being half filled with glycerine, which is the fluid recommended by Mr.
Wm. Denny, though water or any other liquid will answer the purpose.
At one side of the gauge is the circular scale, C, capable of being
revolved round its vertical axis, as well as adjusted up and down, so
as to bring the zero pointer exactly to the top of the fluid when the
vessel is without list. Round the top of the scale, at D, are engraved
four different draughts, and under these are the metacentric heights.
Test tanks of known capacity are placed at each side of the vessel, but
in no way connected with the reservoir or gauge. The metacentric height
is found as follows: The ship being freed from bilge water, the roller
scale is turned round to bring to the front the mark corresponding with
the mean draught of the vessel at the time, and the zero pointer is
placed opposite the surface of the liquid in the gauge. One of the test
tanks being filled with a known weight of water, the vessel is caused
to list, and in consequence the liquid in the tube takes a new position
corresponding with the degree of heel, the disturbance being greater
according as the vessel has been more or less overbalanced. The scale
having previously been properly graduated, the metacentric height for
the draught and state of loading can be at once read off in inches,
while as a check the water can be transferred from the one test tank to
the other, and the metacentric height read off as before, but on the
opposite side of the zero pointer. At the same time the angle of heel is
shown on a second graduated scale, E. Having obtained the metacentric
height, reference to a diagram will at once show the whole range of
stability; and this being ascertained at each loading, the stowage of
the cargo can be so adjusted as to avoid excessive stiffness in the one
hand and dangerous tenderness on the other. It will thus be seen that
Mr. Taylor's invention promises to be of great practical value both in
the hands of the ship-builder and ship-owner, who have now an instrument
placed before them, by the proper use of which all danger from
unskillful loading can be entirely avoided.--_The Engineer_.

[Illustration: STABILITY INDICATOR FOR SHIPS. Fig. 4.]

       *       *       *       *       *




SCRIVANOW'S CHLORIDE OF SILVER PILE.


Considerable attention has been attracted lately at Paris among those
who are interested in electrical novelties to a chloride of silver
pile invented by Mr. Scrivanow. The experiments to which it has been
submitted are, in some respects, sufficiently extraordinary to cause us
to make them known to our readers, along with the inventor's description
of the apparatus.

Mr. Scrivanow's intention appears to be to apply this pile to the
lighting of apartments, and even to the running of small motors, and,
for the purpose of actuating sewing machines, he has already constructed
a small model whose external dimensions are 160 x 100 x 90 millimeters.

"My invention," says the inventor, "is intended as an electric pile
capable of regeneration. The annexed Fig. 1 shows a vertical arrangement
of the apparatus, and Fig. 2 a horizontal one. In the latter, two
elements are represented superposed.

"My pile consists of a prism of retort carbon (a) covered on every side
with pure chloride of silver (b). The carbon thus prepared is immersed
in a solution of hydrate of potassium (KHO) or of hydrate of sodium
(NaHO), marking 1.30 to 1.45 by the Baume areometer, the solvent being
water.

"In the vicinity of the carbon is arranged the plate to be attacked--a
plate of zinc (c) of good quality. The surface of the electrodes, and
their distance apart, depends upon the effects that it is desired to
obtain, and is determined in accordance with the well known principles
of electro-kinetics.

"The chemical reactions that take place in this couple are multiple.
In contact with a sufficiently concentrated solution of hydrate of
potassium or sodium, the chloride of silver, especially if it has been
recently prepared, passes partially into the state of brown or black
oxide, so that the carbon becomes covered, after remaining sufficiently
long in the exciting liquid, with a mixture of chloride and oxide of
silver. When the circuit is closed, the chloride becomes reduced to a
spongy metallic state and adheres to the surface of the carbon. At the
same time the zinc passes, in the alkaline solution, into a state of
chloride and of soluble combination of zinc oxide and of alkali.

"To avoid all loss of silver I cover the carbon with asbestos paper, or
with cloth of the same material, d. My piles are arranged in ebonite
vessels, A, which are flat, as in Fig. 1, or round, as in Fig. 2.

"In Fig 1 there is seen, at e, gutta-percha separating the zinc from the
carbon at the base.

"Under such conditions, we obtain a powerful couple that possesses an
electro-motive power of 1.5 to 1.8 volts, according to the concentration
of the exciting liquid. The internal resistance is extremely feeble. I
have obtained with piles arranged like those shown in the figures nearly
0.06 ohm, the measurements having been taken from a newly charged pile.

"When the element is used up, and, notably, when all the chloride of
silver is reduced, it is only necessary to plunge the carbon with its
asbestos covering (after washing it in water) into a chloridizing bath,
in order to bring back the metallic silver that invests the carbon to a
state of chloride, and thus restore the pile to its primitive energy.
After this the carbon is washed and put back into the exciting liquid.

"These reductions of the chloride of silver during the operation of the
pile can be reproduced _ad infinitum_, since they are accompanied by no
loss of metal. The alkaline liquid is sufficient in quantity for two
successive charges of the couple.

"The chloridizing bath consists of 100 parts of acetic acid, 5 to 6
parts, by weight, of hydrochloric acid, and about 30 parts of water.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--SCRIVANOW'S CHLORIDE OF SILVER PILE.]

"Other acids may be employed equally as well. A bath composed of
chlorochromate of potassium and nitric or sulphuric acid makes an
excellent regenerator.

"To sum up, I claim as the distinctive characters of my pile:

"1. The use of the potassic or sodic alkaline liquid conjointly with
chloride of silver, and the oxide of the same, that forms through the
immersion of the carbon in a chloridizing bath.

"2. The use of retort or other carbon covered with the salt of silver
above specified.

"3. The arrangement and construction of my pile as I have described."

In the experiments recently tried with Mr. Scrivanow's pile, a large
sized battery was made use of, whose dimensions were 300 x 145 x 125
millimeters, and whose weight was from 5 to 6 kilogrammes. The results
were: intensity, 1 ampere; electro-motive power, 25 volts, corresponding
to an energy of 25 volt-amperes, or about 2.5 kilogrammeters per second.
The pile was covered with a copper jacket whose upper parts supported
two Swan lamps. Upon putting on the cover a contact was formed with the
electrodes, and it was possible by means of a commutator key with three
eccentrics to light or extinguish one of the lamps or both at once.
A single element would have sufficed to keep one Swan lamp of feeble
resistance lighted for 20 hours. Accepting the data given above and
the 20 hours' uninterrupted duration of the pile's operation the power
furnished by this large model is equal to 2.5 x 20 x 3,600 = 180,000
kilogrammeters.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--SCRIVANOW'S CHLORIDE OF SILVER PILE.]

In our opinion, Mr. Scrivanow's pile is not adapted for industrial use
because of the expense of the silver and the frequent manipulations it
requires, but it has the advantage, however, of possessing, along with
its small size and little weight, a disposable energy of from 150,000
to 200,000 kilogrammeters utilizable at the will of the consumer and
securing to him a certain number of applications, either for lighting or
the production of power. It appears to us to be specially destined to
become a rival to the bichromate of potash pile for actuating electric
motors applied to the directing of balloons.--_Revue Industrielle_.

       *       *       *       *       *




ON THE LUMINOSITY OF FLAME.


The light emitted from burning gases which burn with bright flame is
known to be a secondary phenomenon. It is the solid, or even liquid,
constituents separated out by the high temperature of combustion, and
rendered incandescent, that emit the light rays. Gases, on the other
hand, which produce no glowing solid or liquid particles during
combustion burn throughout with a weakly luminous flame of bluish or
other color, according to the kind of gas. Now, it is common to say,
merely, in explanation of this luminosity, that the gas highly heated in
combustion is self-incandescent. This explanation, however, has not been
experimentally confirmed. Dr Werner Siemens was, therefore, led recently
to investigate whether highly-heated pure gases really emit light.

The temperature employed in such experiments should, to be decisive,
be higher than those produced by luminous combustion. The author had
recourse to the regenerative furnace used by his brother, Friedrich, in
Dresden, in manufacture of hard glass. This stands in a separate room
which at night can be made perfectly dark. The furnace has, in the
middle of its longer sides, two opposite apertures, allowing free vision
through. It can be easily heated to the melting temperature of steel,
which is between 1,500 deg. and 2,000 deg. C. Before the furnace apertures were
placed a series of smoke blackened screens with central openings, which
enabled one to look through without receiving, on the eye, rays from the
furnace walls. If, now, all air exchange was prevented in the furnace,
and all light excluded from the room, it was found that not the least
light came to the eye from the highly-heated air in the furnace. For
success of the experiment, it was necessary to avoid any combustion in
the furnace, and to wait until the furnace-air was as free from dust as
possible. Any flame in the furnace (even when it did not reach into the
line of sight), and the least quantity of dust in it, illuminated the
field of vision.

As a result of these experiments, Dr. Siemens considers that the view
hitherto held, that highly-heated gases are self-luminous, is not
correct. In the furnace were the products of the previous combustion
and atmospheric air: consequently oxygen, nitrogen, carbonic acid, and
aqueous vapor. If even one of these gases was self-luminous, the field
of vision must have been always illuminated. The weak light given by
the flame of burning gases that separate out no solid nor liquid
constituents cannot, therefore, be explained as a phenomenon of glow of
the gaseous products.

It appealed to the author probable, that heated gases did not, either,
emit heat rays; and he set himself to test this idea, experimenting, in
company with Herr Froehlich, in Dresden. They first convinced themselves
in this case that the light emission of pure heated gases sunk to zero,
even when the field of vision was not always quite dark, and it was
only possible to observe this a short time; but the repeatedly observed
perfect darkness of the field of vision was demonstrative. On the other
hand, experiments made with sensitive thermopiles, in order to settle
the question of emission of heat-rays from highly-heated gases, failed.

Afterward, however, Dr. Siemens was convinced, by a quite simple
experiment of a different kind, that his supposition was erroneous. An
ordinary lamp, with circular wick, and short glass cylinder, was wholly
screened with a board, and a thermopile was so placed that its axis lay
somewhat higher than the edge of the board. As the room-walls had pretty
much a uniform temperature, the deflection of the galvanometer was but
slight, when the tube-axis of the thermopile was directed anywhere
outside of the hot-air current rising from the flame. When, however, the
axis was directed to this current, a deflection occurred, which was as
great as that from the luminous flame itself. That the heat radiation
from hot gases is but very small in comparison with that from equally
hot solid bodies, was shown by the large deflection produced when a
