been better and more profitable if manufacturers had moderated their
aspirations, and aimed at greater simplicity of design; for it must
be remembered that cyclists are, as a rule, without the slightest
mechanical knowledge, while the machines themselves are subject to very
hard usage and considerable wear and tear in traveling over the
ordinary roads in this country. We refer, of course, more especially to
tricycles, which in one form or another are fast taking the place of
bicycles, and which promise to assume an important position in every
day locomotion. Hitherto one of the chief objections to the use of the
tricycle has been the great difficulty experienced in climbing hills, a
very slight ascent being sufficient to tax the powers of the rider to
such an extent as to induce if not compel him in most instances to
dismount and wheel his machine along by hand until more favorable ground
is reached. To obviate this inconvenience many makers have introduced
some arrangement of gearing speeds of two powers giving the necessary
variation for traveling up hill and on the level. We noticed, however,
one machine at the exhibition which seemed to give all that could be
desired without any gearing or chains at all. This was a direct action
tricycle shown by the National Cycle Company, of Coventry, in which the
pressure from the foot is made to bear directly upon the main axle, and
so transmitted without loss to the driving wheels on each side, the
position of the rider being arranged so that just sufficient load is
allowed to fall on the back wheel as to obtain certainty in steerage.
The weight of this machine is much less than when gearing is used, and
the friction is also considerably reduced, trials with the dynamometer
having shown that on a level, smooth road, a pull of 1 lb. readily
moved it, while with a rider in the seat 4 lb. was sufficient. On this
tricycle any ordinary hill can, it is stated, be ascended with great
ease, and as a proof of its power it was exhibited at the Stanley show
climbing over a piece of wood 8 in. high, without any momentum whatever.
We understand that at the works at Coventry a flight of stairs has been
erected, and that no difficulty is experienced in ascending them on one
of these machines.--_The Engineer_.

       *       *       *       *       *




SUBMARINE EXPLORATIONS.

VOYAGE OF THE TALISMAN.


It was but a few years ago that the idea was prevalent that the seas at
great depths were immense solitudes where life exhibited itself under no
form, and where an eternal night reigned. To-day, thanks to expeditions
undertaken for the purpose of exploring the abysses of the ocean, we
know that life manifests itself abundantly over the bottom, and that
at a depth of five and six thousand meters light is distributed by
innumerable phosphorescent animals. Different nations have endeavored to
rival each other in the effort to effect these important discoveries,
and several scientific missions have been sent to different points of
the globe by the English and American governments. The French likewise
have entered with enthusiasm upon this new line of research, and for
four consecutive years, thanks to the devoted aid of the ministry of the
marine, savants have been enabled to take passage in government vessels
that were especially arranged for making submarine explorations.

[Illustration: THE FRENCH SCIENTIFIC STEAMER TALISMAN.]

The first French exploration, which was an experimental trip, was made
in 1880 by the Travailleur in the Gulf of Gascogne. Its unhoped
for results had so great an importance that the following year the
government decided to continue its researches, and the Travailleur was
again put at the disposal of Mr. Alph. Milne Edwards and the commission
over which he presided. Mr. Edwards traversed the Gulf of Gascogne,
visited the coast of Portugal, crossed the Strait of Gibraltar, and
explored a great portion of the Mediterranean. In 1882 the same vessel
undertook a third mission to the Atlantic Ocean, and as far as to the
Canary Islands. The Travailleur, however, being a side-wheel advice-boat
designed for doing service at the port of Rochefort, presented none
of those qualities that are requisite for performing voyages that are
necessarily of long duration. The quantity of coal that could be stored
away in her bunkers was consumed in a week, and, after that, she could
not sail far from the points where it was possible for her to coal up
again. So after her return Mr. Edwards made a request for a ship that
was larger, a good sailer, and that was capable of carrying with it a
sufficient supply of fuel for remaining a long time at sea, and that
was adapted to submarine researches. The Commission indorsed this
application, and the Minister of Instruction received it and transmitted
it to Admiral Jaureguiberry--the Minister of the Marine--who at once
gave orders that the Talisman should be fitted up and put in commission
for the new dredging expedition. This vessel, under command of Captain
Parfait, who the preceding year had occupied the same position on the
Travailleur, left the port of Rochefort on the 1st of June, 1883, having
on board Mr. Milne Edwards and the scientific commission that had been
appointed by the Minister of Public Instruction. The Talisman explored
the coasts of Portugal and Morocco, visited the Canary and Cape Verd
Islands, traversed the Sea of Sargasso, and, after a stay of some time
at the Azores, returned to France, after exploring on its way the Gulf
of Gascogne (Fig.).

[Illustration: FIG.1.--CHART OF THE TALISMAN'S VOYAGE.]

The magnificent collections in natural history that were collected
on this cruise, and during those of preceding years made by the
Travailleur, are, in a few days, to be exhibited at the Museum of
Natural History. We think we shall be doing a service to the readers of
this journal, in giving them some details as to the organization of the
Talisman expedition as well as to the manner in which the dredgings were
performed.

[Illustration: FIG.2.--PLAN OF THE VESSEL.]

The vessel, as shown by her plan in Fig. 2, had to undergo important
alterations for the cruise that she was to undertake. Her deck was
almost completely freed from artillery, since this would have encumbered
her too much. Immediately behind the bridge, in the center of the
vessel, there were placed two windlasses, one, A, to the right, and the
other, B, to the left (Fig. 2). These machines, whose mode of operation
will be explained further along, were to serve for raising and lowering
the fishing apparatus. A little further back there were constructed
two cabins, G and HH. The first of these was designed to serve as a
laboratory, and the second was arranged as quarters for the members of
the mission.

The sounding apparatus, the Brothergood engine for actuating it, and the
electric light apparatus were placed upon the bridge. The operating
of the sounding line and of the electric light was therefore entirely
independent of that of the dredges. On the foremast, at a height of
about two meters, there was placed a crane, F, which was capable of
moving according to a horizontal plane. Its apex, as may be seen from
the plan of the boat, was capable of projecting beyond the sides of the
ship, to the left and right. To this apex was fixed a pulley over which
ran the cable that supported the dredges or bag-nets, which latter were
thus carried over the boat's sides.

[Illustration: FIG.3.--DIAGRAM OF THE THIBAUDIER SOUNDING APPARATUS.]

The preliminary operation in every submarine exploration consists in
exactly determining the depth of the sea immediately beneath the vessel.
To effect this object different sounding apparatus have been proposed.
As the trials that were made of these had shown that each of them
possessed quite grave defects, Mr. Thibaudier, an engineer of the navy,
installed on board the Talisman last year a new sounding apparatus which
had been constructed according to directions of his and which have given
results that are marvelous. The apparatus automatically registers the
number of meters of wire that is paid out, and as soon as the sounding
lead touches bottom, it at once stops of itself. This apparatus is shown
in Fig. 4, and a diagram of it is given in Fig. 3, so that its operation
may be better understood. The Thibaudier sounding apparatus consists of
a pulley, P (Fig. 3), over which is wound 10,000 meters of steel wire
one millimeter in diameter. From this pulley, the wire runs over a
pulley, B, exactly one meter in circumference; from thence it runs to a
carriage, A, which is movable along wooden shears, runs up over a fixed
pulley, K, and reaches the sounding lead, S, after traversing a guide,
g, where there is a small sheave upon which it can bear, whatever be the
inclination of the boat. The wheel, B, carries upon its axle an endless
screw that sets in motion two toothed wheels that indicate the number
of revolutions that it is making. One of these marks the units and the
other the hundredths (Fig. 5). This last is graduated up to 10,000
meters. As every revolution of the wheel, B, corresponds to one meter,
the number indicated by the counter represents the depth. Upon the axle
of the winding pulley there is a break pulley, p. The brake, f, is
maneuvered by a lever, L, at whose extremity there is a cord, C, which
is made fast to the carriage, A. When, during the motions due to
rolling, the tension of the steel wire that supports the lead diminishes
or increases, the carriage slightly rises or falls, and, during these
motions, acts more or less upon the brake and consequently regulates the
velocity with which the wire unwinds. When the lead touches bottom, the
wire, being suddenly relieved from all weight (which is sometimes as
much as 70 kilos), instantly stops.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--GENERAL VIEW OF THE SOUNDING APPARATUS IN THE
"TALISMAN:"]

The maneuver of this apparatus may be readily understood. The apparatus
and its weights are arranged in the interior of the vessel. A man bears
upon the lever, L (Fig. 3), and the counter is set at zero. All being
thus arranged, the man lets go of the break, and the unwinding then
proceeds until the lead has touched bottom. During the operation of
sounding, the boat is kept immovable by means of its engine, so that the
wire shall remain as vertical as possible. The bottom being reached, the
unwinding suddenly ceases, and there is nothing further to do but read
the indication given by the differential counter, this giving the depth.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--APPARATUS FOR MEASURING THE LENGTH OF THE WIRE
PAID OUT.]

Near the winding pulley, there is a small auxiliary engine, M, which
is then geared with the axle of the said pulley, and which raises the
sounding apparatus that has been freed from its weight by a method that
will be described further along.

We have endeavored in Fig. 4 to show the aspect of the bridge at the
moment when a sounding was about being made. From this engraving (made
from a photograph) our readers may obtain a clear idea of the Thibaudier
sounding apparatus, and understand how the wheel over which the wire
runs is set in motion by the Brothergood engine.--_La Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




CABLE GRAPNEL.


Some improvements have recently been made by Mr. Alexander Glegg and the
inventor in the well-known Jamieson grapnel used for raising submerged
submarine cables. The chief feature of the grapnel is that the flukes,
being jointed at the socket, bend back against a spring when they catch
a rock, until the grapnel clears the obstruction, but allow the cable
to run home to the crutch between the fluke and base, as shown in the
figures. In the older form the cable was liable to get jammed, and cut
between the fixed toe or fluke and the longer fluke jointed into it.
This is now avoided by embracing the short fluke within the longer one.
The shank, formerly screwed into the boss, is now pushed through and
kept up against the collar of the boss, by the volute spring, which at
the same time presses back the hinged flukes after being displaced by
a rock. The shank can now freely swivel round, whereas before it was
rigidly fixed. The toes or flukes are now made of soft cast steel, which
can be straightened if bent, and the boss is made of cast steel or
gun-metal.

[Illustration: JAMIESON'S GRAPNEL.]

       *       *       *       *       *




WRETCHED BOILERMAKING.


_To the Editor of the Scientific American_:

As long as I have been a reader of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN I have been
pleased with the manner in which you investigate and explain the cause
of any boiler explosion which comes to your knowledge; and I have
rejoiced when you heaped merited censure upon the fraudulent
boilermaker. In your paper in December last you copied a short article
on "Conscience in Boilermaking," in which the writer, after speaking
of the tricks of the boilermaker in using thinner iron for the center
sheets than for the others, and in "upsetting" the edges of the plates
to make them appear thicker, goes on to say: "We call attention to this,
because the discovery of such practice has made serious trouble between
the boilermaker and the steam user. We would not believe that there were
men so blind to the duties and obligations which rest upon them as
to resort to such practice, but the careful inspector finds all such
defects, and in time we come to know whose work is carefully and
honestly done, and whose is open to suspicion. In States and cities
where inspection laws are in force that give the methods and rules by
which the safe working pressure of a boiler is calculated, there is no
alternative except to follow the rules; and if certain requirements
regarding construction are a part of the law, there is no authority or
right to depart from it, and yet there are boilermakers who try to force
their boilers into such localities when their work is not up to the
requirements of the law."

Now, if some boilermakers are so dishonest as to try and impose upon the
locomotive engineer, who they know will carefully examine every part of
his boiler, and who is able to detect any flaw, it is not to be expected
that the farmer will escape. Nor does he. The great number of explosions
of boilers used in thrashing and in other farm work proves that there
are boilermakers who "force their boilers into such localities
when their work is not up to the requirements of the law." And the
boilermaker, if he be dishonest, is doubly tempted if the broad width of
a continent intervenes between him and the farmer for whom his work is
intended, and if in the place where the boiler is to be used there are
no inspection laws in force. The farmer who lives many miles from a
city, and who has no means of testing any boiler he may purchase,
is wholly at the mercy of the boilermaker, and must run it until it
explodes or time proves it to have been honestly made. Then, again,
there are boilermakers who, although making boilers of good iron and of
the proper thickness, finish them off so badly that the farmer is put to
great inconvenience and expense to put them in working order. Two years
ago I purchased a straw-burning engine and boiler made by an Eastern
firm. Before it had run ten days the boiler began to leak at the
saddle-bolt holes. The engineer tightened the nuts as far as possible,
but could not stop the leaks, which at last became so bad that we had to
stop work and take the engine to the shop. Upon taking off the saddle
and taking out the bolts it was discovered that they were too small for
the holes in the boiler, and that they had been wrapped with candle wick
and white lead to make them fill the holes, and that a light washer had
been put on each bolt between the head and the inside of the boiler.
This washer kept the lead in its place, and prevented the boiler from
showing a leak when first fired up. The water pipes in the fire-box soon
gave out and became utterly useless. Upon inquiring of the patentee of
this straw-burning device, who was supposed to have put it in my boiler,
he stated that he had had nothing to do with it, but that it was put in
by the firm selling these engines, and "as cheaply as possible." Before
I got this boiler and engine in fair running order I had spent hundreds
of dollars and had to do entirely away with the water grates.

Last summer, needing another tharshing engine, I was induced to buy
one of the same make as my old one, but with a different straw-burning
device. The firm who sold it to me agreed that it should have none of
the faults of the old one. Well, I got it, and, upon hauling it out to
my ranch, and getting up steam, I found it to be much worse than the
first one I had bought. The boiler leaked at nearly every hole where
a tap had been screwed into it. It took an engineer, a boilermaker, a
blacksmith, and a fireman several days to get it in shape so that we
could use it at all; and after we did start up, the boilermaker had
to be sent for several times to stop new leaks that were continually
showing themselves.

I send you by this mail for your inspection one of the saddle bolts and
one of the bolts taken out of the piston, and also the certificates of
the engineer, boilermaker, and machinist who repaired the boiler. In
justice to my fellow-farmers I ought to publish these certificates and
the names of these boilermakers to the world, but, for the present at
least, I refrain from so doing. These boilermakers will see this article
and they will know, if the public does not, for whom it is intended. If
it has the effect of making them exercise more care in the construction
and fitting up of their engines and boilers, I have not written in vain.

D. FREEMAN.

Los Angeles, Cal., March 7,1884.

[The two bolts and the certificates above referred to accompany the
letter of Mr. Freeman. We can only wonder how it was that, after having
been treated as he relates in the first instance, he should have had any
further business with parties who would send out such boilers, for the
testimony of the engineer and workmen make the case even stronger than
Mr. Freeman has put it.--ED.]

       *       *       *       *       *




A THREADED SET COLLAR.


There are cases where a long screw must be rotated with a traversing nut
or other threaded piece traveling on its thread a limited and variable
distance. At one time the threaded nut or piece may be required to
go almost the entire length of the screw, and at another time a much
shorter traverse would be required. In many instances the use of side
check nuts is inconvenient, and in some it is impossible. One way of
utilizing the nut as a set collar is to drill through its side for a set
screw, place it on its screw, pour a little melted Babbitt metal, or
drop a short, cold plug of it into the hole, tap the hole, and the tap
will force the Babbitt into the threads.

Insert the set screw, and when it acts on the Babbitt metal it will
force it with great friction on to the thread without injuring the
thread; and when the set screw tension is released, the nut turns
freely. A similar and perhaps a better result may be obtained by
slotting the hole through the nut as though for the reception of a key.
Secure a key (preferably of the same material as the nut) by slight
upsetting at its ends, and then thread the nut, key, and all. Place
a set screw through the nut over the threaded key, and the job is
complete.

       *       *       *       *       *




PNEUMATIC MALTING.


The lethargy in the malting trade, and in all matters relating to
malting processes, induced by two centuries of restrictive legislation,
is being gradually shaken off by the malting industry under the new law.
For many years nearly all improvements in malting processes originated
abroad, as numberless Acts of Parliament fettered every process and the
use of every implement requisite in a malt-house in this country. The
entire removal of these legislative restrictions gives an opportunity
for improved processes, which promises to open up a considerable
field for engineering work, and to develop a very backward art by the
application of scientific principles. The present time is, therefore,
one of more material change than malting has ever experienced.

[Illustration: PNEUMATIC MALTING AT TROYES. Fig. 1.]

Of the numerous improvements effected in the past few years, those made
by M. Galland in France, and more recently by M. Saladin, are by far the
most prominent. M. Galland originated what is known as the pneumatic
system eight or nine years ago. This system is carried out at the
Maxeville brewery, near Nancy.

[Illustration: PNEUMATIC MALTING AT TROYES. Fig. 2.]

Since that time further improvements have been made by M. Galland; but
more recently great advances have been made in the system by M.
Saladin. He has developed the practice of the leading principle, and in
conjunction with Mr. H. Stopes, of London, has added improved kilns and
various mechanical apparatus for performing the work previously done by
hand. He has also devised a very ingenious machine for cooling the moist
air by which the process is carried on.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--ECHANGEUR AND TURNING MACHINE.]

At the recent Brewery Exhibition, some of the machinery used in these
new maltings was shown in action by Messrs. H. Stopes & Co., together
with drawings of a malting constructed at Troyes for M. Bonnette under
M. Saladin's instructions. This malting is the third constructed for the
same firm, the others being at Nancy. That at Troyes we now illustrate.
We will not occupy space by a general description of the pneumatic
system, one great feature in which is the continuous manufacture of malt
throughout the year instead of only from five to eight months of the
year, as it will be gathered from the following description of the
Troyes malting:

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--ECHANGEUR, AXIAL SECTION.]

In our engravings, Figs. 1, 2, and 3, the letter A indicates the
germinating cases; B, Saladin's patent turning screws; C A, air
channels; D, passages; E R, main driving shafts; e, pulleys; F, metal
recesses to fit turning screws; G, elevators; H, trap doors; I, air
channels; J, openings to growing floor for air; K S, engines and fan
room; L N, fans, supply and exhaust; T, boiler; U, chimney; f, well. The
capacity of the malting is 130 qr. malt every day. This is equivalent to
an English house of 520 qr. steep. The whole space occupied is the area
necessary for kilns, malt and barley stores, engine and boiler house,
and fans. No additional area is required for germinating floors, as ten
germinating cases, A, are placed in the basement below the kilns and
stores. The building is of brick, with the internal walls below the
ground line resting upon cast iron columns and rolled joists. The
germinating cases, A A, are of iron; the bottoms are double. One of
perforated plate is placed 6 inches above the bottom. These plates admit
of draining the corn if the germinating case is used as a steeping
cistern also. Their chief object is, however to admit of ready
circulation of the air by the means presently to be described. Large
channels, A a, serve as drains for moisture and to convey the air to or
from the growing corn. Between each case is a passage, D, enabling the
maltster to have free access to the corn at all points.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--ECHANGEUR TRANSVERSE SECTION.]

With the exception of the driving shaft, E, all the machinery is in
duplicate, so that the possibility is remote of any breakdown that would
