power from any single motor by the mere break of contact between two
pieces of metal; we can restore the power by merely letting the two
pieces of metal touch; we can make these changes by electro magnets with
the rapidity of thought, and we can deal as we please with each of
one hundred motors without sensibly affecting the others. These
considerations led me to conclude, in the first place, that when using
electricity we might with advantage subdivide the weight to be carried,
distributing the load among many light vehicles following each other in
an almost continuous stream, instead of concentrating the load in heavy
trains widely spaced, as in our actual railways. The change in the
distribution of the load would allow us to adopt a cheap, light form
of load. The wide distribution of weight, entails many small trains in
substitution for a single heavy train; these small trains could not be
economically run if a separate driver were required for each. But, as
I have already pointed out, electricity not only facilitates the
distribution of power, but gives a ready means of controlling that
power. Our light, continuous stream of trains can, therefore, be
worked automatically, or managed independently of any guard or driver
accompanying the train--in other words, I could arrange a self-acting
block for preventing collisions. Next came the question, what would be
the best form of substructure for the new mode of conveyance? Suspended
rods or ropes, at a considerable height, appeared to me to have great
advantages over any road on the level of the ground; the suspended rods
also seemed superior to any stiff form of rail or girder supported at a
height. The insulation of ropes with few supports would be easy; they
could cross the country with no bridges or earth-works; they would
remove the electrical conductor to a safe distance from men and cattle;
cheap small rods employed as so many light suspension bridges would
support in the aggregate a large weight. Moreover, I consider that a
single rod or rail would present great advantages over any double rail
system, provided any suitable means could be devised for driving a train
along a single track. (Up to that time two conductors had invariably
been used.) It also seemed desirable that the metal rod bearing the
train should also convey the current driving it. Lines such as I
contemplated would not impede cultivation nor interfere with fencing.
Ground need not be purchased for their erection. Mere wayleaves would
be sufficient, as in the case of telegraphs. My ideas had reached this
point in the spring of 1882, and I had devised some means for carrying
them into effect when I read the account of the electrical railway
exhibited by Professors Ayrton and Perry. In connection with this
railway they had contrived means rendering the control of the vehicles
independent of the action of the guard or driver; and this absolute
block, as they called their system, seemed to me all that was required
to enable me at once to carry out my idea of a continuous stream of
light, evenly spaced trains, with no drivers or guards. I saw, moreover,
that the development of the system I had in view would be a severe tax
on my time and energy; also that in Edinburgh I was not well placed for
pushing such a scheme, and I had formed a high opinion of the value of
the assistance which Professors Ayrton and Perry could give in designs
and inventions.

Moved by these considerations, I wrote asking Professor Ayrton to
co-operate in the development of my scheme, and suggesting that he
should join with me in taking out my first Telpher patent. It has been
found more convenient to keep our several patents distinct, but my
letter ultimately led to the formation of the Telpherage Company
(limited), in which Professor Ayrton, Professor Perry, and I have equal
interests. This company owns all our inventions in respect of electric
locomotion, and the line shown in action to-day has been erected by this
company on the estate of the chairman--Mr. Marlborough R. Pryor, of
Weston. Since the summer of last year, and more especially since the
formation of the company this spring, much time and thought has been
spent in elaborating details. We are still far from the end of our work,
and it is highly probable what has been done will change rapidly by a
natural process of evolution. Nevertheless, the actual line now working
does in all its main features accurately reproduce my first conception,
and the general principles I have just laid down will, I think, remain
true, however great the change in details may be.

The line at Weston consist of a series of posts, 60 ft. apart, with two
lines of rods or ropes, supported by crossheads on the posts. Each of
these lines carries a train; one in fact is the up line, and the other
the down line. Square steel rods, round steel rods, and steel wire ropes
are all in course of trial. The round steel rod is my favorite road at
present. The line is divided into sections of 120 ft. or two spans, and
each section is insulated from its neighbor. The rod or rope is at the
post supported by cast-iron saddles, curved in a vertical plane, so as
to facilitate the passage of the wheels over the point of support.
Each alternate section is insulated from the ground; all the insulated
sections are in electrical connection with one another--so are all the
uninsulated sections. The train is 120 ft. long--the same length as that
of a section. It consists of a series of seven buckets and a locomotive,
evenly spaced with ash distance pieces--each bucket will convey, as a
useful load, about 21/2 cwt., and the bucket or skep, as it has come to be
called, weighs, with its load, about 3 cwt. The locomotive also weighs
about 3 cwt. The skeps hang below the line from one or from two V
wheels, supported by arms which project out sideways so as to clear the
supports at the posts; the motor or dynamo on the locomotive is also
below the line. It is supported on two broad flat wheels, and is driven
by two horizontal gripping wheels; the connection of these with the
motor is made by a new kind of frictional gear which I have called nest
gear, but which I cannot describe to-day. The motor on the locomotive
as a maximum 11/2 horse-power when so much is needed. A wire connects one
pole of the motor with the leading wheel of the train, and a second wire
connects the other pole with the trailing wheel; the other wheels are
insulated from each other. Thus the train, wherever it stands, bridges a
gap separating the insulated from the uninsulated section. The insulated
sections are supplied with electricity from a dynamo driven by a
stationary engine, and the current passing from the insulated section
to the uninsulated section through the motor drives the locomotive. The
actual line is quite short, and can only show two trains, one on the up
and one on the down line; but with sufficient power at the station any
number of trains could be driven in a continuous stream on each line.
The appearance is that of a line of buckets running along a single
telegraph wire of large size. A block system is devised and partly made,
but is not yet erected. It differs from the earlier proposals in having
no working parts on the line. This system of propulsion is called by us
the Cross Over Parallel Arc. Other systems of supplying the currents,
devised both by Professors Ayrton and Perry and myself, will be tried on
lines now being erected; but that just described gives good results. The
motors employed in the locomotives were invented by Messrs. Ayrton and
Perry. They are believed to have the special advantage of giving a
larger power for a given weight than any others. One weighing 99 lb.
gave 11/2 horse-power in some tests lately made. One weighing 36 lb. gave
0.41 horse-power.

No scientific experiments have yet been made on the working of the line,
and matters are not yet ripe for this--but we know that we can erect a
cheap and simple permanent way, which will convey a useful load of say
15 cwt. on every alternate span of 130 feet. This corresponds to 161/2
tons per mile, which, running at five miles per hour, would convey 921/2
tons of goods per hour. Thus if we work for 20 hours, the line will
convey 1850 tons of goods each way per diem, which seems a very fair
performance for an inch rope. The arrangement of the line with only one
rod instead of two rails diminishes friction very greatly. The carriages
run as light as bicycles. The same peculiarity allows very sharp curves
to be taken, but I am without experimental tests as yet of the limit
in this respect. Further, we now know that we can insulate the line
satisfactorily, even if very high potentials come to be employed. The
grip of the locomotive is admirable and almost frictionless, the gear is
silent and runs very easily. It is suited for the highest speeds, and
this is very necessary, as the motors may with advantage, run at 2,000
revolutions per minute.

       *       *       *       *       *




MACHINE FOR MAKING ELECTRIC LIGHT CARBONS.


One of the hinderances to the production of a regular and steady light
in electric illumination is the absence of perfect uniformity in the
carbons. This defect has more than once been pointed out by us, and we
are glad to notice any attempt to remedy an admitted evil. To this end
we illustrate above a machine for manufacturing carbons, invented by
William Cunliffe. The object the inventor has in view is not only the
better but the more rapid manufacture of carbons, candles, or electrodes
for electric lighting or for the manufacture of rods or blocks of carbon
or other compressible substances for other purposes, and his invention
consists in automatic machinery whereby a regular and uniform pressure
and compression of the carbon is obtained, and the rods or blocks are
delivered through the formers, in a state of greater density and better
quality then hitherto. The machine consists of two cylinders, A A',
placed longitudinally, as shown at Fig. 1, and in reversed position in
relation to each other. In each cylinder works a piston or plunger, a,
with a connecting rod or rods, b; in the latter case the ends of the
rods have right and left handed threads upon which a sleeve, c, with
corresponding threads, works. This sleeve, c, is provided with a hand
wheel, so that by the turning it the stroke of the plungers, a a, and
the size of the chambers, A A', is regulated so that the quantity of
material to be passed through the dies or formers is thereby determined
and may be indicated. In front of the chambers, A A', are fixed the dies
or formers, d d, which may have any number of perforations of the size
or shape of the carbon it is intended to mould. The dies are held in
position by clamp pieces, e e, secured to the end of the chambers A
A', by screws, and on each side of these clamp pieces are guides, with
grooves, in which moves a bar with a crosshead, termed the guillotine,
and which moves across the openings of the dies, and opening or closing
them. Near the front end of the cylinders are placed small pistons or
valves, f f, kept down in position by the weighted levers, g g (see Fig.
2, which is drawn to an enlarged scale), which, when the pressure in
the chamber exceeds that of the weighted levers connected to the safety
valve, f, the latter is raised and the guillotine bar, h, moved across
the openings of the dies by the connecting rods, h', thereby allowing
the carbon to be forced through the dies. In the backward movement
of the piston, a, a fresh supply of material is drawn by atmospheric
pressure through the hoppers, B B', alternately. At the end of the
stroke the arms of the rocking levers (which are connected by tension
rods with the tappet levers) are struck by the disk wheel or regulator,
the guillotine is moved back and replaced over the openings of the
dies, ready for the next charge, as shown. The plungers are operated by
hydraulic, steam, compressed air, or other power, the inlet and outlet
of such a pressure being regulated by a valve, an example of which is
shown at Fig. 1, and provided with the tappet levers, i i, hinged to the
valve chest, C, as shown, and attached to spindles, i' i', operating the
slide valves, and struck alternately at the end of each stroke, thus
operating the valves and the guillotine connections, i squared and i cubed. The
front ends of the cylinders may be placed at an angle for the more
convenient delivery of the moulded articles.--_Iron_.

[Illustration: MACHINE FOR MAKING ELECTRIC LIGHT CARBONS]

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW ELECTRIC BATTERY LIGHTS.


There has lately been held, at No. 31 Lombard Street, London, a private
exhibition of the Holmes and Burke primary galvanic battery. The chief
object of the display was to demonstrate its suitability for the
lighting of railway trains, but at the same time means were provided
to show it in connection with ordinary domestic illumination, as it is
evident that a battery will serve equally as well for the latter as for
the former purpose. Already the great Northern express leaving London at
5:30 P.M. is lighted by this means, and satisfactory experiments have
been made upon the South-western line, while the inventors give a long
list of other companies to which experimental plant is to be supplied.
The battery shown, in Lombard Street consisted of fifteen cells arranged
in three boxes of five cells each. Each box measured about 18 in. by
12 in. by 10 in., and weighed from 75 lb. to 100 lb. The electromotive
force of each cell was 1.8 volts and its internal resistance from 1/40
to 1/50 of an ohm, consequently the battery exhibited had, under the
must favorable circumstances, a difference of potential of 27 volts at
its poles, and a resistance of 0.3 ohm.

When connected to a group of ten Swan lamps of five candle power,
requiring a difference of potential of 20 volts, it raised them to vivid
incandescence, considerably above their nominal capacity, but it failed
to supply eighteen lamps of the same kind satisfactorily, showing that
its working capacity lay somewhere between the two. A more powerful lamp
is used in the railway carriages, but as there was only one erected it
was impossible to judge of the number that a battery of the size shown
would feed. _Engineering_ says the trial, however, demonstrated that
great quantities of current were being continuously evolved, and if,
as we understood, the production can be maintained constant for about
twenty-four hours without attention, the new battery marks a distinct
step in this kind of electric lighting. Of the construction of the
battery we unfortunately can say but little, as the patents are not yet
completed, but we may state that the solid elements are zinc and
carbon, and that the novelty lies in the liquid, and in the ingenious
arrangement for supplying and withdrawing it.

Ordinarily one charge of liquid will serve for twenty-four hours
working, but this, of course, is entirely determined by the space
provided for it. It is sold at sevenpence a gallon, and each gallon is
sufficient, we are informed, to drive a cell while it generates 800
ampere hours of current, or, taking the electromotive force at 1.8
volts, it represents (800 x 1.8) / 746 = 1.93 horse-power hours. The
cost of the zinc is stated to be 35 per cent. of that of the fluid,
although it is difficult to see how this can be, for one horse-power
requires the consumption of 895.2 grammes of zinc per hour, or 1.96 lb.,
and this at 18_l_. per ton, would cost 1.93 pence per pound, or 3.8
pence per horse-power hour. This added to 3.6 pence for the fluid, would
give a total of 7.4 pence per horse-power per hour, and assuming twenty
lamps of ten candle power to be fed per horse-power, the cost would be
about one-third of a penny per hour per lamp.

Mr Holmes admits his statement of the consumption of zinc does not agree
with what might be theoretically expected but he bases it upon the
result of his experiments in the Pullman train, which place the cost at
one farthing per hour per light. At the same time he does not profess
that the battery can compete in the matter of cost with mechanically
generated currents on a large scale, but he offers it as a convenient
means of obtaining the electric light in places where a steam engine or
a gas engine is inadmissible, as in a private house, and where the cost
of driving a dynamo machine is raised abnormally high by reason of a
special attendant having to be paid to look after it.

But he has another scheme for the reduction of the cost, to which we
have not yet alluded, and of which we can say but little, as the details
are not at present available for publication. The battery gives off
fumes which can be condensed into a nitrogenous substance, valuable, it
is stated, as a manure, while the zinc salts in the spent liquid can be
recovered and returned to useful purposes. How far this is practicable
it is at present impossible to say, but at any rate the idea represents
a step in the right direction, and if the electricians can follow the
example of the gas manufacturers and obtain a revenue from the residuals
of galvanic batteries, they will greatly improve their commercial
position. There is nothing impossible in the idea, and neither is it
altogether novel, although the way of carrying it out may be. In 1848,
Staite, one of the early enthusiasts in electric lighting, patented a
series of batteries from which he proposed to recover sulphate, nitrate,
and chloride of zinc, but we never heard that he obtained any success.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW ELECTRIC RAILWAY.


The original electric railway laid down by Messrs. Siemens and Halske
at Berlin seems likely to be the parent of many others. One of the most
recent is the underground electric line laid down by the firm in the
mines of Zankerodain Saxony. An account of this railway has appeared in
_Glaser's Annalen_, together with drawings of the engine, which we are
able to reproduce. They are derived from a paper by Herr Fischer, read
on the 19th December, 1882, before the Electro-Technical Union of
Germany. The line in question is 700 meters long--770 yards--and has two
lines of way. It lies 270 meters--300 yards--below the surface of the
ground. It is worked by an electric locomotive, hauling ten wagons at a
speed of 12 kilometers, or 71/2 miles per hour. The total weight drawn is
eight tons. The gauge is a narrow one, so that the locomotive can be
made of small dimensions. Its total length between the buffer heads is
2.43 meters; its height 1.04 meters; breadth 0.8 meter; diameter of
wheels, 0.34 meter. From the rail head to the center of the buffers is a
height of 0.675 meter; and the total weight is only 1550 kilogrammes, or
say 3,400 lb. We give a longitudinal section through the locomotive. It
will be seen that there is a seat at each end for the driver, so that he
can always look forwards, whichever way the engine may be running. The
arrangements for connection with the electric current are very simple.
The current is generated by a dynamo machine fixed outside the mine, and
run by a small rotary steam engine, shown in section and elevation, at a
speed of 900 revolutions per minute. The current passes through a cable
down the shaft to a T-iron fixed to the side of the heading. On this
T-iron slide contact pieces which are connected with the electric engine
by leading wires. The driver by turning a handle can move his engine
backward or forward at will. The whole arrangement has worked extremely
well, and it is stated that the locomotive, if so arranged, could easily
do double its present work; in other words, could haul 15 to 16 tons of
train load at a speed of seven miles an hour. The arrangements for the
dynamo machine on the engine, and its connection with the wheels, are
much the same as those used in Sir William Siemens' electric railway now
working near the Giant's Causeway.--_The Engineer_.

[Illustration: THE SIEMENS ELECTRIC RAILWAY AT ZANKERODA MINES.]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE EARLIEST GAS-ENGINE.


Lebon, in the certificate dated 1801, in addition to his first patent,
described and illustrated a three-cylinder gas-engine in which an
