mine and the shipping place, and that a swamp, river, or valley would
cost more to bridge over than the whole line besides. If at this obstacle
the trucks or carriages could be lifted bodily, passed along the flexible
girder, and again placed on the line the other side of the obstacle, the
advantage to be derived is obvious; and as the flexible girder is really
little more than a suspension bridge _minus_ the platform, and having but
two suspension wires, the cost and the difficulties should both be very
small.--_Industrial Review_.

       *       *       *       *       *




BOZERIAN'S REFRIGERANT PUNKAS.


Punkas (also called pankasor tankas) are apparatus that serve for fanning
rooms throughout the entire extent of English India. These devices
consist of a light wooden frame covered with canvas, from the bottom of
which depends a fringe. These frames are suspended from the ceiling in
such a way as to occupy nearly the entire width and length of the room.
To the base of the frame is attached a cord which passes over a wheel,
and which is pulled by a Hindoo domestic. After the frame has been
lifted, a weight fastened to the lower part causes it to fall back again.
The result of the continuous motion of this colossal fan is a coolness
that is highly appreciated in a country where the temperature is at times
incredibly high, and where, without the factitious breeze created by the
punka, living would not be endurable. This breeze prevents perspiration,
or evaporates the same as soon as it is formed. Sometimes it sinks to a
light zephyr; then, if you are reading or writing, you may continue your
work, but in a distracted way, with a moist brow, and with a feeling of
annoyance that soon makes you leave book or pen.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--TENT OR TABLE FAN OR PUNKA.]

Looking around you, you find the punka immovable. The bahi still holds
the cord that pulls it, but it is because he has tied it to his hand. He
has gently slid to the floor in a squatting posture. He is asleep and you
are burning. A vigorous exclamation brings him to his feet all standing,
and he begins to pull the punka with all his might, and you have a
feeling of ease and coolness. It is like the passage from an attack of
fever to a state of comfort in an intermittent disease. So the punka is
seen everywhere--in the temple and court room and other public places, as
well as in private dwellings. It is one of the first things to astonish
the European upon his arrival in India, and it is not long before he has
to bless the happy invention.

Although, in a country where the temperature generally reaches, and even
often exceeds, 40 deg. C., it is absolutely necessary to obtain by every
means possible a factitious coolness without which the Indies would not
be habitable for Europeans; and although there is no hesitancy in putting
up these punkas everywhere to be maneuvered by bahis, the elevation of
the temperature is not such in France that we are obliged to have
recourse to such processes. But, without being forced thereto by nature,
it is none the less true that we are often the more incommoded by heat in
that we are not accustomed to it, and that in southern France, at certain
hours of the day, such heat becomes absolutely unbearable. We can, it is
true, obtain a little air by moving a fan, but, aside from the fact that
this exercise soon becomes tiresome, it prevents the use of the hand that
is fanning.

[Illustration: FIG 2.--AN APARTMENT FAN.]

The new apparatus which have just been devised by Mr. G. Bozerian permit
of one's fanning himself all day long if he wants to, without any
fatigue, and while he is eating, reading, writing, etc.

In one of these apparatus, designed to be used in the open air (Fig. 1),
we find a table, a tent, and a fan combined; but as each part is
independent, we can have the table and fan without tent, or the fan and
pedals alone without table or tent. Under the tent there is arranged a
frame which pivots freely in apertures formed in the uprights that
support both the tent and table. This frame is connected, through two
levers, with the pedals upon which one's feet rest. The motion of the
pedals is an alternating one like those of sewing machines; but while in
the case of the latter a pressure has to be exerted that soon becomes
very tiresome, the motion in Mr. Bozerian's apparatus is so easy that it
is only necessary to raise the toes of each foot in succession in order
to produce a swing of the fan through the weight alone of the foot that
is pressing. The frame, which when at rest hangs perpendicularly,
describes about a quarter of a circle when the extremity of the foot is
raised about an inch. In consequence of the absence of passive
resistances, motion occurs without any stress, and almost mechanically,
giving air not only to him who is actuating the fan, but also to his
vis-a-vis.

Fig. 2 represents an apartment apparatus designed to be placed in front
of a table or desk, in order that one can fan himself while eating or
writing. Being mounted upon casters, it can be readily moved about from
one place to another. At the extremity of a wooden support, whose height
may be varied at will, there is arranged a flexible fan whose handle is
fixed near a pulley. A small piece of lead forms the counterpoise of the
fan, which is thus completely balanced. Over the pulley runs a cord, each
end of which is attached to a pedal. It will be seen that the alternate
motion of these pedals must cause a rotation of the pulley in one
direction or the other, and that consequently the fan will rise or fall
more or less rapidly, and give a quantity of air that varies according to
the rapidity with which the toes are moved.--_La Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




PUNKAS.

[Footnote: Extract from a lecture recently delivered at Bombay.]

By J. WALLACE, C.E.


The function of a punka is to cause a current of air to pass the human
body so that the animal heat may escape more rapidly. This has nothing to
do with ventilation; for if the punka were used in a closed room, it
would still produce a cooling effect on the skin.

Let us for a moment examine into what takes place in this operation, for
a clear idea of the cause of our sensations of heat is absolutely
necessary to enable us to go directly to the simplest and best form of
remedy. The heat we feel, and which sometimes renders us uncomfortable,
is produced _within us_ by the slow combustion of the food we eat.

This heat continues to escape from the whole surface of the body during
the whole lifetime, and if anything occurs to arrest it to any great
extent, the result is fatal.

In cold weather, and especially when there is much wind, the animal heat
escapes very rapidly from the body, and extra clothing is used, not for
any heat it imparts, but simply because it interrupts the escape of the
heat, and thus maintains the temperature of the skin--that part of us
which is most sensible of change of temperature. It is a wonderful fact
that the heat of the interior of the body varies very little in a healthy
man between India and Greenland.

The skin may bear a good many degrees of change of temperature with
impunity, but the blood will only suffer a very small variation from the
normal temperature of 98-4/10 deg. Fahrenheit without serious consequences.

Well, to keep the skin at an agreeable temperature in India we generally
wear a minimum of clothing, and when there is no breeze, we try to
produce one with the punka.

The escape of animal heat from the body forms a subject which is much
more complicated, and much more important, than the one we have met to
consider, but it is impossible within the limits of our time to refer to
it, except in the measure that is strictly necessary to elucidate the
principles that should control the construction of the punka.

It has often been said that every engineer on his arrival in India sets
about improving this useful apparatus; but if we may judge from the
endless variety of forms which may be seen in shops and offices, in
public and in private buildings, no general principle of construction has
been recognized, and the punka, as we see it, seems to depend, for its
form, more upon the taste of the workman who makes it than on anything
else.

We shall begin by directing our attention to the suspended punka, which
is usually hung from the ceiling, and put in movement by a cord. The
object of this class of punka is to produce a downward current of air by
swinging to and fro, and the best punka is the one which throws downward
the greatest quantity of air with the smallest applied force.

The swinging punka is one of the simplest forms of mechanism; it can be
fitted up with the most primitive materials, and however badly made, it
will always have _some_ effect. This fact has its good and its bad
aspects; it brings a certain comfort within the reach of all, but it
removes a great part of that _necessity_ which, as we all know, is the
mother of invention.

There are some very important natural laws which are illustrated in the
punka. The first is that which governs the movement of the pendulum. The
number of swings it makes per minute depends on the length of the
suspending cords; a pendulum three feet long will swing 621/2 times per
minute, and a pendulum six feet long will swing 441/4 times per minute.
Whether the swings are long ones or short ones, the number per minute is
still the same. You cannot, therefore, alter the natural rate of movement
of a punka unless you pull it at both sides.

The next law is that which determines that the angles of incidence and of
reflection are equal. This in simple language means that it is useless to
expect a good downward current of air from a slow moving and heavy punka,
with long suspending cords which keep it nearly always in a vertical
position to its plane of movement. Striking the air squarely as it does
in its forward and backward movement, it throws almost as much air upward
as downward, and of course all the air that is propelled in any other
than a downward direction represents just so much power wasted.

One more law, and then we may proceed to demonstration.

As the air weighs 0.072 lb. per cubic foot at 82 deg. Fahrenheit, and as a
considerable quantity of air is put in motion, the power required to
drive a punka depends upon the quantity of air it puts in motion in a
given time.

The _useful effect_ is a separate matter; it depends on the amount of air
thrown in a downward direction.

To summarize; all punkas of the same size or surface, and going at the
same speed, require the same amount of pulling. The best one is that
which will throw down more air than any other of the same size.

To obtain the greatest result from the power expended in driving it, the
punka should be placed as near as possible to the person to be cooled,
as the loss of effect, due to distance, increases not in direct ratio,
but in proportion to the square of the distance between punka and person.
If at two feet of distance he receives one eighth of the total effect, he
will at four feet of distance obtain only one thirty-second part.

In practice, the punka should just clear his head when standing, and the
weighting of the curtain should be of some yielding material, so as not
to damage any person who might stand in its course.

We shall now proceed to examine several forms of punka, all made to the
same size, and, for purposes of comparison, we shall drive them all at
the same speed. And in order that their effects may be visible to you, I
have prepared an indicator which resembles more than anything else the
keyboard of a piano. It consists of a series of balanced levers with
blades or keys attached, forming a keyboard four feet long. The levers,
each three feet long, are delicately hung on fine brass centers, and each
lever is counterbalanced by a weight hung in a vessel of water, which
acts as a hydraulic brake, and checks any spasmodic movement in the
apparatus.

On the end of each blade is fixed a disk of white Bristol board four
inches in diameter, forming a row which faces the audience.

This apparatus is so sensitive that a slight change in the humidity of
the atmosphere is sufficient to throw it out of balance.

The power required to drive a punka is nearly all due to the resistance
of the air; that part due to the force of gravity, and the friction of
the suspending joints, is scarcely worth counting. We may readily observe
the effect of the resistance of the air by swinging two pendulums of
equal length and having each a large cardboard disk attached. One of the
disks shall present its edge to the line of movement, and the other its
face.

_Exp. 1._--They are now swinging, and being both of the same gravity
length, they should swing together and for an equal length of time. This
they would do in a vacuum, but you have already observed that one of them
is lagging, and will evidently soon come to a standstill. It is the one
_facing_ the air.

If punkas were pulled from both sides, they might be made very much
lighter than they are at present, but for the sake of simplicity a single
pull is preferred. They must, therefore, be made of such a weight that
they will swing nearly as far on the opposite side as they are pulled on
the near side; any greater weight is useless and only serves to wear out
the suspending cords, which, by the way, are nearly always too numerous
and too thick for their purpose.

_Exp. 2._--Here is a panel punka which we shall try to use without the
customary swing bar. It is of calico stretched on a light wooden frame,
and you will be able to judge if it swings equally on each side of the
post which supports it. The irregularity of its movement shows that it is
too light, so we shall add, by way of swing bar, a bar of round iron one
and a quarter inch thick.

_Exp. 3._--It is now swinging regularly, and experiments have already
proved that the swing bar should not be lighter than this one, which
weighs four and a sixth lb. per foot of length. Iron is the best material
for this purpose, as it offers the smallest surface to the resistance of
the air. The length of the suspending cords is usually a matter of
accident in the construction of a punka, but a little attention to the
subject will soon convince us that it is one of the most important
considerations.

The limit of movement of a punka is to be found in the man who pulls it.
Twenty-four pulls a minute of a length of 36 inches give in practice a
speed of 168 linear feet to the punka curtain. This speed is found to
produce a current sufficiently rapid for practical purposes, and
twenty-four pulls or beats per minute correspond to a length of
suspending cord of fifty inches.

       *       *       *       *       *




HOW TO MAKE A KITE WITHOUT A TAIL.


The following is the method of making a kite without a tail: All the
calculations necessary in order to obtain the different proportions are
based upon the length of the stick, A'A, employed. Such length being
found, we divide it by ten, and thus obtain what is called the unit of
length. With such unit it is very easy to obtain all the proportions. The
bow, K'K, consists of two pieces of osier each 51/2 units in length, that
form, through their union, a total length of 7 units.

[Illustration: KITE WITHOUT A TAIL.]

After the bow has been constructed according to these measurements, it
only remains to fix it to the stick in such a way that it shall be two
units distant from the upper end of the stick. The balance, CC', whose
accuracy contributes much to the stability of the whole in the air,
consists of a string fixed at one end to the junction, D, of the bow and
stick, and at the other to the stick itself at a distance of three units
from the lower extremity. Next, a cord, B, is passed around the frame,
and the whole is covered with thin paper.

Before raising the kite, the string, which hangs from K', is made fast at
K in such a way as to cause the bow to curve backward. This curvature is
increased or diminished according to the force of the wind.

Nothing remains to be done but to attach the cord to the balance, and
raise the kite.--_La Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS FOR DRYING FLOUR.


The accompanying drawing represents a simple but effective apparatus for
drying flour and ascertaining the quantity of water contained therein. It
consists of four pieces, the whole being made of block tin. A is a simple
saucepan for containing the water. B is the lid, which only partially
covers the top of the pan, to which it is fixed by two slots, a hole
being left in the middle for the placing of the vessel which contains the
flour to be operated upon, and is dropped in in the same way as the pan
containing the glue is let into an ordinary glue pot. C is the spout,
which serves as an outlet for the steam arising from the boiling water. D
is the vessel in which the flour is placed to be experimented upon; and
EE are the funnels of the lid which covers the said vessel, and which
serve as escapes for the steam arising from the moisture contained in the
flour.

[Illustration: APPARATUS FOR DRYING FLOUR]

_Directions for use_.--Partially fill the pan with water and allow it to
boil. Place a given quantity of flour in the inner vessel, D, taking care
first to weigh it. Subject it to the action of the boiling water until it
is perfectly dry, which will be indicated by the steam ceasing to issue
from the funnels. Then weigh again, and the difference in the weight will
represent the quantity of moisture contained in it, dried at a
temperature of 212 degrees Fahr., that of boiling water.--_The Miller_.

       *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS FOR MANUFACTURING BOUQUETS.


For some years past, the sale of flowers has been gradually increasing.
Into the larger cities, such as Paris for example, they are introduced by
the car load, and along about the first of January the consumption of
them is extraordinary. All choice flowers are now being cultivated by
improved methods that assure of an abundant production of them. What
twenty years ago would have appeared to be an antiquated mechanism, viz.,
an apparatus for making bouquets, has now become a device of prime
necessity by reason of the exigencies of an excessive demand.

Mr. Myard, a gardener of Chalon-sur-Saone, and vice-president of the
horticultural society of that city, has devised a curious apparatus,
which we represent herewith from a photograph.

This bouquet machine, which the inventor styles a _bouquetiere_, consists
of a stationary rod (shown to the right of the figure), upon which slides
a spool wound with twine, and the lower part of which is provided with
three springs for keeping the twine taut. A horizontal arm at the top
supports a guide or pattern whose curve is to be followed, on placing the
flowers in position. This arm is removed or turned aside after the
binding screw has been loosened, in order that the rod to the left that
carries the bouquet may be taken out. A guide, formed of a steel ribbon,
is fixed to the arm and to its movable rod by means of binding screws,
which permit of its being readily elongated. This central rod can be
raised or lowered at will, and, owing to these combinations, every
desired form of bouquet may be obtained.

[Illustration: APPARATUS FOR MAKING BOUQUETS.]

The rod to the left is provided with a steel pivot, and contains several
apertures, into which a pin enters, thus rendering it easy to begin
bouquets at different heights.

The bouquet is mounted upon the rod to the left, as shown in the figure.
The pin passes through the rod and enters a loop formed at the extremity
of the twine, and thus serves as a point of support, and prevents the
bouquet from falling, no matter what its weight is. When the pin is
removed in order that the bouquet may be taken out, the loop escapes.

At the lower part of the rod upon which the bouquet is mounted, there is
a collar with three branches, by means of which a rotary motion is given
to the flowers through the aid of the hand. The twine used for tying is
thus wound around the stems. When the apparatus is in motion, the twine
unwinds from the spool, and winds around the rod that carries the
flowers, and twists about and holds every stem.

An experienced operator can work very rapidly with this little apparatus,
which has been constructed with much care and ingenuity, and which enters
into a series of special mechanisms that is always of interest to know
about.

The manufacturer was advised to construct his apparatus so that it could
be run by foot power, but, after some trials, it was found that the
addition of a pedal and the mechanism that it necessitates was absolutely
superfluous, the apparatus working very well such as it is.--_La Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 567, page 9057.]




RADII OF CURVATURE GEOMETRICALLY DETERMINED.

By Prof. C.W. MACCORD, Sc.D.

NO. VII.--PATH OF A POINT ON A CONNECTING ROD.


The motion of the connecting rod of a reciprocating steam engine is very
clearly understood from the simple statement that one end travels in a
circle and the other in a right line. From this statement it is also
readily inferred that the path of any point between the centers of the
crank and crosshead pins will be neither circular nor straight, but an
elongated curve. This inference is so far correct, but the very common
impression that the middle point of the rod always describes an ellipse
is quite erroneous. The variation from that curve, while not conspicuous
in all cases, is nevertheless quite sufficient to prevent the use of this
movement for an elliptograph. To this there is, abstractly, one
exception. Referring to Fig. 22 in the preceding article, it will be seen
that if the crank OH and the connecting HE are of equal length, any point
on the latter or on its prolongation, except E, H, and F, will describe
an exact ellipse. But the proportions are here so different from anything
used in steam engines (the stroke being four times the length of the
crank), that this particular arrangement can hardly be considered as what
is ordinarily understood by a "crank and connecting rod movement," such
as is shown in Fig. 23.

The length DE of the curve traced by the point P will evidently be equal
to A'B', the stroke of the engine, and that again to AB, the throw of the
crank. The highest position of P will be that shown in the figure,
determined by placing the crank vertically, as OC. At that instant the
motions of C and C' are horizontal, and being inclined to CC' they must
be equal. In other words, the motion is one of translation, and the
radius of curvature at P is infinite.

