       *       *       *       *       *




THE SCHOLAR'S COMPASSES.


Among the numerous arrangements that have been devised for drawing
circles in diagrams, sketches, etc., one of the simplest is doubtless
that which is represented in the accompanying figure, and which is known
in England as the "scholar's compasses." It consists of a socket into
which slides a pencil by hard friction, and to which is hinged a
tapering, pointed leg. This latter and the pencil are held at the proper
distance apart by means of a slotted strip of metal and a binding screw.
When the instrument is closed, as shown in the figure to the left, it
takes up but little space, and may be easily carried in the pocket
without the point tearing the clothing, as the binding screw holds the
leg firmly against the pencil.

The mode of using the apparatus is so well shown in the figure to the
right that it is unnecessary to enter into any explanation.--_La
Nature_.

[Illustration: THE SCHOLAR'S COMPASSES.]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE INTEGRAPH.


In scientific researches in the domain of physics we often meet with the
following problem: Being given any function whatever, y = f(x), to find
a curve whose equation shall be

      _
     /
     |
y =  | f(x)dx + C.
     |
   _/

[TEX: y = \int f(x) dx + C.]

Let us take an example that touches us more closely; let us suppose that
we know an induced current, and that we can represent it by a curve
y=f(x). The question is to find the inductive current, that is to say,
the curve represented by the equation

      _
     /
     |
y =  | f(x)dx + C.
     |
   _/

[TEX: y = \int f(x) dx + C.]

The apparatus called an integraph, constructed by Messrs. Napoli and
Abdank-Abakanowicz, is designed for solving this problem mechanically,
by tracing the curve sought. Let us take another example from the domain
of electricity, in order to better show the utility of the apparatus;
let us suppose that we have a curve representing the discharge of a pile
or of an accumulator. The abscisses represent the times, and the
ordinates the amperes. The question is to know at every moment the
quantity of coulombs produced by the pile. The apparatus traces a curve
whose ordinates give the number of coulombs sought. We might find a
large number of analogous applications.

[Illustration: THE INTEGRAPH.]

The apparatus is represented in the accompanying figure. An iron ruler,
I, parallel with the axis of the X's, is fixed upon a drawing-board, and
is provided with a longitudinal groove in its upper surface. In this
groove move two rollers, which, in the center of the piece that connects
them, carry two brass T-squares that are parallel with each other and at
right angles with the first, or parallel with the axis of the Y's.
Between these two rulers move two carriages, the first of which (nearest
the axis of the X's) carries a point, A, designed to follow the contour
of the curve to be integrated, while the second, which is placed further
away, is provided at the center with a drawing-pen, A', whose point is
guided by two equidistant wheels, R, R', that roll over the paper in
such a way as to have their plane parallel with a given straight line,
and that have always a direction such that the tangent of the point's
angle with the axes of the X's is constantly proportional to the
ordinate of the primitive curve.

The carriages are rendered very movable by substituting rolling for a
sliding friction of the axes. To this effect, the extremities of the
axes of the wheels that support and guide them are made thin, and roll
over the plane surface of recesses formed for the purpose in the lateral
steel surfaces of the carriages, while the circumference of the wheels
rolls in grooves along the two T-squares.

These latter are, on the one hand, carried by rollers that run in the
groove of the iron, I, and, on the other, by a single roller that runs
over the paper. At right angles with one of these bars is fixed a
divided ruler, through one point of which continually passes a third
ruler, whose extremity pivots upon the point, A, of the first carriage.

When the divided ruler is placed upon the axis of the X's, and the
point, A, of this carriage is following the contours of the figure to be
integrated, the tangent of the angle made by the inclined ruler with the
axis of the X's will be proportional to the ordinate of the figure. The
wheels, R and R', of the drawing-pen, A', of the second carriage must
move parallel with this ruler. In order to obtain such parallelism, we
employ a parallelogram formed as follows: Two gear-wheels of the same
diameter are fixed upon the ruler that ends at the point, A, of the
first carriage, and their line of centers is parallel with the latter.
The second carriage likewise carries two drums equal in diameter to
those of the toothed wheels. These are fixed, and their line of centers
must remain constantly parallel with the line of centers of the
gear-wheels, and consequently with the straight line which passes
through the point, A. This parallelism is obtained by means of a weak
steel spring, or of a silken thread passing over the four wheels, the
two first of which (the gear-wheels) hold it taut by means of a barrel
and spring placed in the center of one of them.

The edge of the wheels, R, R', of the second carriage prevents the
latter from giving way to the traction of the threads, permitting it
thus to move only in the direction of their plane.

It will be seen that by this system two of the sides of the
parallelogram are capable of elongating or contracting through the
unwinding and winding of the silken thread on the drums of the two cog
wheels, which latter, gearing with each other, allow of the escape of
but the same length of the two threads.

It will be observed that in this system integration is effected by
forcing the pen to follow a certain direction, and that consequently the
curve does not depend upon the dimensions of the different parts of the
apparatus.--_La_ _Lumiere Electrique_.

       *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS FOR MANUFACTURING GASEOUS BEVERAGES.


The apparatus represented in the accompanying cuts is designed for the
manufacture of gaseous beverages, and is of Messrs. Boulet & Co.'s make.
Fig. 1 represents the apparatus complete, with gasometer and bottling
machine. Fig. 2 gives a vertical section of the apparatus properly so
called, including the producer, the purifier, and the saturator, all
grouped upon a cast-iron column.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. APPARATUS FOR MANUFACTURING GASEOUS BREEZES.]

The producer, A, is designed to receive the sulphuric acid and carbonate
of lime. A mixer, F, revolves in the interior of this, and effects an
intimate admixture of the lime and acid without the necessity of the
former being pulverized beforehand. The carbonate of lime (usually in
the form of chalk) is introduced directly into the producer through the
aperture, K, while the acid contained in the receptacle, B, at the side
of the column and above the producer flows put through a curved pipe in
the bottom. The flow is regulated by the valve, C. The receptacle, B, is
lined with platinum. As soon as the acid comes into contact with the
carbonate, there occurs a disengagement of carbonic acid gas, which
flows directly through the pipe, F, into the purifier at the upper part
of the column. From thence the gas passes into a third washer, D, of
glass. When thoroughly washed, it flows through the pipe, L, into the
gasometer, which is of galvanized iron, and is very carefully balanced.

The saturator, which is the most important part of the apparatus,
comprises a pump, a feed reservoir, and a sphere. The pump, which is of
bronze, is placed at the side of the column, at the lower part (Fig. 1).
This sucks up the gas stored in the gasometer and the water contained in
the reservoir, and forces them into the sphere. This latter is of
bronze, cast in a single piece, and the thickness of its sides prevents
all danger of explosion. It is silvered internally, and provided with a
powerful rotary agitator that favors the admixture of the water and gas.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

The apparatus it rendered complete by a bottling machine, which is
placed either on a line with the apparatus or in front of it. This
machine is connected directly with the sphere by a block-tin
pipe.--_Chronique Industrielle_.

       *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS FOR MEASURING THE FORCE OF EXPLOSIVES.


Among the numerous apparatus that have been devised for determining the
power of powder, those designed for military purposes are the ones most
extensively used. Up to the present, very few experimental apparatus
have been constructed for civil uses, although such are no less
necessary than the others. Mr. D'O. Guttman has examined the principal
types of dynamometers with respect to their use for testing explosive
materials, and, after ascertaining wherein they are defective, has
devised an apparatus in which the principle is the same as that employed
by Messrs. Montluisant and Reffye at Meudon, that is to say, one in
which the force of the powder is made to act upon a lead cylinder fixed
in a conical channel. Mr. Desortiaux objects that in this system, when
it is employed with charges for cannons, the action has already begun
when only a portion of the powder is burned. To this, Mr. Guttman
responds that his apparatus operates only with small charges (300
grains), which practically inflame simultaneously in every part when the
igniting is done in a closed space. In order that the force may not be
made to act in one direction only, the inventor uses two leaden
cylinders. His apparatus is shown in the accompanying Figs. 1, 2, and 3.
It consists of a median piece, a, and of two heads, b, of an external
diameter of four inches. These pieces are of tempered Bessemer steel.
The two heads are four inches in length, one inch of which is provided
with a screw thread. Each of them contains an aperture, c, 1.34 inches
wide below, 1.3 inches wide above, and 1.18 inches deep. This aperture
is followed by another and conical one, d, 1.38 inches deep, and 0.4
inch wide at its narrowest end, and finally by another one, e, 0.4 inch
wide, which runs to the exterior. The median piece, a, is 4 inches long.
It is provided at the two sides with nuts, between which there is a
cylindrical space, f, 1.8 inches long, designed to receive the charge.
The inflaming plug, g, is screwed into the exact center of the median
piece, a, which it enters to a depth of one inch. Into the space that
still remains free is screwed a plug, h. The lower surface of the plug,
g, contains a hollow space, 0.6 inch wide and deep. This hollow is
prolonged by another one, 0.24 inch wide, and contains a valve, i, which
has a play of about 0.08 inch. The three parts are connected by a key
which passes into the holes, x, and are rendered tight by copper rings,
y.

When it is desired to charge the apparatus, a leaden cylinder, 1.34
inches long and 1.3 inches in diameter, is placed in one of the heads,
and the median piece is so screwed that it can be made still tighter by
a few turns. Then a steel plate, k, 1.3 inches wide by 0.2 inch thick,
is placed against the cylinder, and against this plate again is placed a
cardboard disk, 1.34 inches wide by 0.4 inch thick. This completely
closes the hollow space. The steel plates and heads are marked with the
figures 1 and 2, which, through the pressure, are impressed upon the
leaden cylinders. Then the charge of powder, weighing exactly 300
grains, is introduced, and a new cardboard disk, a steel plate, and a
leaden cylinder are inserted, and the second head is screwed up. The
apparatus is now ready to operate. An ordinary priming is placed on the
pyramid, h, and the plug with the valve is screwed down in such a way
that the latter shall have a little play. By means of a hammer, m, a
smart blow is given the valve i, and this detonates the priming, and
causes an explosion of the charge. The gases make their exit through the
pyramid, h, and lift the valve and press it against the plug, so that
their escape is effectually prevented. In fact, the explosion takes
place without noise. A slight whistling, only, indicates that the
capsule has not missed fire, and that the apparatus may be immediately
opened, the gases having condensed in the interior. It is well, however,
to place the closed apparatus in water, in order that the residua that
have entered the threads of the screw may become detached, and that the
apparatus may be opened easily. Although there is no danger in standing
alongside the apparatus, it is much better to spring the hammer by means
of a cord of a certain length, since the valve and especially the
pyramid gradually burn and may be thrown out. With some kinds of powder
the pyramid rapidly melts, and must be frequently replaced.

[Illustration: APPARATUS FOR MEASURING THE FORCE OF EXPLOSIVES.]

The two cones of lead obtained are then measured to 0.004 of an inch by
means of a gauge (Fig. 3).

The inventor has made numerous experiments with his apparatus, and
thinks it permits of determining the total force developed by powder
very perfectly.

       *       *       *       *       *




SANDMANN'S VINEGAR APPARATUS.


For obtaining anhydrous or very concentrated vinegar directly from
pyrolignite of lime or other acetates by a single distillation, Mr. D.
Sandmann, of Charlottenburg, employs the apparatus shown in the
accompanying engraving. It consists of a double-bottomed copper or
enameled iron boiler, A, arranged for being heated by steam, and the
upper part of which is protected against the action of the acid vapors
disengaged during distillation by a lining of refractory clay. The stone
cover, B, is provided with an aperture, b, through which the boiler is
filled. The steam pipe, k, is inclosed in a second pipe, f, provided
with radii. This tube serves as a stirrer; and is set in motion by means
of a pulley, g. The tube, c, is connected with a worm, h, and the tube,
d, which is provided with a valve, leads to the second boiler, C. The
head, D, which acts, by reason of its internal arrangement, as a
dephlegmator, is of enameled iron, and is provided with a thermometer,
f, and an aperture, p. Above the spirals of the worm, e, are placed
strips of glass, the free intervals between which are filled in with
pieces of glass, porcelain, or any other material not attackable by
acids. The arrangement is such that the rising vapors can regularly and
without obstruction traverse these materials of wide surface. The
condensed liquid falls back into the lower part of the boiler. The worm,
e, debouches into a cooler, F, fed with water through the cock, n.

At the bottom of the boiler, A, there is fixed a tubulure, r, closed by
a lever, s, and having a fastening device, o. This tubulure permits of
emptying the boiler into the reservoir, L.

A like arrangement is found in the boiler, C. The valves, V, serve to
introduce steam for heating into the double bottoms of the two boilers.
The water of condensation flows out through the tubes, u. The water for
cooling enters the coolers, F, J, and Z, through the cocks, n, and flows
out through the tubes, v.

The acetate, previously crushed, is placed in the boiler, A, and the
quantity of acid necessary to decompose it is added. The mass is
afterward mixed with care by means of the stirrer, and the distillation
may then proceed at once.

The vapors of acetic acid that are disengaged enter the boiler, C,
through the tube, d, and are kept hot by the steam. In the head, D, they
are separated into two portions, viz., into concentrated acetic acid,
which condenses by reason of its high boiling point, and into steam,
which distills and carries along but a very small amount of acetic acid.
This steam passes through the pipe, G, into the worm, H, condenses, and
afterward flows into the vessel, N.

[Illustration: APPARATUS FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF VINEGAR.]

The acetic acid that accumulates in the boiler, C, must be again
vaporized and treated until it no longer gives off any steam at all
through the pipe, G. The amount of cooling water admitted into the worm,
e, that traverses the head, D, is regulated according to the degree of
concentration it is desired to give the acid. As soon as the steam can
no longer be separated in the boiler, C, and temperature has reached 118
degrees, the anhydrous acetic acid is distilled through the tube, g, and
received in the cooler, K, wherein it condenses. When the contents of
the boiler, A, have been distilled to dryness, the tube, d, is closed
and the cock of the tube, c, is opened. After this, steam is injected
directly through the tube, k, in order to distill the acetic acid that
still remains in the residuum, and which passes thus through the tube,
e, into the worm, h, and flows into the two-necked bottle, S.

There may be added to the boiler, C, certain materials for purifying the
acetic acid, such as permanganate of potassa or acetate of soda, so as
to obtain an absolutely pure article.--_Dingler's Polytech. Journal_.

       *       *       *       *       *




FIELD KITCHENS.


We illustrate the field kitchens of Captain J.C. Baxter, R.E., in the
Inventions Exhibition. Figs. 1 to 3 represent Captain Baxter's
Telescopic Kitchen, both open for use and packed up for traveling. These
kitchens, which are on an entirely new principle, consist of from three
to five annular kettles, either circular or elliptical, which are placed
one on another, and the fire lighted inside the central tube. The
kettles are built up on the top of the outer case in which they are
carried, the central tube being placed over the grate in the lid. A
small iron stand, supporting an ordinary pot, is placed on the top. When
packed up, the annular kettles fit or nest into each other, and into the
outer case; the iron stand packs inside the innermost kettle, and the
top pot is placed on the outer case, being secured by a strap. This form
of kitchen is intended for the use of officers, both regular and
volunteer, and for officers' and sergeants' messes on active service or
in camp. They are also suited for travelers, explorers, colonists,
boating, shooting, and fishing parties, and in fact for all who may
require to cook in the open air. Figs. 4 to 6 represent the kitchen of
the field service pattern with conical kettles, while Figs. 7 and 8
represent the same pattern with elliptical kettles. These kitchens
consist of five annular vessels, either circular or elliptical, which
are placed one upon another, and the fire lighted in the central tube or
flue. A small iron stand, supporting an ordinary pot or kettle, may be
placed on the top as in the other set. A small hole, 18 inches long, 6
inches deep, and of the same width as the central tube of the annular
kettles, may be made for an ashpit, or the kitchen may be raised a few
inches from the ground on stones or turf. The annular vessels may be
made cylindrical or conical; in the latter case they will fit or nest
into one another, and save space when not in use. They may be made
circular or elliptical. Those intended for cavalry are provided with
straps to attach them to the saddle. This form of kitchen is intended
for the use of troops on active service, or in camp or barracks,
workhouses prisons, schools, and soup kitchens; also for cooking food
for cattle and hounds; and for all who may require to cook and
distribute quickly large quantities of food, soup, or tea, or to heat
water rapidly at a small cost. The manufacturers are M. Adams & Son,
London.--_Iron_.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.-FIG. 3. FIELD KITCHENS.]

[Illustration: FIG. 4.-FIG. 6. FIELD KITCHENS.]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.-FIG. 8. FIELD KITCHENS.]

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW COP-WINDER.


In Germany extensive use is made of a cop-winding machine in which the
wooden spindle consists of a cone moved by a screw, and the position of
which is horizontal. Fig. 1 shows the primitive type of the German
apparatus, in which the cone that forms the cop is set in motion by a
horizontal screw. It is at first the greater diameter of the cone that
moves the tube, and permits the thread to accumulate beneath the narrow
extremity. But, as soon as a core of thread has been formed, it is in
contact with the entire surface of the cone, and thus revolves with a
mean velocity until it is finished.

In the new model (Fig. 2) the arrangement is different. Here A is the
paper tube, with wooden base, to which it is freely attached, and C is
the cone that moves over the screw, D. The thread passes into a groove
which makes one revolution of the cone, and from thence over the paper
tube, where it receives the form of a cop by reason of the transverse
motion of the cone upon the screw. This transverse motion is at first
prevented by the click, F, which falls into the teeth of the
ratchet-wheel fixed behind the cone. The shaft revolves continuously,
but has, at the same time, a to and fro motion in the direction of its
axis, so as to cause the thread to move forward constantly and form a
cop. This to and fro motion is obtained by means of a lever and a
sleeve, I, the wheel, H, of the shaft being set in motion by the pinion,
J, actuated by the transmission of the machine. As the spindle advances,
a core is formed; the click, F, is then pushed backward, and the cone is
kept in motion by the thread until the cop is finished.

[Illustration: A NEW COP-WINDING MACHINE.]

Preference is usually given to the horizontal model; but the system may
likewise be applied to a vertical spindle, and the arrangement in this
case is simpler, as shown in Fig. 3. A rotary motion of the shaft is
useless here, as the click, F, acts in an oblique position upon the
ratchet-wheel, O, and pushes it by reason of the to and fro motion of
the screw.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 513, page 8191.]



