aurous chloride from a 15 grain tube precisely over the perforation, and
then gently heated to about 200 deg. C. till the salt melted and ran through
the holes. A little further heating caused the reduced gold to solidify
on each side of the basin. The blowpipe was now brought to bear on the
bottom of the dish, right over the particular spots it was wished to
solder, and in a few moments, at a yellow-red heat (in daylight), the
gold was seen to "run." On the vessel being immediately withdrawn, a very
neat soldering was evident. The operation was repeated several times,
till in a few minutes the dish had been rendered quite tight and
serviceable.

Using the gold salt in this way, the principal difficulty experienced in
holding gold wire unflinchingly in the exact position vanishes, while
only a comparatively low temperature and small amount of gold is
necessary. Care must be taken to withdraw the platinum from the flame
just at the moment the gold is seen to run, for if the heat be continued
longer, the gold alloys with a larger surface of platinum, spreads, and
leaves the aperture empty. As in the case of all gold-soldered vessels,
the article cannot afterward be safely exposed to a temperature higher
than that at which the soldering was effected, and on this account it is
advisable to use as small an amount of auric chloride as possible. When
the perforations are of comparatively large size, the repairing is not so
easy, owing to the auric chloride, on fusing, refusing to fill them. I
find, however, that if some spongy platinum be mixed with a few
milligrammes of the gold salt, pressed into the perforation, and heat
applied as directed, a very good soldering can be effected. It is well to
hammer the surface of the platinum while hot, so as to secure perfect
union and welding of the two surfaces. This may be done in a few minutes
in such a manner as to render the repair indistinguishable. Strips of
platinum may be joined together in much the same way as already
described--a few crystals of auric chloride placed on each clean surface
and gently heated till nearly black, then bound together and further
heated for a few moments in the blowpipe flame. Rings and tubes can also
be formed on a mandrel, and soldered in the same fashion, and the chemist
thus enabled to build up small pieces of apparatus from sheet platinum in
the laboratory.--_Chem. News._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HELICOIDAL OR WIRE STONE SAW.


The sides of solid bodies, whatever be the degree of hardness, and
however fine the texture, possess surfaces formed of a succession of
projections and depressions. When two bodies are in contact, these
projections and indentations fit into one another, and the adherence that
results is proportional to the degree of roughness of the surfaces. If,
by a more or less energetic mechanical action, we move one of the bodies
with respect to the other, we shall produce, according as the action
overcomes cohesion, more or less disintegration of the bodies. The
resulting wear in each of them will evidently be inversely proportional
to its hardness and the nature of its surface; and it will vary, besides,
with the pressure exerted between the surfaces and the velocity of the
mechanical action. We may say, then, that the wear resulting from rubbing
two bodies against each other is a function of their degree of hardness,
of the extent and state of their surface, of the pressure, of the
velocity, and of the time.

[Illustration: FIGS. 1, 2 and 3.--APPARATUS FOR SAWING STONE.]

According as these factors are varied in a sense favorable or unfavorable
to their proper action, we obtain variations in the final erosion. Thus,
in rubbing together two bodies of different hardness and nature of
surface, we obtain a wear inversely proportional to the hardness and
state of polish of their surfaces. Through the interposition of a
pulverized hard body we can still further accelerate such wear, as a
consequence of the rapid renewal of the disintegrating element.

The gradual wear effected over the entire surface of a body brings about
a polish, while that effected along a line or at some one point
determines a cleavage or an aperture.

The process usually employed in quarries or stone-yards for sawing
consists in slowly moving a stone-saw backward and forward, either by
hand or machinery, and with scarcely any pressure. Mr. P. Gray has,
however, devised a new process, which is based upon the theoretical
considerations given above. His _helicoidal saw_ is, in reality, an
endless cable formed by twisting together three steel wires in such a way
as to give the spirals quite an elongated pitch.

The apparatus in its form for cutting blocks of stone into large slabs
(Figs. 1, 2, and 3) consists of two frames, A A, five feet apart, each
formed of two iron columns, 71/2 feet in height and one foot apart, fixed
to cast iron bases resting upon masonry. At the upper part, a frame, B B,
formed of double T-irons cross-braced here and there, supports a
transmission composed of gearwheels, R R, and a pitch-chain, G G. Along
the columns of the frame, which serve as guides, move two kinds of
pulley-carriers, C C. The pulleys, D D, are channeled, and receive the
cable, a a, which serves as a helicoidal saw. The direction of the saw's
motion is indicated by the arrow. The carriages, C C, are traversed by
screws, V V, which are fixed between the columns. The extremity, v, of
the axle of the pulley to the right is threaded, and actuates a
helicoidal wheel, E, which transmits motion to the wheel, R, through the
intermedium of the vertical shaft, F. This transmission, completed by the
wheels, R R, and the pitch-chains, G G, is designed to move the saw
vertically, through the simultaneous shifting of the carriages, C C. A
tension weight, P, through the intermedium of pulleys, D_{1} D_{1},
permits of keeping the saw taut. A reservoir, H, at the upper part of the
frame, B B, contains the water and sand necessary for sawing. The feeding
is effected by means of a rubber tube, I, terminating in a flattened
rose, J, which is situated over the aperture made by the saw. A small
pump, L. over the reservoir takes water from K, and raises it to H. The
sand is put in by hand.

Above the basin, K, a system of rails and ties supports the carriage, Q,
upon which is placed the block of stone to be sawn. When one operation
has been finished, and it is desired to begin another, it is necessary to
raise the pulley-carriers and the saw. In order to do this quickly, there
is provided a special transmission, M, which is actuated by hand, through
a winch.

The work done by this saw is effected more rapidly than by the ordinary
processes, and certain very hard rocks, usually regarded as almost
intractable, can be sawed at the rate of from one to one and a half
inches per hour.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--APPARATUS FOR SAWING STONE INTO SLABS.]

For sawing marble into slabs of all thicknesses, the arrangement
described above may be replaced by a system consisting of two drums
having several channels to receive as many saws, or two corresponding
series of channeled pulleys, b b (Fig. 4), independent of each other, but
keyed to the same axles, i i. When the pulleys have been properly spaced
by means of keys, the whole affair is rendered solid by a bolt, g. The
extremity of the axles forms a nut into which pass vertical screws, c c.
These latter are connected above with cone-wheels, l l, which, gearing
with bevel wheels keyed to the shafts, e, secure a complete
interdependence of the whole. The ascending motion, which is controlled
by the endless screws, f, and the helicoidal wheels, m, is in this way
effected with great regularity. Uprights, a a, of double T-iron, fixed to
joists, k k, and connected and braced by pieces, d d, form a strong
frame.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--APPLICATION OF GAY'S STONE SAW IN A MARBLE
QUARRY.]

The power necessary to run this kind of saw is less than _n_ x 1/4 H.P.,
on account of the number of passive parts. The most interesting
application of the helicoidal saw is in the exploitation of quarries.
Fig. 5 represents a Belgian marble quarry which is being worked by Mr.
Gay's method.

_Tubular Perforators_.--Mr. Gay has rendered his saw completer by the
invention of a tubular perforator for drilling the preliminary well. It
is based upon the same principle as the Leschot rotary drill, but differs
from that in its extremity being simply of tempered steel instead of
being set with black diamonds. A special product, called metallic
agglomerate, is used instead of sand for hastening the work.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--TUBULAR PERFORATOR.]

The apparatus, Fig. 6, consists of an iron plate cylinder, A, 271/2
inches in diameter, and of variable length, according to the depth to be
obtained, and terminating beneath in a steel head, B, of greater
thickness. This cylinder is traversed by a shaft, C, to which it is
keyed, and which passes through the center of the aperture drilled. This
shaft is connected with the cylinder, A, through the intermedium of cross
bars, D, and transmits thereto a rapid rotary motion, which is received
at the upper part from a telodynamic wire that passes through the channel
of the horizontal pulley, P. This latter is supported by a frame
consisting of three uprights, Q Q, strengthened by stays, R R, fixed to
the ground.

In order that the cylinder, A, may be given a vertical motion, cords, M
M, fixed to a piece, S, loose on the hub, D, wind round the drum of a
windlass, T, after passing over the pulleys, p p.

The rapid gyratory motion of the cylinder, along with the erosive action
of the metallic agglomerate, rapidly wears away the rock, and causes the
descent of the perforator. During this operation a core of marble forms
in the cylinder. This is detached by lateral pressure, and is capable of
being utilized. The tool descends at the rate of from 20 to 24 inches per
hour, or from 8 to 10 yards per day in ordinary lime rock.--_Le Genie
Civil_.

       *       *       *       *       *




PORTABLE PROSPECTING DRILL.


[Illustration: PORTABLE PROSPECTING DRILL.]

The Aqueous Works and Diamond Rock-boring Company, Limited, of London,
show at the Inventions Exhibition, London, a light portable rock-boring
machine for prospecting for minerals, water, etc. It is capable of
sinking holes from 2 in. to 5 in. in diameter, and to a depth of 400 ft.
The screwed boring spindle, which is in front of the machine, is actuated
by miter gearing driven by a six horse power engine; the speed of driving
is 400 revolutions a minute. The pump shown on the left-hand side of the
engraving is used to deliver a constant stream of water through the
boring bar, the connection being made by a flexible hose. Suitable
winding gear for raising or lowering the lining tubes, boring rods, etc.,
is also mounted on the same frame. The drill is automatic in its action,
and the speed can be regulated by friction gearing. The front part of the
carriage is arranged so that it can be swung clear of the drill to raise
and lower the bore rods, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *




AUTOMATIC SAFETY GEAR.


Among the safety appliances which are to be found in the Mining Section
of the Inventions Exhibition is a model of an ingenious contrivance for
the prevention of overwinding, the joint patent of Mr. W.T. Lewis,
Aberdare, lead mineral agent to the Marquis of Bute, and W.H. Massey,
electric light engineer to the Queen. Both these gentlemen, having been
members of jury, were not allowed to compete for an award. The invention,
says _Engineering_, seems to possess considerable merit, and it should
prove of practical utility in collieries where enginemen are usually kept
winding for many hours at a stretch, and where the slightest mistake on
the part of the driver may lead to an accident.

Safety hooks are often fitted to winding ropes, and although the damage
to life and property is greatly reduced by the use of them, they do not
protect a descending cage from injury in a case of overwinding; besides
which, they are almost useless when a wild run takes place, an accident
which, strange to say, has already occurred many times after engines and
boilers have been laid off for repairs. Stop valves are left open, the
reversing lever is not fixed in mid-gear, steam is got up in the boilers
at a time when no one is in the engine house, and the engines run away.

[Illustration: LEWIS & MASSEY'S AUTOMATIC SAFETY GEAR.]

Various devices have been suggested and tried as a preventive, but their
application has either caused as much mischief as a bad accident, or it
has depended upon the driver doing something intentionally; whereas in
the automatic gear of Messrs. Massey and Lewis, of which an illustration
is annexed, there is nothing to cause damage or to interfere in any way
with the proper handling of the engines, and it is practically out of the
power of the driver to render the gear inoperative. It is here shown in
its simplest form as applied to the ordinary reversing and steam handles
of a winding engine, the only additions being an arm jointed to the top
of the valve spindle, with its connections to the shaft of the reversing
lever, and a disk receiving a suitable motion from the main shaft of the
engine. On the disk is a projecting piece or stop which is brought into
such positions, at or near the end of each journey, that the stop valve
cannot be opened, except slightly, when the reversing lever is not set
for winding in the proper direction, or when the cages have reached a
point beyond which it is undesirable that the engine driver should have
the power of turning on full steam. Thus, if one cage is at bank, the
driver cannot draw it up into the head gear suddenly; but after it has
been lifted slowly off the keeps or fangs, and the reversing lever thrown
over, the stop valve can be lifted wide open; and supposing that while
the engine is running the driver neglects to shut off steam in proper
time, then the projecting piece on the disk in traveling round, slowly
or quickly, and by steps according to requirements, will come in contact
with the driver, and so prevent an accident by bringing the reversing
lever into or beyond mid-gear.

Messrs. Lewis and Massey contemplate the use of governors in combination
with various forms of their automatic gear, so as to provide for every
imaginable case of winding, and also to avoid accidents when heavy loads
are sent down a pit; the special feature in their mechanism being that
when two or more things happen with regard to the positions of steam or
reversing handles, speed or position of cages in the pit, whatever it may
be necessary to do to meet the particular case shall be done
automatically.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE WATER SUPPLY OF ANCIENT ROMAN CITIES.

[Footnote: An address by Prof. W.H. Corfield, M.D., M.A., delivered
before the Sanitary Institute of Great Britain, July 9, 1885.--_Building
News_.]


As the supply of water to large populations is one of the most important
subjects in connection with sanitary matters, and one upon which the
health of the populations to a very large extent depends, I propose to
give a short account of some of the more important works carried out for
this purpose by the ancient Romans--the great sanitary engineers of
antiquity--more especially as I have had exceptional opportunities of
examining many of those great works in Italy, in France, and along the
north coast of Africa. Of the aqueducts constructed for the supply of
Rome itself we have an excellent detailed account in the work of
Frontinus, who was the controller of the aqueducts under the emperor
Nerva, and who wrote his admirable work on them about A.D. 97.

It may be interesting in passing to mention that Frontinus was a
patrician, who had commanded with distinction in Britain under the
emperor Vespasian, before he was appointed by the emperor Nerva as
controller (or, we should say, surveyor) of the aqueducts. He was also an
antiquarian, and in his work he not only describes the aqueducts as they
were in this time, but also gives a very interesting history of them. He
begins by telling us that for 441 years after the building of the
city--that is to say, B.C. 312--there was no systematic supply of water
to the city; that the water was got direct from the Tiber, from shallow
wells, and from natural springs; but that these sources were found no
longer to be sufficient, and the construction of the first aqueduct was
undertaken during the consulship of Appius Claudius Crassus, from whom it
took the name of the Appian aqueduct. This was, as may be expected from
its being the first aqueduct, not a very long one; the source was about
eight miles to the east of Rome, and the length of the aqueduct itself
rather more than eleven miles, according to Mr. James Parker, to whose
paper on the "Water Supply of Ancient Rome" I am indebted for many of the
facts concerning the aqueducts of Rome itself. This aqueduct was carried
underground throughout its whole length, winding round the heads of the
valleys in its course, and not crossing them, supported on arches, after
the manner of more recent constructions; it was thus invisible until it
got inside the city itself, a very important matter when we consider how
liable Rome was, in these early times, to hostile attacks.

It was soon found that more water was required than was brought by this
aqueduct, and it was no doubt considered desirable to have tanks at a
higher level in the city than those supplied by the Appian aqueduct. It
was determined, therefore, to bring water from a greater height, and from
a greater distance, and the river Anio, above the falls at Tivoli, was
selected for this purpose. The second aqueduct, the Anio Vetus, was no
less than 42 miles in length, and was, like the Appian, entirely under
the surface of the ground, except at its entrance into Rome at a point
about 60 ft. higher than the level of the Appian aqueduct.

Little search has been made for the remains of this aqueduct, and its
exact course is not known; but during my examination of the remains of
the subsequent aqueducts at a place called the Porta Furba, near Rome,
where the ruins of five aqueducts are seen together, and at, or close to,
which point the Anio Vetus must also have passed underground, I was
rewarded for my search by discovering a hole, something like a fox's
hole, leading into the ground; and on clearing away a few loose stones
which had apparently been thrown into it, and putting my arm in, I found
that it led into the specus or channel of an underground aqueduct; and on
relating this incident to the late Mr. John Henry Parker, the
antiquarian, who was then in Rome, and showing him a sketch of the place,
he said that he had no doubt that I had been fortunate enough to discover
the exact position of the veritable Anio Vetus at that spot. These two
aqueducts sufficed for the supply of Rome with water for about 120 years,
for Frontinus tells us that 127 years after the date at which the
construction of the Anio Vetus was undertaken--that is to say, the 608th
year after the foundation of the city--the increase of the city
necessitated a more ample supply of water, and it was determined to bring
it from a still greater distance. It was no longer considered necessary
to conceal the aqueduct underground during the whole of its course, and
so it was in part carried above ground on embankments or supported upon
arches of masonry. The water was brought from some pools in one of the
valleys on the eastern side of the Anio, some miles farther up than the
point from which the Anio Vetus was supplied; and the new aqueduct, which
was 54 miles in length, was called the Marcian, after the Praetor Marcius,
to whom the work was intrusted. Frontinus also tells us the history of
the other six aqueducts which were in existence in his time, viz., the
Tepulan, the Julian, the Virgo, the Alsietine or Augustan, the Claudian,
and the Anio Novus; the last two being commenced by the Emperor Caligula,
and finished by Claudius, because "seven aqueducts seemed scarcely
sufficient for public purposes and private amusements;" but it is not
necessary for our purpose to give any detailed account of the course of
these aqueducts; it is only necessary to mention one or two very
interesting points in connection with them. In order to allow of the
deposit of suspended matters, piscinae, or settling reservoirs, were
constructed in a very ingenious manner. Each had four compartments, two
upper and two lower; the water was conducted into one of the upper
compartments, and from this passed, probably by what we should call a
standing waste or overflow pipe, into the one below; from this it passed
(probably through a grating) into the third compartment at the same
level, and thence rose through a hole in the roof of this compartment
into the fourth, which was above it, and in which the water, of course,
attained the same level as in the first compartment, thence passing on
along the aqueduct, having deposited a good deal of its suspended matter
in the two lower compartments of the piscinae. Arrangements were made by
which these two lower compartments should be cleaned out from time to
time. The specus or channel itself was, of course, constructed of
masonry, generally of blocks of stone cemented together, and it was
frequently, though not, it would appear always, lined with cement inside.
It was roofed over, and ventilating shafts were constructed at intervals;
in order to encourage the aeration of the water, irregularities were
occasionally introduced in the bed of the channel. The water supplied by
the different aqueducts was of various qualities; thus, for instance,
that of the Alsietine, which was taken from a lake about 18 miles from
Rome, was of an inferior quality, and was chiefly used to supply a large
naumachia, or reservoir, in which imitation sea fights were performed;
while, on the other hand, the water of the Marcian was very clear and
good, and was therefore used for domestic purposes. Frontinus gives the
most accurate details as to the measurements of the amount of water
supplied by the various aqueducts, and the quantities used for different
purposes. From these details Mr. Parker computes the sectional area of
the water at about 120 square feet, and says: "We can form some opinion
of the vast quantity if we picture to ourselves a stream 20 ft. wide by 6
ft. deep constantly pouring into Rome at a fall six times as rapid as
that of the river Thames." He considers that the amount was equivalent to
about 332 million gallons a day, or 332 gallons per head per day,
assuming the population of the city to be a million. When we consider
that we in London have only 30 gallons a head daily, and that many other
towns have less, we get some idea of the profusion with which water was
supplied to ancient Rome. But the remains of Roman aqueducts are not only
to be found near Rome. Almost every Roman city, whether in Italy or in
the south of France, or along the north coast of Africa, can show the
remains of its aqueduct, and almost the only things that are to be seen
on the site of Carthage are the remains of the Roman water tanks and the
ruins of the aqueduct which supplied them. The most beautiful aqueduct
bridge in the world, on the course of the aqueduct which supplied the
ancient Nemaucus, now Nismes, still stands, and is called, from the name
of the department in which it is, the Pont du Gard. It consists of a row
of large arches crossing the valley over which the water had to be
carried, surmounted by a series of smaller arches, and these again by a
series of still smaller ones, carrying the specus of the aqueduct. This
