"But what made him draw such an animal?"

"Trade gin, I should think."

"Oh, that's the best explanation you can give, is it?"

"Well, sir, what is yours?"

"The obvious one that the creature exists.  That is actually sketched
from the life."

I should have laughed only that I had a vision of our doing another
Catharine-wheel down the passage.

"No doubt," said I, "no doubt," as one humors an imbecile.  "I confess,
however," I added, "that this tiny human figure puzzles me.  If it were
an Indian we could set it down as evidence of some pigmy race in
America, but it appears to be a European in a sun-hat."

The Professor snorted like an angry buffalo.  "You really touch the
limit," said he.  "You enlarge my view of the possible.  Cerebral
paresis!  Mental inertia!  Wonderful!"

He was too absurd to make me angry.  Indeed, it was a waste of energy,
for if you were going to be angry with this man you would be angry all
the time.  I contented myself with smiling wearily.  "It struck me that
the man was small," said I.

"Look here!" he cried, leaning forward and dabbing a great hairy
sausage of a finger on to the picture.  "You see that plant behind the
animal; I suppose you thought it was a dandelion or a Brussels
sprout--what?  Well, it is a vegetable ivory palm, and they run to
about fifty or sixty feet.  Don't you see that the man is put in for a
purpose?  He couldn't really have stood in front of that brute and
lived to draw it.  He sketched himself in to give a scale of heights.
He was, we will say, over five feet high.  The tree is ten times
bigger, which is what one would expect."

"Good heavens!" I cried.  "Then you think the beast was---- Why,
Charing Cross station would hardly make a kennel for such a brute!"

"Apart from exaggeration, he is certainly a well-grown specimen," said
the Professor, complacently.

"But," I cried, "surely the whole experience of the human race is not
to be set aside on account of a single sketch"--I had turned over the
leaves and ascertained that there was nothing more in the book--"a
single sketch by a wandering American artist who may have done it under
hashish, or in the delirium of fever, or simply in order to gratify a
freakish imagination.  You can't, as a man of science, defend such a
position as that."

For answer the Professor took a book down from a shelf.

"This is an excellent monograph by my gifted friend, Ray Lankester!"
said he.  "There is an illustration here which would interest you.  Ah,
yes, here it is!  The inscription beneath it runs:  'Probable
appearance in life of the Jurassic Dinosaur Stegosaurus.  The hind leg
alone is twice as tall as a full-grown man.'  Well, what do you make of
that?"

He handed me the open book.  I started as I looked at the picture.  In
this reconstructed animal of a dead world there was certainly a very
great resemblance to the sketch of the unknown artist.

"That is certainly remarkable," said I.

"But you won't admit that it is final?"

"Surely it might be a coincidence, or this American may have seen a
picture of the kind and carried it in his memory.  It would be likely
to recur to a man in a delirium."

"Very good," said the Professor, indulgently; "we leave it at that.  I
will now ask you to look at this bone." He handed over the one which he
had already described as part of the dead man's possessions.  It was
about six inches long, and thicker than my thumb, with some indications
of dried cartilage at one end of it.

"To what known creature does that bone belong?" asked the Professor.

I examined it with care and tried to recall some half-forgotten
knowledge.

"It might be a very thick human collar-bone," I said.

My companion waved his hand in contemptuous deprecation.

"The human collar-bone is curved.  This is straight.  There is a groove
upon its surface showing that a great tendon played across it, which
could not be the case with a clavicle."

"Then I must confess that I don't know what it is."

"You need not be ashamed to expose your ignorance, for I don't suppose
the whole South Kensington staff could give a name to it." He took a
little bone the size of a bean out of a pill-box.  "So far as I am a
judge this human bone is the analogue of the one which you hold in your
hand.  That will give you some idea of the size of the creature.  You
will observe from the cartilage that this is no fossil specimen, but
recent.  What do you say to that?"

"Surely in an elephant----"

He winced as if in pain.

"Don't!  Don't talk of elephants in South America.  Even in these days
of Board schools----"

"Well," I interrupted, "any large South American animal--a tapir, for
example."

"You may take it, young man, that I am versed in the elements of my
business.  This is not a conceivable bone either of a tapir or of any
other creature known to zoology.  It belongs to a very large, a very
strong, and, by all analogy, a very fierce animal which exists upon the
face of the earth, but has not yet come under the notice of science.
You are still unconvinced?"

"I am at least deeply interested."

"Then your case is not hopeless.  I feel that there is reason lurking
in you somewhere, so we will patiently grope round for it.  We will now
leave the dead American and proceed with my narrative.  You can imagine
that I could hardly come away from the Amazon without probing deeper
into the matter.  There were indications as to the direction from which
the dead traveler had come.  Indian legends would alone have been my
guide, for I found that rumors of a strange land were common among all
the riverine tribes.  You have heard, no doubt, of Curupuri?"

"Never."

"Curupuri is the spirit of the woods, something terrible, something
malevolent, something to be avoided.  None can describe its shape or
nature, but it is a word of terror along the Amazon.  Now all tribes
agree as to the direction in which Curupuri lives.  It was the same
direction from which the American had come.  Something terrible lay
that way.  It was my business to find out what it was."

"What did you do?"  My flippancy was all gone.  This massive man
compelled one's attention and respect.

"I overcame the extreme reluctance of the natives--a reluctance which
extends even to talk upon the subject--and by judicious persuasion and
gifts, aided, I will admit, by some threats of coercion, I got two of
them to act as guides.  After many adventures which I need not
describe, and after traveling a distance which I will not mention, in a
direction which I withhold, we came at last to a tract of country which
has never been described, nor, indeed, visited save by my unfortunate
predecessor.  Would you kindly look at this?"

He handed me a photograph--half-plate size.

"The unsatisfactory appearance of it is due to the fact," said he,
"that on descending the river the boat was upset and the case which
contained the undeveloped films was broken, with disastrous results.
Nearly all of them were totally ruined--an irreparable loss.  This is
one of the few which partially escaped.  This explanation of
deficiencies or abnormalities you will kindly accept.  There was talk
of faking.  I am not in a mood to argue such a point."

The photograph was certainly very off-colored.  An unkind critic might
easily have misinterpreted that dim surface.  It was a dull gray
landscape, and as I gradually deciphered the details of it I realized
that it represented a long and enormously high line of cliffs exactly
like an immense cataract seen in the distance, with a sloping,
tree-clad plain in the foreground.

"I believe it is the same place as the painted picture," said I.

"It is the same place," the Professor answered.  "I found traces of the
fellow's camp.  Now look at this."

It was a nearer view of the same scene, though the photograph was
extremely defective.  I could distinctly see the isolated, tree-crowned
pinnacle of rock which was detached from the crag.

"I have no doubt of it at all," said I.

"Well, that is something gained," said he.  "We progress, do we not?
Now, will you please look at the top of that rocky pinnacle?  Do you
observe something there?"

"An enormous tree."

"But on the tree?"

"A large bird," said I.

He handed me a lens.

"Yes," I said, peering through it, "a large bird stands on the tree.
It appears to have a considerable beak.  I should say it was a pelican."

"I cannot congratulate you upon your eyesight," said the Professor.
"It is not a pelican, nor, indeed, is it a bird.  It may interest you
to know that I succeeded in shooting that particular specimen.  It was
the only absolute proof of my experiences which I was able to bring
away with me."

"You have it, then?"  Here at last was tangible corroboration.

"I had it.  It was unfortunately lost with so much else in the same
boat accident which ruined my photographs.  I clutched at it as it
disappeared in the swirl of the rapids, and part of its wing was left
in my hand.  I was insensible when washed ashore, but the miserable
remnant of my superb specimen was still intact; I now lay it before
you."

From a drawer he produced what seemed to me to be the upper portion of
the wing of a large bat.  It was at least two feet in length, a curved
bone, with a membranous veil beneath it.

"A monstrous bat!" I suggested.

"Nothing of the sort," said the Professor, severely.  "Living, as I do,
in an educated and scientific atmosphere, I could not have conceived
that the first principles of zoology were so little known.  Is it
possible that you do not know the elementary fact in comparative
anatomy, that the wing of a bird is really the forearm, while the wing
of a bat consists of three elongated fingers with membranes between?
Now, in this case, the bone is certainly not the forearm, and you can
see for yourself that this is a single membrane hanging upon a single
bone, and therefore that it cannot belong to a bat.  But if it is
neither bird nor bat, what is it?"

My small stock of knowledge was exhausted.

"I really do not know," said I.

He opened the standard work to which he had already referred me.

"Here," said he, pointing to the picture of an extraordinary flying
monster, "is an excellent reproduction of the dimorphodon, or
pterodactyl, a flying reptile of the Jurassic period.  On the next page
is a diagram of the mechanism of its wing.  Kindly compare it with the
specimen in your hand."

A wave of amazement passed over me as I looked.  I was convinced.
There could be no getting away from it.  The cumulative proof was
overwhelming.  The sketch, the photographs, the narrative, and now the
actual specimen--the evidence was complete.  I said so--I said so
warmly, for I felt that the Professor was an ill-used man.  He leaned
back in his chair with drooping eyelids and a tolerant smile, basking
in this sudden gleam of sunshine.

"It's just the very biggest thing that I ever heard of!" said I, though
it was my journalistic rather than my scientific enthusiasm that was
roused.  "It is colossal.  You are a Columbus of science who has
discovered a lost world.  I'm awfully sorry if I seemed to doubt you.
It was all so unthinkable.  But I understand evidence when I see it,
and this should be good enough for anyone."

The Professor purred with satisfaction.

"And then, sir, what did you do next?"

"It was the wet season, Mr. Malone, and my stores were exhausted.  I
explored some portion of this huge cliff, but I was unable to find any
way to scale it.  The pyramidal rock upon which I saw and shot the
pterodactyl was more accessible.  Being something of a cragsman, I did
manage to get half way to the top of that.  From that height I had a
better idea of the plateau upon the top of the crags.  It appeared to
be very large; neither to east nor to west could I see any end to the
vista of green-capped cliffs.  Below, it is a swampy, jungly region,
full of snakes, insects, and fever.  It is a natural protection to this
singular country."

"Did you see any other trace of life?"

"No, sir, I did not; but during the week that we lay encamped at the
base of the cliff we heard some very strange noises from above."

"But the creature that the American drew?  How do you account for that?"

"We can only suppose that he must have made his way to the summit and
seen it there.  We know, therefore, that there is a way up.  We know
equally that it must be a very difficult one, otherwise the creatures
would have come down and overrun the surrounding country.  Surely that
is clear?"

"But how did they come to be there?"

"I do not think that the problem is a very obscure one," said the
Professor; "there can only be one explanation.  South America is, as
you may have heard, a granite continent.  At this single point in the
interior there has been, in some far distant age, a great, sudden
volcanic upheaval.  These cliffs, I may remark, are basaltic, and
therefore plutonic.  An area, as large perhaps as Sussex, has been
lifted up en bloc with all its living contents, and cut off by
perpendicular precipices of a hardness which defies erosion from all
the rest of the continent.  What is the result?  Why, the ordinary laws
of Nature are suspended.  The various checks which influence the
struggle for existence in the world at large are all neutralized or
altered.  Creatures survive which would otherwise disappear.  You will
observe that both the pterodactyl and the stegosaurus are Jurassic, and
therefore of a great age in the order of life.  They have been
artificially conserved by those strange accidental conditions."

"But surely your evidence is conclusive.  You have only to lay it
before the proper authorities."

"So in my simplicity, I had imagined," said the Professor, bitterly.
"I can only tell you that it was not so, that I was met at every turn
by incredulity, born partly of stupidity and partly of jealousy.  It is
not my nature, sir, to cringe to any man, or to seek to prove a fact if
my word has been doubted.  After the first I have not condescended to
show such corroborative proofs as I possess.  The subject became
hateful to me--I would not speak of it.  When men like yourself, who
represent the foolish curiosity of the public, came to disturb my
privacy I was unable to meet them with dignified reserve.  By nature I
am, I admit, somewhat fiery, and under provocation I am inclined to be
violent.  I fear you may have remarked it."

I nursed my eye and was silent.

"My wife has frequently remonstrated with me upon the subject, and yet
I fancy that any man of honor would feel the same.  To-night, however,
I propose to give an extreme example of the control of the will over
the emotions.  I invite you to be present at the exhibition."  He
handed me a card from his desk.  "You will perceive that Mr. Percival
Waldron, a naturalist of some popular repute, is announced to lecture
at eight-thirty at the Zoological Institute's Hall upon 'The Record of
the Ages.' I have been specially invited to be present upon the
platform, and to move a vote of thanks to the lecturer.  While doing
so, I shall make it my business, with infinite tact and delicacy, to
throw out a few remarks which may arouse the interest of the audience
and cause some of them to desire to go more deeply into the matter.
Nothing contentious, you understand, but only an indication that there
are greater deeps beyond.  I shall hold myself strongly in leash, and
see whether by this self-restraint I attain a more favorable result."

"And I may come?" I asked eagerly.

"Why, surely," he answered, cordially.  He had an enormously massive
genial manner, which was almost as overpowering as his violence.  His
smile of benevolence was a wonderful thing, when his cheeks would
suddenly bunch into two red apples, between his half-closed eyes and
his great black beard.  "By all means, come.  It will be a comfort to
me to know that I have one ally in the hall, however inefficient and
ignorant of the subject he may be.  I fancy there will be a large
audience, for Waldron, though an absolute charlatan, has a considerable
popular following.  Now, Mr. Malone, I have given you rather more of my
time than I had intended.  The individual must not monopolize what is
meant for the world.  I shall be pleased to see you at the lecture
to-night.  In the meantime, you will understand that no public use is
to be made of any of the material that I have given you."

"But Mr. McArdle--my news editor, you know--will want to know what I
have done."

"Tell him what you like.  You can say, among other things, that if he
sends anyone else to intrude upon me I shall call upon him with a
riding-whip.  But I leave it to you that nothing of all this appears in
print.  Very good.  Then the Zoological Institute's Hall at
eight-thirty to-night."  I had a last impression of red cheeks, blue
rippling beard, and intolerant eyes, as he waved me out of the room.




                            CHAPTER V

                           "Question!"

What with the physical shocks incidental to my first interview with
Professor Challenger and the mental ones which accompanied the second,
I was a somewhat demoralized journalist by the time I found myself in
Enmore Park once more.  In my aching head the one thought was throbbing
that there really was truth in this man's story, that it was of
tremendous consequence, and that it would work up into inconceivable
copy for the Gazette when I could obtain permission to use it.  A
taxicab was waiting at the end of the road, so I sprang into it and
drove down to the office.  McArdle was at his post as usual.

"Well," he cried, expectantly, "what may it run to?  I'm thinking,
young man, you have been in the wars.  Don't tell me that he assaulted
you."

"We had a little difference at first."

"What a man it is!  What did you do?"

"Well, he became more reasonable and we had a chat.  But I got nothing
out of him--nothing for publication."

"I'm not so sure about that.  You got a black eye out of him, and
that's for publication.  We can't have this reign of terror, Mr.
Malone.  We must bring the man to his bearings.  I'll have a leaderette
on him to-morrow that will raise a blister.  Just give me the material
and I will engage to brand the fellow for ever.  Professor
Munchausen--how's that for an inset headline?  Sir John Mandeville
redivivus--Cagliostro--all the imposters and bullies in history.  I'll
show him up for the fraud he is."

"I wouldn't do that, sir."

"Why not?"

"Because he is not a fraud at all."

"What!" roared McArdle.  "You don't mean to say you really believe this
stuff of his about mammoths and mastodons and great sea sairpents?"

"Well, I don't know about that.  I don't think he makes any claims of
that kind.  But I do believe he has got something new."

"Then for Heaven's sake, man, write it up!"

"I'm longing to, but all I know he gave me in confidence and on
condition that I didn't."  I condensed into a few sentences the
Professor's narrative.  "That's how it stands."

McArdle looked deeply incredulous.

"Well, Mr. Malone," he said at last, "about this scientific meeting
to-night; there can be no privacy about that, anyhow.  I don't suppose
any paper will want to report it, for Waldron has been reported already
a dozen times, and no one is aware that Challenger will speak.  We may
