strong currents. But with a steel horseshoe, magnetized once for all,
the magnetic lines that flow around the bend of the steel are a fixed
quantity, and, however much you diminish the reluctance of the
magnetic circuit, you do not create or evoke any more. When the
armature is away the magnetic lines arch across, not at the ends of
the horseshoe only, but from its flanks; the whole of the magnetic
lines leaking somehow across the space. Where you have put the
armature on, these lines, instead of arching out into space as freely
as they did, pass for the most part along the steel limbs and through
the iron armature. You may still have a considerable amount of
leakage, but you have not made one line more go through the bent part.
You have absolutely the same number going through the bend with the
armature off as with the armature on. You do not add to the total
number by reducing the magnetic reluctance, because you are not
working under the influence of a constantly impressed magnetizing
force. By putting the armature on to a steel horseshoe magnet you
only _collect_ the magnetic lines, you do not _multiply_ them. This is
not a matter of conjecture. A group of my students have been making
experiments in the following way: They took this large steel horseshoe
magnet (Fig. 52), the length of which, from end to end, through the
steel, is 421/2 inches. A light, narrow frame was constructed so that it
could be slipped on over the magnet, and on it were wound 30 turns of
fine wire, to serve as an exploring coil. The ends of this coil were
carried to a distant part of the laboratory, and connected to a
sensitive ballistic galvanometer. The mode of experimenting is as
follows:

The coil is slipped on over the magnet (or over its armature) to any
desired position. The armature of the magnet is placed gently upon the
poles, and time enough is allowed to elapse for the galvanometer
needle to settle to zero. The armature is then suddenly detached. The
first swing measures the change, due to removing the armature, in the
number of magnetic lines that pass through the coil in the particular
position.

[Illustration: FIG. 52.--EXPERIMENT WITH PERMANENT MAGNET.]

I will roughly repeat the experiment before you: The spot of light on
the screen is reflected from my galvanometer at the far end of the
table. I place the exploring coil just over the pole, and slide on the
armature; then close the galvanometer circuit. Now I detach the
armature, and you observe the large swing. I shift the exploring coil,
right up to the bend; replace the armature; wait until the spot of
light is brought to rest at the zero of the scale. Now, on detaching
the armature, the movement of the spot of light is quite
imperceptible. In our careful laboratory experiments, the effect was
noticed inch by inch all along the magnet. The effect when the
exploring coil was over the bend was not as great as 1-3000th part of
the effect when the coil was hard up to the pole. We are, therefore,
justified in saying that the number of magnetic lines in a permanently
magnetized steel horseshoe magnet is not altered by the presence or
absence of the armature.

You will have noticed that I always put on the armature gently. It
does not do to slam on the armature; every time you do so, you knock
some of the so-called permanent magnetism out of it. But you may pull
off the armature as suddenly as you like. It does the magnet good
rather than harm. There is a popular superstition that you ought never
to pull off the keeper of a magnet suddenly. On investigation, it is
found that the facts are just the other way. You may pull off the
keeper as suddenly as you like, but you should never slam it on.

From these experimental results I pass to the special design of
electromagnets for special purposes.


ELECTROMAGNETS FOR MAXIMUM TRACTION.

These have already been dealt with in the preceding lecture; the
characteristic feature of all the forms suitable for traction being
the compact magnetic circuit.

Several times it has been proposed to increase the power of
electromagnets by constructing them with intermediate masses of iron
between the central core and the outside, between the layers of
windings. All these constructions are founded on fallacies. Such iron
is far better placed either right inside the coils or right outside
them, so that it may properly constitute a part of the magnetic
circuit. The constructions known as Camacho's and Cance's, and one
patented by Mr. S.A. Varley, in 1877, belonging to this delusive order
of ideas, are now entirely obsolete.

Another construction which is periodically brought forward as a
novelty is the use of iron windings of wire or strip in place of
copper winding. The lower electric conductivity of iron, as compared
with copper, makes such a construction wasteful of exciting power. To
apply equal magnetizing power by means of an iron coil implies the
expenditure of about six times as many watts as need be expended if
the coil is of copper.


ELECTROMAGNETS FOR MAXIMUM RANGE OF ATTRACTION.

We have already laid down the principle which will enable us to design
electromagnets to act at a distance. We want our magnet to project, as
it were, its force across the greatest length of air gap. Clearly,
then, such a magnet must have a very large magnetizing power, with
many ampere turns upon it, to be able to make the required number of
magnetic lines pass across the air resistance. Also it is clear that
the poles must not be too close together for its work, otherwise the
magnetic lines at one pole will be likely to curl round and take short
cuts to the other pole. There must be a wider width between the poles
than is desirable in electromagnets for traction.


ELECTROMAGNETS OF MINIMUM WEIGHT.

In designing an apparatus to put on board a boat or a balloon, where
weight is a consideration of primary importance, there is again a
difference. There are three things that come into play--iron, copper,
and electric current. The current weighs nothing, therefore, if you
are going to sacrifice everything else to weight, you may have
comparatively little iron, but you must have enough copper to be able
to carry the electric current; and under such circumstances you must
not mind heating your wires nearly red hot to pass the biggest
possible current. Provide as little copper as you conveniently can,
sacrificing economy in that case to the attainment of your object;
but, of course, you must use fireproof material, such as asbestos, for
insulating, instead of cotton or silk.


A USEFUL GUIDING PRINCIPLE.

In all cases of design there is one leading principle which will be
found of great assistance, namely, that a magnet always tends so to
act as though it tried to diminish the length of its magnetic circuit.
It tries to grow more compact. This is the reverse of that which holds
good with an electric current. The electric circuit always tries to
enlarge itself, so as to inclose as much space as possible, but the
magnetic circuit always tries to make itself as compact as possible.
Armatures are drawn in as near as can be, to close up the magnetic
circuit. Many two-pole electromagnets show a tendency to bend together
when the current is turned on. One form in particular, which was
devised by Ruhmkorff for the purpose of repeating Faraday's celebrated
experiment on the magnetic rotation of polarized light, is liable to
this defect. Indeed, this form of electromagnet is often designed very
badly, the yoke being too thin, both mechanically and magnetically,
for the purpose which it has to fulfill.

Here is a small electric bell, constructed by Wagener, of Wiesbaden,
the construction of which illustrates this principle. The
electromagnet, a horseshoe, lies horizontally; its poles are provided
with protruding curved pins of brass. Through the armature are drilled
two holes, so that it can be hung upon the two brass pins; and when so
hung up it touches the ends of the iron cores just at one edge, being
held from more perfect contact by a spring. There is no complete gap,
therefore, in the magnetic circuit. When the current comes and applies
a magnetizing power, it finds the magnetic circuit already complete in
the sense that there are no absolute gaps. But the circuit can be
bettered by tilting the armature to bring it flat against the polar
ends, that being indeed the mode of motion. This is a most reliable
and sensitive pattern of bell.

[Illustration: FIG. 53.--ELECTROMAGNETIC POP-GUN.]

_Electromagnetic Pop-gun._--Here is another curious illustration of
the tendency to complete the magnetic circuit. Here is a tubular
electromagnet (Fig. 53), consisting of a small bobbin, the core of
which is an iron tube about two inches long. There is nothing very
unusual about it; it will stick on, as you see, to pieces of iron when
the current is turned on. It clearly is an ordinary electromagnet in
that respect. Now suppose I take a little round rod of iron, about an
inch long, and put it into the end of the tube, what will happen when
I turn on my current? In this apparatus as it stands, the magnetic
circuit consists of a short length of iron, and then all the rest is
air. The magnetic circuit will try to complete itself, not by
shortening the iron, but by _lengthening_ it; by pushing the piece of
iron out so as to afford more surface for leakage. That is exactly
what happens; for, as you see, when I turn on the current, the little
piece of iron shoots out and drops down. You see that little piece of
iron shoot out with considerable force. It becomes a sort of magnetic
popgun. This is an experiment which has been twice discovered. I found
it first described by Count Du Moncel, in the pages of _La Lumiere
Electrique_, under the name of the "pistolet electromagnetique;" and
Mr. Shelford Bidwell invented it independently. I am indebted to him
for the use of this apparatus. He gave an account of it to the
Physical Society, in 1885, but the reporter missed it, I suppose, as
there is no record in the society's proceedings.


ELECTROMAGNETS FOR USE WITH ALTERNATING CURRENTS.

When you are designing electromagnets for use with alternating
currents, it is necessary to make a change in one respect, namely, you
must so laminate the iron that internal eddy currents shall not occur;
indeed, for all rapid-acting electromagnetic apparatus it is a good
rule that the iron must not be solid. It is not usual with telegraphic
instruments to laminate them by making up the core of bundles of iron
plates or wires, but they are often made with tubular cores, that is
to say, the cylindrical iron core is drilled with a hole down the
middle, and the tube so formed is slit with a saw cut to prevent the
circulation of currents in the substance of the tube. Now when
electromagnets are to be employed with rapidly alternating currents,
such as are used for electric lighting, the frequency of the
alternations being usually about 100 periods per second, slitting the
cores is insufficient to guard against eddy currents; nothing short of
completely laminating the cores is a satisfactory remedy. I have here,
thanks to the Brush Electric Engineering Company, an electromagnet of
the special form that is used in the Brush arc lamp when required for
the purpose of working in an alternating current circuit. It has two
bobbins that are screwed up against the top of an iron box at the head
of the lamp. The iron slab serves as a kind of yoke to carry the
magnetism across the top. There are no fixed cores In the bobbins,
which are entered by the ends of a pair of yoked plungers. Now in the
ordinary Brush lamp for use with a steady current, the plungers are
simply two round pieces of iron tapped into a common yoke; but for
alternate current working this construction must not be used, and
instead a U-shaped double plunger is used, made up of laminated iron,
riveted together. Of course it is no novelty to use a laminated core;
that device, first used by Joule, and then by Cowper, has been
repatented rather too often during the past fifty years to be
considered as a recent invention.

The alternate rapid reversals of the magnetism in the magnetic field
of an electromagnet, when excited by alternating electric currents,
sets up eddy currents in every piece of undivided metal within range.
All frames, bobbin tubes, bobbin ends, and the like, must be most
carefully slit, otherwise they will overheat. If a domestic flat iron
is placed on the top of the poles of a properly laminated
electromagnet, supplied with alternating currents, the flat iron is
speedily heated up by the eddy currents that are generated internally
within it. The eddy currents set up by induction in neighboring masses
of metal, especially in good conducting metals such as copper, give
rise to many curious phenomena. For example, a copper disk or copper
ring placed over the pole of a straight electromagnet so excited is
violently repelled. These remarkable phenomena have been recently
investigated by Professor Elihu Thomson, with whose beautiful and
elaborate researches we have lately been made conversant in the pages
of the technical journals. He rightly attributes many of the repulsion
phenomena to the lag in phase of the alternating currents thus induced
in the conducting metal. The electromagnetic inertia, or
self-inductive property of the electric circuit, causes the currents
to rise and fall later in time than the electromotive forces by which
they are occasioned. In all such cases the impedance which the circuit
offers is made up of two things--resistance and inductance. Both these
causes tend to diminish the amount of current that flows, and the
inductance also tends to delay the flow.


ELECTROMAGNETS FOR QUICKEST ACTION.

I have already mentioned Hughes' researches on the form of
electromagnet best adapted for rapid signaling. I have also
incidentally mentioned the fact that where rapidly varying currents
are employed, the strength of the electric current that a given
battery can yield is determined not so much by the resistance of the
electric circuit as by its electric inertia. It is not a very easy
task to explain precisely what happens to an electric circuit when the
current is turned on suddenly. The current does not suddenly rise to
its full value, being retarded by inertia. The ordinary law of Ohm in
its simple form no longer applies; one needs to apply that other law
which bears the name of the law of Helmholtz, the use of which is to
give us an expression, not for the final value of the current, but for
its value at any short time, t, after the current has been turned on.
The strength of the current after a lapse of a short time, t, cannot
be calculated by the simple process of taking the electromotive force
and dividing it by the resistance, as you would calculate steady
currents.

In symbols, Helmholtz's law is:

       i_{t} = E/R ( 1 - e^{-(R/L)t} )

In this formula i_{t} means the strength of the current after the
lapse of a short time t; E is the electromotive force; R, the
resistance of the whole circuit; L, its coefficient of self-induction;
and _e_ the number 2.7183, which is the base of the Napierian
logarithms. Let us look at this formula; in its general form it
resembles Ohm's law, but with a new factor, namely, the expression
contained within the brackets. The factor is necessarily a fractional
quantity, for it consists of unity less a certain negative
exponential, which we will presently further consider. If the factor
within brackets is a quantity less than unity, that signifies that
i_{t} will be less than E / R. Now the exponential of negative sign,
and with negative fractional index, is rather a troublesome thing to
deal with in a popular lecture. Our best way is to calculate some
values, and then plot it out as a curve. When once you have got it
into the form of a curve, you can begin to think about it, for the
curve gives you a mental picture of the facts that the long formula
expresses in the abstract. Accordingly we will take the following
case. Let E = 2 volts; R = 1 ohm; and let us take a relatively large
self-induction, so as to exaggerate the effect; say let L = 10 quads.
This gives us the following:

      ________________________________________
      |             |              |         |
      |  t_{(sec.)} | e^{+(R/L)t}  |  i_{t}  |
      --------------+--------------+---------|
      |      0      |      1       |  0      |
      |      1      |      1.105   |  0.950  |
      |      2      |      1.221   |  1.810  |
      |      5      |      1.649   |  3.936  |
      |     10      |      2.718   |  6.343  |
      |     20      |      7.389   |  8.646  |
      |     30      |     20.08    |  9.501  |
      |     60      |    403.4     |  9.975  |
      |    120      |  16200.0     |  9.999  |
      ----------------------------------------

In this case the value of the steady current as calculated by Ohm's
law is 10 amperes, but Helmholtz's law shows us that with the great
self-induction which we have assumed to be present, the current, even
at the end of 30 seconds, has only risen up to within 5 percent. of
its final value; and only at the end of two minutes has practically
attained full strength. These values are set out in the highest curve
in Fig. 54, in which, however, the further supposition is made that
the number of spirals, S, in the coils of the electromagnet is 100, so
that when the current attains its full value of 10 amperes, the full
magnetizing power will be Si = 1000. It will be noticed that the
curve rises from zero at first steeply and nearly in a straight line,
then bends over, and then becomes nearly straight again, as it
gradually rises to its limiting value. The first part of the
curve--that relating to the strength of the current after _very small_
interval of time--is the period within which the strength of the
current is governed by inertia (i.e., the self-induction) rather than
by resistance. In reality the current is not governed either by the
self-induction or by the resistance alone, but by the ratio of the
two. This ratio is sometimes called the "time constant" of the
circuit, for it represents _the time_ which the current takes in that
circuit to rise to a definite fraction of its final value.

  E = 10
  r = 1
  R = 100
  L = 10

      Si
  1000 +              _..-------------------------------
       |           .                        _ _---------
       |         .                   .----
       |        .                 .-  2 IN SERIES
       |       .               .-
       |      -
       |     .:           - :
       |     .:         .   :
   500 |    . :     __-      -:---------------------------
       |   .  : _.- -       :         2 IN PARALLEL
       |  .   :.  -         :
       | .  / : -           :
       | . /  -             :
       |. / - :             :
       |./.   :             :
       |/_____:_____________:____________________________ t
             10     20     40     60     80    100    120

             FIG. 54.--CURVES OF RISE OF CURRENTS.

This definite fraction is the fraction (e - 1)/e; or in decimals,
0.634. All curves of rise of current are alike in general shape, they
differ only in scale, that is to say, they differ only in the height
to which they will ultimately rise, and in the time they will take to
attain this fraction of their final value.

_Example (1)._--Suppose E = 10; R = 200 ohms; L = 8. The final value
of the current will be 0.025 amp. or 25 milliamperes. Then the time
constant will be 8 / 400 = 1-50th sec.

_Example (2)._--The P.O. Standard "A" relay has R = 400 ohms; L =
3.25. It works with 0.5 milliampere current, and therefore will work
with 5 Daniell cells through a line of 9,600 ohms. Under these
circumstances the time constant of the instrument on short circuit is
0.0081 sec.

It will be noted that the time constant of a circuit can be reduced
either by diminishing the self-induction or by increasing the
resistance. In Fig. 54 the position of the time constant for the top
curve is shown by the vertical dotted line at 10 seconds. The current
will take 10 seconds to rise to 0.634 of its final value. This
retardation of the rise of current is simply due to the presence of
coils and electromagnets in the circuit; the current as it grows being
retarded because it has to create magnetic fields in these coils, and
so sets up opposing electromotive forces that prevent it from growing
all at once to its full strength. Many electricians, unacquainted with
Helmholtz's law, have been in the habit of accounting for this by
saying that there is a lag in the iron of the electromagnet cores.
They tell you that an iron core cannot be magnetized suddenly, that it
takes time to acquire its magnetism. They think it is one of the
properties of iron. But we know that the only true time lag in the
magnetization of iron, that which is properly termed "viscous
hysteresis," does not amount to any great percentage of the whole
amount of magnetization, takes comparatively a long time to show
itself, and cannot therefore be the cause of the retardation which we
are considering. There are also electricians who will tell you that
when magnetization is suddenly evoked in an iron bar, there are
induction currents set up in the iron which oppose and delay its
magnetization. That they oppose the magnetization is perfectly true,
but if you carefully laminate the iron so as to eliminate eddy
currents, you will find, strangely enough, that the magnetism rises
still more slowly to its final value. For by laminating the iron you
have virtually increased the self-inductive action, and increased the
time constant of the circuit, so that the currents rise more slowly
than before. The lag is not in the iron, but in the magnetizing
current, and the current being retarded, the magnetization is of
course retarded also.


CONNECTING COILS FOR QUICKEST ACTION.

Now let us apply these most important though rather intricate
considerations to the practical problems of the quick working of the
electromagnet. Take the case of an electromagnet forming some part of
the receiving apparatus of a telegraph system in which it is desired
to secure very rapid working. Suppose the two coils that are wound
upon the horseshoe core are connected together in series. The
coefficient of self-induction for these two is four times as great as
that of either separately; coefficients of self-induction being
proportional to the square of the number of turns of wire that
surround a given core. Now if the two coils instead of being put in
series are put in parallel, the coefficient of self-induction will be
reduced to the same value as if there were only one coil, because half
the line current (which is practically unaltered) will go through each
coil. Hence the time constant of the circuit when the coils are in
parallel will be a quarter of that which it is when the coils are in
series; on the other hand, for a given line current, the final
magnetizing power of the two coils in parallel is only half what it
would be with the coil in series. The two lower curves in Fig. 54
illustrate this, from which it is at once plain that the magnetizing
power for very brief currents is greater when the two coils are put in
parallel with one another than when they are joined in series.

Now this circumstance has been known for some time to telegraph
engineers. It has been patented several times over. It has formed the
theme of scientific papers, which have been read both in France and in
England. The explanation generally given of the advantage of uniting
the coils in parallel is, I think, fallacious; namely that the "extra
currents" (i.e., currents due to self-induction) set up in the two
coils are induced in such directions as tend to help one another when
the coils are in series, and to neutralize one another when they are
in parallel. It is a fallacy, because in neither case do they
neutralize one another. Whichever way the current flows to make the
magnetism, it is opposed in the coils while the current is rising,
and helped in the coils while the current is falling, by the so-called
extra currents. If the current is rising in both coils at the same
moment, then, whether the coils are in series or in parallel, the
effect of self-induction is to retard the rise of the current. The
advantage of parallel grouping is simply that it reduces the time
constant.


BATTERY GROUPING FOR QUICKEST ACTION.

One may consider the question of grouping the battery cells from the
same point of view. How does the need for rapid working, and the
question of time constant, affect the best mode of grouping the
battery cells? The amateur's rule, which tells you to so arrange your
battery that its internal resistance should be equal to the external
resistance, gives you a result wholly wrong for rapid working. The
supposed best arrangement will not give you (at the expense even of
economy) the best result that might be got out of the given number of
cells. Let us take an example and calculate it out, and place the
results graphically before our eyes in the form of curves. Suppose the
line and electromagnet have together a resistance of 6 ohms, and that
we have 24 small Daniell cells, each of electromotive force say 1 volt,
and of internal resistance 4 ohms. Also let the coefficient of
self-induction of the electromagnet and circuit be 6 quadrants. When
all the cells are in series, the resistance of the battery will be 96
ohms, the total resistance of the circuit 102 ohms, and the full value
of the current 0.235 ampere. When all the cells are in parallel, the
resistance of the battery will be 0.133 ohm, the total resistance
6.133 ohms, and the full value of the current 0.162 ampere. According
to the amateur rule of grouping cells so that internal resistance
equals external, we must arrange the cells in 4 parallels, each having
6 cells in series, so that the internal resistance of the battery will
be 6 ohms, total resistance of circuit 12 ohms, full value of current
0.5 ampere. Now the corresponding time constants of the circuit in the
three cases (calculated by dividing the coefficient of self-induction
by the total resistance) will be respectively--in series, 0.06 sec.;
in parallel, 0.5 sec.; grouped for maximum steady current, 0.96 sec.
From these data we may now draw the three curves, as in Fig. 55,
wherein the abscissae are the values of time in seconds and the
ordinates the current. The faint vertical dotted lines mark the time
constants in the three cases. It will be seen that when rapid working
is required the magnetizing current will rise, during short intervals
of time, more rapidly if all the cells are put in series than it will
do if the cells are grouped according to the amateur rule.

   |
  5|                                                           .
   |                                                      .
   |                                                 .
  4|                           MAXIMUM         .
   |                          OUTPUT \    .
   |                                 .
  3|                             .
   |                          .  :     ALL IN SERIES
   |         _-------------------:------------------------------
  2|      .-             -       :
   |    -            -           :
   |  -:         -               :
  1| / :      -                  :             ALL IN PARALLEL
   |.  :  .                      :             _________--------
   |-  :__      :      ----------
   +-----------------------------:-------------------------------
   0     1     2     3     4     5     6     7     8     9    10

FIG. 55.--CURVES OF RISE OF CURRENT WITH DIFFERENT GROUPINGS OF BATTERY.

When they are all put in series, so that the battery has a much
greater resistance than the rest of the circuit, the current rises
much more rapidly, because of the smallness of the time constant,
although it never attains the same ultimate maximum as when grouped in
the other way. That is to say, if there is self-induction as well as
resistance in the circuit, the amateur rule does not tell you the best
way of arranging the battery. There is another mode of regarding the
matter which is helpful. Self-induction, while the current is growing,
acts as if there were a sort of spurious addition to the resistance of
the circuit; and while the current is dying away it acts of course in
the other way, as if there were a subtraction from the resistance.
Therefore you ought to arrange the battery so that the internal
resistance is equal to the real resistance of the circuit, plus the
spurious resistance during that time. But how much is the spurious
resistance during that time? It is a resistance proportional to the
time that has elapsed since the current was turned on. So then it
