
On the location and construction of the feed depends to some extent the
economical working of a boiler, and, to a great extent, especially with
certain types of boilers, its safety, durability, and freedom from a
variety of defects, such as leaky seams, fractured plates, and others of
a similar kind. And it is unfortunately true that the type of boiler
which from its nature is most severely affected by mal-construction, such
as we are now speaking of, is the very one which is the oftenest subject
to it. We are speaking now more particularly of the plain cylinder
boiler, of which there are many in use throughout the country.

Plain cylinder boilers are, as a rule, provided with mud drums located
near the back end. As a rule, also, these boilers are set in pairs over a
single furnace, and the mud drum extends across beneath, and is connected
to both, and one end projects through the setting wall at the side. Our
illustrations show a typical arrangement of this kind. Fig. 1 shows a
transverse section of the boilers and setting, while Fig. 2 shows a
longitudinal section of the same. It is a favorite method to connect the
feed pipe, F, to the end of the mud drum which projects through the wall,
and here the feed water is introduced, whether hot or cold; and there is
really not so much difference after all between the two, for no matter
_how_ effective a heater may be, the temperature to which it can raise
water passing through is quite low compared with the temperature of the
water in the boiler due to a steam pressure of say eighty pounds per
square inch. The difference in the effect produced by feeding hot or cold
water at the wrong place is one of degree, not of kind.

When a boiler is under steam of say eighty pounds per square inch, the
body of water in it will have a temperature of about 324 degrees Fahr.,
and the shell plates will necessarily be somewhat hotter, especially on
the bottom (just _how_ much hotter will depend entirely upon the quantity
of scale or sediment present). Now introduce a large volume of cold water
through an opening in the bottom, and what becomes of it? Does it rise at
once, and become mixed with the large body of water in the boiler? By no
means. It _cannot_ rise until it has become heated, for there is a great
difference between the specific gravity of water at 60 deg., or even 212 deg.
Fahr., and water at 324 deg.. Consequently, it "hugs" the bottom of the
boiler, and flows toward the _front_ end, or hottest portion of the
shell. Now let us examine the effect which it produces.

We know that wrought iron expands or contracts about 1 part in 150,000
for each degree that its temperature is raised or lowered. This is
equivalent to a stress of _one ton_ per square inch of section for every
15 degrees. That is, suppose we fix a piece of iron, a strip of
boilerplate, for instance, 1/4 of an inch thick and 4 inches wide, at a
temperature of 92 degrees Fahr., between a pair of immovable clamps.
Then, if we reduce the temperature of the bar under experiment to that of
melting ice, we put a stress of four tons upon it, or one ton for each
inch of its width.

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

Now this is precisely what happens when cold water is fed into the bottom
of a boiler. We have the plates of the shell at a temperature of not
less, probably, than 350 deg. Fahr. A large quantity of cold water, often at
a temperature as low as 50 deg. Fahr., is introduced through an opening in
the bottom, and flows along over these heated plates. If it could produce
its _full_ effect at once, the contraction caused thereby would bring a
stress of 300 / 15 = 20 tons per square inch upon the bottom plates of
the shell. But fortunately it cannot exert its full effect at once, but
it _can_ act to such an extent that we have known it to rupture the
plates of a new boiler through the seams on the bottom _no less than
three times in less than six weeks_ after the boilers were started up.

The effect in such cases will always be the most marked, especially if
the plant is furnished with a heater, when the engine is not running, for
then, as no steam is being drawn from the boilers, there is comparatively
little circulation going on in the water in the boiler, and the water
pumped in, colder than usual from the fact that the heater is not in
operation, spreads out in a thin layer on the lowest point of the shell,
and _stays there_, and keeps the temperature of the shell down, owing to
the fires being banked or the draught shut, while the larger body of
water above, at a temperature of from 300 to 325 degrees, keeps the upper
portion of the shell at _its_ higher temperature. It will readily be seen
that the strain brought upon the seams along the bottom is something
enormous, and we can understand why it is that many boilers of this class
rupture their girth seams while being filled up for the night after the
engine has been shut down. To most persons who have but a slight
knowledge of the matter, we fancy it would be a surprise to see the
persistence with which cold water will "hug" the bottom of a boiler under
such circumstances. We have seen boilers when the fire has been drawn,
and cold water pumped in to cool them off, so cold on the bottom that
they felt cold to the touch, and must consequently have had a temperature
considerably below 100 deg. Fahr., while the water on top, above the tubes,
was sufficiently hot to scald; and they will remain in such a condition
for hours.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

The only thing to be done, where feed connections are made in the manner
described, is to change them, and by changing them at once much trouble,
or even a disastrous explosion, may be avoided. Put the feedpipe in
through the front head, at the point marked _p_ in Fig. 1, drill and tap
a hole the proper size for the feed pipe, cut a long thread on the end of
the pipe, and screw the pipe through the head, letting it project through
on the inside far enough to put on a coupling, then screw into the
coupling a piece of pipe not less than eight or ten feet long, letting it
run horizontally toward the back end of the boiler, the whole arrangement
being only from 3 to 4 inches below the water line of the boiler, and hot
or cold water may be fed indifferently, without fear of danger from
ruptured plates or leaky seams. In short, put in a "top feed," and avoid
further trouble.--_The Locomotive_.

       *       *       *       *       *




[MICROSCOPICAL JOURNAL.]

IRON PRINTING AND MICROSCOPIC PHOTOGRAPHY.

By C.M. VORCE, F.R.M.S.


I. FORMULAS FOR PRINTING SOLUTIONS.

_Blue Prints_.--The best formula for this process, of many that I have
tried, is that furnished by Prof. C.H. Kain, of Camden, N.J., in which
the quantity of ammonio-citrate of iron is exactly double that of the red
prussiate of potash, and the solutions strong. This gives strong prints
of a bright dark blue, and prints very quickly in clear sunlight.

Dissolve six grains of red prussiate of potash in one drm. of distilled
water; in another drm. of distilled water dissolve twelve grains of
ammonio-citrate of iron. Mix the two solutions in a cup or saucer, and at
once brush over the surface of clean strong paper. Cover the surface
thoroughly, but apply no more than the paper will take up at once; it
should become limp and moist, but not wet. The above quantity of
solution, two drms., will suffice to sensitize ten square feet of paper,
or three sheets of the "regular" size of plain paper, 18x22. As fast as
the sheets are washed over with the solution, hang them up to dry by one
corner. The surplus fluid will collect in a drop at the lower corner, and
can be blotted off.

_Black Prints_.--Wash the paper with a saturated solution of bichromate
of potash, made quite acid with acetic acid. After printing, wash the
prints in running water for twenty to thirty minutes, then float them
face down on a weak solution (five to ten per cent.) of protosulphate of
iron for five minutes, and wash as before. If preferred, the iron
solution may be washed over the prints, or they may be immersed in it,
but floating seems preferable. After the second washing, wash the prints
over with a strong solution of pyrogallic acid, when the print will
develop black, and the ground, if the washings were sufficient, will
remain white. A final washing completes the process.

If a solution of yellow prussiate of potash be used in place of the pyro
solution, a blue print is obtained. Bichromate prints can be made on
albumenized paper by floating it on the solution, and by using a
saturated solution of protosulphate of iron and a saturated solution of
gallic acid. Very fine prints can be so produced nearly equal to silver
prints, and at somewhat less cost, but with a little or no saving of time
or labor.

_Chief Proof Solution_.--If old oxalate developer be exposed in a shallow
vessel in a warm place, a deposit of light green crystals will be formed,
composed of an impure oxalate of iron. If these crystals be dissolved in
water, and paper washed with a strong solution, when dry it may be
exposed in the printing-frame, giving full time. The image is very faint,
but on washing in or floating on a moderately strong solution of red
prussiate of potash for a minute or less, a blue positive is produced,
which is washed in water as usual to fix it. The unused developer
produces the best crystals for the purpose, and the pure ammonio-oxalate
is vastly better than either.

All of the above operations, except the printing, should be carried on in
the dark room, or by lamp or gas light only. The solutions and the paper
should also be kept in the dark, and prepared as short a time as possible
before use.


II. COMPOUND NEGATIVES.

In photographing with the microscope, it frequently occurs that the
operator, instead of devoting a negative to each of two or more similar
objects for comparison, printing both upon the same print, prefers to
have the whole series upon one negative, and taking from this a single
print. There is often room for two or more images upon the same plate. If
the center of the plate is devoted to one, obviously no more can be
accommodated on it, but by placing one at each end, or one on each
quarter of the plate, both economy of plates and convenience of printing
are secured. The end may be readily accomplished by matting the plate as
a negative is matted in printing.

Suppose it be desired to photograph four different species of acari on
one plate, the image of each when magnified to the desired extent only
covering about one-fourth the exposed area of the plate. First, a mat is
prepared of card-board or thick non-actinic paper, which is adjusted to
exactly fill the opening of the plate holder, lying in front of and close
against the plate when exposed, and having one-quarter very exactly cut
out. A convenient way to fit this mat is to leave projecting lugs on each
side at exactly the same distance from the ends, and cut notches in the
plate-holder into which the lugs may closely fit. If this work is
carefully done, the mat may be reversed both sidewise and endwise, and
the lugs will fit the notches; if so, it is ready for use. The object
being focused upon the focusing glass or card, the camera is raised
one-half the vertical dimension of the plate and displaced to one side
half the horizontal dimension, when the image will be found to occupy
one-quarter of the plate. The mat being placed in the plate holder, a
focusing glass is inserted in the position the plate will occupy, and
final adjustment and focusing made. The plate is then marked on one
corner on the film side with a lead pencil, placed in the holder without
disturbing the mat, and the exposure made. When the plate is replaced for
a second exposure, either the mat is reversed or the plate turned end for
end; but it is best to always place the plate in the holder in the same
position and change the mat to expose successive quarters, but this
requires the camera to be moved for each exposure.

With similar objects, and some judgment in making two exposures,
negatives may be made with almost exactly the same density in each
quarter, and by cutting out slightly less than one-quarter of the mat the
four images will be separated by black lines in the print; by cutting out
a trifle more than the exact quarter, they will be separated by white
lines instead of black.

       *       *       *       *       *




PRACTICAL DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING LANTERN TRANSPARENCIES.

[Footnote: Abstract of a paper communicated to the Glasgow and West of
Scotland Amateur Photographic Association.--From the _Photographic
News_.]

By T.N. ARMSTRONG.


When the season for out-door work closes, amateurs begin to look about
for means of employment during the dark evenings. There is, fortunately,
no necessity for being idle, or to relinquish photographic pursuits
entirely, even though the weather and light combine to render out-door
work almost impracticable; and most amateurs will be found to have some
hobby or favorite amusement which enables them to keep in practice during
those months when many channels of employment are closed to them; and
probably one of the most popular as well as the most pleasing occupations
is the production of transparencies for the lantern.

It is not my desire to enter into any discussion as to this or that being
the best means of producing these delightful pictures, but merely to
describe a way by which a pleasant evening can be spent at photography,
and slides produced of much excellence by artificial light.

To-night I propose, by the aid of artificial light, to make a few slides
with Beechy's dry plates. On the whole, I have been most successful with
them, and have obtained results more satisfactory than by any of the
other processes I have tried. I do not say that results quite as good
cannot be obtained by any other method, for I know manipulative skill
plays a most important part in this class of work.

When I first took up the making of transparencies with wet collodion, I
was told that my sorrows would not be far to seek, and so I soon found
out. Need I tell you of all my failures, such as films floating off the
glass, oyster-shell markings, pin-holes, films splitting when dry, etc.,
etc., not to speak of going to business with fingers in fearful state
with nitrate of silver and iron developer? Now all these miseries have
gone, and I can, with dry collodion plates, work with the greatest of
comfort, and obtain results quite equal to the best products of any
method.

It may be interesting to some to know the formula by which the emulsion
is made, and as the making of it is by no means a difficult operation, I
may be pardoned if, before going fully into the more practical part of my
paper, I describe the formula, and also the manner in which I coat and
dry the plates. The formula is as follows, for which the world is
indebted to Canon Beechy:

In 8 ounces of absolute alcohol dissolve 5 drachms of anhydrous bromide
of cadmium. The solution will be milky. Let it stand at least twenty-four
hours, or until perfectly clear; it will deposit a white powder. Decant
carefully into an 8-ounce bottle, and add to it a drachm of strong
hydrochloric acid. Label this "bromide solution;" and it is well to add
on the label the constituents, which will be found to be nearly:

 Alcohol.              1 ounce.
 Bromide of cadmium.  32 grains.
 Hydrochloric acid.    8 drops.

This solution will keep for ever, and will be sufficient to last two or
three years, and with this at hand you will be able in two days to
prepare a batch of plates at any time. In doing so, you should proceed
thus: Make up your mind how many plates you mean to make, and take of the
above accordingly. For two dozen 1/2-plates or four dozen 31/4 by 31/4,
dissolve by heat over, but not too near, a spirit lamp, and by yellow
light, 40 grains of nitrate of silver in 1 ounce of alcohol 0.820. While
this is dissolving in a little Florence flask on a retort stand at a safe
distance from the lamp--which it will do in about 5 minutes--take of the
bromized solution 1/2 an ounce, of absolute ether 1 ounce, of gun-cotton
grains; put these in a clean bottle, shake once or twice, and the
gun-cotton, if good, will entirely dissolve. As soon as the silver is all
dissolved, and while quite hot, pour out the above bromized collodion
into a clean 4-ounce measure, having ready in it a clean slip of glass.
Pour into it the hot solution of silver in a continuous stream, stirring
rapidly all the while with a glass rod. The result will be a perfectly
smooth emulsion without lumps or deposit, containing, with sufficient
exactitude for all practical purposes, 8 grains of bromide, 16 grains of
nitrate of silver, and 2 drops of hydrochloric acid per ounce. Put this
in your stock solution bottle, and keep it in a dark place for
twenty-four hours. When first put in, it will be milky; when taken out,
it will be creamy; and it will be well to shake it once or twice in the
twenty-four hours.

At the end of this time you can make your two dozen plates in about an
hour. Proceed as follows: Have two porcelain dishes large enough to hold
four or six of your plates; into one put sufficient clean water to nearly
fill it, into the other put 30 ounces of clear, flat, _not acid,_ bitter
beer, in which you have dissolved 30 grains of pyrogallic acid. Pour this
through a filter into the dish, and avoid bubbles. If allowed to stand an
hour, any beer will be flat enough; if the beer be at all brisk, it will
be difficult to avoid small bubbles on the plate. At all events, let your
preservative stand while you filter your emulsion. This must be done
through perfectly clean cotton-wool into a perfectly clean collodion
bottle; give the emulsion a good shaking, and when all bubbles have
subsided, pour it into the funnel, and it will go through in five
minutes. The filtered emulsion will be found to be a soft, smooth, creamy
fluid, flowing easily and equally over the plates. Coat with it six
plates in succession, and place each, as you coat it, into the water. By
the time the sixth is in, the first will be ready to come out. Take it
out, see that all greasiness is gone, and place it in the preservative,
going on till all the plates are so treated.

A very handy way of drying is to have a flat tin box of the usual hot
plate description, which fill with hot water, then screw on the cap; on
this flat tin box place the plates to dry, which they will do rapidly;
when dry, store away in your plate box, and you will have a supply of
really excellent dry collodion plates.

Just a word as to the preparation of the glasses before coating. It is
very generally considered that it is better the glasses receive either a
substratum of albumen or very weak gelatine. I use the latter on account
of the great ease of its preparation. After your glasses are well
cleaned, place them in, and rub them with a weak solution of hydrochloric
acid of the strength of 2 ounces acid to 18 ounces water.

Prepare a solution of gelatine 1 grain to the ounce of water, rinse the
plate after removal from the acid mixtures, and coat twice with the above
gelatine substratum; the first coating is to remove the surplus water,
and should be rejected. Rear the plates up to drain, and dry in a plate
rack or against a wall, and be careful to prevent any dust adhering to
the surface while wet.

Having now described the plates I intend to use, let us next consider
what a transparency is, that we may understand the nature of the work we
are undertaking. You are all aware that if we take a negative, and in
contact with it place a sheet of sensitized paper, we obtain a positive
picture. Substitute for the paper a sensitive glass plate, and we obtain
also a positive picture, but, unlike the paper print, the collodion or
other plate will require to be developed to bring the image into view.
Now this is what is termed making a transparency by contact. It often
happens, however, that a lantern slide 31/4 by 31/4 has to embrace the whole
of a picture contained in a much larger negative, so that recourse must
be had to the camera, and the picture reduced with the aid of a short
focus lens to within the lantern size; this is what is called making a
transparency by reduction in the camera. Both cases are the same,
however, so far as the process being simply one of printing.

Those who have never made a transparency will have doubtless printed
silver prints from their negatives, and when printing, how often do you
find that to secure the best results you require to have recourse to some
little dodge.

Now, let us bear this in mind when using such a negative for the printing
of a transparency, for, as I have said before, it is only a process of
printing, after all. Although we cannot, when using a sensitive plate,
employ the same means of dodging as in the case of a silver print, still
we are not left without a means of obtaining the same results in a
different way, and this just brings me to what I have already hinted at
previously, that a deal more depends on the manipulative skill of the
operator than in the adoption of any particular make plate or formula;
and not only does this manipulative skill show itself in the exposure,
