and any portion of the air could bend the human tympanic membrane once in
and once out 440 times in one second; and that 40,000,000 people, nearly
the whole population of the United States, could have their 5,000 pounds
of tympanic membrane thus shaken by an insect that could not move an ounce
weight to save its life; and that the 231,222 pounds of tympanic membrane
of the entire population of the earth, amounting to 1,350,000,000, who
could conveniently stand in 111/4 square miles, would be affected the same
way by 34 locusts stridulating in the air. According to the barometric
theory of Sir William Thomson, he showed that a locust would have to add
60,000,000 pounds to the weight of the atmosphere.

Under elasticity and density he stated that elasticity was a mere property
of a body, and could not add one grain of force to that exercised by the
locust, so as to assist it in performing such wonderful feats. Under
interference he showed that the law of interference is fallacious; that no
such thing occurs; and that in the experiment with the siren to show such
fact, the octave is produced which of necessity ought to be when the
number of orifices are alternately doubled, and the same effect would be
produced with one disk with double the number of holes. Under the last
head of his paper Dr. Mott proved that the membrana tympani was not
necessary for good hearing, that in fact when it was punctured, a deaf man
could in many cases be made to hear, and in fact it improved the hearing
in general; the only reason why the tympanic membrane was not punctured
oftener was that dust, heat, and cold were apt to injure the middle ear.

In closing his paper Dr. Mott said that he would risk the fallacy of the
current theory of sound on the argument advanced relating to the
impossibility of the slow motion of a tuning fork to produce sonorous
waves, and stated that he would retire if any one could show the fallacy
of the argument; but if not, the wave theory must be abandoned as absurd
and fallacious, as was the Ptolemaic system of astronomy, which was handed
down from age to age until Copernicus and his aide de camp Galileo gave to
the world a better system.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ATTOCK BRIDGE.


We give illustrations from _Engineering_ of a bridge recently constructed
across the Indus River at Attock, for the Punjaub Northern State Railway.
This bridge, which was opened on May 24, 1883, was erected under the
direction of Mr. F.L. O'Callaghan, engineer in chief, Mr. H. Johnson
acting as executive engineer, and Messrs. R.W. Egerton and H. Savary as
assistants.

[Illustration: BRIDGE OVER THE RIVER INDUS AT ATTOCK: PUNJAUB NORTHERN
STATE RAILWAY, INDIA.]

The principal spans cover a length of about 1,150 feet. It will be seen
from the diagram that there is a difference of nearly 100 feet in the
levels of high and low water.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ELASTICITY OF METALS.


M. Tresca has contributed to the _Comptes Rendus_ some observations on the
effect of hammering, and the variation of the limit of elasticity of
metals and materials used in the arts.

He says that hitherto, in considering the deformation of solids under
strain, two distinct periods, relative to their mechanical properties,
have alone been recognized. These periods are of course the elastic limit
and the breaking point. In the course of M. Tresca's own experiments,
however, he has found it necessary to consider, at the end of the period
of alteration of elasticity, a third state, geometrically defined and
describable as a period of fluidity, corresponding to the possibility of a
continuous deformation under the constant action of the same strain. This
particular condition is only realized with very malleable or plastic
bodies; and it may even be regarded as characteristic of such bodies,
since its absence is noticeable in all non-malleable or fragile bodies,
which break without being deformed. It is already known that the period of
altered elasticity for hard or tempered steel is much less than for iron.
In 1871 the author showed that steel or iron rails that had acquired a
permanent set were at the same time perfectly elastic up to the limit of
the load which they had already borne. With certain bars the same result
was renewed five times in succession; and thus their period of perfect
elasticity could be successively extended, while the coefficient of
elasticity did not appear to sustain any appreciable modification. This
process of repeated straining, when there is an absence of a certain
hammering effect, renders malleable bodies somewhat similar to those which
are not malleable and brittle. There is an indication here of another
argument against the testing of steam boilers by exaggerated pressures
before use, which process has the effect of rendering the plates more
brittle and liable to sudden rupture.

M. Tresca also protests against the elongation of metals under breaking
strain tests being stated as a percentage of the length. The elongation is
in all cases, chiefly local; and is therefore the same for a test piece
12 inches or 8 inches long, being confined to the immediate vicinity of
the point of rupture. The indication of elasticity should rather be sought
for in the reduction of the area of the bar at the point of rupture. This
portion of the bar is otherwise remarkable for having lost its original
condition. It is condensed in a remarkable manner, and has almost
completely lost its malleability. The final rupture, therefore, is that of
a brittle zone of the metal, of the same character that may be produced by
hammering. If a test bar, strained almost to the verge of rupture, be
annealed, it will stretch yet further before breaking; and, indeed, by
successive annealings and stretchings, may be excessively modified in its
proportions.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HARRINGTON ROTARY ENGINE.


The chief characteristic or principle of this engine is the maintenance of
an accurate steam and mechanical balance and the avoidance of cross
pressure. The power is applied directly to the work, the only friction
being that of the steel shaft in phosphor-bronze bearings. Referring to
the cuts, Fig. 1 shows the engine and an electric dynamo on the same
shaft, all connecting mechanism being done away with, and pounding
obviated. There are but two parts to the engine (two disks which supply
the place of all the ordinary mechanism), both of which are large, solid,
and durable. These disks have a bearing surface of several inches on each
other, preventing the passage of steam between them--a feature peculiar to
this engine. Fig. 2 represents an end elevation partly in section, showing
the piston, A, and the abutment disk, B, in the position assumed in the
instant of taking steam through a port from the valve-chamber, E. Fig. 3
is a vertical section through the center of Fig. 2, showing the relations
of the disks, C, and the abutment disks, B, and gear. The piston disks and
gear are attached to the driving shaft, H, and the abutment disks and gear
are attached to the shaft, K. These shafts, H and K, as above stated, run
in taper phosphor-bronze bearings, which are adjustable for wear or other
causes by the screw-caps, O. The whole mechanism is kept rigidly in place
by the flanged hub, r, bolted securely to the cylinder head, F. These
flanged heads project through the cylinder head, touching the piston disk,
and thereby prevent any end motion of the shaft, H, or its attachments.
The abutment disks and shaft are furnished with similar inwardly
projecting flanged hubs, which are provided with a recess, I, Fig. 2, on
their periphery, located radially between the shaft, K, and the clearance
space, J. Into this recess steam is admitted--through an inlet in the
cylinder head not shown in the cuts. By this means the shaft, K, is
relieved of all side pressure. The exhaust-port, which is very large and
relieves all back pressure, is shown at D. The pistons and disks are made
to balance at the speed at which the engine is intended to run. The
steam-valve, for which patent is pending, is new in principle. It has a
uniform rotating motion, and, like the engine, is steam and mechanically
balanced. The governor is located in the flywheel, and actuates the
automatic cut-off, with which it is directly connected, without the
intervention of an eccentric, in such a way as to vary the cut-off without
changing the point of admission. By this means is secured uniformity of
motion under variable loads with variable boiler pressure. It also secures
the advantage resulting from high initial and low terminal pressure with
small clearances and absence of compression, giving a large proportionate
power and smooth action.

Expansion has been excellently provided for, the steam passing entirely
around before entering the cylinder. These engines are mounted on a
bed-plate which may be set on any floor without especial preparation
therefor. The parts are all made interchangeable. A permanent indicator is
provided which shows the exact point of cut-off. The steam-port is
exceptionally large, being one-fourth of the piston area. Reciprocating
motion is entirely done away with. The steam is worked at the greatest
leverage of the crank through the entire stroke. Among the other chief
advantages claimed for this engine are direct connection to the machinery
without belts, etc., impossibility of getting out of line, uniform crank
leverage, capacity for working equally well slow or fast, etc. It has but
one valve, which is operated by gear from the shaft, as shown, traveling
at one-half the velocity of the piston.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--THE HARRINGTON ROTARY ENGINE COUPLED TO A DYNAMO.]

With this engine a speed of 5,000 revolutions per minute is easily
attainable, while, as a matter of fact and curiosity, a speed of 8,000
revolutions per minute has been obtained. An engine of this class was run
at the Illinois Inter-State Exposition at Chicago for six weeks at a
uniform speed of 1,050 revolutions per minute, furnishing the power for
twenty-three electric arc lights, with a steam pressure not exceeding
fifty-five pounds per square inch, and cutting off at from one-tenth to
one-sixth of the stroke. It was taking steam from a large main-pipe, so
there was no opportunity for an exact test of the amount of fuel used, but
from a careful mathematical calculation it must have been developing one
horse-power from three pounds of coal.

The inventor claims that, as his engine works the steam expansively, even
better results would have been obtained had the engine been furnished
steam at 100 pounds per square inch.

[Illustration: Figs. 2 and 3.--DETAILS OF HARRINGTON ENGINE.]

The Harrington Rotary Engine Company, 123 Clinton Street, Chicago, are the
owners and manufacturers.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a can of peas sold in Liverpool recently the public analyst found two
grains of crystallized sulphate of copper, a quantity sufficient to
injuriously affect human health. The defendant urged that the public
insisted upon having green peas; and that artificial means had to be
resorted to to secure the required color.

       *       *       *       *       *




TESTING CAR VARNISHES.

By D.D. ROBERTSON.


At the Master Car-Painters' Convention, D.D. Robertson, of the Michigan
Central, read the following paper on the best method of testing varnishes
to secure the most satisfactory results as to their durability, giving
practical suggestions as to the time a car may safely remain in the
service before being taken in for revarnishing:

The subject which the association has assigned to me for this convention
has always been regarded as important. There is no branch of the business
which gives the painter more anxiety than the varnishing department. It is
more susceptible to an endless variety of difficulties, and therefore
needs more close and careful attention, than all other branches put
together, and even with all the research and practical experience which
has been given to the subject we are yet far from coming to a definite
conclusion as to the causes of many of the unfavorable results.

Beauty and durability are what we aim at in the paint shop, and from my
experience in varnish work we may have beauty without durability, but we
have rarely durability without beauty, so that the fewer defects of any
kind in our work caused by inferior material, inferior workmanship, or any
other cause, it is more likely to be durable, and ought, therefore, to
possess beauty. There are certain qualifications absolutely necessary to
durability in varnish. The material of which it is made must be of the
proper kind, pure and unadulterated; the manipulation in manufacturing
must be correct as to time, quantities, temperature, handling, etc., and
age is also necessary. The want of durability arising from the quality of
the materials, or from the manner of manufacturing, the painter has no
control over; but let me say here, that frequently a first-class varnish
has been used upon a car, and after being in service for a short time it
deadens, checks, cracks, chips, or flakes, and therefore shows a very poor
record. The varnish is condemned, when in reality, had the varnish been
applied under different circumstances and over different work, the result
would have been good and the durability satisfactory.

I am satisfied that in many cases first-class varnish has to bear the
odium, when the root of the evil is to be found nearer the foundation. The
leading varnish manufacturers of this country have expended large fortunes
to secure the best skill and appliances, and, indeed, to do everything to
bring their goods to perfection. Their standing and respectability put
them beyond suspicion, and their reputation is of too much value for them
knowingly to put into the hands of large consumers an inferior article;
and even when we have just cause to complain of the varnish, we ought to
be charitable enough to attribute the mistake to circumstances beyond
their control (for every kettleful is subjected to such circumstances),
and not to charge them with using cheap or inferior material for the sake
of gain.

If the question which has been given me means to give some method of
testing before using, I confess my inability to answer. For varnish to be
pronounced "durable" must be composed of the materials to make it so, and
to ascertain this, chemistry must be called in to test it. Comparatively
few painters understand chemistry sufficiently to analyze, and if they
did, and found the material all that is necessary, the manipulation may
have been defective, so as to injure its wearing qualities, and therefore
I cannot suggest any way of pronouncing varnish durable before using it.

As to the common custom of hanging out boards prepared and varnished to
the exposure of the sun and weather for months does not seem to me to be
the correct way of testing durability. It is true we may by this mode get
some idea of wearing properties, but the most thorough and correct way is
to put the varnish to the same exposure, the tear and wear, that it would
have in the regular service on the road on which it is to run. Cars while
running are exposed to circumstances which boards on the wall are not
subjected to. The cars under my charge run through two different countries
and three different States, and therefore subjected to such a variety of
climate and soil that the testing by stationary boards would completely
fail to give the correct result. For example: I have placed two sample
boards, prepared and varnished, and exposed them to all kinds of weather
and to the constant and steady rays of the sun for an equal length of
time, and both gave favorable results; and I have also put the same
varnishes on a car and found very different results. One of the varnishes
having some properties adapted to resist the friction caused by cinders,
sand, and dust, and consequently not so liable to cut the surface, and
therefore much more durable.

The system which I adopted long ago, and to which I still adhere (not on
account of "old fogyism," but for want of better), is as follows: I have
two varnishes which I want to put into competition to test their relative
merits. With varnish No. 1, I do the south half of the east end of the car
and the east half of the south side of the car, the north half of the west
end, and also the west end of the north side; this is also done with the
same varnish. On the other half of the car varnish No. 2 is put.

Thus you will see it is so placed that, should the car be turned at any
time, both varnishes on each side will have the same exposure and
circumstances to contend with. This I regard as the best method to test
the durability of varnish. And again let me say that it would be wrong for
me to argue that because the varnish which I use gives me the best
results, therefore I would regard it the best for all to use. This would
be wrong, inasmuch as we have a diversity of climates between Maine and
California, and between the extreme northern and southern States. The
varnish which has failed to give me satisfaction may be most suitable for
other parts of the Union.

As to the second part of my subject, "What length of time may a car safely
remain in service before being taken in for revarnishing?" this must be
regulated by the nature of the run and general treatment of the car while
in service. Through cars are frequently continuously on the road, and
little or no opportunity can be had to attend to them while in service.
Such cars should be called in earlier than those which make shorter runs,
and where ample time is allowed at both ends of the journey to be kept in
order. And again, cars which are run nearest the engine cannot make so
large a running record as those less exposed. Some roads, for a variety of
reasons which might be given, can run cars for 14 months with less wear
than others can run 12 months. So that I hold that the master painter on
every road should keep a complete and correct record of his cars, and have
an opportunity to examine these at intervals and report their condition,
in order to have them called in before they are too far gone for
revarnishing. If this system was more frequently adopted, the rolling
stock of our roads would be more attractive, and the companies would be
the gainers.

I cannot lay down a standard rule as to the exact time a car should remain
in service before being called in for revarnishing, but I find as a
general rule with the cars on the Michigan Central Railroad that they
should not exceed 12 months' service, and new cars, or those painted from
the foundation, should not be allowed to run over 10 months the first
year. By thus allowing a shorter period the first year the car will look
better and wear longer by this mode of treatment. Cars treated in this way
can be kept running for six and seven years without repainting.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FIXATION OF MAGNETIC PHANTOMS.


When we place a thin sheet of cardboard or glass upon a magnet and scatter
iron filings over it, we observe the iron to take certain positions and
trace certain lines which Faraday has styled lines of magnetic force, or,
more simply, lines of force. The figure, as a whole, which is thus formed
constitutes a magnetic phantom. The forms of the latter vary with that of
the magnet, the relative positions of the magnet and plate, etc.

[Illustration: METHOD OF FIXING MAGNETIC PHANTOMS.]

The whole space submitted to the influence of the magnet constitutes a
_magnetic field_, which is characterized by the presence of these lines of
force, and the study of which is of the most important character as
regards electro-magnetic action and that of induction. In order to study
these phantoms it is convenient to fix them so that they can be preserved,
projected, or photographed. Fig. 1 shows how they may be fixed. To effect
this, we cover the plate with a layer of mucilage of gum arabic, allow the
latter to harden, and then place the plate over the magnet. Next, iron
filings are scattered over the surface by means of a small sieve, and,
when the curves are well developed,[1] the surface is moistened by the aid
of an ordinary vaporizer. The layer of gum arabic thus becomes softened
and holds the iron filings so that the particles cannot change position.
When the gum has hardened again, the magnet is removed, and the phantom is
fixed.

[Footnote 1: The curves are obtained by striking the plate lightly with a
glass rod.]

We thus have a tangible representation of the magnetic field produced by
the magnet in the plane of the glass plate or sheet of paper. The number
of these lines, or their density, is at every point proportional to the
intensity of the field, and the curves that are traced show their
direction. To finish the definition of the field, it remains to determine
the direction of these lines of force. Such direction is, by definition,
and conventionally, that in which the north pole of a small magnetic
needle, free to move in the field, would travel. It results from this
definition that the lines of force issue from the north pole of a magnet
and re-enter the south pole, since the north pole of a magnet repels the
north pole of a needle, and _vice versa._

These considerations relative to the direction and intensity of the
magnetic field are of the highest importance for the physical theory of
magneto-electric machines.

The following is another method of fixing phantoms, as employed by Prof.
Bailie, of the Industrial School of Physics and Chemistry of the City of
Paris. He begins by forming the phantom, in the usual way, upon paper
prepared with ferrocyanide, and exposes it to daylight for a sufficient
length of time. The filings form a screen which is so much the more
perfect in proportion as it is denser, and, after fixation, there is
obtained a negative phantom, that is to say, one in which the parts where
the field is densest have remained white.

The same processes of fixation apply equally well to galvanic phantoms,
that is to say, to the galvanic fields produced by the passage of a
current in a conductor, and which consists of analogous lines of force.
The processes may be employed very efficaciously and with certainty of
success.--_La Nature._
