a time. Give them higher wages than they would receive elsewhere, and
be prompt and ready in your payments."

Many accounts are given by alchemical writers of the agent, and many
names are bestowed on it. The author of _A Brief Guide to the
Celestial Ruby_ speaks thus of the agent--"It is our doorkeeper, our
balm, our honey, oil, urine, maydew, mother, egg, secret furnace,
oven, true fire, venomous dragon, Theriac, ardent wine, Green Lion,
Bird of Hermes, Goose of Hermogenes, two-edged sword in the hand of
the Cherub that guards the Tree of Life.... It is our true secret
vessel, and the Garden of the Sages in which our sun rises and sets.
It is our Royal Mineral, our triumphant vegetable Saturnia, and the
magic rod of Hermes, by means of which he assumes any shape he likes."

Sometimes we are told that the agent is mercury, sometimes that it is
gold, but not common mercury or common gold. "Supplement your common
mercury with the inward fire which it needs, and you will soon get rid
of all superfluous dross." "The agent is gold, as highly matured as
natural and artificial digestion can make it, and a thousand times
more perfect than the common metal of that name. Gold, thus exalted,
radically penetrates, tinges, and fixes metals."

The alchemists generally likened the work to be performed by their
agent to the killing of a living thing. They constantly use the
allegory of death, followed by resurrection, in describing the steps
whereby the Essence was to be obtained, and the processes whereby the
baser metals were to be partially purified. They speak of the
mortification of metals, the dissolution and putrefaction of
substances, as preliminaries to the appearance of the true life of the
things whose outward properties have been destroyed. For instance,
Paracelsus says: "Destruction perfects that which is good; for the
good cannot appear on account of that which conceals it." The same
alchemist speaks of rusting as the mortification of metals; he says:
"The mortification of metals is the removal of their bodily
structure.... The mortification of woods is their being turned into
charcoal or ashes."

Paracelsus distinguishes natural from artificial mortification,
"Whatever nature consumes," he says, "man cannot restore. But whatever
man destroys man can restore, and break again when restored." Things
which had been mortified by man's device were considered by Paracelsus
not to be really dead. He gives this extraordinary illustration of his
meaning: "You see this is the case with lions, which are all born
dead, and are first vitalised by the horrible noise of their parents,
just as a sleeping person is awakened by a shout."

The mortification of metals is represented in alchemical books by
various images and allegories. Fig. I. is reduced from a cut in a 16th
century work, _The Book of Lambspring, a noble ancient Philosopher,
concerning the Philosophical Stone_.

[Illustration: Here the father devours the son;
               The soul and spirit flow forth from the body.
               FIG. I.]

The image used to set forth the mortification of metals is a king
swallowing his son. Figs. II. and III. are reduced from Basil
Valentine's _Twelve Keys_. Both of these figures represent the process
of mortification by images connected with death and burial.

[Illustration: FIG. II.]

In his explanation (?) of these figures, Basil Valentine says:--

  "Neither human nor animal bodies can be multiplied or propagated
  without decomposition; the grain and all vegetable seed, when cast
  into the ground, must decay before it can spring up again;
  moreover, putrefaction imparts life to many worms and other
  animalculae.... If bread is placed in honey, and suffered to decay,
  ants are generated ... maggots are also developed by the decay of
  nuts, apples, and pears. The same thing may be observed in regard
  to vegetable life. Nettles and other weeds spring up where no such
  seed has ever been sown. This occurs only by putrefaction. The
  reason is that the soil in such places is so disposed, and, as it
  were, impregnated, that it produces these fruits; which is a
  result of the properties of sidereal influences; consequently the
  seed is spiritually produced in the earth, and putrefies in the
  earth, and by the operation of the elements generates corporeal
  matter according to the species of nature. Thus the stars and the
  elements may generate new spiritual, and ultimately, new vegetable
  seed, by means of putrefaction.... Know that, in like manner, no
  metallic seed can develop, or multiply, unless the said seed, by
  itself alone, and without the introduction of any foreign
  substance, be reduced to a perfect putrefaction."

[Illustration: FIG. III.]

The action of the mineral agent in perfecting substances is often
likened by the alchemists to the conjoining of the male and the
female, followed by the production of offspring. They insist on the
need of a union of two things, in order to produce something more
perfect than either. The agent, they say, must work upon something;
alone it is nothing.

The methods whereby the agent is itself perfected, and the processes
wherein the agent effects the perfecting of the less perfect things,
were divided into stages by the alchemists. They generally spoke of
these stages as _Gates_, and enumerated ten or sometimes twelve of
them. As examples of the alchemical description of these gates, I give
some extracts from _A Brief Guide to the Celestial Ruby_.

The first gate is _Calcination_, which is "the drying up of the
humours"; by this process the substance "is concocted into a black
powder which is yet unctuous, and retains its radical humour." When
gold passes through this gate, "We observe in it two natures, the
fixed and the volatile, which we liken to two serpents." The fixed
nature is likened to a serpent without wings; the volatile, to a
serpent with wings: calcination unites these two into one. The second
gate, _Dissolution_, is likened to death and burial; but the true
Essence will appear glorious and beautiful when this gate is passed.
The worker is told not to be discouraged by this apparent death. _The
mercury of the sages_ is spoken of by this author as the queen, and
gold as the king. The king dies for love of the queen, but he is
revived by his spouse, who is made fruitful by him and brings forth "a
most royal son."

Figs. IV. and V. are reduced from _The Book of Lambspring_; they
express the need of the conjunction of two to produce one.


[Illustration: Here you behold a great marvel--
               Two Lions are joined into one.

               The spirit and soul must be united in their body.
               FIG. IV.]

After dissolution came _Conjunction_, wherein the separated elements
were combined. Then followed _Putrefaction_, necessary for the
germination of the seed which had been produced by calcination,
dissolution, and conjunction. Putrefaction was followed by
_Congelation_ and _Citation_. The passage through the next gate,
called _Sublimation_, caused the body to become spiritual, and the
spiritual to be made corporal. _Fermentation_ followed, whereby the
substance became soft and flowed like wax. Finally, by _Exaltation_,
the Stone was perfected.

[Illustration: Here are two birds, great and strong--the body and
               spirit; one devours the other.

               Let the body be placed in horse-dung, or a warm bath,
               the spirit having been extracted from it. The body has
               become white by the process, the spirit red by our art.
               All that exists tends towards perfection, and thus is
               the Philosopher's Stone prepared.

               FIG. V.]

The author of _The Open Entrance_ speaks of the various stages in the
perfecting of the agent as _regimens_. The beginning of the heating
of gold with mercury is likened to the king stripping off his golden
garments and descending into the fountain; this is the _regimen of
Mercury_. As the heating is continued, all becomes black; this is the
_regimen of Saturn_. Then is noticed a play of many colours; this is
the _regimen of Jupiter_: if the heat is not regulated properly, "the
young ones of the crow will go back to the nest." About the end of the
fourth month you will see "the sign of the waxing moon," and all
becomes white; this is the _regimen of the Moon_. The white colour
gives place to purple and green; you are now in the _regimen of
Venus_. After that, appear all the colours of the rainbow, or of a
peacock's tail; this is the _regimen of Mars_. Finally the colour
becomes orange and golden; this is the _regimen of the Sun_.

The reader may wish to have some description of the Essence. The
alchemists could describe it only in contraries. It had a bodily form,
but its method of working was spiritual. In _The Sodic Hydrolith, or
Water Stone of the Wise_ we are told:--

  "The stone is conceived below the earth, born in the earth,
  quickened in heaven, dies in time, and obtains eternal glory....
  It is bluish-grey and green.... It flows like water, yet it makes
  no wet; it is of great weight, and is small."

Philalethes says, in _A Brief Guide to the Celestial Ruby_: "The
Philosopher's Stone is a certain heavenly, spiritual, penetrative, and
fixed substance, which brings all metals to the perfection of gold or
silver (according to the quality of the Medicine), and that by natural
methods, which yet in their effects transcend Nature.... Know then
that it is called a stone, not because it is like a stone, but only
because, by virtue of its fixed nature, it resists the action of fire
as successfully as any stone. In species it is gold, more pure than
the purest; it is fixed and incombustible like a stone, but its
appearance is that of very fine powder, impalpable to the touch, sweet
to the taste, fragrant to the smell, in potency a most penetrative
spirit, apparently dry and yet unctuous, and easily capable of tinging
a plate of metal.... If we say that its nature is spiritual, it would
be no more than the truth; if we described it as corporeal, the
expression would be equally correct."

The same author says: "There is a substance of a metalline species
which looks so cloudy that the universe will have nothing to do with
it. Its visible form is vile; it defiles metalline bodies, and no one
can readily imagine that the pearly drink of bright Phoebus should
spring from thence. Its components are a most pure and tender mercury,
a dry incarcerate sulphur, which binds it and restrains fluxation....
Know this subject, it is the sure basis of all our secrets.... To deal
plainly, it is the child of Saturn, of mean price and great venom....
It is not malleable, though metalline. Its colour is sable, with
intermixed argent which mark the sable fields with veins of glittering
argent."

In trying to attach definite meanings to the alchemical accounts of
Principles, Elements, and the One Thing, and the directions which the
alchemists give for changing one substance into others, we are very
apt to be misled by the use of such an expression as _the
transmutation of the elements_. To a chemist that phrase means the
change of an element into another element, an element being a definite
substance, which no one has been able to produce by the combination of
two or more substances unlike itself, or to separate into two or more
substances unlike itself. But whatever may have been the alchemical
meaning of the word _element_, it was certainly not that given to the
same word to-day. Nor did the word _transmutation_ mean to the
alchemist what it means to the chemist.

The facts which are known at present concerning the elements make
unthinkable such a change as that of lead into silver; but new facts
_may_ be discovered which will make possible the separation of lead
into things unlike itself, and the production of silver by the
combination of some of these constituents of lead. The alchemist
supposed he knew such facts as enabled him not only to form a mental
picture of the change of lead into silver, or tin into gold, but also
to assert that such changes must necessarily happen, and to accomplish
them. Although we are quite sure that the alchemist's facts were only
imaginings, we ought not to blame him for his reasoning on what he
took to be facts.

Every metal is now said to be an element, in the modern meaning of
that word: the alchemist regarded the metals as composite substances;
but he also thought of them as more simple than many other things.
Hence, if he was able to transmute one metal into another, he would
have strong evidence in support of his general conception of the
unity of all things. And, as transmutation meant, to the alchemist,
the bringing of a substance to the condition of greatest perfection
possible for that substance, his view of the unity of nature might be
said to be proved if he succeeded in changing one of the metals, one
of these comparatively simple substances, into the most perfect of all
metals, that is, into gold.

The transmutation of the baser metals into gold thus came to be the
practical test of the justness of the alchemical scheme of things.

Some alchemists assert they had themselves performed the great
transmutation; others tell of people who had accomplished the work.
The following story is an example of the accounts given of the making
of gold. It is taken from _John Frederick Helvetius' Golden Calf,
which the world worships and adores_ (17th century):--

  "On the 27th December 1666, in the forenoon, there came to my
  house a certain man, who was a complete stranger to me, but of an
  honest grave countenance, and an authoritative mien, clothed in a
  simple garb.... He was of middle height, his face was long and
  slightly pock-marked, his hair was black and straight, his chin
  close-shaven, his age about forty-three or forty-four, and his
  native province, as far as I could make out, North Holland. After
  we had exchanged salutations, he asked me whether he might have
  some conversation with me. He wished to say something to me about
  the Pyrotechnic Art, as he had read one of my tracts (directed
  against the Sympathetic Powder of Dr Digby), in which I hinted a
  suspicion whether the Grand Arcanum of the Sages was not after all
  a gigantic hoax. He, therefore, took that opportunity of asking me
  whether I could not believe that such a grand mystery might exist
  in the nature of things, by means of which a physician could
  restore any patient whose vitals were not irreparably destroyed. I
  answered, 'Such a medicine would be a most desirable acquisition
  for any physician; nor can any man tell how many secrets there may
  be hidden in Nature; yet, though I have read much about the truth
  of this art, it has never been my good fortune to meet with a real
  master of the alchemical science.' ... After some further
  conversation, the Artist Elias (for it was he) thus addressed me:
  'Since you have read so much in the works of the alchemists about
  this stone, its substance, its colour and its wonderful effects,
  may I be allowed the question, whether you have not prepared it
  yourself?' On my answering his question in the negative, he took
  out of his bag a cunningly-worked ivory box, in which were three
  large pieces of substance resembling glass, or pale sulphur, and
  informed me that here was enough of the tincture for the
  production of twenty tons of gold. When I had held the precious
  treasure in my hand for a quarter of an hour (during which time I
  listened to a recital of its wonderful curative properties), I was
  compelled to restore it to its owner, which I could not help doing
  with a certain degree of reluctance.... My request that he would
  give me a piece of his stone (though it were no larger than a
  coriander seed), he somewhat brusquely refused, adding, in a
  milder tone, that he could not give it me for all the wealth I
  possessed, and that not on account of its great preciousness, but
  for some other reason which it was not lawful for him to
  divulge.... Then he inquired whether I could not show him into a
  room at the back of the house, where we should be less liable to
  the observation of passers-by. On my conducting him into the state
  parlour (which he entered without wiping his dirty boots), he
  demanded of me a gold coin, and while I was looking for it, he
  produced from his breast pocket a green silk handkerchief, in
  which were folded up five medals, the gold of which was infinitely
  superior to that of my gold piece." Here follows the inscriptions
  on the medals. "I was filled with admiration, and asked my visitor
  whence he had obtained that wonderful knowledge of the whole
  world. He replied that it was a gift freely bestowed on him by a
  friend who had stayed a few days at his house." Here follows the
  stranger's account of this friend's experiments. "When my strange
  visitor had concluded his narrative, I besought him to give me a
  proof of his assertion, by performing the transmutatory operation
  on some metals in my presence. He answered evasively, that he
  could not do so then, but that he would return in three weeks, and
  that, if he was then at liberty to do so, he would show me
  something that would make me open my eyes. He appeared punctually
  to the promised day, and invited me to take a walk with him, in
  the course of which we discoursed profoundly on the secrets of
  Nature in fire, though I noticed that my companion was very chary
  in imparting information about the Grand Arcanum.... At last I
  asked him point blank to show me the transmutation of metals. I
  besought him to come and dine with me, and to spend the night at
  my house; I entreated; I expostulated; but in vain. He remained
  firm. I reminded him of his promise. He retorted that his promise
  had been conditional upon his being permitted to reveal the secret
  to me. At last, however, I prevailed upon him to give me a piece
  of his precious stone--a piece no larger than a grain of rape
  seed.... He bid me take half an ounce of lead ... and melt it in
  the crucible; for the Medicine would certainly not tinge more of
  the base metal than it was sufficient for.... He promised to
  return at nine o'clock the next morning.... But at the stated hour
  on the following day he did not make his appearance; in his stead,
  however, there came, a few hours later, a stranger, who told me
  that his friend the artist was unavoidably detained, but that he
  would call at three o'clock in the afternoon. The afternoon came;
  I waited for him till half-past seven o'clock. He did not appear.
  Thereupon my wife came and tempted me to try the transmutation
  myself. I determined however to wait till the morrow. On the
  morrow ... I asked my wife to put the tincture in wax, and I
  myself ... prepared six drachms of lead; I then cast the tincture,
  enveloped as it was in wax, on the lead; as soon as it was melted,
  there was a hissing sound and a slight effervescence, and after a
  quarter of an hour I found that the whole mass of lead had been
  turned into the finest gold.... We immediately took it to the
  goldsmith, who at once declared it the finest gold he had ever
  seen, and offered to pay fifty florins an ounce for it." He then
  describes various tests which were made to prove the purity of the
  gold. "Thus I have unfolded to you the whole story from beginning
  to end. The gold I still retain in my possession, but I cannot
  tell you what has become of the Artist Elias."




CHAPTER VI.

ALCHEMY AS AN EXPERIMENTAL ART.


A modern writer, Mr A.E. Waite, in his _Lives of the Alchemystical
Philosophers_, says: "The physical theory of transmutation is based on
the composite character of the metals, on their generation in the
bowels of the earth, and on the existence in nature of a pure and
penetrating matter which applied to any substance exalts and perfects
it after its own kind." It must he admitted that the alchemists could
cite many instances of transmutations which seemed to lead to the
conclusion, that there is no difference of kind between the metals and
other substances such as water, acids, oils, resins, and wood. We are
able to-day to effect a vast number of transformations wherein one
substance is exchanged for another, or made to take the place of
another. We can give fairly satisfactory descriptions of these
changes; and, by comparing them one with another, we are able to
express their essential features in general terms which can be applied
to each particular instance. The alchemists had no searching knowledge
of what may be called the mechanism of such changes; they gave an
explanation of them which we must call incorrect, in the present state
of our knowledge. But, as Hoefer says in his _Histoire de la Chimie_,
"to jeer at [the alchemical] theory is to commit at once an
anachronism and an injustice.... Unless the world should finish
to-morrow, no one can have the pretension to suppose that our
contemporaries have said the last word of science, and nothing will
remain for our descendants to discover, no errors for them to correct,
no theories for them to set straight."

[Illustration: FIG. VI. _See p. 90._]

[Illustration: FIG. VII. _See p. 90._]

[Illustration: FIG. VIII. _See p. 91._]

What kind of experimental evidence could an alchemist furnish in
support of his theory of transmutation? In answering this question, I
cannot do better than give a condensed rendering of certain pages in
Hoefer's _Histoire de la Chimie_.

The reader is supposed to be present at experiments conducted in the
laboratory of a Grand Master of the Sacred Art in the 5th or 6th
century.

_Experiment_.--Ordinary water is boiled in an open vessel; the water
is changed to a vapour which disappears, and a white powdery earth
remains in the vessel.

_Conclusion_.--Water is changed into air and earth.

Did we not know that ordinary water holds certain substances in
solution, and that boiling water acts on the vessel wherein it is
boiled, we should have no objection to urge against this conclusion.

It only remained to transmute fire that the transmutation of the four
elements might be completed.

_Experiment._--A piece of red-hot iron is placed in a bell-jar, filled
with water, held over a basin containing water; the volume of the
water decreases, and the air in the bell-jar takes fire when a lighted
taper is brought into it.

_Conclusion._--Water is changed into fire.

That interpretation was perfectly reasonable at a time when the fact
was unknown that water is composed of two gaseous substances; that one
of these (oxygen) is absorbed by the iron, and the other (hydrogen)
collects in the bell-jar, and ignites when brought into contact with a
flame.

_Experiment_.--Lead, or any other metal except gold or silver, is
calcined in the air; the metal loses its characteristic properties,
and is changed into a powdery substance, a kind of cinder or calx.
When this cinder, which was said to be the result of the _death of the
metal_, is heated in a crucible with some grains of wheat, one sees
the metal revive, and resume its original form and properties.

_Conclusion._--The metal which had been destroyed is revivified by the
grains of wheat and the action of fire.

Is this not to perform the miracle of the resurrection?

No objection can he raised to this interpretation, as long as we are
ignorant of the phenomena of oxidation, and the reduction of oxides by
means of carbon, or organic substances rich in carbon, such as sugar,
flour, seeds, etc. Grains of wheat were the symbol of life, and, by
extension, of the resurrection and eternal life.

[Illustration: FIG. IX. _See p. 91._]

_Experiment_.--Ordinary lead is calcined in a cupel made of cinders or
powdered bones; the lead is changed to a cinder which disappears into
the cupel, and a button of silver remains.

_Conclusion_.--The lead has vanished; what more natural than the
conclusion that it has been transformed into silver? It was not known
then that all specimens of lead contain more or less silver.

[Illustration: FIG. X. _See p. 92._]

_Experiment._-The vapour of arsenic bleaches copper. This fact gave
rise to many allegories and enigmas concerning the means of
transforming copper into silver.

Sulphur, which acts on metals and changes many of them into black
substances, was looked on as a very mysterious thing. It was with
sulphur that the coagulation (solidification) of mercury was effected.

_Experiment_.--Mercury is allowed to fall, in a fine rain, on to
melted sulphur; a black substance is produced; this black substance is
heated in a closed vessel, it is volatilised and transformed into a
beautiful red solid.

One could scarcely suppose that the black and the red substances are
identical, if one did not know that they are composed of the same
quantities of the same elements, sulphur and mercury.

How greatly must this phenomenon have affected the imagination of the
chemists of ancient times, always so ready to be affected by
everything that seemed supernatural!

Black and red were the symbols of darkness and light, of the evil and
the good principle; and the union of these two principles represented
the moral order. At a later time the idea helped to establish the
alchemical doctrine that sulphur and mercury are the Principles of all
things.

_Experiment._--Various organic substances are analysed by heating in a
distillation-apparatus; the products are, in each case, a solid
residue, liquids which distil off, and certain spirits which are
disengaged.

The results supported the ancient theory which asserted that _earth_,
_water_, _air_, and _fire_ are the four Elements of the world. The
solid residue represented _earth_; the liquid products of the
distillation, _water_; and the spirituous substances, _air_. _Fire_
was regarded sometimes as the means of purification, sometimes as the
soul, or invisible part, of all substances.

_Experiment_.-A strong acid is poured on to copper. The metal is
attacked, and at last disappears, giving place to a green liquid, as
transparent as water. A thin sheet of iron is plunged into the liquid;
the copper re-appears, and the iron vanishes.

What more simple than to conclude that the iron has been transformed
into copper?

Had lead, silver, or gold been used in place of copper, one would have
said that the iron was transformed into lead, silver, or gold.

In their search for "the pure and penetrating matter which applied to
any substance exalts and perfects it after its own kind," the
alchemists necessarily made many inventions, laid the foundation of
many arts and manufactures, and discovered many facts of importance in
the science of chemistry.

The practitioners of the _Sacred Art_ of Egypt must have been
acquainted with many operations which we now class as belonging to
applied chemistry; witness, their jewellery, pottery, dyes and
pigments, bleaching, glass-making, working in metals and alloys, and
their use of spices, essential oils, and soda in embalming, and for
other purposes.

During the centuries when alchemy flourished, gunpowder was invented,
the art of printing was established, the compass was brought into use,
the art of painting and staining glass was begun and carried to
perfection, paper was made from rags, practical metallurgy advanced by
leaps and bounds, many new alloys of metals came into use, glass
mirrors were manufactured, and considerable advances were made in
practical medicine and sanitation.

[Illustration: FIG. XI. _See p. 92._]

Basil Valentine, who was one of the greatest alchemists of the 16th
century, discovered many of the properties of the metal antimony, and
prepared and examined many compounds of that metal; he made green
vitriol from pyrites, brandy from fermented grape-juice, fulminating
gold, sulphide of potash, and spirits of salt; he made and used baths
of artificial mineral waters, and he prepared various metals by what
are now called _wet methods_, for instance, copper, by immersing
plates of iron in solutions of bluestone. He examined the air of
mines, and suggested practical methods for determining whether the
air in a mine was respirable. Hoefer draws attention to a remarkable
observation recorded by this alchemist. Speaking of the "spirit of
mercury," Basil Valentine says it is "the origin of all the metals;
that spirit is nothing else than an air flying here and there without
wings; it is a moving wind, which, after it has been chased from its
home of Vulcan (that is, fire), returns to the chaos; then it expands
and passes into the region of the air from whence it had come." As
Hoefer remarks, this is perhaps one of the earliest accounts of the
gas discovered by Priestley and studied by Lavoisier, the gas we now
call oxygen, and recognise as of paramount importance in chemical
reactions.

[Illustration: FIG. XII. _See p. 92._]

Besides discovering and recording many facts which have become part
and parcel of the science of chemistry, the alchemists invented and
used various pieces of apparatus, and conducted many operations, which
are still employed in chemical laboratories. I shall reproduce
illustrations of some of these processes and pieces of apparatus, and
quote a few of the directions, given in a book, published in 1664,
called _The Art of Distillation_, by John French, Dr. in Physick.

The method recommended by French for hermetically sealing the neck of
a glass vessel is shown in Fig. VI. p. 80. The neck of the vessel is
surrounded by a tray containing burning coals; when the glass melts it
is cut off by shears, and then closed by tongs, which are made hot
before use.

Fig. VII. p. 81, represents a method for covering an open vessel,
air-tight, with a receptacle into which a substance may be sublimed
from the lower vessel. The lettering explains the method of using the
apparatus.

French gives very practical directions and much sound advice for
conducting distillations of various kinds. The following are specimens
of his directions and advice:--

  "When you put water into a seething Balneum wherein there are
  glasses let it be hot, or else thou wilt endanger the breaking of
  the glasses.

  "When thou takest any earthen, or glass vessel from the fire,
  expose it not to the cold aire too suddenly for fear it should
  break.

  "In all your operations diligently observe the processes which you
  read, and vary not a little from them, for sometimes a small
  mistake or neglect spoils the whole operation, and frustrates your
  expectations.

  "Try not at first experiments of great cost, or great difficulty;
  for it will be a great discouragement to thee, and thou wilt be
  very apt to mistake.

  "If any one would enter upon the practices of Chymistry, let him
  apply himself to some expert artist for to be instructed in the
  manual operation of things; for by this means he will learn more
  in two months, than he can by his practice and study in seven
  years, as also avoid much pains and cost, and redeem much time
  which else of necessity he will lose."

Fig. VIII. p. 82, represents a common cold still, and Fig. IX. p. 84,
is a sketch of an apparatus for distilling by the aid of boiling
water. The bath wherein the vessels are placed in Fig. IX. was called
by the alchemists _balneum Mariae_, from Mary the Jewess, who is
mentioned in the older alchemical writings, and is supposed to have
invented an apparatus of this character. Nothing definite is known of
