a distance I saw in a pool of moonlight on the yellow road the black
irregular mass of the convoy. Then I heard a weary dirge; the wretches
were singing. One, in a sad and gutteral voice, gave the couplet,
which trailed dismally through the depths of the blue ravines:

"'_Maintenant qu'elle est grande,
  Elle fait le trottoir,
  Avec ceux de la bande
        A Richard-Lenoir_.'

"And the others took up in chorus the horrible refrain:

"'_A la Bastille, a la Bastille,
  On aime bien, on aime bien
        Nini Peau d'Chien;
  Elle est si belle et si gentille
          A la Bastille_'

"I saw them all in contrast to myself when the diligence passed them.
They were terrible. Under the hideous searchlight their eyes shone
with a sombre fire in their pale and shaven faces. The burning dust
strangled their raucous voices in their throats. A frightful sadness
took possession of me.

"When the diligence had left this fearful nightmare behind, I regained
my self-control.

"'Further, much further South,' I exclaimed to myself, 'to the places
untouched by this miserable bilgewater of civilization.'

"When I am weary, when I have a moment of anguish and longing to turn
back on the road that I have chosen, I think of the prisoners of
Berroughia, and then I am glad to continue on my way.

"But what a reward, when I am in one of those places where the poor
animals never think of fleeing because they have never seen man, where
the desert stretches out around me so widely that the old world could
crumble, and never a single ripple on the dune, a single cloud in the
white sky come to warn me.

"'It is true,' I murmured. 'I, too, once, in the middle of the desert,
at Tidi-Kelt, I felt that way.'"

Up to that time I had let him enjoy his exaltations without
interruption. I understood too late the error that I had made in
pronouncing that unfortunate sentence.

His mocking nervous laughter began anew.

"Ah! Indeed, at Tidi-Kelt? I beg you, old man, in your own interest,
if you don't want to make an ass of yourself, avoid that species of
reminiscence. Honestly, you make me think of Fromentin, or that poor
Maupassant, who talked of the desert because he had been to Djelfa,
two days' journey from the street of Bab-Azound and the Government
buildings, four days from the Avenue de l'Opera;--and who, because he
saw a poor devil of a camel dying near Bou-Saada, believed himself in
the heart of the desert, on the old route of the caravans....
Tidi-Kelt, the desert!"

"It seems to me, however, that In-Salah--" I said, a little vexed.

"In-Salah? Tidi-Kelt! But, my poor friend, the last time that I passed
that way there were as many old newspapers and empty sardine boxes as
if it had been Sunday in the Wood of Vincennes."

Such a determined, such an evident desire to annoy me made me forget
my reserve.

"Evidently," I replied resentfully, "I have never been to--"

I stopped myself, but it was already too late.

He looked at me, squarely in the face.

"To where?" he said with good humor.

I did not answer.

"To where?" he repeated.

And, as I remained strangled in my muteness:

"To Wadi Tarhit, do you mean?"

It was on the east bank of Wadi Tarhit, a hundred and twenty
kilometers from Timissao, at 25.5 degrees north latitude, according to
the official report, that Captain Morhange was buried.

"Andre," I cried stupidly, "I swear to you--"

"What do you swear to me?"

"That I never meant--"

"To speak of Wadi Tarhit? Why? Why should you not speak to me of Wadi
Tarhit?"

In answer to my supplicating silence, he merely shrugged his
shoulders.

"Idiot," was all he said.

And he left me before I could think of even one word to say.

So much humility on my part had, however, not disarmed him. I had the
proof of it the next day, and the way he showed his humor was even
marked by an exhibition of wretchedly poor taste.

I was just out of bed when he came into my room.

"Can you tell me what is the meaning of this?" he demanded.

He had in his hand one of the official registers. In his nervous
crises he always began sorting them over, in the hope of finding some
pretext for making himself militarily insupportable.

This time chance had favored him.

He opened the register. I blushed violently at seeing the poor proof
of a photograph that I knew well.

"What is that?" he repeated disdainfully.

Too often I had surprised him in the act of regarding, none too
kindly, the portrait of Mlle. de C. which hung in my room not to be
convinced at that moment that he was trying to pick a quarrel with me.

I controlled myself, however, and placed the poor little print in the
drawer.

But my calmness did not pacify him.

"Henceforth," he said, "take care, I beg you, not to mix mementoes of
your gallantry with the official papers."

He added, with a smile that spoke insult:

"It isn't necessary to furnish objects of excitation to Gourrut."

"Andre," I said, and I was white, "I demand--"

He stood up to the full height of his stature.

"Well what is it? A gallantry, nothing more. I have authorized you to
speak of Wadi Halfa, haven't I? Then I have the right, I should
think--"

"Andre!"

Now he was looking maliciously at the wall, at the little portrait the
replica of which I had just subjected to this painful scene.

"There, there, I say, you aren't angry, are you? But between ourselves
you will admit, will you not, that she is a little thin?"

And before I could find time to answer him, he had removed himself,
humming the shameful refrain of the previous night:

"_A la Bastille, a la Bastille,
 On aime bien, on aime bien,
       Nini, Peau de Chien_."

For three days neither of us spoke to the other. My exasperation was
too deep for words. Was I, then, to be held responsible for his
avatars! Was it my fault if, between two phrases, one seemed always
some allusion--

"The situation is intolerable," I said to myself. "It cannot last
longer."

It was to cease very soon.

One week after the scene of the photograph the courier arrived. I had
scarcely glanced at the index of the _Zeitschrift_, the German review
of which I have already spoken, when I started with uncontrollable
amazement. I had just read: _"Reise und Entdeckungen zwei
fronzosischer offiziere, Rittmeisters Morhange und Oberleutnants de
Saint-Avit, in westlichen Sahara."_

At the same time I heard my comrade's voice.

"Anything interesting in this number?"

"No," I answered carelessly.

"Let's see."

I obeyed; what else was there to do?

It seemed to me that he grew paler as he ran over the index. However,
his tone was altogether natural when he said:

"You will let me borrow it, of course?"

And he went out, casting me one defiant glance.

       *       *       *       *       *

The day passed slowly. I did not see him again until evening. He was
gay, very gay, and his gaiety hurt me.

When we had finished dinner, we went out and leaned on the balustrade
of the terrace. From there out swept the desert, which the darkness
was already encroaching upon from the east.

Andre broke the silence.

"By the way, I have returned your review to you. You were right, it is
not interesting."

His expression was one of supreme amusement.

"What is it, what is the matter with you, anyway?"

"Nothing," I answered, my throat aching.

"Nothing? Shall I tell you what is the matter with you?"

I looked at him with an expression of supplication.

"Idiot," he found it necessary to repeat once more.

Night fell quickly. Only the southern slope of Wadi Mia was still
yellow. Among the boulders a little jackal was running about, yapping
sharply.

"The _dib_ is making a fuss about nothing, bad business," said
Saint-Avit.

He continued pitilessly:

"Then you aren't willing to say anything?"

I made a great effort, to produce the following pitiful phrase:

"What an exhausting day. What a night, heavy, heavy--You don't feel
like yourself, you don't know any more--"

"Yes," said the voice of Saint-Avit, as from a distance, "A heavy,
heavy night: as heavy, do you know, as when I killed Captain
Morhange."




III

THE MORHANGE-SAINT-AVIT MISSION


"So I killed Captain Morhange," Andre de Saint-Avit said to me the
next day, at the same time, in the same place, with a calm that took
no account of the night, the frightful night I had just been through.
"Why do I tell you this? I don't know in the least. Because of the
desert, perhaps. Are you a man capable of enduring the weight of that
confidence, and further, if necessary, of assuming the consequences it
may bring? I don't know that, either. The future will decide. For the
present there is only one thing certain, the fact, I tell you again,
that I killed Captain Morhange.

"I killed him. And, since you want me to specify the reason, you
understand that I am not going to torture my brain to turn it into a
romance for you, or commence by recounting in the naturalistic manner
of what stuff my first trousers were made, or, as the neo-Catholics
would have it, how often I went as a child to confession, and how much
I liked doing it. I have no taste for useless exhibitions. You will
find that this recital begins strictly at the time when I met
Morhange.

"And first of all, I tell you, however much it has cost my peace of
mind and my reputation, I do not regret having known him. In a word,
apart from all question of false friendship, I am convicted of a black
ingratitude in having killed him. It is to him, it is to his knowledge
of rock inscriptions, that I owe the only thing that has raised my
life in interest above the miserable little lives dragged out by my
companions at Auxonne, and elsewhere.

"This being understood, here are the facts:"

[NOTE: From this point on begins an extended narrative;
indeed it may be most of the remaining book.
I was changing the quoting, until I reached the end
of the chapter and found that it continued on from there.]

It was in the Arabian Office at Wargla, when I was a lieutenant, that
I first heard the name, Morhange. And I must add that it was for me
the occasion of an attack of bad humor. We were having difficult
times. The hostility of the Sultan of Morocco was latent. At Touat,
where the assassination of Flatters and of Frescaly had already been
concocted, connivance was being given to the plots of our enemies.
Touat was the center of conspiracies, of razzias, of defections, and
at the same time, the depot of supply for the insatiable nomads. The
Governors of Algeria, Tirman, Cambon, Laferriere, demanded its
occupation. The Ministers of War tacitly agreed.... But there was
Parliament, which did nothing at all, because of England, because of
Germany, and above all because of a certain _Declaration of the Rights
of Man and of the Citizen_, which prescribed that insurrection is the
most sacred of duties, even when the insurgents are savages who cut
your head off. In short, the military authority could only, at its own
discretion, increase the southern garrisons, and establish new posts;
this one, Berresof, Hassi-el-Mia, Fort MacMahon, Fort Lallemand, Fort
Miribel.... But as Castries puts it, you don't hold the nomads with
bordjs, you hold them by the belt. The middle was the oasis of Touat.
Their honors, the lawyers of Paris, had to be convinced of the
necessity of taking possession of the oasis of Touat. The best way
