compasses, barometers, telescopes, and other instruments.

There were levers and wheels on every side, switches, valves, electric
plugs and handles. Lockers arranged close to the wall and along the
floor held supplies and materials. Everything was new and shining, and
the professor smiled with pride as he touched piece after piece of
machinery, and looked at the different instruments.

"Now we'll go out on the stern," he said.

The boys followed as he ascended the companion steps and emerged on a
small platform at the rear end of the cabin.

"Do you know what this is?" asked the professor, touching a long, thin,
round object.

"Looks like a gun," replied Mark.

"That's just what it is. It's a machine gun that will fire one hundred
shots a minute, and it can be turned in any direction, as it works on a
swivel. I don't know that we'll have any use for it, but I thought I'd
take it along."

Then the professor pointed out where the propeller shaft ran from the
engine room out through the stern, and showed how the rudder was worked
by wire ropes extending from it to the conning tower.

"In short we have everything necessary to successfully navigate the
air," he went on. "Not a thing has been overlooked. All I have to do is
to fill the big bag of oiled silk with a new gas I have discovered and
up we go. This is really the most important part of the invention.
Without this powerful gas the airship would not rise above the earth.

"But I have found this gas, which can be made in unlimited quantities
from simple materials that we can carry with us. The gas has enormous
lifting power, and if it was not for that I would not dare make such a
large and comfortable airship. As it is, we can sail through the air as
easily as if we were on an ocean liner on the sea and much more quickly.

"I generate the gas in the engine room as I need it," the professor
went on. "It goes to the oiled silk bag through two tubes. When we have
arisen to a sufficient height I start the electric engine, the propeller
whirls around, and the ship moves forward, just as a steamboat does when
the screw is set in motion. Then all I have to do is to steer."

"It's great!" cried Jack with sparkling eyes.

"It certainly is," agreed Mark.

From the stern the professor took the boys to the conning tower, where
there were several wheels and levers, that placed most of the important
machines and engines in the boat under the direct control of the
steersman. A lever turned one way would send the ship ahead. Turned in
the opposite direction it would reverse the course. A wheel like that on
an automobile served to direct the rudder and so guided the _Monarch's_
course. Other levers controlled the speed of the engines, and the supply
of gas that filled the silk bag.

"Here is where we shall carry our supplies of condensed food," the
professor went on, leading the way back into the middle room. "We will
take along capsules that will supply us in a small space with meat,
vegetables, soups, tea and coffee, besides milk.

"The water we will get as we speed along, dropping down to earth
whenever it is necessary. As for clothing, I have an abundant supply."

He opened a locker and disclosed a pile of fur garments. There were big
coats, caps and boots, everything made with a furry surface within as
well as without.

"Any one would think you were going into some cold country, professor,"
said Jack, looking at the warm garments.

"So we are! We are going to find the north pole!" exclaimed the old
inventor.

"The north pole?" cried Mark.

"That's what I said. Do you boys want to go along in the _Monarch_ to a
place where never mortal man has been?"

At that instant there came a loud knock at the door.




CHAPTER V

A PLAN TO SEEK THE NORTH POLE


"Hark! What was that?" exclaimed Professor Henderson in a hoarse
whisper.

"Sounded like some one at the door," replied Mark.

"Quick, Washington! Put out the lights! You boys creep back and hide
under the bed. My secret must not be discovered now when everything is
ready for the trial!"

The boys started back toward the living room, Washington began putting
out the lights and then, with the professor, joined the boys. The shed
containing the airship was in total darkness, and the negro, turning
down the lamp in the cabin, shrouded that in gloom also.

Once more the knock was repeated. It was a peculiar one; first two raps,
then a silence, then three blows, followed at intervals by six single
raps.

"Who is there?" asked the professor, going close to the door.

"A friend," was the reply.

"Give the countersign."

"The North Pole, and long may it stand!" was the queer answer. It was
the same the colored man had given when he sought admission after his
second trip to the wreck that afternoon.

Slowly the inventor unfastened the door. As he cautiously opened it a
roughly dressed man slipped in.

"What's the need of all this foolishness?" he demanded. "Why have you
made it so dark? It's like a pocket. Is any one here?"

The two boys had crawled under the bed before the door was opened, in
accordance with the instructions from the old man. The inventor and
Washington were the only ones visible in the cabin.

"Why don't you turn up the light?" went on the visitor in fretful tones.
"Are you sure no one is here to learn our secret?"

"Do you see any one?" asked the professor, not wishing to disclose the
boys' presence. "Do you think I am so foolish as to waste the labor and
toil of years?"

"I didn't think so," said the man, "but as I came along I thought I saw
lights in the balloon shed."

"Very likely," admitted Mr. Henderson coolly. "Washington and I were
out there doing some work."

"All right," was the rather ungracious answer. "I have those chemicals
you wanted."

"Give them to me!" implored the old man in an anxious tone. "I thought
you would never bring them."

"Oh, I don't forget so easily. Here you are," and the newcomer passed
over a package. "Now when are you going to sail?"

"In about a week," answered the inventor.

"Then I guess I'll stay until you go," spoke the stranger. "I don't want
to be left behind."

At this the old professor seemed strangely excited. His hands trembled
as he placed the chemicals on a shelf.

"You don't like it, I see," observed the stranger with a sort of snarl.
"But I know you too well, Professor Henderson. You would be only too
glad to go and leave me behind after all I have done for you."

"My only desire, and you know it, James Taggert," broke in the old man,
"is to preserve my secret from the world until I see whether I can
succeed or not. I do not want to be laughed at if I fail. I admit you
have been of service to me, but, rather than risk failure, rather than
run the chance of having my plans made known before I am ready to have
them, I would do anything. I know you too well to imagine that you have
aided me from pure love."

"Well, go on," snarled the man, as the professor paused.

"You have some object back of it all," continued the professor. "I do
not know what your motive is, but I say, rather than have my plans
spoiled, I will make you a prisoner and keep you here until after I have
sailed. I am all ready to start,--tonight, if need be!"

"So that's your game, is it?" cried Taggert. He turned toward the old
man with an ugly look.

"Washington!" cried the professor. "Bind him! Put him in the little room
and see that he does not escape!"

The next instant the big negro had folded his arms around Taggert. The
white man struggled, but he was like a baby in the grasp of a giant, for
Washington was very powerful. He procured a strong cord, and, before
Taggert could resist had him firmly bound. Then, picking the man up in
his arms, Washington carried him back into the balloon shed.

"Help! Help!" cried Taggert, and then his cries were smothered.

"Don't hurt him!" cautioned the professor, calling into the darkness to
Washington.

"I only guv him a soft piece ob wood to bite on," replied the negro. "He
mustn't expostulate sounds too freely 'cause it might keep us awake."

In a few minutes Washington returned.

"I made him as comfortableness as de existin' circumstanceableness would
permit ob," he announced.

"That's right. I did not want to do this, but I was forced to," the
inventor said. "I will release him as soon as we are ready to sail. But
I am forgetting the boys. Come out," he called, and Jack and Mark, much
mystified and somewhat frightened by what had taken place, crawled from
under the bed.

"I am sorry you witnessed what you did," the professor said to them.
"But I could not have this man spoil my plans. Some time ago he
discovered my secret, and to keep him from publishing it broadcast I was
forced to take him into my confidence. He has given me some aid in
getting rare chemicals, but he wants a heavy price. He demands a half
interest in the _Monarch_, and to be taken to the north pole."

"Then you are really going to search for the pole?" asked Jack.

"I am, my boy, and, what is more, I am going to find it. Why, it is
simple with the wonderful gas I have discovered. That is the whole
secret of what will be my success. It is easy enough to make an airship
that will move, but the trouble is no one has yet been able to make a
gas strong enough to lift the heavy weight of the ship high into the
air. That is where I have the advantage."

"I wish I could see your ship sail," said Jack.

"You may if you like," exclaimed the old man. "Do you remember what I
asked you when the knock interrupted us? I asked you if you wanted to go
to the north pole. Now I have taken a great liking to both you boys. I
haven't even asked your names yet, but I like you. I need some help in
running the ship, also in making my explorations in the frozen north.
Would you like to go along?"

For a few seconds the boys did not know what to say. It was a strange
and sudden proposition. They had been through so many adventures in the
last few hours that their brains were fairly bewildered. But to both of
them there came a great desire to make this wonderful trip through the
air. Before they could make a reply Professor Henderson spoke again:

"Perhaps you had better think it over a bit," he said. "I realize that
it comes rather suddenly. Supposing you go to bed, and we'll talk more
in the morning. Come, Washington, make up a couple of bunks for the boys
in this room. You can sleep in the balloon shed as usual."

In a few minutes the colored man had made rude but comfortable beds on
two bunks, like shelves that folded against the wall. Then, with an
armful of bed clothes, he retired to the big shed.

"Better use a little more liniment," advised the old man. "I don't want
you sore and stiff if you go with me."

Accordingly Jack and Mark rubbed their arms and legs well. Something in
the stuff must have been very soothing for they soon fell asleep.

It was broad day when the boys awoke. At first they could not realize
where they were. They saw a colored man moving about and cooking
something on the gasolene stove.

"Did yo' gen'men obtain a sufficient percentage of restful
slumberation?" he asked with a broad grin.

"We slept fine," said Mark.

"Washington, is breakfast ready?" asked Mr. Henderson, coming in from
the balloon shed.

"It am prepared," was the reply.

"Hello, boys! How did you sleep?" asked the inventor, observing that
Mark and Jack were awake.

"Fine!" they said in a chorus and with a smile.

"Well, wash up and we'll have something to eat. You'll find soap, water
and towels out in the shed," and he pointed to where he had just come
from.

The boys found two big tubs full of cool water. In an instant they had
stripped and were splashing around like ducks. It was a treat to get a
good bath. They came back into the cabin glowing. Not even a reminder of
the soreness and stiffness of the railroad accident remained. They did
full justice to the meal of coffee and ham and eggs Washington had
prepared.

"Now, Washington, you had better take the prisoner something, and get
your own breakfast," the professor said. "I want to have a talk with the
boys."

Whistling a merry tune, the colored man took out a tray of food to
Taggert, who was still bound so he could not escape.

"Now I'd like to hear your names, and all about you," the old man said.

The lads told their simple stories from the time each of them had
started to shift for himself until they had accidentally met, and been
hurled from the train.

"And have you thought over what I asked you last night?" asked the
professor, when they had finished.

"I have," said Jack, "and I'd like to go along."

"Good! You shall go!" exclaimed the inventor. "How about you, Mark?"

"I'll go, too."

"All right. Now we have plenty to do," the old professor went on. "The
actions of this man Taggert will hasten my plans. There are a few
finishing touches to put on the ship. Come out into the shed."

Delighted at the chance of helping about the mysterious _Monarch_, the
boys followed the professor. They found the shed lighted by windows in
the roof, from which the curtains had been rolled back. The windows on
the side were not opened.

By daylight the airship looked larger than before. It was a wonderful
machine. The professor and his colored helper busied themselves in the
engine room. Now and then the two boys were allowed to aid.

