    convenient) to the care of Francis B. Ogden, Consul of the
    United States at Liverpool.

               I am
                        Your obedient servant,
                        ROBERT L. STEVENS,
                        _President and Engineer of the Camden and
                        South Amboy Railroad and Transportation Company._ ]


DIFFICULTY OF ROLLING THE AMERICAN RAIL.

Mr. Stevens received no favorable answer to his proposals, but being
acquainted with Mr. Guest (afterward Sir John Guest), a member of
Parliament, proprietor of large iron works in Dowlais, Wales, he
prevailed upon him to have rails rolled at his works. Mr. Guest became
interested in the matter and accompanied Mr. Stevens to Wales, where
the latter gave his personal supervision to the construction of the
rolls. After the rolls were completed the Messrs. Guest hesitated to
have them used, through fear of damage to the mill machinery, upon
hearing which Mr. Stevens deposited a handsome sum guaranteeing the
expense of repairing the mill in case it was damaged. The receipt for
this deposit was preserved for many years among the archives of the
Camden and Amboy Company. As a matter of fact, the rolling apparatus
did break down several times. "At first," as Mr. Stevens in a letter
to his father, which I have seen, described it, "the rails came from
the rolls twisted and as crooked as snakes," and he was greatly
discouraged. At last, however, the mill men acquired the art of
straightening the rail while it cooled.

The first shipment,[3] consisting of five hundred and fifty bars
eighteen feet long, thirty-six pounds to the yard, arrived in
Philadelphia on the ship Charlemagne, May 16, 1831.

Over thirty miles of this rail was laid before the summer of 1832.

A few years after, on much of the Stevens rail laid on the Camden and
Amboy Railroad, the rivets at the joints were discarded, and the bolt
with the screw thread and nut, similar to that now used, was adopted
as the standard.

The rail was first designed to weigh thirty-six pounds per yard, but
it was almost immediately increased in weight to between forty and
forty-two pounds, and rolled in lengths of sixteen feet. It was then
three and a half inches high, two and one-eighth inches wide on the
head and three and a half inches wide at the base, the price paid in
England being L8 per ton. The import duty was $1.85.

The first shipment of rail, having arrived in America, was transported
to Bordentown, and here, upon the ground on which we stand, and which
this monument is erected to mark forever, was laid the first piece of
track (about five-sixths of a mile long) in August, 1831. The Camden
and Amboy Company, following the example of the Manchester and
Liverpool Railroad, laid their first track upon stone blocks two feet
square and ten to thirteen inches deep. These blocks were purchased
from the prison authorities at Sing Sing, N.Y. Some of these stone
blocks have been used in constructing the foundation for this
monument.

  [Footnote 3: A list of the vessels chartered to transport the rails,
   with dates, tonnage, etc., is given below:

                                    No. of        Tonnage.     Rate of
  Date.              Ship.           Bars.     tons. cwt. lb.    Duty.

  May    16, 1831.   Charlemagne     550       504    0   14     $1.85
  May    19, 1831.   Salem           963       744    2   14      1.85
  April   7, 1832.   Caledonia        38        63    3   07      1.85
  April  23, 1832.   Armadilla       525     1,000    3   21      1.85
  May     4, 1832.   George Clinton  624       986    2   14      1.85
  June 2-18, 1833.   Henry Kneeland  204       377    3   21      1.85
  May     8, 1832.   Cumberland    1,464     2,790    1   00      1.85
  June    2, 1832.   Gardiner        601     1,136    0   00      1.85
  June    5, 1832.   Globe           499       943    1   14      1.85
  June    6, 1832.   Jubilee          70       130    0   21      1.85
  July   18, 1832.   Hellen        1,080     2,004    3   21      1.85
  July   19, 1832.   Nimrod          937     1,745    3   00      1.85
  Aug.    2, 1832.   Emery           240       454    2   00      1.85
  Aug.    7, 1833.   Ajax            364       700    0   21      1.85
  Aug.   13, 1832.   Concordia       622     1,174    3   14      1.85
  Aug.   14, 1830.   William Byrny 1,120     2,138    1   07      1.85
  Aug.   20, 1832.   Mary Howland    932     1,755    3   07      1.85
  Aug.   23, 1832.   Pulaski         488       924    1   00      1.85
  Aug.   24, 1832.   Robert Morris 1,985     3,732    0   14      1.85
  Aug.   27, 1832.   Ann             506       961    2   27      1.85
  Sept.   3, 1832.   Montgomery    1,369     2,959    0   14      1.85
  Sept.   4, 1832.   Marengo         534     1,004    2   07      1.85
  Oct.   12, 1832.   Vestal          237       460    2   07      1.85

  This iron proved to be of such superior quality that after it was
  worn out in the track, the company's mechanics preferred it to new
  iron in making repairs. Some of this rail is still in use in side
  tracks. It is pronounced equal in durability to much of the steel
  rail of to-day. ]


FIRST JOINT FIXTURES.

Mr. Stevens ordered the first joint fixtures also from an English
mill, at the same time. The ends of the rails were designed to rest
upon wrought iron plates or flat cast plates. The rails were connected
at the stems by an iron "tongue" five inches long, two inches wide,
and five-eighths of an inch thick. A rivet, put on hot, passing
through the stem of each rail near the ends of the bar, fastened it to
the tongue and completed the joint. A hole oblong in shape, to allow
for expunctral contraction, was punched in the stem at each end of the
rail.


THE FIRST RAILROAD SPIKES.

The first "spikes six inches long, with hooked heads," were also
ordered at the same time. These were undoubtedly the "first railroad
spikes" (as they are known to the trade) ever manufactured.

Mr. Stevens neglected to obtain a patent for these inventions,
although urged to do so by Mr. Ogden, American Consul at Liverpool,
and the credit of being the inventor of the American rail was for a
time claimed for others, but the evidence brought forward in late
years fully established the fact that he was the originator of the
American system of railway construction.

The "Stevens rail and spike" gradually found great favor everywhere in
America--all the roads being relaid with it as the original T or strap
rail became worn out.

In England the T rail still continues to be used. The London and
Birmingham Railway, opened in 1838, was laid with Berkenshaw rails;
part with the straight and part with the fish-bellied rail, and the
remainder with reversible "bull-headed" rail, both types being
supported by chairs.[4]

  [Footnote 4: The experiment of laying the Stevens rail in chairs
  was tried on the Albany and Schenectady road in 1837, on the
  Hudson River Railroad 1848, but the chairs were soon afterward
  discarded, nothing but spikes being used to attach the rail to the
  tie.]

Sixty years have elapsed since this rail was adopted by the Camden and
Amboy Company, and with the exception of slight alterations in the
proportions incident to increased weight, no radical change has been
made in the "Stevens rail," which is now in use on every railroad in
America. Many improvements have been made in the joint fixture, but
the "tongue" or fish plate improved into the angle splice bar is in
general use, and nothing has yet been found to take the place of the
"hook-headed" railroad spike which Robert Stevens then designed.

The track upon which we stand was the first in the world that was laid
with the rail and spike now in general use.


MR. STEVENS EXAMINES ENGLISH LOCOMOTIVES.

Mr. Stevens divided his time while abroad between arranging for the
manufacture of track material and examining the English locomotives
that were being constructed or had been in service.

A year had elapsed since the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester
Railway, and the English mechanics had not been idle. The "Rocket,"
although successful in the Rainhill contest, when put to work had
shown many defects that Stephenson & Co. were striving to correct in
subsequent locomotives.

The "Planet," built by that firm, was tried in public December 4,
1830, shortly after Mr. Stevens arrived in England, and at that time
was undoubtedly the best locomotive in the world.


THE "JOHN BULL" ORDERED.

Mr. Stevens was present at a trial when the "Planet" showed most
satisfactory properties, and he at once ordered a locomotive of
similar construction, from the same manufacturers, for the Camden and
Amboy Railroad. This engine, afterward called the "John Bull" and "No.
1," was completed in May and shipped by sailing vessel from
Newcastle-on-Tyne in June, 1831, arriving in Philadelphia about the
middle of August of that year. It was then transferred to a sloop at
Chestnut Street wharf, Philadelphia, whence it was taken to
Bordentown.


THE "JOHN BULL" ARRIVES AT BORDENTOWN.

The following circumstances connected with the arrival of the engine
at Bordentown, N.J., are related by Isaac Dripps, Esq., for many years
master mechanic of the Camden and Am boy Railroad, and afterward
superintendent of motive power of the Pennsylvania Railroad, who is
now, after a busy life, enjoying a peaceable retirement at his
pleasant home in West Philadelphia.

Mr. Dripps, who is now in the eighty-second year of his age, was
employed by Robert and Edwin Stevens in repairing and assisting with
their steamboats on the Delaware River and at Hoboken as early as
1829. When the "John Bull" arrived in Philadelphia he was detailed by
Robert Stevens to attend to the transportation of the engine to
Bordentown, where it was landed safely the last week in August, 1831.

The boiler and cylinders were in place, but the loose parts--rods,
pistons, valves, etc.--were packed in boxes. No drawings or directions
for putting the engine together had come to hand, and young Dripps,
who had never seen a locomotive, found great difficulty in discovering
how to put the parts in place, alone and unassisted, as Robert
Stevens, who had returned from Europe, was absent at Hoboken at the
time attending to other matters.


DIMENSIONS OF ENGINE AND PARTS.

The bronze bass-relief upon the monument, made from the working
drawing furnished by Mr. Dripps, is an exact representation of the
locomotive when it arrived in America.

The engine originally weighed about ten tons. The boiler was thirteen
feet long and three feet six inches in diameter. The cylinders were
nine inches by twenty inches. There were four driving wheels, four
feet six inches in diameter, arranged with outside cranks for
connecting parallel rods, but owing to the sharp curves on the road
these rods were never used. The driving wheels were made with cast
iron hubs and wooden (locust) spokes and felloes. The tires were of
wrought iron, three quarters of an inch thick, the tread being five
inches and the depth of flange one and a half inches. The gauge was
originally five feet from center to center of rails. The boiler was
composed of sixty-two flues seven feet six inches long, two inches in
diameter; the furnace was three feet seven inches long and three feet
two inches high, for burning wood. The steam ports were one and
one-eighth inches by six and a half inches; the exhaust ports one and
one-eighth by six and a half inches; grate surface, ten feet eight
inches; fire box surface, thirty-six feet; flue surface, two hundred
and thirteen feet; weight, without fuel or water, twenty-two thousand
four hundred and twenty-five pounds.

After the valves were in gear and the engine in motion, two levers on
the engineman's side moved back and forth continuously. When it was
necessary to put the locomotive on the turntable, enginemen who were
skilled in the handling of the engines first put the valves out of
gear by turning the handle down, and then worked the levers by hand,
thus moving the valves to the proper position and stopping the engine
at the exact point desired.

The reversing gear was a very complicated affair. The two eccentrics
were secured to a sleeve or barrel, which fitted loosely on the crank
shaft, between the two cranks, so as to turn freely. A treadle was
used to change the position of this loose eccentric sleeve on the
shaft of the driving wheel (moving it to the right or left) when it
was necessary to reverse. Two carriers were secured firmly to the body
of this shaft (one on each side of the eccentrics); one carrier worked
the engine ahead, the other back. The small handle on the right side
of the boiler was used to lift the eccentric rod (which passed forward
to the rock shaft on the forward part of the engine) off the pin, and
thus put the valves out of gear before it was possible to shift the
sleeve and reverse the engine.

Great similarity will be noticed in the American locomotives built for
many years after the arrival of the "John Bull," especially in the
matter of making the keys, brasses, etc., on the connecting rods, and
in the construction of valves, fire box and tubes. Even the old plan
of setting the ends of the exhaust nozzle high up in the smoke box,
which was discontinued when the petticoat pipe came in use, is now
again resorted to in connection with the extended smoke box of modern
locomotives.


FIRST TRIAL OF THE LOCOMOTIVE.

Mr. Dripps informs me that, after many attempts, he succeeded in
putting the parts of the engine together, and when it was placed in
position upon the track he notified Robert Stevens of the fact. Mr.
Stevens came at once to Bordentown, as his anxiety to see it in
operation was very great. Upon his arrival the boiler was pumped full
of water, by hand, from the hogshead in which it was brought. Benjamin
Higgins made the fire with pine wood, and when the scale[5] showed
thirty pounds steam pressure, Isaac Dripps opened the throttle, Robert
Stevens standing by his side, and the first locomotive on this great
highway _moved_. It would be difficult to describe the feeling of
these three men as they stood upon the moving engine--the first human
freight drawn by steam on what was afterward destined to be the great
highway connecting the two most populous cities of the American
continent; a most important link in the chain of intercommunication
between the North and South and West. What possibilities must have
dawned upon them if they cared to lift the veil of the future!

  [Footnote 5: The dial gauge was not in use at that time.]

During the next few days after this preliminary trial the engine was
again taken apart, and as a few of the parts needed modification some
time intervened before it was again in running order. It will be
remembered that young Dripps had never seen a locomotive before and
there were no "old engineers" to consult in regard to the construction
or management of the engine.


A TENDER IMPROVISED.

As no tender came with the locomotive, one was improvised from a
four-wheel flat car that had been used on construction work, which was
soon equipped to carry water and wood. The water tank consisted of a
large whisky cask which was procured from a Bordentown storekeeper,
and this was securely fastened on the center of this four-wheeled car.
A hole was bored up through the car into the barrel and into it a
piece of two-inch tin pipe was fastened, projecting below the platform
of the car. It now became necessary to devise some plan to get the
water from the tank to the pump and into the boiler around the turns
under the cars, and as a series of rigid sections of pipe was not
practicable, young Dripps procured four sections of hose two feet
long, which he had made out of shoe leather by a Bordentown shoemaker.
These were attached to the pipes and securely fastened by bands of
waxed thread. The hogshead was filled with water, a supply of wood for
fuel was obtained, and the engine and tender were ready for work.


STEAM OR HORSE POWER?

At that time the question whether the railroad should be operated by
steam locomotives or horse power had already become a political issue.
The farmers and other horse owners and dealers, who had made money by
selling hay and grain and horses to the stage and freight wagon lines,
were discussing the possibilities of loss of business.


TRIAL OF THE ENGINE BEFORE THE LEGISLATURE.

Many of the members of the New Jersey Legislature were farmers. The
management of the Camden and Amboy Railroad was anxious to give these
gentlemen and other prominent citizens an opportunity to examine a
steam locomotive at work and to ride in a railway train.

Sixty years ago to-day, on the 12th of November, 1831, by special
invitation, the members of the Legislature and other State officials
were driven from Trenton to Bordentown in stages to witness the trial.
Among them were John P. Jackson (father of the present general
superintendent of the United Railroads of New Jersey division of the
Pennsylvania Railroad, who afterward took a prominent part in the
affairs of the New Jersey Railroad, whose termini were at New
Brunswick and Jersey City); Benjamin Fish (director for fifty years
for the Camden and Amboy Railroad), afterward president of the
Freehold and Jamesburg Agricultural Railroad; Ashbel Welch, chief
engineer and superintendent of the Belvidere and Delaware Railroad for
many years, and president of the United Railroads of New Jersey during
the years immediately preceding the lease to the Pennsylvania
Railroad; Edwin A. and Robert L. Stevens, afterward managers of the
road.


FIRST CARS.

Two coaches built so that they might be drawn by horses were attached
to the locomotive. These coaches were of the English pattern. They had
four wheels and resembled three carriage bodies joined together, with
seats in each facing each other. There were three doors at each side.
These cars were made by a firm of carriage manufacturers, M.P. and
M.E. Green, of Hoboken, and were thought to be very handsome. The New
Jersey law makers were somewhat dubious, it is said, about risking
their lives in this novel train, but at last they concluded to do so
and the train started and made many trips back and forth without
accident or delay. Madam Murat, wife of Prince Murat, a nephew of
Napoleon Bonaparte, who was then living in Bordentown, insisted on
being the first woman to ride on a train hauled by a steam locomotive
in the State.

In the evening a grand entertainment was given to the Legislature by
the railroad company at Arnell's Hotel, Bordentown, and it has been
whispered that the festivities kept up until a late hour in the night.
Whether that be true or not, it is generally conceded that from that
time to this the Legislature of New Jersey have always been more or
less interested in the affairs of the Camden and Amboy Railroad and
its successors, or _vice versa_.

This first movement of passengers by steam in the State of New Jersey
was regarded as a success from every point of view, and in
commemoration of the important events here enacted the boundaries of
this first piece of railway laid between New York and Philadelphia,
which were identified and staked out by Isaac Dripps a half century
afterward, have been definitely marked for all time by the
Pennsylvania Railroad Company, who have erected these handsome stones.


EARLY DIFFICULTIES.

Among the earliest troubles of the young engineer and his employer,
Robert L. Stevens, was the fact that as there were only four wheels
under the engines, they were derailed frequently in going around
curves; so it was necessary to provide an appliance to prevent this.


THE FIRST PILOT.

The first pilot was planned, 1832, by Robert L. Stevens. A frame made
of oak, eight by four feet, pinned together at the corners, was made.
Under one end of it a pair of wheels twenty-six inches in diameter
were placed in boxes, and the other end was fastened to an extension
of the axle outside of the forward driving wheels, it having been
found by experience that a play of about one inch on each side on the
pedestals of the front wheels of the pilot or engine was necessary in
order to get around the curves then in the tracks. For years afterward
there was very little change in constructing the pilots from that
originally applied to the "John Bull."

The spiral spring, which held the front wheels of the pilot in place,
acted substantially as the center pin of a truck. The turntables in
use on the road were so short that it was necessary to unconnect and
take off these pilots before turning the engine. After the pilot was
adopted the forward large wheel on right of the engine was made loose
on the shaft in order to afford additional play in going around
curves. Other[6] changes and additions were also made in the
locomotive.

  [Footnote 6: Changes in the locomotive "John Bull" since date of
  construction, 1830:

  Steam dome changed from rear of boiler forward to a part over what
  was called the "man-hole," and throttle valve placed therein.

  Steam pipes changed to outside of boiler, connecting new dome with
  smoke box, entering it on each side.

  In the beginning the reverse gear was changed from one single
  eccentric rod on each side to two on each side, connecting on to
  the same eccentric wheel, and the lifting rod, in pulling back,
  lifted the forward gear hook off the rocker arm, and the back
  motion hook then connecting on the rocker arm reversed the engine.

  Side rods were never used.

  Driver spring was changed from a bearing under the pedestal boxes
  to a point over the boxes.

  The pilot was attached in this manner:

  Right forward wheel being loose, forward axle extended eight
  inches beyond box on each side; to this was attached the beam of
  the pilot, having play of about one inch between box and pedestal
  plate to act while going around curves. The weight of forward part
  of engine rested upon a cross brace of the two-wheel pilot, which
  took bearing by a screw pin surrounded by a spring, by turning
  which pin the weight on the drivers could be adjusted.

  A brace used as a hand rail was added on top of the frame, bracing
  frame and acting as a guide to the driving springs.

  Water-cocks changed from right to left side of the boiler.

  Bell, whistle and headlight were added.

  Balance safety valve scale was changed forward to a point over
  barrel of boiler, the secret valve being over the new dome.]


IMPROVEMENTS IN LOCOMOTIVE BUILDING.

During 1831-35 the company's shops were located at Hoboken, N.J., and
during the winter of 1832-33, three locomotives were commenced at
these shops (two completed before March, 1833, the other in April),
the valves, cylinders, pistons, etc., coming from England, the boilers
being made under the direction of Robert L. Stevens. It was his
opinion that the "John Bull" was too heavy, and the new boilers were
built smaller and lighter, so that the engines, when completed,
weighed eight instead of ten tons. With these three engines, which
were delivered to the railroad company at South Amboy, the stone
blocks and other material for the permanent track was delivered along
the line of the road.


BALDWIN'S FIRST LOCOMOTIVES.

The importation of the locomotive "John Bull" was destined to have a
far-reaching influence in moulding the types of early American
locomotives.

After the demonstration of November 12, 1831, the engine was taken
from the track and stored in a shed constructed to protect it until
such time as the track should be completed.

It was about this time that the proprietor of Peale's Museum, in
Philadelphia, applied to Matthias Baldwin, an ingenious mathematical
instrument maker, for a small locomotive to run upon a circular track
on the floor of the museum. Mr. Baldwin had heard of this locomotive.
He came to Bordentown and applied to Isaac Dripps for permission to
inspect it. Mr. Dripps tells me he remembers very well the day that he
explained to Mr. Baldwin the construction of the various working
parts.

Mr. Baldwin built a toy engine for Mr. Peale, which was so successful,
