large proportion of our food is in a form inviting mastication.

The teeth perform the very important function of breaking down our food
and enabling it to be intimately incorporated with the saliva and
afterwards with the digestive juices. The Anglo-Saxon race shows a greater
tendency to degeneracy in the teeth than do other races; the teeth of the
present generation are less perfect than those of previous generations. A
dentist writes (_Lancet_, 1903-2, p. 1054) "I have had the opportunity of
examining the teeth of many natives in their more or less uncivilised
state, from the Red Indians of North America, the negroes of Africa, to
the more civilised Chinese, Japanese, and Indians of the East, and I have
usually found them possessed of sound teeth, but so soon as they come
under the influence of civilised life in Washington, Montreal, London,
Paris and other cities, their teeth begin to degenerate, though their
general health may remain good." In a long article on mastication in the
_Lancet_ (1903-2, p. 84) from which we have already quoted, Dr. Harry
Campbell gives as the effect of thorough and efficient mastication, that
it increases the amount of alkaline saliva passing into the stomach, and
prolongs the period of starch digestion within that organ. That it
influences the stomach reflexly by promoting the flow of gastric juice.
That the frequent use of the jaws and the tongue, during the period of
growth, cause the jaws to expand. If the jaws are not adequately exercised
during this period, owing to the use of soft food, they do not reach their
normal size, the teeth are overcrowded, do not develop fully, and are
prone to decay. The effect of vigorous mastication is to stimulate the
circulation in the tooth pulp, which promotes nutrition and maintains a
firm dental setting. Dr. Campbell writes: "I am perfectly at one with Dr.
Wallace, in believing that the removal of the fibrous portion of food is
the main cause of the prevalence of caries among moderns."

When the food reaches the stomach, gastric juice is secreted. This juice
contains a ferment called pepsin and hydrochloric acid. Pepsin is only
active in an acid media. Starch digestion proceeds in the stomach to such
a time--stated as from 15 to 30 minutes--when the acid gastric juice has
been poured out in sufficient quantity to neutralise the alkalinity of
the saliva. The gastric juice acts upon the proteids only. After a time
the liquefied contents of the stomach are passed into the first portion
of the small intestine, called the duodenum. Here it meets with the
pancreatic juice, which like the gastric juice attacks proteids, but even
more energetically, and only in an alkaline media. The proteolitic ferment
is called trypsin. The pancreatic, the most important of the digestive
fluids, contains other ferments; one called amylopsin, takes up the
digestion of any remaining or imperfectly converted starch left from the
salivary digestion. Amylopsin is much more powerful and rapid than the
ptyalin of the saliva, especially on uncooked starch. Its absence from the
pancreatic juice of infants is an indication that starch should not be
given them. Another ferment, stearopsin, emulsifies fats. The bile is
alkaline and assists the pancreatic juice in neutralising the acid mixture
that leaves the stomach; it also assists the absorption of fats. The
digestion of proteids is not completed in the stomach. There are some who
look upon the stomach as chiefly of use as a receptacle for the large mass
of food, which is too quickly eaten to be passed at once into the
intestines; the food being gradually expelled from the stomach, in such
quantities as the duodenal digestion can adequately treat. A frequently
used table, showing the time required for the digestion of various foods
in the stomach, is of little practical value. There is ample provision for
the digestion of food, there is a duplication of ferments for the proteids
and starch. In health, the ferments are not only very active, but are
secreted in ample quantities. The digestive or unorganised ferments must
not be confused with the organised ferments such as yeast. The latter are
living vegetable cells, capable of indefinite multiplication. The former
are soluble bodies, and though capable of transforming or digesting some
thousands of times their mass of food, their power in this direction is
restricted within definite limits. Another and preferable name for them is
enzymes.

The action of saliva on starch is powerfully retarded by tea, this is due
to the tannin. Coffee and cocoa are without effect. Tea infused for two
minutes only, was not found to have sensibly less restraining effect than
when infused for thirty minutes. On peptic digestion both tea and coffee
had a powerful retarding effect. When of equal strength cocoa was nearly
as bad, but as it is usually taken much weaker, its inhibitory effect is
of little consequence.

Bacteria are minute vegetable organisms, which exist in the dust of the
air, in water and almost everywhere on or near the surface of the earth.
They are consequently taken in with our food. They exist in the mouth;
those in carious teeth are often sufficient to injuriously affect
digestion and health. The healthy gastric juice is to a great degree
antiseptic, but few bacteria being able to endure its acidity. When the
residue of the food reaches the large intestine, bacteria are found in
very great numbers. The warmth of the body is highly favourable to their
growth. They cause the food and intestinal _debris_ to assume its faecal
character. Should the mass be retained, the bacterial poisons accumutate
and being absorbed into the body produce headaches, exhaustion,
neurasthenia and other complaints. Proteid matter, the products of its
decomposition and nitrogenous matter generally, are especially the food of
bacteria; this is shown in the offensiveness of the faeces of the
carnivora, notwithstanding their short intestines, compared with that of
the herbivora. Also in the difference of the faeces of the dog when fed on
flesh and on a nearly vegetable diet. On a rich proteid diet, especially
if it consists largely of flesh, the bacterial products in the intestines
are greater than on a vegetable diet. On the latter such a disease as
appendicitis is rare. Professor Elie Metchnikoff, of the Pasteur
Institute, thinks that man's voluminous and highly developed large
intestine fulfils no useful purpose, and on account of its breeding a very
copious and varied bacterial flora, could with advantage be dispensed
with. He also has said that man, who could support himself on food easily
digestible, has a small intestine which is disproportionately fully
developed. Instead of having between 18 and 21 feet of small intestine,
man might do with one-third of that length. According to him, there is a
disharmony of our food and our digestive system. Referring to such views,
and the desire of some surgeons to remove the vermiform appendix and
portions of the intestines upon too little provocation, Sir W. Macewin,
M.D., F.R.S. (_B. Medical Jrn._, 1904, 2 p. 874) says:--"Is this human
body of ours so badly constructed that it contains so many useless parts
and requires so much tinkering? Possibly I may be out of fashion with the
times, as I cannot find such imperfections in the normal human body as are
alleged. On the contrary, the more one looks into the human body and sees
it work, the better one understands it and the more one is struck with the
wondrous utility, beauty, and harmony of all its parts." Our food we can
change, but not our organs-except by a dangerous surgical operations. Our
teeth with our complex and very long intestines are adapted for fibrous,
bulky and solid food. On such food mankind has lived for an immense period
of time. It is true that there are several theoretical advantages in
cooked vegetable foods; but unfortunately there is a want of conformity
with our digestive organs. If a flesh diet is taken, the incongruity is
greater. Concentrated food causes constipation. An active man, leading an
out-of-door life, can take unsuitable food with little or no apparent
inconvenience, the movements of his body favouring intestinal action;
whilst the same food to a sedentary person will prove distinctly
injurious.

Some persons have such a vigorous digestion that they can consume almost
any food, even that which is obviously unsuitable; not only bad in kind
but excessive in quantity. Other persons have to be very careful. Many
have boasted that they can take of what they call the good things of life
to their full, without bad effect. We know of such men who have been much
esteemed for their joviality and good nature, but who have broken down in
what should have been a hearty and useful middle life. There are others
who were poorly equipped for the battle of life, with indifferent
constitutions, never having had the buoyancy and overflowing of animal
spirits; but who, by conserving such strength as they had, have outlived
all their more healthy but less careful comrades. The errors of the
parents are often most evident in the children or grandchildren. There
are many persons who cannot eat of some particular food, although it may
be quite wholesome to others. Sometimes it is a psychological rather than
a physiological disability, which may he overcome by an effort of the
will. At other times it seems to have no connection with the imagination,
although it is not always possible to give a sound reason for it. In the
main, of course, there are principles of dietetics applicable to all
alike, but in regard to details, everyone should make rules for himself,
according to his experience. When there appears no real reason for an
idiosyncrasy, a little humouring of our taste and digestion will often
overcome it, to our advantage. It is generally those of delicate
constitution who are most sensitive. Some cannot eat oatmeal except in
small quantity. Olive and other vegetable oils, even when of good quality
cannot be taken by many people, whilst others find them quite as
wholesome, or even better than butter. Vegetarians can generally detect
lard in pastry both by its taste and its after effects, although those
accustomed to this fat do not object to it. It is also surprising how some
individual's tastes and habits will vary at different periods of their
lives.

One form of dyspepsia is due to undigested starch remaining in the stomach
and causing an excessive secretion of hydrochloric acid. As long as
proteid food is present, the pepsin and acid expend themselves on it, and
are removed together. The undigested starch continues to stimulate gastric
secretion, and the acid residuum causes pain, heartburn and flatulence. If
there be also any butyric acid, or some other fatty acid, derived from
milk, butter, cheese, &c., there will be acid eructations. For this form
of indigestion there are several methods of treatment. First; the very
thorough cooking of all starchy food, and it is an advantage to take a
little good extract of malt, either at the time of eating or directly
afterwards. The diastase of the malt has the same action on starch as the
ptyalin in the saliva. It is better, scientifically, to have the
farinaceous food at about 130 deg. F. (as hot as the mouth can bear will
do), and then to add malt extract. On keeping the mixture warm, from a
few minutes to half an hour or more, the starch is digested and rendered
soluble. Such food is not very pleasant to take. The food known as Grape
Nuts has been treated in a similar manner. The use of malt extract,
however, seems a clumsy substitute for salivary digestion. Second; the
eating of starch in the form of hard and dry biscuits, crusts and other
hard food, which demand thorough mastication and insalivation, and the
keeping in the mouth for a long while, during which the saliva has time to
act. This is the best plan. Third; the taking of sodium bicarbonate
towards the end of the period of digestion, in order to neutralise the
acid in the stomach. This gives relief, but does not cure, as the dose has
to be repeated after each meal; in course of time the quantity of soda has
sometimes to be increased to an alarming extent. Fourth; the abstention
from starchy foods and the substitution of an exclusive flesh dietary. In
the "Salisbury" treatment, raw minced beef is given. This method often
gives immediate relief, but its ultimate effect on the kidneys and other
organs is very bad.

No hard and fast rule can be laid down as to the number of meals into
which the daily amount of food required should be divided. The stomach
appears to work to the best advantage when it is full, or nearly so, and
the appetite is appeased. Three approximately equal meals seems to be a
convenient division. Dr. Dewey and his followers advise only two meals a
day, and it seems incontestable that many persons find the plan
advantageous. These are generally adults with weak digestions, or elderly
persons who, on account of their age and the sluggish action of their
assimilative functions, require comparatively little food. Children, on
account of their vigorous vitality, rapid growth and hearty appetites,
ought not to be restricted to this number. Persons who have got into the
pernicious habit of greatly over-eating, and whose stomachs have become
distended and unusually large, sometimes find it easier to restrict their
daily food to a healthy quantity by taking only two meals. The general
objections against two meals are that either two little food is taken, or
the ingestion of such a large quantity is bad for the stomach and causes
it to press on the adjacent viscera. The large quantity of blood and nerve
force drawn to the over-distended stomach, depletes the brain and nervous
system, causing drowsiness and incapacity for mental and physical work.
The carnivora, whose opportunity for obtaining food--unlike the
herbivora--is irregular and often at long intervals, gorge themselves upon
opportunity and are in the habit of sleeping after a meal. The frugivora
and herbivora, however, are alert and ready to fly from their enemies
should such appear. The conveying of so much nourishment to the liver and
blood stream at one time, is probably a greater tax on them. A light lunch
between the usual full meals has nothing to recommend it. The stomach is
burdened to little purpose, often before it has finished with one meal
another is imposed upon it, no time being left for recuperation.

Dietaries.--The best proportions of proteids, carbo-hydrates and fats
required for the nourishment of the body has not yet been conclusively
decided. The common plan is to average the dietary of large bodies of
persons, particualrly of soldiers and prisoners. These dietaries have been
adjusted empirically (the earlier ones at least), and are generally
considered as satisfactory. They are chiefly of English and German origin.
Another method is to laboriously analyse the injesta or food consumed and
compare it with the dejecta or excretions, until a quantity and kind of
food is found which is just sufficient to keep the body in equilibrium.
This latter plan is the best, but to be quite satisfactory must be tried
on a large number of suitable persons under varying conditions, both of
quantity and kind of food. Nearly all the experiments have been made on
persons accustomed to a stimulating dietary: their usual food has included
a considerable quantity of flesh and alcoholic drinks. Sufficient
attention has not been paid to the dietaries of the more abstemious races
who partake of little if any flesh food. The standard daily dietary for a
man of average weight, doing a moderate amount of work, is variously
stated by the best authorities as proteids from 100 to 130 grammes, fat 35
to 125 grammes, and carbo-hydrates 450 to 550 grammes. There is a
surprising difference of opinion on the amount of fat, but those who give
least fat give the largest quantity of carbo-hydrate and _vice-versa_. Dr.
R. Hutchison in "Food and Dietetics," sums up the quantities given by the
highest authorities as follows:---

Proteid       125 g. ( 4.4 oz.) x 4.1 =  512 cal. = 20 g. N,  62 C
Carbo-hydrate 500 g. (17.6 oz.)   4.1   2050                 200
Fat            50 g. ( 1.8 oz.)   9.3    465                  38
              -----------------         ----        -------- -----
               675 g.(23.8    )         3027 Total  20 g. N, 300 C

The nutrient ratio is 1 : 4.9. For scientific purposes, metrical weights
and measures are used, instead of the inconvenient English grains, ounces,
pounds, &c. (1 gramme = 15.43 grains; 1 ounce avoirdupois = 437.5 grains =
28.35 grammes). A calorie is a measure of the power of a food in
generating heat and muscular energy (these two being convertible).

The calories used in food tables are kilo-calories, representing the
amount of heat which would raise a kilogramme (1000 grammes) of water
1 deg. Centigrade. This is the same as raising 1 pound weight 4 deg.
Fahrenheit. According to the table given, 125 grammes of dry proteid are
required per day; this contains 20 grammes of nitrogen and 62 of carbon.
When thoroughly consumed or utilised in the body, the heat or its
equivalent in muscular work equals 512 kilo-calories. Proteids have, of
course, an additional value as tissue formers. The factors used here, of
4.1 and 9.3, are those commonly employed; but the latest and most
reliable research, taking account only of that part of the food which
is actually available in the body, gives for proteid and carbo-hydrate
4 calories, and for fat 8.9 calories.

Fat has a higher food value than the carbo-hydrates, as 4.1 : 9.3 = 2.27
or 4.0 : 89 = 2.225, according to whether the old or new factors are used.
In the table of analyses 2.225 was used. The standard dietary for a woman,
or of a boy 14 to 16 years of age, is given as equivalent to eight-tenths
that of a man; a child of 10 to 13 six-tenths; of 2 to 5 four-tenths. A
man doing hard work requires one-tenth more. The following table gives
three standard dietaries, and a few actual ones, in grammes per day. The
food of persons in easy circumstances, and of working men in the receipt
of good wages, approximate to the standard dietaries, except that the fat
is higher and the carbo-hydrates proportionately less. This is due to an
abundance of animal food. It was thought unnecessary to give them in
detail:--

                                                 Pr't. Fat. C'rb. Cal. N.R.
Hutchison: Man, moderate muscular work            125   50   500  3027  4.9
Atwater:    "      "       "       "              125  ...   ...  3400  6.2
Voit:       "      "       "       "              118   56   500  2965  5.5
Atwater: Woman, light to moderate muscular work,
  or Man without muscular exercise                 90  ...   ...  2450  6.1
Football teams, Connecticut and California, U.S.  226  354   634  6590  6.6
Russian peasants                                  129   33   589  3165  5.4
Negro families--Alabama and Virginia               86  145   440  3395  9.3
Labourers-Lombardy (diet, mostly vegetable)        82   40   362  2192  5.5
Japanese, on vegetable diet (_a_)                  71   12   396  2026  6.0
Trappist monk, in Cloisters-vegetable diet         68   11   469  2304  7.3
Java village--Columbia Exposition, 1893            66   19   254  1450  4.7
Sewing girl-London (3/9 per week)                  53   33   316  1820  7.3
German vegetarians                                 54   22   573  2775 11.6
German labourers' family (poor circumstances)      52   32   287  1640  7.2
Dr. T.R.A.--wheatmeal bread and water only (_b_)   82    8.5 470  2342  6.0
Man--3 years' exclusively vegetable diet (_c_)     54   22   557  2710 11.2
Thomas Wood, the miller of Billericay (_d_)        55    5.7 313  1560  6.0

Dr. Alexander Haig considers that 88 grammes of proteid is required by a
man leading a decidedly active life.

NOTES.--(_a_) The Japanese are of small stature and weight.

(_b_) One of a series of experiments by A.W. Blyth, 1888. 1-1/2 lbs. of
wheatmeal per day was required for equilibrium; sedentary occupation, with
a daily walk of six miles.

(_c_) See "A Text Book of Physiology," by M. Foster, 5th edition, part
ii., p. 839; the diet was bread, fruit and oil. The man was in apparently
good health and stationary weight; only 59 per cent. of the proteids were
digested, leaving the small quantity of 32 grammes available for real use.
In commenting upon this, Professor Foster writes:--"We cannot
authoritatively say that such a reduction is necessarily an evil; for our
knowledge will not at present permit us to make an authoritative exact
statement as to the extent to which the proteid may be reduced without
disadvantage to the body, when accompanied by adequate provision of the
other elements of food; and this statement holds good whether the body be
undertaking a small or large amount of labour."

(_d_) The Miller of Billericay's case is quoted by Dr. Carpenter, and also
by Dr. Pavy. It was reported to the College of Physicians in 1767 by Sir
George Baker. A remarkable degree of vigour is said to have been sustained
for upwards of eighteen years on no other nutriment than 16 oz. of flour,
made into a pudding with water, no other liquid of any kind being taken.

A striking instance of abstemiousness is that of Cornaro, a Venetian
nobleman, who died in the year 1566 at the age of 98. Up to the age of 40
he spent a life of indulgence, eating and drinking to excess. At this
time, having been endowed with a feeble constitution, he was suffering
from dyspepsia, gout, and an almost continual slow fever, with an
intolerable thirst continually hanging upon him. The skill of the best
physicians of Italy was unavailing. At length he completely changed his
habits of diet, and made a complete recovery. At the age of 83 he wrote a
treatise on a "Sure and certain method of attaining a long and healthful
life." He says, what with bread, meat, the yolk of an egg and soup, I ate
as much as weighed 12 ozs., neither more nor less. I drank 14 oz. of wine.
When 78 he was persuaded to increase his food by the addition of 2 oz. per
day, and this nearly proved fatal. He writes that, instead of old age
being one of weakness, infirmity and misery, I find myself to be in the
most pleasant and delightful stage of life. At 83 I am always merry,
maintaining a happy peace in my own mind. A sober life has preserved me in
that sprightliness of thought and gaiety of humour. My teeth are all as
sound as in my youth. He was able to take moderate exercise in riding and
walking at that age. He was very passionate and hasty in his youth. He
wrote other treatises up to the age of 95.

Kumagara, Lapicque and Breis-acher, have, as the result of their
experiments, reduced the quantity of proteid required per 24 hours to 45
grammes. T. Hirschfeld states, as the conclusion of his research, that it
is possible for a healthy man (in one case for 15 days and in another for
10 days) to maintain nitrogenous balance on from 30 to 40 grammes of
proteid per day. Labbe and Morchoisne (Comptes Rendus, 30th May, 1904, p.
1365) made a dieting experiment during 38 days, upon one of themselves.
The proteid was derived exclusively from vegetable food. The food
consisted of bread, lentils, haricots, potatoes, carrots, chestnuts,
endives, apples, oranges, preserves, sugar, starch, butter, chocolate and
wine. At the commencement, the day's food contained 14.1 grammes of
nitrogen = 89.3 proteid, which was gradually diminished. On the 7th day
11.6 g. N. = 73.5 g. proteid was reached; during this time less N. was
eliminated, indicating that the proteid food was in excess of that
required for the wear and tear of the body. As the quantity of nitrogenous
food was diminished almost daily, the N. eliminated was found to diminish
also. This latter was in slight excess of that absorbed; but when a day or
two's time was allowed, without further reduction in the food, the body
tended to adjust itself to the dimished supply, and there was an
approximation of income and expenditure. The smallest quantity of food was
reached on the 32nd day with 1.06 N. = 6.7 proteid, which was obviously
too little, as 2.19 N. = 13.9 proteid was eliminated. On the 21st day 4.12
N. = 26 proteid was injested, and 4.05 N. was eliminated. The inference
drawn from the research is that about 26 grammes of proteid per day was
sufficient. The weight of the body remained practically constant
