In determining the proper dimensions of a conductor for railway
purposes, Sir William Thomson's law should properly apply. But on a
line where the gradients and traffic are very irregular, it is
difficult to estimate the average current, and the desirability of
having the rail mechanically strong, and of such low resistance that
the potential shall not vary very materially throughout its length,
becomes more important than the economic considerations involved in
Sir William Thomson's law. At Portrush the resistance of a mile,
including the return by earth and the ground rails, is actually about
0.23 ohm. If calculated from the section of the iron, it would be 0.15
ohm, the difference being accounted for by the resistance of the
copper loops, and occasional imperfect contacts. The E.M.F. at which
the conductor is maintained is about 225 volts, which is well within
the limit of perfect safety assigned by Sir William Thomson and Dr.
Siemens. At the same time the shock received by touching the iron is
sufficient to be unpleasant, and hence is some protection against the
conductor being tampered with.

Consider a car requiring a given constant current; evidently the
maximum loss due to resistance will occur when the car is at the
middle point of the line, and will then be one-fourth of the total
resistance of the line, provided the two extremities are maintained by
the generators at the same potential. Again, by integration, the mean
resistance can be shown to be one-sixth of the resistance of the line.
Applying these figures, and assuming four cars are running, requiring
4 horse power each, the loss due to resistance does not exceed 4 per
cent. of the power developed on the cars; or if one car only be
running, the loss is less than 1 per cent. But in actual practice at
Portrush even these estimates are too high, as the generators are
placed at the bottom of the hills, and the middle portion of the line
is more or less level, hence the minimum current is required when the
resistance is at its maximum value.

The insulation of the conductor has been a matter of considerable
difficulty, chiefly on account of the moistness of the climate. An
insulation has now, however, been obtained of from 500 to 1,000 ohms
per mile, according to the state of the weather, by placing a cap of
insulite between the wooden posts and T-iron. Hence the total leakage
cannot exceed 2.5 amperes, representing a loss of three-fourths of a
horse power, or under 5 per cent, when four cars are running. But
apart from these figures, we have materials for an actual comparison
of the cost of working the line by electricity and steam. The steam
tramway engines, temporarily employed at Portrush, are made by Messrs.
Wilkinson, of Wigan, and are generally considered as satisfactory as
any of the various tramway engines. They have a pair of vertical
cylinders, 8 inches diameter and one foot stroke, and work at a boiler
pressure of 120 lb., the total weight of the engine being 7 tons. The
electrical car with which the comparison is made has a dynamo weighing
13 cwt., and the tare of the car is 52 cwt. The steam-engines are
capable of drawing a total load of about 12 tons up the hill,
excluding the weight of the engine; the dynamo over six tons,
including its own weight; hence, weight for weight, the dynamo will
draw five times as much as the steam-engine. Finally, compare the
following estimates of cost. From actual experience, the steam-engine,
taking an average over a week, costs--

                                          L  s. d.
  Driver's wages.                         1 10  0
  Cleaner's  "                            0 12  0
  Coke, 581/2 cwt. at 25s. per ton.         3 13  11/2
  Oil, 1 gallon at 3s. 1d.                0  3  1
  Tallow, 4 lb. at 6d.                    0  2  0
  Waste, 8 lb. at 2d.                     0  1  4
  Depreciation, 15 per cent. on L750.     2  3  3
                                        ----------
                           Total.        L8  4  91/2

The distance run was 312 miles. Also, from actual experience, the
electrical car, drawing a second behind it, and hence providing for
the same number of passengers, consumed 18 lb. of coke per mile run.
Hence, calculating the cost in the same way, for a distance run of 312
miles in a week--

                                                            L s. d.
  Wages of stoker of stationary engine.                     1  0 0
  Coke, 52 cwt. at 25s. per ton.                            2 15 0
  Oil, 1 gallon at 3s. 1d.                                  0  3 1
  Waste, 4 lb. at 2d.                                       0  0 8
  Depreciation on stationary engine, 10 per cent.      }
    on L300 11s. 6d.                                   }
  Depreciation of electrical apparatus, 15 per cent.   }    2  0 4
    on L500, L1 8s. 10d.                               }
                                                         ---------
                            Total.                         L5 19 1

A saving of over 25 per cent.

The total mileage run is very small, on account of the light traffic
early in the year. Heavier traffic will tell very much in favor of the
electric car, as the loss due to leakage will be a much smaller
proportion of the total power developed.

It will be observed that the cost of the tramway engines is very much
in excess of what is usual on other lines, but this is entirely
accounted for by the high price of coke, and the exceedingly difficult
nature of the line to work, on account of the curves and gradients.
These causes send up the cost of electrical working in the same ratio,
hence the comparison is valid as between the steam and electricity,
but it would be unsafe to compare the cost of either with
horse-traction or wire-rope traction on other lines. The same fuel was
burnt in the stationary steam-engine and in the tramway engines, and
the same rolling stock used in both cases; but, otherwise, the
comparison was made under circumstances in favor of the tramway
engine, as the stationary steam-engine is by no means economical,
consuming at least 5 lb. of coke per horse-power hour, and the
experiments were made, in the case of the electrical car, over a
length of line three miles long, which included the worst hills and
curves, and one-half of the conductor was not provided with the
insulite caps, the leakage consequently being considerably larger than
it will be eventually.

Finally, as regards the speed of the electrical car, it is capable of
running on the level at the rate of 12 miles per hour, but as the line
is technically a tramway, the Board of Trade Regulations do not allow
the speed to exceed 10 miles an hour.

Taking these data as to cost, and remembering how this will be reduced
when the water power is made available, and remembering such
considerations as the freedom from smoke and steam, the diminished
wear and tear of the permanent way, and the advantage of having each
car independent, it may be said that there is a future for electrical
railways.

We must not conclude without expressing our best thanks to Messrs.
Siemens Bros. for having kindly placed all this apparatus at our
disposal to-night, and allowing us to publish the results of
experiments made at their works.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE THOMSON-HOUSTON ELECTRIC LIGHTING SYSTEM.


The generator is known as the "Thomson spherical," on account of the
nearly spherical form of its armature, and differs radically from all
others in all essential portions, viz., its field magnets, armature,
and winding thereof, and in its commutator; both in principle and
construction, and, besides, it is provided with an automatic
regulator, an attachment not applied to other generators. The annexed
view of the complete machine will convey an idea of the general
appearance and disposition of its parts.

The revolving armature which generates the electrical current is made
internally of a hollow shell of soft iron secured to the central
portion of the shaft between the bearings, and is wound externally
with a copper conducting wire, constituting three coils or helices
surrounding the armature, which coils are, however, permanently
joined, and in reality act as a single three-branched wire.

This wire, being wound on the exterior of the armature, is fully
exposed to the powerful magnetic influence of the field poles, which
inclose the armature almost completely. The armature will thus be seen
to be thoroughly incased and protected, at the same time that all the
wire upon it is subject to a powerful action of the surrounding
magnets, resulting in an economy in the generation of current in its
coils. The form of the armature being spherical, very little power is
lost by air friction, and no injury can occur from increased speed
developing centrifugal force. The field magnets, which surround the
armature, are cast iron shells, wound outside with many convolutions
of insulated copper wire, and are joined externally by iron bars to
convey the magnetism. These outer bars serve also as a most efficient
protection to the wire and armature of the machine during
transportation or otherwise. Objects cannot fall upon or rest upon the
wire coils and injure them. The coils of wire upon the field magnets
surround not only the iron poles or shells, but are situated also so
as to surround likewise the revolving armature, and increase the
effect produced in it by direct induction and magnetism. This feature
is not used in any other generator, nor does any other make use of a
spherical armature. The shaft is mounted in babbitted bearings of
ample size, sustained by a handsome frame therefor, and is of steel,
finely turned and perfectly true. The shaft and armature together are
balanced with the utmost care, and run without buzz or rumble. The
armature wire is kept cool by an active circulation of air over its
whole surface during revolution. The commutator, or portion from which
the currents developed in the armature are carried out for use, is a
beautiful piece of mechanism. It is mounted upon the end of the shaft,
and has attached to it the wires, three only, coming from the armature
wire through the tubular shaft.

[Illustration: THE THOMSON SPHERICAL.]

The commutator is peculiar, consisting of only three segments of a
copper ring, while in the simplest of other continuous current
generators several times that number exist, and frequently 120!
segments are to be found. These three segments are made so as to be
removable in a moment for cleaning or replacement. They are mounted
upon a metal support, and are surrounded on all sides by a free air
space, and cannot, therefore, lose their insulated condition. This
feature of air insulation is peculiar to this system, and is very
important as a factor in the durability of the commutator. Besides
this, the commutator is sustained by supports carried in flanges upon
the shaft, which flanges, as an additional safeguard, are coated all
over with hard rubber, one of the finest known insulators. It may be
stated, without fear of contradiction, that no other commutator made
is so thoroughly insulated and protected. The three commutator
segments virtually constitute a single copper ring, mounted in free
air, and cut into three equal pieces by slots across its face. Four
slit copper springs, called commutator brushes or collectors, are
allowed to bear lightly upon the commutator when it revolves, and
serve to take up the current and convey it to the circuit. These
commutator brushes are carried by movable supports, and their position
is automatically regulated so as to control the strength of the
developed current--a feature not found in other systems. This feature,
as well as the fact that the commutator can be oiled to prevent wear,
saves attendance and greatly increases the durability of the wearing
surfaces, while the commutator brushes are maintained in the position
of best adjustment. The commutator and brushes, in consequence, after
weeks of running, show scarcely any wear.


THE AUTOMATIC CURRENT REGULATOR.

This consists of a peculiar magnet attached to the frame of the
generator, and the movable armature of which has connections to the
supports of the commutator brushes for controlling their position. The
regulator magnet is so formed as to give a uniform attraction upon
its armature in different positions. In Thomson's improved form this
is accomplished in a novel manner by making the pole of the magnet
paraboloidal in form, and making an opening in the movable armature to
encircle said pole.

[Illustration: THE CURRENT REGULATOR]

The armature is hung on pivots so as to be free to move only toward
and from the regulating magnet on changes in the current traversing
the latter, and being connected to the commutator brushes,
automatically adjusts their position. By this means the power of the
generator is adapted to run any number of lights within its limit of
capacity, or may be short circuited purposely or by accident without
difficulty arising therefrom; and a number of instances have occurred
where the injurious effects of a short circuit accidentally formed
have been entirely obviated by the presence of the regulator. In one
instance four generators, in series representing over forty lights'
capacity, were accidentally short circuited, and no injury or even
noticeable action took place except a quick movement of the regulators
in adapting themselves to the new conditions. Had this accident
occurred to generators unprovided with regulators, great injury or
possible destruction of the apparatus would have resulted. It is
important to a full understanding of the regulation, to state that its
action is independent of resistances introduced, that it saves power
and carbons in proportion to lights extinguished, and that it
compensates for speed variations above the minimum speed. The manner
of its action is to control the generation of current at the source in
the armature, and it does so by combining certain electrical actions
so as to obtain a differential effect, such that when small force of
current only is required it alone is furnished, and when the maximum
force is needed the same shall be forthcoming.

[Illustration: THE CONTROLLER MAGNET.]

On the larger generators we combine with the regulator magnet above
described an exceedingly sensitive controller magnet governing the
regulation, and by whose accuracy the smallest variations of current
are counteracted, and the operation of the generator rendered perfect.
The controller magnet is contained in a box placed on the wall or
other support near the generator, and consists of a delicate double
axial magnet controlling the admission of current to the regulator,
upon the generator, and its action is exceedingly simple and
effective. So perfect is the action that in a circuit of twenty-five
to thirty lights, lights may be removed or put out in rapid succession
without apparently affecting those that remain. Besides, we have been
enabled to put out even eight or ten lights together instantly, while
the remainder burn as before. The features above set forth are
peculiar to the Thomson-Houston system, and have been thoroughly
covered by patents, and cannot therefore be adopted into other
systems.


THE THOMSON ARC LAMP.

This lamp is essentially a series lamp; that is, any number of them
can be put on one circuit wire, but a single lamp, used alone, burns
equally well. It consists of a metal frame supporting at the bottom
the holder for the globe and lower carbon, which is insulated from the
frame.

The annexed figure of the plain lamp will convey an understanding of
its general appearance. The upper carbon is fed downward by the
mechanism contained in the box above, and is carried by a vertical
round rod called the carbon holding rod.

[Illustration: THE THOMSON ARC LAMP.]

In the regulating box of the lamp there exists a simple mechanism, the
result of careful study and experiment to discover the best and
simplest combination of appliances, which would obviate the necessity
for the use of clockwork or dash-pots, from which fluids might be
accidentally spilled, for obtaining a gradual feeding of the carbon as
fast as it is consumed in producing the light, and at the same time to
maintain the arc or space between the carbons in burning, of such
extent as to give a steady, noiseless light, of greatest possible
economy.

The lamp, once adjusted, does not require any readjustment, and, in
fact, is built in such a manner as to avoid the presence of adjusting
devices in it. The lamp also contains an automatic safety device for
preserving the continuity of the circuit in case of accidental injury
to the feeding mechanism or the carbons of the lamps. This is quite
important when a considerable number of lights are operated upon one
circuit wire, as a break in the circuit, due to a defective lamp,
would result in the extinguishment of all the lights. With the safety
device mentioned, such a break does not occur, but the flow of current
is preserved through the faulty lamp.

By an exceedingly simple device upon the carbon holding rod, the lamps
are extinguished when the carbons are burned out, and injury by
burning the holders completely avoided.

The system is based upon the joint inventions of Elihu Thomson and
Edwin J. Houston, for generators, regulators, and electric lamps, and
also the patents of Elihu Thomson, in generators, regulators, and
electric lamps; all of which are now operated and controlled by the
Thomson-Houston Electric Co., 131 Devonshire Street, Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *





A MODIFICATION OF THE VIBRATING BELL.


One of the causes which gives rise to induction in the telephone lines
running along the Belgian railroads is that there are so many electric
bells in the stations.

Mr. Lippens proposes as a remedy for the trouble a slight modification
of the vibrating bell of his invention so as to exclude from the line
the extra currents from the bell.

In one of the styles (Fig. 1) a spring, R, is attached at T to a fixed
metallic rod, and presses against the rod, T¹. The current enters
through the terminal, B, traverses the bobbins, passes through T,
through the spring, through T¹, and makes its exit through the other
terminal. The armature is attracted, and the point, P, fixed thereto
draws back the spring from the rod, T¹, and interrupts the current;
but, at the moment at which the point touches the spring, and before
the latter has been detached from the rod, T¹, the electro-magnet
becomes included in a short circuit, and the line current, instead of
passing through the bobbins for a very short time, passes through the
wire, T, the armature, and the rod, T¹, so that the extra current is
no longer sent into the line.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

In another style (Fig. 2) the current is not interrupted at all, but
enters through the terminal, B, traverses the bobbins, and goes
through C to the terminal, B.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

As soon as the armature is attracted, the spring, R, which is fixed to
it presses against the fixed metallic rod, T, and thus gives the
electricity a shorter travel than it would take by preference. The
current ceases, then, to pass through the bobbins, demagnetization
occurs, and the spring that holds the armature separates anew. The
current now passes for a second time into the bobbins and produces a
new action, and so on. There is no longer, then, any interruption of
the current, and the motions of the hammer are brought about by the
change in direction of the current, which alternately traverses and
leaves the bobbins.

In a communication that he has addressed to us on the subject of these
bells, Mr. Lippens adds a few details in regard to the mode of
applying the ground pile to micro-telephone stations.

Being given any two stations, he puts into the ground at the first a
copper plate, and at the second a zinc one, and connects the two by a
line wire provided with two vibrating bells and two telephone
apparatus. The earth current suffices to actuate the bells, but, in
order to effect a call, the inventor is obliged to run them
continuously and to interrupt them at the moment at which he wishes to
communicate. The correspondent is then notified through the cessation
of noise in the bells, and the two call-apparatus are thrown out of
the circuit by the play of the commutator, and are replaced by the
micro-telephone apparatus.

It is certainly impracticable to allow vibrating bells to ring
continuously in this manner. The ground pile would, at the most, be
only admissible in cases where the call, having to be made from only
one of the stations, might be effected by a closing of the
circuit.--_La Lumiere Electrique_.

       *       *       *       *       *


The advantage of lighting vessels by electricity was shown when the
steamer Carolina, of the old Bay Line between Baltimore and Norfolk,
ran into the British steamship Riversdale in a dense fog off Cedar
Point, on Chesapeake Bay. The electric lights of the Carolina were
extinguished only in the damaged part of the boat, and her officers
think that if she had been lighted in any other way, a conflagration
would have followed the collision.

       *       *       *       *       *




PHOTO PLATES--WET AND DRY.


Dr. Eder has recently published, in the _Correspondenz_, the first of
a series of articles embodying the results of his more recent work on
gelatino bromide; and we now reproduce the substance of the article in
a somewhat abstracted form.

The "sensitiveness of a wet" plate continues to be used as a rough and
ready standard of comparison; and, notwithstanding the fact that it is
physically impossible to exactly compare the sensitiveness of a wet
plate with that of a gelatino bromide film, it is convenient to refer
to wet plates as some kind of a rough standard.

Experiments have shown that a gelatine plate which gives the number 10
on the Warnerke sensitometer, may be regarded as approximately
corresponding to the average wet plate; and setting out from this
point, the following table has been constructed:

  Sensitometer           Sensitiveness, expressed in terms
    number.                       of a "Wet Plate."

     10                                  1
     11                                  1-1/3
     12                                  1-3/4
     13                                  2-1/3
     14                                  3
     15                                  4
     16                                  5
     17                                  7
     18                                  9
     19                                 12
     20                                 16
     21                                 21
     22                                 27
     23                                 36
     24                                 48
     25                                 63

The nature of the developer used has, of course, some influence on the
sensitiveness of the plates; but in the above cases it is assumed that
oxalate developer, without any addition, is used; or pyro., to which
ammonia is added at intervals of about thirty seconds, so as to
produce a slight tendency to fog; the time of development being from
three to four minutes. The numbers are supposed to be read after
fixation, the plate being held against the sky.

Schumann's statement that a gelatino bromide plate is less sensitive
when developed at 30 deg. C. than when developed at 5 deg., is contested; the
more recent investigations of Dr. Eder serving to demonstrate that a
developer at a moderate high temperature acts very much more rapidly
than when the temperature is low; but when a sufficient time is
allowed for each developer to thoroughly penetrate the film, the
difference becomes less apparent. Here are examples:

      _A.--Oxalate Developer._

    Temperature of developer    4-8 deg.  C.  16-17 deg. C.  26-28 deg. C.
    Time of development 1 min.    3 deg.  W.      8 deg. W.     13 deg. W.
          "      "      2 min.    91/2 deg. W.     10 deg. W.     15 deg. W.

      _B.--Pyrogallic Developer._

    Temperature of developer    1-2 deg. C.  26-28 deg. C.
    Time of development 1/4 min.    6 deg. W.     10 deg. W.
          "      "      3 min.   14 deg. W.     15 deg. W.

       *       *       *       *       *




INTENSIFIER FOR WET PLATES.

By MAJOR WATERHOUSE.


The collodion process is still preferred for reproducing black and
white designs, drawings, engravings, etc., where very dense negatives
are desirable. The fixed and washed plate is put in a bath of bromide
of copper (ten per cent. solution); the film whitens immediately, and
when the color is even all over, the plate is taken out and plunged
into a bath of the ordinary ferrous oxalate developer. It takes a dark
olive tint, which is very non-actinic, the shadows meanwhile remaining
very clear.--_Photo. News._

       *       *       *       *       *




GELATINO BROMIDE EMULSION WITH BROMIDE OF ZINC.


By this time of the year I have no doubt many, both amateur and
professional photographers, are either contemplating or are actually
at work making their stock of plates for the coming season, and it is
to be hoped that we shall have more favorable weather than we had last
year.

Some four or five years since I tried using bromide of zinc instead of
the ordinary salts, namely, bromide of ammonium or potassium. I only
made one batch of plates at the time, which possessed several
important features I considered an advantage, and I think well worth
while following out. I do not think it can be denied that ordinary
