to prevent British ships from ascending; these links were made
of two-and-a-quarter-inch iron. A powerful locomotive might tug
in vain at one of them and not stretch it the thousandth part of
an inch. But the heat of a single gas-burner, that glows with the
preserved sunlight of other ages, when suitably applied to the
link, stretches it with ease; such enormous power has a little
heat. There is a certain iron bridge across the Thames at London,
resting on arches. The warm sunshine, acting [Page 35] upon the
iron, stations its particles farther and farther apart. Since the
bottom cannot give way the arches must rise in the middle. As they
become longer they lift the whole bridge, and all the thundering
locomotives and miles of goods-trains cannot bring that bridge down
again until the power of the sunshine has been withdrawn. There is
Bunker Hill Monument, thirty-two feet square at the base, with an
elevation of two hundred and twenty feet. The sunshine of every
summer's day takes hold of that mighty pile of granite with its
aerial fingers, lengthens the side affected, and bends the whole
great mass as easily as one would bend a whipstock. A few years ago
we hung a plummet from the top of this monument to the bottom. At 9
A.M. it began to move toward the west; at noon it swung round toward
the north; in the afternoon it went east of where it first was, and
in the night it settled back to its original place.

The sunshine says to the sea, held in the grasp of gravitation,
"Rise from your bed! Let millions of tons of water fly on the wings
of the viewless air, hundreds of miles to the distant mountains,
and pour there those millions of tons that shall refresh a whole
continent, and shall gather in rivers fitted to bear the commerce
and the navies of nations." Gravitation says, "I will hold every
particle of this ocean as near the centre of the earth as I can."
Sunshine speaks with its word of power, and says, "Up and away!"
And in the wreathing mists of morning these myriads of tons rise
in the air, flyaway hundreds of miles, and supply all the Niagaras,
Mississippis and Amazons of earth. The sun says to the earth, wrapped
in the mantle of winter, [Page 36] "Bloom again;" and the snows
melt, the ice retires, and vegetation breaks forth, birds sing, and
spring is about us.

Thus it is evident that every force is constitutionally arranged
to be overcome by a higher, and all by the highest. Gravitation of
earth naturally and legitimately yields to the power of the sun's
heat, and then the waters fly into the clouds. It as naturally
and legitimately yields to the power of mind, and the waters of the
Red Sea are divided and stand "upright as an heap." Water naturally
bursts into flame when a bit of potassium is thrown into it, and
as naturally when Elijah calls the right kind of fire from above.
What seems a miracle, and in contravention of law, is only the
constitutional exercise of higher force over forces organized to
be swayed. If law were perfectly rigid, there could be but one
force; but many grades exist from cohesion to mind and spirit.
The highest forces are meant to have victory, and thus give the
highest order and perfectness.

Across the astronomic spaces reach all these powers, making creation
a perpetual process rather than a single act. It almost seems as
if light, in its varied capacities, were the embodiment of God's
creative power; as if, having said, "Let there be light," he need do
nothing else, but allow it to carry forward the creative processes
to the end of time. It was Newton, one of the earliest and most
acute investigators in this study of light, who said, "I seem to
have wandered on the shore of Truth's great ocean, and to have
gathered a few pebbles more beautiful than common; but the vast
ocean itself rolls before me undiscovered and unexplored."

[Page 37]
EXPERIMENTS WITH LIGHT.

A light set in a room is seen from every place; hence light streams
in every possible direction. If put in the centre of a hollow sphere,
every point of the surface will be equally illumined. If put in
a sphere of twice the diameter, the same light will fall on all
the larger surface. The surfaces of spheres are as the squares
of their diameters; hence, in the larger sphere the surface is
illumined only one-quarter as much as the smaller. The same is true
of large and small rooms. In Fig. 7 it is apparent that the light
that falls on the first square is spread, at twice the distance,
over the second square, which is four times as large, and at three
times the distance over nine times the surface. The varying amount
of light received by each planet is also shown in fractions above
each world, the amount received by the earth being 1.

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

[Illustration: Fig. 8.--Measuring Intensities of Light.]

The intensity of light is easily measured. Let two lights of different
brightness, as in Fig. 8, cast shadows on the same screen. Arrange
them as to distance so that both shadows shall be equally dark.
Let them fall side by side, and study them carefully. Measure the
respective distances. Suppose one is twenty inches, the other forty.
Light varies as the square [Page 38] of the distance: the square of
20 is 400, of 40 is 1600. Divide 1600 by 400, and the result is that
one light is four times as bright as the other.

[Illustration: Fig. 9.--Reflection and Diffusion of Light.]

Light can be handled, directed, and bent, as well as iron bars.
Darken a room and admit a beam of sunlight through a shutter, or
a ray of lamp-light through the key-hole. If there is dust in the
room it will be observed that light goes in straight lines. Because
of this men are able to arrange houses and trees in rows, the hunter
aims his rifle correctly, and the astronomer projects straight
lines to infinity. Take a hand-mirror, or better, a piece of glass
coated on one side with black varnish, and you can send your ray
anywhere. By using two mirrors, or having an assistant and using
several, you can cause a ray of light to turn as many corners as you
please. I once saw Mr. Tyndall send a ray into a glass jar filled
with smoke (Fig. 9). Admitting a slender ray through a small hole in
a card over the mouth, one ray appeared; removing the cover, the
whole jar was luminous; as the smoke disappeared in spots cavities
of darkness appeared. Turn the same ray into a tumbler of water,
[Page 39]
it becomes faintly visible; stir into it a teaspoonful of milk, then
turn in the ray of sunlight, and it glows like a lamp, illuminating
the whole room. These experiments show how the straight rays of
the sun are diffused in every direction over the earth.

Set a small light near one edge of a mirror; then, by putting the
eye near the opposite edge, you see almost as many flames as you
please from the multiplied reflections. How can this be accounted
for?

Into your beam of sunlight, admitted through a half-inch hole,
put the mirror at an oblique angle; you can arrange it so as to
throw half a dozen bright spots on the opposite wall.

[Illustration: Fig. 10.--Manifold Reflections.]

In Fig. 10 the sunbeam enters at A, and, striking the mirror _m_
at _a_, is partly reflected to 1 on the wall, and partly enters
the glass, passes through to the silvered back at B, and is totally
reflected to _b_, where it again divides, some of it going to the
wall at 2, and the rest, continuing to make the same reflections
and divisions, causes spots 3, 4, 5, etc. The brightest spot is
at No.2, because the silvered glass at B is the best reflector
and has the most light.

When the discovery of the moons of Mars was announced in 1877,
it was also widely published that they could be seen by a mirror.
Of course this is impossible. The point of light mistaken for the
moon in this secondary reflection was caused by holding the mirror
in an oblique position.

Take a small piece of mirror, say an inch in surface, and putting
under it three little pellets of wax, putty, or clay, set it on
the wrist, with one of the pellets on the pulse. Hold the mirror
steadily in the beam of light, and the frequency and prominence of
each pulse-beat will be indicated by the tossing spot of light on
the wall. If the operator becomes excited the fact will be evident
to all observers.

[Illustration: Fig. 11.]

Place a coin in a basin (Fig. 11), and set it so that the rim will
conceal the coin from the eye. Pour in water, and the coin will
[Page 40] appear to rise into sight. When light passes from a medium
of one density to a medium of another, its direction is changed.
Thus a stick in water seems bent. Ships below the horizon are
sometimes seen above, because of the different density of the layers
of air.

Thus light coming from the interstellar spaces, and entering our
atmosphere, is bent down more and more by its increasing density.
The effect is greatest when the sun or star is near the horizon,
none at all in the zenith. This brings the object into view before
it is risen. Allowance for this displacement is made in all delicate
astronomical observations.

[Illustration: Fig. 12.--Atmospherical Refraction.]

Notice on the floor the shadow of the window-frames. The glass
of almost every window is so bent as to turn the sunlight aside
enough to obliterate some of the shadows or increase their thickness.

DECOMPOSITION OF LIGHT.

Admit the sunbeam through a slit one inch long and one-twentieth
of an inch wide. Pass it through a prism. Either purchase one or
make it of three plain pieces of glass one and a half inch wide
by six inches long, fastened together in triangular shape--fasten
the edges with hot wax and fill it with water; then on a screen
or wall you will have the colors of the rainbow, not merely seven
but seventy, if your eyes are sharp enough.

Take a bit of red paper that matches the red color of the spectrum.
Move it along the line of colors toward the violet. In the orange
it is dark, in the yellow darker, in the green and all beyond,
black. That is because there are no more red rays to be reflected
by it. So a green object is true to its color only in the green
rays, and black elsewhere. All these colors may be recombined by
a second prism into white light.




[Page 41]
III.

ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS.

  "The eyes of the Lord are in every place."--_Proverbs_ xv. 3.

[Page 42]
"Man, having one kind of an eye given him by his Maker, proceeds
to construct two other kinds. He makes one that magnifies invisible
objects thousands of times, so that a dull razor-edge appears as
thick as three fingers, until the amazing beauty of color and form
in infinitesimal objects is entrancingly apparent, and he knows that
God's care of least things is infinite. Then he makes the other kind
four or six feet in diameter, and penetrates the immensities of space
thousands of times beyond where his natural eye can pierce, until he
sees that God's immensities of worlds are infinite also."--BISHOP
FOSTER.




[Page 43]
III.

_THE TELESCOPE._

Frequent allusion has been made in the previous chapter to discovered
results. It is necessary to understand more clearly the process by
which such results have been obtained. Some astronomical instruments
are of the simplest character, some most delicate and complex.
When a man smokes a piece of glass, in order to see an eclipse
of the sun, he makes a simple instrument. Ferguson, lying on his
back and slipping beads on a string at a certain distance above
his eye, measured the relative distances of the stars. The use
of more complex instruments commenced when Galileo applied the
telescope to the heavens. He cannot be said to have invented the
telescope, but he certainly constructed his own without a pattern,
and used it to good purpose. It consists of a lens, O B (Fig. 13),
which acts as a multiple prism to bend all the rays to one point
at R. Place the eye there, and it receives as much light as if it
were as large as the lens O B. The rays, however, are convergent,
and the point difficult to [Page 44] find. Hence there is placed at
R a concave lens, passing through which the rays emerge in parallel
lines, and are received by the eye. Opera-glasses are made upon
precisely this principle to-day, because they can be made
conveniently short.

[Illustration: Fig. 13.--Refracting Telescope.]

If, instead of a concave lens at R, converting the converging rays
into parallel ones, we place a convex or magnifying lens, the minute
image is enlarged as much as an object seems diminished when the
telescope is reversed. This is the grand principle of the refracting
telescope. Difficulties innumerable arise as we attempt to enlarge
the instruments. These have been overcome, one after another, until
it is now felt that the best modern telescope, with an object lens
of twenty-six inches, has fully reached the limit of optical power.

_The Reflecting Telescope_.

This is the only kind of instrument differing radically from the
refracting one already described. It receives the light in a concave
mirror, M (Fig. 14), which reflects it to the focus F, producing the
same result as the lens of the refracting telescope. Here a mirror
may be placed obliquely, reflecting the image at right angles to the
eye, outside the tube, in which case it is called the Newtonian
telescope; or a mirror at R may be placed perpendicularly, and send
the rays through [Page 45] an opening in the mirror at M. This form
is called the Gregorian telescope. Or the mirror M may be slightly
inclined to the coming rays, so as to bring the point F entirely
outside the tube, in which case it is called the Herschelian
telescope. In either case the image may be magnified, as in the
refracting telescope.

[Illustration: Fig. 14.--Reflecting Telescope.]

Reflecting telescopes are made of all sizes, up to the Cyclopean
eye of the one constructed by Lord Rosse, which is six feet in
diameter. The form of instrument to be preferred depends on the
use to which it is to be put. The loss of light in passing through
glass lenses is about two-tenths. The loss by reflection is often
one-half. In view of this peculiarity and many others, it is held
that a twenty-six-inch refractor is fully equal to any six-foot
reflector.

The mounting of large telescopes demands the highest engineering
ability. The whole instrument, with its vast weight of a twenty-six-inch
glass lens, with its accompanying tube and appurtenances, must be
pointed as nicely as a rifle, and held as steadily as the axis
of the globe. To give it the required steadiness, the foundation
on which it is placed is sunk deep in the earth, far from rail or
other roads, and no part of the observatory is allowed to touch
this support. When a star is once found, the earth swiftly rotates
the telescope away from it, and it passes out of the field. To
avoid this, clock-work is so arranged that the great telescope
follows the star by the hour, if required. It will take a star at
its eastern rising, and hold it constantly in view while it climbs
to the meridian and sinks in the west (Fig. 15). The reflector
demands still more difficult engineering. That of Lord Rosse has
a metallic mirror [Page 46] weighing six tons, a tube forty feet
long, which, with its appurtenances, weighs seven tons more. It
moves between two walls only 10 deg. east and west. The new Paris
reflector (Fig. 16) has a much wider range of movement.

[Illustration: Fig. 15.--Cambridge Equatorial.]

[Illustration: Fig. 16.--New Paris Reflector.]

_The Spectroscope._

A spectrum is a collection of the colors which are dispersed by
a prism from any given light. If it is sunlight, it is a solar
spectrum; if the source of light is a [Page 49] star, candle,
glowing metal, or gas, it is the spectrum of a star, candle, glowing
metal, or gas. An instrument to see these spectra is called a
spectroscope. Considering the infinite variety of light, and its
easy modification and absorption, we should expect an immense number
of spectra. A mere prism disperses the light so imperfectly that
different orders of vibrations, perceived as colors, are mingled. No
eye can tell where one commences or ends. Such a spectrum is said to
be impure. What we want is that each point in the spectrum should be
made of rays of the same number of vibrations. As we can let only a
small beam of light pass through the prism, in studying celestial
objects with a telescope and spectroscope we must, in every
instance, contract the aperture of the instrument until we get only
a small beam of light. In order to have the colors thoroughly
dispersed, the best instruments pass the beam of light through a
series of prisms called a battery, each one spreading farther the
colors which the previous ones had spread. In Fig. 17 the ray is
seen entering through the telescope A, which renders the rays
parallel, and passing [Page 50] through the prisms out to telescope
B, where the spectrum can be examined on the retina of the eye for a
screen. In order to still farther disperse the rays, some batteries
receive the ray from the last prism at O upon an oblique mirror,
send it up a little to another, which delivers it again to the prism
to make its journey back again through them all, and come out to be
examined just above where it entered the first prism.

[Illustration: Fig. 17.--Spectroscope, with Battery of Prisms.]

Attached to the examining telescope is a diamond-ruled scale of glass,
enabling us to fix the position of any line with great exactness.

[Illustration: Fig. 18.--Spectra of glowing Hydrogen and the Sun.]

In Fig. 18 is seen, in the lower part, a spectrum of the sun, with
about a score of its thousands of lines made evident. In the upper
part is seen the spectrum of bright lines given by glowing hydrogen
gas. These lines are given by no other known gas; they are its
autograph. It is readily observed that they precisely correspond
with certain dark lines in the solar spectrum. Hence we easily
know that a glowing gas gives the same bright lines that it absorbs
from the light of another source passing through it--that is, glowing
gas gives out the same rays of light that it absorbs when it is
not glowing.

The subject becomes clearer by a study of the chromolithic plate.
No. 1 represents the solar spectrum, with a few of its lines on an
accurately graduated scale. [Page 51] No.3 shows the bright line of
glowing sodium, and, corresponding to a dark line in the solar
spectrum, shows the presence of salt in that body. No. 2 shows that
potassium has some violet rays, but not all; and there being no dark
line to correspond in the solar spectrum, we infer its absence from
the sun. No.6 shows the numerous lines and bands of barium--several
red, orange, yellow, and four are very bright green ones. The lines
given by any volatilized substances are always in the same place on
the scale.

A patient study of these signs of substances reveals, richer results
than a study of the cuniform characters engraved on Assyrian slabs;
for one is the handwriting of men, the other the handwriting of
God.

One of the most difficult and delicate problems solved by the
spectroscope is the approach or departure of a light-giving body
in the line of sight. Stand before a locomotive a mile away, you
cannot tell whether it approaches or recedes, yet it will dash by
in a minute. How can the movements of the stars be comprehended
when they are at such an immeasurable distance?

It can best be illustrated by music. The note C of the G clef is
made by two hundred and fifty-seven vibrations of air per second.
Twice as many vibrations per second would give us the note C an octave
above. Sound travels at the rate of three hundred and sixty-four
yards per second. If the source of these two hundred and fifty-seven
vibrations could approach us at three hundred and sixty-four yards
per second, it is obvious that twice as many waves would be put
into a given space, and we should hear the upper C when only waves
enough were made for the lower C. The same [Page 52] result would
appear if we carried our ear toward the sound fast enough to take up
twice as many valves as though we stood still. This is apparent to
every observer in a railway train. The whistle of an approaching
locomotive gives one tone; it passes, and we instantly detect
another. Let two trains, running at a speed of thirty-six yards a
second, approach each other. Let the whistle of one sound the note
E, three hundred and twenty-three vibrations per second. It will be
heard on the other as the note G, three hundred and eighty-eight
