performance double that which we did with apparatus on the old system.

Desirous of making known the efforts that have been made in this
direction, we lately described Mr. Dumont's atmospheric turbine. In
speaking of this apparatus we stated that aerial motors generally stop
or are destroyed in high winds. Recently, Mr. Sanderson has
communicated to us the result of some experiments that he has been
making for years back by means of an apparatus which he styles a
pantanemone.

The engraving that we give of this machine shows merely a cabinet
model of it; and it goes without saying that it is simply designed to
exhibit the principle upon which its construction is based.

[Illustration: THE PANTANEMONE.]

Two plane surfaces in the form of semicircles are mounted at right
angles to each other upon a horizontal shaft, and at an angle of 45 deg.
with respect to the latter. It results from this that the apparatus
will operate (even without being set) whatever be the direction of the
wind, except when it blows perpendicularly upon the axle, thus
permitting (owing to the impossibility of reducing the surfaces) of
three-score days more work per year being obtained than can be with
other mills. Three distinct apparatus have been successively
constructed. The first of these has been running for nine years in the
vicinity of Poissy, where it lifts about 40,000 liters of water to a
height of 20 meters every 24 hours, in a wind of a velocity of from 7
to 8 meters per second. The second raises about 150,000 liters of
water to the Villejuif reservoir, at a height of 10 meters, every 24
hours, in a wind of from 5 to 6 meters. The third supplies the
laboratory of the Montsouris observatory.

The first is not directible, the second may be directed by hand, and
the third is directed automatically. These three machines defied the
hurricane of the 26th of last January.--_La Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




RELVAS'S NEW LIFE-BOAT.


The Spanish and Portuguese papers have recently made known some
interesting experiments that have been made by Mr. Carlos Relvas with
a new life-boat which parts the waves with great facility and exhibits
remarkable stability. This boat, which is shown in front view in one
of the corners of our engraving, is T-shaped, and consists of a very
thin keel connected with the side-timbers by iron rods. Cushions of
cork and canvas are adapted to the upper part, and, when the boat is
on the sea, it has the appearance of an ordinary canoe, although, as
may be seen, it differs essentially therefrom in the submerged part.
When the sea is heavy, says Mr. Relvas, and the high waves are
tumbling over each other, they pass over my boat, and are powerless to
capsize it. My boat clears waves that others are obliged to recoil
before. It has the advantage of being able to move forward, whatever
be the fury of the sea, and is capable, besides, of approaching rocks
without any danger of its being broken.

[Illustration: RELVAS'S NEW LIFE BOAT.]
A committee was appointed by the Portuguese government to examine this
new life-boat, and comparative experiments were made with it and an
ordinary life-boat at Porto on a very rough sea. Mr. Relvas's boat was
manned by eight rowers all provided with cork girdles, while the
government life-boat was manned by twelve rowers and a pilot, all
likewise wearing cork girdles. The chief of the maritime department,
an engineer of the Portuguese navy and a Portuguese deputy were
present at the trial in a pilot boat. The three boats proceeded to the
entrance of the bar, where the sea was roughest, and numerous
spectators collected upon the shore and wharfs followed their
evolutions from afar.

The experiments began at half past three o'clock in the afternoon. The
two life-boats shot forward to seek the most furious waves, and were
seen from afar to surmount the billows and then suddenly disappear. It
was a spectacle as moving as it was curious. It was observed that Mr.
Relvas's boat cleft the waves, while the other floated upon their
surface like a nut-shell. After an hour's navigation the two boats
returned to their starting point.

The official committee that presided over these experiments has again
found in this new boat decided advantages, and has pointed out to its
inventor a few slight modifications that will render it still more
efficient.--_La Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




EXPERIMENTS WITH DOUBLE-BARRELED GUNS AND RIFLES.


The series of experiments we are about to describe has recently been
made by Mr. Horatio Phillips, a practical gun maker of London. The
results will no doubt prove of interest to those concerned in the use
or manufacture of firearms.

The reason that the two barrels of a shot gun or rifle will, if put
together parallel, throw their charges in diverging lines has never
yet been satisfactorily accounted for, although many plausible and
ingenious theories have been advanced for the purpose. The natural
supposition would be that this divergence resulted from the axes of
the barrels not being in the same vertical plane as the center line of
the stock. That this is not the true explanation of the fact, the
following experiment would tend to prove.

[Illustration: EXPERIMENTS WITH DOUBLE-BARRELLED GUNS.]

Fig. 1 represents a single barrel fitted with sights and firmly
attached to a heavy block of beech. This was placed on an ordinary
rifle rest, being fastened thereto by a pin at the corner, A, the
block and barrel being free to revolve upon the pin as a center.
Several shots were fired both with the pin in position and with it
removed, the barrel being carefully pointed at the target each time.
No practical difference in the accuracy of fire was discernible under
either condition. When the pin was holding the corner of the block,
the recoil caused the barrel to move from right to left in a circular
path; but when the pin was removed, so that the block was not attached
to the rest in any way, the recoil took place in a line with the axis
of the bore. It will be observed that the conditions which are present
when a double barreled gun is fired in the ordinary way from the
shoulder were in some respects much exaggerated in the apparatus, for
the pin was a distance of 3 in. laterally from the axis of the barrel,
whereas the center of resistance of the stock of a gun against the
shoulder would ordinarily be about one-sixth of this distance from the
axis of the barrel. This experiment would apparently tend to prove
that the recoil does not appreciably affect the path of the
projectile, as it would seem that the latter must clear the muzzle
before any considerable movement of the barrel takes place.

With a view to obtain a further confirmation of the result of this
experiment, it was repeated in a different form by a number of shots
being fired from a "cross-eyed" rifle,[1] in which the sights were
fixed in the center of the rib. Very accurate shooting was obtained
with this arm.

   [Footnote 1: A cross-eyed rifle is one made with a crooked stock
   for the purpose of shooting from the right shoulder, aim being
   taken with the left eye.]

A second theory, often broached, in order to account for the
divergence of the charge, is that the barrel which is not being fired,
by its _vis inertia_ in some way causes the shot to diverge. In order
to test this, Mr. Phillips took a single rifle and secured it near the
muzzle to a heavy block of metal, when the accuracy of the shooting
was in no way impaired.

So far the experiments were of a negative character, and the next step
was made with a view to discover the actual cause of the divergence
referred to. A single barrel was now taken, to which a template was
fitted, in order to record its exact length. The barrel was then
subjected to a heavy internal hydrostatic pressure. Under this
treatment it expanded circumferentially and at the same time was
reduced in length. This, it was considered, gave a clew to the
solution of the problem. A pair of barrels was now taken and a
template fitted accurately to the side of the right-hand one. As the
template fitted the barrel when the latter was not subject to internal
pressure, upon such pressure being applied any alterations that might
ensue in the length or contour of the barrel could be duly noted. The
right-hand barrel was then subjected to internal hydrostatic pressure.
The result is shown in an exaggerated form in Fig. 2. It will be seen
that both barrels are bent into an arched form. This would be caused
by the barrel under pressure becoming extended circumferentially, and
thereby reduced in length, because the metal that is required to
supply the increased circumference is taken to some extent from the
length, although the substance of metal in the walls of the barrel by
its expansion contributes also to the increased diameter. A simple
illustration of this effect is supplied by subjecting an India-rubber
tube to internal pressure. Supposing the material to be sufficiently
elastic and the pressure strong enough, the tube would ultimately
assume a spherical form. It is a well known fact that heavy barrels
with light charges give less divergence than light barrels with heavy
charges.

After the above experiments it was hoped that, if a pair of barrels
were put together parallel and soldered only for a space of 3 in. at
the breech end, and were then coupled by two encircling rings joined
together as in Fig. 4, the left-hand ring only being soldered to the
barrel, very accurate shooting would be obtained. For, it was argued,
that by these means the barrel under fire would be able to contract
without affecting or being affected by the other barrel; that on the
right-hand, it will be seen by the illustration, was the one to slide
in its ring.

A pair of able 0.500 bore express rifle barrels were accordingly
fitted in this way. Fig. 3 shows the arrangement with the rings in
position. Upon firing these barrels with ordinary express charges it
was found that the lines of fire from each barrel respectively crossed
each other, the bullet from the right-hand barrel striking the target
10 in. to the left of the bull's eye, while the left barrel placed its
projectile a similar distance in the opposite direction; or, as would
be technically said, the barrels crossed 20 in. at 100 yards, the
latter distance being the range at which the experiment was made.
These last results have been accounted for in the following manner:
The two barrels were rigidly joined for a space of 3 in., and for that
distance they would behave in a manner similar to that illustrated in
Fig. 2, and were they not coupled at the muzzles by the connecting
rings they would shoot very wide, the charges taking diverging
courses. When the connecting rings are fitted on, the barrel not being
fired will remain practically straight, and, as it is coupled to the
barrel being fired by the rings, the muzzle of the latter will be
restrained from pointing outward.

The result will be as shown in an exaggerated manner by the dotted
lines on the right barrel in Fig. 3.

It would appear from these experiments that when very accurate
shooting is required at long ranges with double-barreled rifles, they
should be mounted in a manner similar to that adopted in the
manufacture of the Nordenfelt machine gun, in which weapon the barrels
are fitted into a plate at the extreme breech end, the muzzles
projecting through holes bored to receive them in a metal plate. No
unequal expansion would then take place, and the barrels would be free
to become shorter independently of each other. We give the above
experiments on the authority of their author, who, we believe, has
taken great pains to render them as exhaustive as possible, so far as
they go.--_Engineering._

       *       *       *       *       *




BALL TURNING MACHINE.


The distinguishing feature in the ball turning machine shown opposite
is that the tool is stationary, while the work revolves in two
directions simultaneously. In the case of an ordinary spherical
object, such as brass clack ball, the casting is made from a perfect
pattern having two small caps or shanks, in which the centers are also
marked to avoid centering by hand. It is fixed in the machine between
two centers carried on a face plate or chuck, with which they revolve.
One of these centers, when the machine is in motion, receives a
continuous rotary motion about its axis from a wormwheel, D. This is
driven by a worm, C, carried on a shaft at the back of the chuck, and
driven itself by a wormwheel, B, which gears with a screw which rides
loosely upon the mandrel, and is kept from rotating by a finger on the
headstock. This center, in its rotation, carries with it the ball,
which is thus slowly moved round an axis parallel to the face plate,
at the same time that it revolves about the axis of the mandrel, the
result being that the tool cuts upon the ball a scroll, of which each
convolution is approximately a circle, and lies in a plane parallel to
the line of centers.

When the chuck is set for one size of ball, which may be done in a few
minutes, any quantity of that diameter may be turned without further
adjustment. A roughing cut for a 2 in. ball may be done in one minute,
and a finishing cut leaving the ball quite bright in the same time.
The two paps are cut off within one-sixteenth of an inch and then
broken off, and the ball finished in the usual way. On account of the
work being geometrically true, the finishing by the ferrule tool is
done in one quarter of the time usually required.

[Illustration: IMPROVED BALL TURNING MACHINE.]

The chuck may be applied to an ordinary lathe or may be combined with
a special machine tool, as show in our illustration. In the latter
case everything is arranged in the most handy way for rapid working,
and six brass balls of 2 in. in diameter can be turned and finished in
an hour. The machine is specially adapted for turning ball valves for
pumps, pulsometers, and the like, and in the larger sizes for turning
governor balls and spherical nuts for armor plates, and is
manufactured by Messrs. Wilkinson and Lister, of Bradford Road Iron
Works, Keighley.--_Engineering._

       *       *       *       *       *




COOLING APPARATUS FOR INJECTION WATER.


It often happens in towns and where manufactories are crowded
together, that the supply of water for condensing purposes is very
small, and consequently that it attains an inconveniently high
temperature under unfavorable conditions of weather, resulting in the
deterioration of the vacuum and a consequent increase in the
consumption of fuel. To remedy or to diminish this difficulty, Messrs.
Boase and Miller, of London, have brought out the water cooler
illustrated above. This consists, says _Engineering_, of a revolving
basket of wire gauze surrounding an inner stationary vessel pierced
with numerous small holes, through which the heated water discharged
by the air pump finds its way into the basket, to be thrown out in the
form of fine spray to a distance of 20 ft. at each side. The drops are
received in the tank or pond, and in their rapid passage through the
air are sufficiently cooled to be again injected into the condenser.

The illustration shows a cooler having a basket three feet in
diameter, revolving at 300 revolutions per minute, and discharging
into a tank 40 ft. square. It requires 3 to 4 indicated horse-power to
drive it, and will cool 300 gallons per minute. The following decrease
of temperature has been observed in actual practice: Water entering at
95 deg. fell 20 deg. in temperature; water entering at 100 deg. to 110
deg. fell 25 deg.; and water entering at 110 deg. to 120 deg. fell 30
deg. The machine with which these trials were made was so placed that
the top of the basket was four ft. from the surface of the water in
the pond. With a greater elevation, as shown in the engraving, better
results can be obtained.

[Illustration: IMPROVED WATER COOLING APPARATUS.]

The advantages claimed for the cooler are that by its means the
temperature of the injection water can be reduced, the cost and size
of cooling ponds can be diminished, and condensing engines can be
employed where hitherto they have not been possible. The apparatus has
been for two years in operation at several large factories, and there
is every reason to believe that its use will extend, as it supplies a
real want in a very simple and ingenious manner. Messrs. Duncan
Brothers, of Dundee and 32 Queen Victoria Street, E.C., are the
manufacturers.

       *       *       *       *       *




CORRUGATED DISK PULLEYS.


This is a pulley recently introduced by Messrs. J. and E. Hall, of
Dartford Eng. With the exception of the boss, which is cast, it is
composed entirely of steel or sheet iron. In place of the usual arms a
continuous web of corrugated sheet metal connects the boss to the rim;
this web is attached to the boss by means of Spence's metal. Inside
the rim, which is flanged inward, a double hoop iron ring is fixed for
strengthening purposes. The advantageous disposition of metal obtained
by means of the corrugated web enables the pulley to be made of a
given strength with less weight of material, and from this cause and
also on account of being accurately balanced these pulleys are well
adapted for high speeds.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

[KANSAS CITY REVIEW.]




EARLY HISTORY OF THE TELEGRAPH.


Although the electric telegraph is, comparatively speaking, a recent
invention, yet methods of communication at a distance, by means of
signals, have probably existed in all ages and in all nations. There
is reason to believe that among the Greeks a system of telegraphy was
in use, as the burning of Troy was certainly known in Greece very soon
after it happened, and before any person had returned from Troy.
Polybius names the different instruments used by the ancients for
communicating information--"pyrsia," because the signals were always
made by means of fire lights. At first they communicated information
of events in an imperfect manner, but a new method was invented by
Cleoxenus, which was much improved by Polybius, as he himself informs
us, and which may be described as follows:

Take the letters of the alphabet and arrange them on a board in five
columns, each column containing five letters; then the man who signals
would hold up with his left hand a number of torches which would
represent the number of the column from which the letter is to be
taken, and with his right hand a number of torches that will represent
the particular letter in that column that is to be taken. It is thus
easy to understand how the letters of a short sentence are
communicated from station to station as far as required. This is the
pyrsia or telegraph of Polybius.

It seems that the Romans had a method of telegraphing in their walled
cities, either by a hollow formed in the masonry, or by a tube fixed
thereto so as to confine the sound, in order to convey information to
any part they liked. This method of communicating is in the present
age frequently employed in the well known speaking tubes. It does not
appear that the moderns had thought of such a thing as a telegraph
until 1661, when the Marquis of Worcester, in his "Century of
Inventions," affirmed that he had discovered a method by which a man
could hold discourse with his correspondent as far as they could
reach, by night as well as by day; he did not, however, describe this
invention.

Dr. Hooke delivered a discourse before the Royal Society in 1684,
showing how to communicate at great distances. In this discourse he
asserts the possibility of conveying intelligence from one place to
another at a distance of 120 miles as rapidly as a man can write what
he would have sent. He takes to his aid the then recent invention of
the telescope, and explains how characters exposed at one station on
the top of one hill may be made visible to the next station on the top
of the next hill. He invented twenty-four simple characters, each
formed of a combination of three deal boards, each character
representing a letter by the use of cords; these characters were
pushed from behind a screen and exposed, and then withdrawn behind the
screen again. It was not, however, until the French revolution that
the telegraph was applied to practical purposes; but about the end of
1703 telegraphic communication was established between Paris and the
frontiers, and shortly afterward telegraphs were introduced into
England.

The history of the invention and introduction of the electric
telegraph by Prof. Morse is one of inexhaustible interest, and every
incident relating to it is worthy of preservation. The incidents
described below will be found of special interest. The article is from
the pen of the late Judge Neilson Poe, and was the last paper written
by him. He prepared it during his recent illness, the letter embodied
in it from Mr. Latrobe being of course obtained at the time of its
date. It is as follows:

On the 5th of April, 1843, when the monthly meeting of the directors
of the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad Company was about to adjourn, the
President, the Hon. Louis McLane, rose with a paper in his hand which
he said he had almost overlooked, and which the Secretary would read.
It proved to be an application from Prof. Morse for the privilege of
laying the wires of his electric telegraph along the line of the
railroad between Baltimore and Washington, and was accompanied by a
communication from B.H. Latrobe, Esq., Chief Engineer, recommending
the project as worthy of encouragement.

On motion of John Spear Nicholas, seconded by the Hon. John P.
Kennedy, the following resolution was then considered:

_Resolved_, "That the President be authorized to afford Mr. Morse such
facilities as may be requisite to give his invention a proper trial
upon the Washington road, provided in his opinion and in that of the
engineer it can be done without injury to the road and without
embarrassment to the operations of the company, and provided Mr. Morse
will concede to the company the use of the telegraph upon the road
without expense, and reserving to the company the right of
discontinuing the use if, _upon experiment_, it should prove _in any
manner injurious_."

"Whatever," said Mr. McLane, "may be our individual opinions as to the
feasibility of Mr. Morse's invention, it seems to me that it is our
duty to concede to him the privilege he asks, and to lend him all the
aid in our power, especially as the resolution carefully protects the
company against all present or future injury to its works, and secures
us the right of requiring its removal at any time."

[In view of the fact that no railroad can now be run safely without
the aid of the telegraph, the cautious care with which the right to
remove it if it should become a nuisance was reserved, strikes one at
this day as nearly ludicrous.]

A short pause ensued, and the assent of the company was about to be
assumed, when one of the older directors, famed for the vigilance with
which he watched even the most trivial measure, begged to be heard.

He admitted that the rights and interests of the work were all
carefully guarded by the terms of the resolution, and that the company
was not called upon to lay out any of its means for the promotion of
the scheme. But notwithstanding all this, he did not feel, as a
conscientious man, that he could, without further examination, give
his vote for the resolution. He knew that this idea of Mr. Morse,
however plausible it might appear to theorists and dreamers, and
so-called men of science, was regarded by all practical people as
destined, like many other similar projects, to certain failure, and
must consequently result in loss and possibly ruin to Mr. Morse. For
one, he felt conscientiously scrupulous in giving a vote which would
aid or tempt a visionary enthusiast to ruin himself.

Fortunately, the views of this cautious, practical man did not
prevail. A few words from the mover of the resolution, Mr. Nicholas,
who still lives to behold the wonders he helped to create, and from
Mr. Kennedy, without whose aid the appropriation would not have passed
the House of Representatives, relieved the other directors from all
fear of contributing to Mr. Morse's ruin, and the resolution was
adopted. Of the President and thirty directors who took part in this
transaction, only three, Samuel W. Smith, John Spear Nicholas, and the
writer, survive. Under it Morse at once entered upon that test of his
invention whose fruits are now enjoyed by the people of all the
continents.

It was not, however, until the spring of 1844 that he had his line and
its appointments in such a condition as to allow the transmission of
messages between the two cities, and it was in May of that year that
the incident occurred which has chiefly led to the writing of this
paper.


MR. LATROBE'S RECOLLECTIONS.

MY DEAR MR. POE: Agreeably to my promise, this morning I put
on paper my recollection of the introduction of the magnetic telegraph
between Baltimore and Washington. I was counsel of the Baltimore &
Ohio Railroad Co. at the time, and calling on Mr. Louis McLane, the
President, on some professional matter, was asked in the course of
conversation whether I knew anything about an electric telegraph which
the inventor, who had obtained an appropriation from Congress, wanted
to lay down on the Washington branch of the road. He said he expected
Mr. Morse, the inventor, to call on him, when he would introduce me to
him, and would be glad if I took an opportunity to go over the subject
with him and afterward let him, Mr. McLane, know what I thought about
it. While we were yet speaking, Mr. Morse made his appearance, and
when Mr. McLane introduced me he referred to the fact that, as I had
been educated at West Point, I might the more readily understand the
scientific bearings of Mr. Morse's invention. The President's office
being no place for prolonged conversation, it was agreed that Mr.
Morse should take tea at my dwelling, when we would go over the whole
subject. We met accordingly, and it was late in the night before we
parted. Mr. Morse went over the history of his invention from the
beginning with an interest and enthusiasm that had survived the
wearying toil of an application to Congress, and with the aid of
diagrams drawn on the instant made me master of the matter, and wrote
for me the telegraphic alphabet which is still in use over the world.
