"lance-bout." This contrivance takes the place of the agate of the
ordinary filature, and is made up, essentially, of the following
parts:

(1) A hollow axis, through the inside of which the thread passes
instead of going through the hole of an agate. This hollow axis is
furnished, near its lower end, with a ridge which serves to support a
movable portion turning constantly round the axis. (2) A movable
portion turning constantly round the axis. (3) A finger or hook
fastened on the side of the movable portion and revolving with it.
This hook, in revolving, catches the filament brought up by the finger
and serves it on to the thread.

Such are the principal parts of the automatic reeling machine.
Although the fact that this machine is entirely a new invention has
necessitated a somewhat long explanation, its principal organs can
nevertheless be summed up in a few words: (1) A controlling drum which
serves to give the thread a constant elongation; (2) a pulley mounted
on a pivot which closes an electric current every time that the thread
becomes too fine, and attains, in consequence, its minimum strength,
in other words, every time that a fresh cocoon is needed; (3)
electromagnets with the necessary conducting wires; (4) the feeding
basin; (5) distributing finger and stops; and (6) the lance-bout.

Our illustration, Fig. 1, shows diagrammatically a section through the
cocoon frame and reel. The thread is composed of three, four, or more
filaments, and after passing through the lance-bout, it travels as
shown by the arrows. At first it is wound round itself about two
hundred times, then passed over a fixed guide pulley, and over a
second guide pulley lower down fixed to the frames which carry the
lance-bouts, then up through the twist and over the smaller of the
pulleys, D. Taking one complete turn, it is led round the guide
pulley, L, from there round the larger of the pulleys, D, round the
second guide pulley, L¹, then back to the large wheel, and over a
fixed guide pulley across to the reeling frame. Power is supplied to
the latter by means of a friction clutch, and to insure even winding
the usual reciprocating motion of a guide is employed. The measuring
apparatus is pivoted at F, and by raising or lowering the nuts at the
end of the bar the required inclination is given.

We had recently an opportunity of examining the whole of this
machinery in detail, and seeing the process of silk reeling in actual
operation, Mr. Serrell having put up a complete set of his machines in
Queen Victoria Street, London. Regarded simply as a piece of ingenious
mechanism, the performance of these machines cannot fail to be of the
highest interest to engineers, the reeling machine proper seeming
almost endowed with human intelligence, so perfectly does it work.
But, apart from the technical perfection, Mr. Serrell's improvements
are of great importance as calculated to introduce the silk-reeling
industry in this country on a large scale, while at the same time its
effect upon India as a silk-growing country will be of equal
importance.--_Industries._

       *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS USED FOR MAKING ALCOHOL FOR HOSPITAL USE DURING THE
CIVIL WAR BETWEEN THE STATES.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Read at the Cincinnati meeting of the American
  Pharmaceutical Association.]

By CHARLES K. GALLAGHER, Washington, N.C.


A is an ordinary farm boiler or kettle, with an iron lid securely
bolted on; B, a steam pipe ending in a coil within a trough, D. C, D,
two troughs made of gum logs, one inverted over the other, securely
luted and fastened together by clamps and wedges. The "beer" to be
distilled was introduced at E and the opening closed with a plug. The
distillate--"low wine"--was collected at F, and redistilled from a set
of similar troughs not shown in above figure, and heated by a
continuation of the steam coil from D.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *




CONFEDERATE APPARATUS FOR MANUFACTURING SALTPETER FOR
AMMUNITION.

By CHARLES K. GALLAGHER, Washington, N.C.


Any convenient number of percolators, made of rough boards, arranged
over a trough after the style of the old fashioned "lye stand,"
similar to the figure. Into these was placed the earth scraped from
around old tobacco barns, from under kitchens and smokehouses. Then
water or water and urine was poured upon it until the mass was
thoroughly leached or exhausted. The percolate was collected in a
receptacle and evaporated, the salt redissolved, filtered, again
evaporated, and crystallized from the mother water.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE TELEMETER SYSTEM.

By F.R. UPTON.


In this paper, read before the British Association, the author
explained that the "Telemeter System," invented by C.L. Clarke, of New
York, is a method by which the slow movement of a revolving hand of
any indicating instrument may be reproduced by the movement of a
similar hand at a distant place, using electricity to convey the
impulse. The primary hand moves until it makes electrical contact,
thus sending an impulse. It is here that all previous methods have
failed. This contact should be absolute and positive, for if it is
not, the receiver will not work in unison. The contact could often be
doubled by the jarring of the instrument, thus making the receiver
jump twice. Clarke has overcome this defect by so arranging his
mechanism that the faintest contact in the primary instrument closes
two platinum points in multiple arc with it, thus making a firm and
positive contact, which is not disturbed by any jar on the primary
contact. This gives the instruments a positive start for the series of
operations, instead of the faint contact which would be given, for
example, by the light and slowly moving hand of a metallic
thermometer. The other trouble with previous methods was that the
contact points would corrode, and, in consequence of such corrosion,
the instrument would fail to send impulses. Corrosion of the contacts
is due to breaking the circuit slowly on a small surface. This is
entirely remedied by breaking the circuit elsewhere than at the
primary contact, using a quick motion, and also by giving this
breaking contact large surface and making it firm. The instrument, as
applied to a thermometer, is made as follows: From the free end of the
light spiral of a metallic thermometer fixed at the other end, an arm,
C, is attached, the end of which moves over an arc of a circle when
the temperature varies. This end carries on either side of its
extremity platinum contacts which, when the thermometer is at rest,
lie between two other platinum points, A B, carried on radial arms.
Any variation in temperature brings a point on the thermometer arm in
contact with one of these points, and thus gives the initial start to
the series of operations without opposing any friction to the free
motion of the instrument. The first result is the closing of a short
circuit round the initial point of contact, so that no current flows
through it. Then the magnets which operate one set of pawls come into
play. The two contact points are attached to a toothed wheel in which
the pawls play, and these pawls are so arranged that they drive the
wheel whenever moved by their magnets; thus the primary contact is
broken.

[Illustration]

In the receiver there is a similar toothed wheel carrying the hand of
the indicating instrument, and actuated at the same moment as the
transmitter. The primary contacts are so arranged that the contact is
made for each degree of temperature to be indicated. This series of
operations leaves the instruments closed and the pawls home in the
toothed wheel. To break the circuit another wire and separate set of
contacts are employed.

These are arranged on the arms carrying the pawls, and so adjusted
that no contact is made until after the toothed wheel has moved a
degree, when a circuit is closed and a magnet attracts an armature
attached to a pendulum. This pendulum, after starting, breaks the
circuit of the magnets which hold the pawls down, as well as of the
short-circuiting device. As the pendulum takes an appreciable time to
vibrate, this allows all the magnets to drop back, and breaks all
circuits, leaving the primary contacts in the same relation as at
first. The many details of the instruments are carefully worked out.
All the contacts are of a rubbing nature, thus avoiding danger from
dirt, and they are made with springs, so as not to be affected by jar.

The receiving instruments can be made recorders also by simple
devices. Thus, having only a most delicate pressure in the primary
instrument, a distinct ink record may be made in the receiver, even
though the paper be rough and soft. The method is applicable to steam
gauges, water indicators, clocks, barometers, etc., in fact, to any
measuring instrument where a moving hand can be employed.

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW MONSTER REVOLVING BLACK ASH FURNACE AND THE WORK DONE WITH IT.

By WATSON SMITH, Lecturer in Chemical Technology in the Victoria
University, etc.


The Widnes Alkali Company, limited, to which I am indebted for
permission to describe this latest addition to a family of revolving
black ash furnaces, of late not only increasing in number, but also
individual size, has kindly allowed my friend, Mr. H. Baker, to
photograph the great revolver in question, and I have pleasure now in
throwing on the screen a picture of it, and also one of a revolver of
ordinary size, so as to render a comparison possible. The revolver of
ordinary size measures at most 181/2 ft. long, with a diameter of 121/2
ft. The boiling down pans connected with such a furnace measure 60 ft.
in length. Each charge contains four tons of salt cake, and some of
these revolvers get through 18 tons of salt cake per day and consume
13 cwt. of coal per ton of cake decomposed.

With regard to the larger revolver, it may be just said that the
Widnes Alkali Company has not at once sprung to the adoption of a
furnace of the immense size to be presently given, but in 1884 it
erected a revolver only about 3 ft. to 4 ft. short of the length of
that one, and having two discharging holes. The giant revolving
furnace to be described measures in length 30 ft. and has a diameter
of 12 ft. 6 in. Inside length is 28 ft. 6 in., with a diameter of 11
ft. 4 in. It is lined with 16,000 fire bricks and 120 fire-clay blocks
or breakers, weighing each 11/4 cwt. The bricks weigh per 1,000 about
four tons. The weight of salt cake per charge (i.e., contained in
each charge of salt cake, limestone, mud, and slack) is 8 tons 12 cwt.
For 100 tons of salt cake charged, there are also charged about 110
tons of lime mud and limestone and 55 tons of mixing slack. In a week
of seven days about 48 charges are worked through, weighing of raw
materials about 25 _tons per charge_. The total amount of salt cake
decomposed weekly is about 400 tons, and may be reckoned as yielding
240 tons of 60 per cent. caustic soda. As regards fuel used for
firing, this may be put down as 200 tons per week, or about 10 cwt.
per ton of salt cake decomposed. Also with regard to the concentration
of liquor from 20 deg. Tw. to 50 deg. Tw., there is sufficient of such
concentrated liquor evaporated down to keep three self-fired caustic
pots working, which are boiled at a strength of 80 deg. Tw. Were it not
for this liquor, no less than seven self-fired pots would be required
to do this work, showing a difference of 80 tons of fuel.

[Illustration: A NEW MONSTER REVOLVING BLACK ASH FURNACE. (2 Figures.) ]

The question may be asked, "Why increase the size of these huge pieces
of apparatus?" The answer, I apprehend, is that owing to competition
and reduction of prices, greater efforts are necessary to reduce
costs. With automatic apparatus like the black ash revolver, we may
consider no very sensible addition of man power would be needed, in
passing from the smallest sized to the largest sized revolver. Then,
again, we may, reckoning a certain constant amount of heat lost per
each revolver furnace of the small size, consider that if we doubled
the size of such revolver, we should lose by no means double the
amount of heat lost with the small apparatus; but only the same as
that lost in the small furnace _plus_ a certain fraction of that
quantity, which will be smaller the better and more efficient the
arrangements are. Then, again, there is an economy in iron plate for
such a large revolver; there is economy in expense on the engine power
and on fuel consumed, as well as in wear and tear.

Just to mention fuel alone, we saw that with an ordinary large sized
revolver, the coal consumption was 13 cwt. per ton of salt cake
decomposed in the black ash process; but with the giant revolver we
have been describing, that consumption is reduced to 10 cwt. per ton
of cake decomposed.

[Illustration: A NEW MONSTER REVOLVING BLACK ASH FURNACE. (2 Figures.)]

The question will be probably asked, How is it possible to get a flame
from one furnace to carry through such a long revolver and do its work
in fusing the black ash mixture effectively from one end to the other?
The furnace employed viewed in front looks very like an ordinary
revolver fireplace, but at the side thereof, in line with the front of
the revolver, at which the discharge of the "crude soda" takes place,
there are observed to be three "charging holes," rather than doors,
through which fuel is charged from a platform directly into the
furnace through those holes.

The furnace is of course a larger one than furnaces adjusted to
revolvers of the usual size. But the effect of one charging door in
front and three at the side, which after charging are "banked" up with
coal, with the exception of a small aperture above for admission of
air, is very similar to that sometimes adopted in the laboratory for
increasing heating effect by joining several Bunsen lamps together to
produce one large, powerful flame. In this case, the four charging
holes represent, as it were, the air apertures of the several Bunsen
lamps. Of course the one firing door at front would be totally
inadequate to supply and feed a fire capable of yielding a flame that
would be adequate for the working of so huge a revolver. As an effort
of chemical engineering, it is a very interesting example of what
skill and enterprise in that direction alone will do in reducing
costs, without in the least modifying the chemical reactions taking
place.--_Journal Soc. Chem. Industry._

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVEMENTS IN THE MANUFACTURE OF PORTLAND CEMENT.[1]

  [Footnote 1: A paper recently read before the British
  Association.]

By FREDERICK RANSOMS, A.I.C.E.


So much has been said and written on and in relation to Portland
cement that further communications upon the subject may appear to many
of the present company to be superfluous. But is this really so? The
author thinks not, and he hopes by the following communication, to
place before this meeting and the community at large some facts which
have up to the present time, or until within a very recent date, been
practically disregarded or overlooked in the production of this very
important and valuable material, so essential in carrying out the
great and important works of the present day, whether of docks and
harbors, our coast defenses, or our more numerous operations on land,
including the construction of our railways, tunnels, and bridges,
aqueducts, viaducts, foundations, etc. The author does not propose to
occupy the time of this meeting by referring to the origin or the
circumstances attendant upon the early history of this material, the
manufacture of which has now assumed such gigantic proportions--these
matters have already been fully dealt with by other more competent
authorities; but rather to direct the attention of those interested
therein to certain modifications, which he considers improvements, by
means of which a large proportion of capital unnecessarily involved in
its manufacture may be set free in the future, the method of
manufacture simplified, the cost of manipulation reduced, and stronger
and more uniformly reliable cement be placed within the reach of those
upon whom devolves the duty and responsibility of constructing works
of a substantial and permanent character; but in order to do this it
will be necessary to allude to certain palpable errors and defects
which, in the author's opinion, are perpetuated, and are in general
practice at the present day.

Portland cement is, as is well known, composed of a mixture of chalk,
or other carbonate of lime, and clay--such as is obtained on the banks
of the Thames or the Medway--intimately mixed and then subjected to
heat in a kiln, producing incipient fusion, and thereby forming a
chemical combination of lime with silica and alumina, or practically
of lime with dehydrated clay. In order to effect this, the usual
method is to place the mechanically mixed chalk and clay (technically
called slurry), in lumps varying in size, say, from 4 to 10 lb., in
kilns with alternate layers of coke, and raise the mass to a glowing
heat sufficient to effect the required combination, in the form of
very hard clinker. These kilns differ in capacity, but perhaps a fair
average size would be capable of producing about 30 tons of clinker,
requiring for the operation, say, from 60 to 70 tons of dried slurry,
with from 12 to 15 tons of coke or other fuel. The kiln, after being
thus loaded, is lighted by means of wood and shavings at the base,
and, as a matter of course, the lumps of slurry at the lower part of
the kiln are burned first, but the moisture and sulphurous gases
liberated by the heat are condensed by the cooler layers above, and
remain until the heat from combustion, gradually ascending, raises the
temperature to a sufficient degree to drive them further upward, until
at length they escape at the top of the kiln. The time occupied in
loading, burning, and drawing a kiln of 30 tons of clinker averages
about seven days. It will be readily understood that the outside of
the clinker so produced must have been subjected to a much greater
amount of heat then was necessary, before the center of such clinker
could have received sufficient to have produced the incipient fusion
necessary to effect the chemical combination of its ingredients; and
the result is not only a considerable waste of heat, but, as always
occurs, the clinker is not uniformly burnt, a portion of the outer
part has to be discarded as overburnt and useless, while the inner
part is not sufficiently burnt, and has to be reburned afterward.
Moreover, the clinker, which is of excessively hard character, has to
be reduced by means of a crusher to particles sufficiently small to be
admitted by the millstones, where it is ground into a fine powder, and
becomes the Portland cement of commerce.

This process of manufacture is almost identical in principle and in
practice with that described and patented by Mr. Joseph Aspden in the
year 1824; and though various methods have been patented for utilizing
the waste heat of the kilns in drying the slurry previous to
calcination, still the main feature of burning the material in mass in
large and expensive kilns remained the same, and is continued in
practice to the present day. The attention of the author was directed
to this subject some time since in consequence of the failure of a
structure in which Portland cement formed an essential element, and he
had not proceeded far in his investigation of the cause of the failure
when he was struck with what appeared to him to be the unscientific
method adopted in its manufacture, and the uncertain results that must
necessarily accrue therefrom. Admitting, in the first place, that the
materials employed were considered the best and most economical for
the purpose readily accessible, viz., chalk and an alluvial deposit
found in abundance on the banks of the Thames and the Medway, and
being intimately mixed together in suitable proportions, was it
necessary, in order to effect the chemical combination of the
ingredients at an intense heat, to employ such massive and expensive
structures of masonry, occupying such an enormous space of valuable
ground, with tall chimney stacks for the purpose of discharging the
objectionable gases, etc., at such a height, in order to reduce the
nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood? Again, was it possible to
effect the perfect calcination of the interior of the lumps alluded to
without bestowing upon the outer portions a greater heat than was
necessary for the purpose, causing a wasteful expenditure of both
time and fuel? And further, as cement is required to be used in the
state of powder, could not the mixture of the raw materials be
calcined in powder, thereby avoiding the production of such a hard
clinker, which has afterward to be broken up and reduced to a fine
powder by grinding in an ordinary mill?

The foregoing are some of the defects which the author applied himself
to remove, and he now desires to draw attention to the way in which
the object has been attained by the substitution of a revolving
furnace for the massive cement kilns now in general use, and by the
application of gaseous products to effect calcination, in the place of
coke or other solid fuel. The revolving furnace consists of a
cylindrical casing of steel or boiler plate supported upon steel
rollers (and rotated by means of a worm and wheel, driven by a pulley
upon the shaft carrying the worm), lined with good refractory fire
brick, so arranged that certain courses are set so as to form three or
more radial projecting fins or ledges. The cylindrical casing is
provided with two circular rails or pathways, turned perfectly true,
to revolve upon the steel rollers, mounted on suitable brickwork, with
regenerative flues, by passing through which the gas and air severally
become heated, before they meet in the combustion chamber, at the
mouth of the revolving furnace. The gas may be supplied from slack
coal or other hydrocarbon burnt in any suitable gas producer (such,
for instance, as those for which patents have been obtained by Messrs.
Brook & Wilson, of Middlesbrough, or by Mr. Thwaite, of Liverpool),
which producer may be placed in any convenient situation.

The cement mixture or slurry, instead of being burnt in lumps, is
passed between rollers or any suitable mill, when, it readily falls
into coarse dry powder, which powder is thence conveyed by an elevator
and fed into the revolving furnace by means of a hopper and pipe,
which, being set at an angle with the horizon, as it turns gradually
conveys the cement material in a tortuous path toward the lower and
hotter end, where it is discharged properly calcined. The material
having been fed into the upper end of the cylinder falls through the
flame to the lower side of it; the cylinder being in motion lifts it
on its advancing side, where it rests against one of its projecting
fins or ledges until it has reached such an angle that it shoots off
in a shower through the flame and falls once more on the lower side.
This again causes it to travel in a similar path, and every rotation
of the cylinder produces a like effect, so that by the time it arrives
at the lower and hotter end it has pursued a roughly helical path,
during which it has been constantly lifted and shot through the flame,
occupying about half an hour in its transit.

To some who have been accustomed to the more tedious process of kiln
burning, the time thus occupied may appear insufficient to effect the
combinations necessary to produce the required result; but it will be
seen that the conditions here attained are, in fact, those best suited
to carry out effectively the chemical changes necessary for the
production of cement. The raw material being in powder offers every
facility for the speedy liberation of water and carbonic acid, the
operation being greatly hastened by the velocity of the furnace gases
through which the particles pass. That such is practically the case is
shown by the following analysis of cement so burnt in the revolving
furnace or cylinder:

                                         Per cent.
    Carbonic acid, anhydrous                0.4
    Sulphuric acid, anhydrous               0.26
    Silica soluble                         24.68
    Silica insoluble                        0.6
    Alumina and oxide of iron              10.56
    Lime                                   61.48
    Magnesia, water, and alkalies           2.02
                                          ------
                                          100

