fire by friction. For this purpose a joint of thoroughly dry bamboo is
selected, about 11/2 inches in diameter, and this joint is then split in
halves. A ball is now prepared by scraping off shavings from a
perfectly dry bamboo, and this ball being placed on some firm support,
as a fallen log or piece of rock, one of the above halves is held by
its ends firmly down on it, so that the ball of soft fiber is pressed
with some force against its inner or concave surface. Another man now
takes a piece of bamboo a foot long or less, and shaped with a blunt
edge, something like a paper knife, and commences a sawing motion
backward and forward across the horizontal piece of bamboo, and just
over the spot where the ball of soft fiber is held. The motion is slow
at first, and by degrees a groove is formed, which soon deepens as the
motion increases in quickness. Soon smoke arises, and the motion is
now made as rapid as possible, and by the time the bamboo is cut
through not only smoke but sparks are seen, which soon ignite the
materials of which the ball beneath is composed. The first tender
spark is now carefully blown, and when well alight the ball is
withdrawn, and leaves and other inflammable materials heaped over it,
and a fire secured. This is the only method that I am aware of for
procuring fire by friction in Burma, but on the hills and out of the
way parts, that philosophical toy, the "pyrophorus," is still in use.
This consists[1] of a short joint of a thick woody bamboo, neatly cut,
which forms a cylinder. At the bottom of this a bit of tinder is
placed, and a tightly-fitting piston inserted composed of some hard
wood. The tube being now held in one hand, or firmly supported, the
piston is driven violently down on the tinder by a smart blow from the
hand, with the result of igniting the tinder beneath.

   [Footnote 1: It is also made of a solid cylinder of buffalo's
   horn, with a central hollow of three-sixteenths of an inch in
   diameter and three inches deep burnt into it. The piston, which
   fits very tightly in it, is made of iron-wood or some wood
   equally hard.]

Another method of obtaining fire by friction from bamboos is thus
described by Captain T.H. Lewin ("Hill Tracts of Chittagong, and the
Dwellers Therein", Calcutta, 1869, p. 83), as practiced in the
Chittagong Hills. The Tipporahs make use of an ingenious device to
obtain fire; they take a piece of dry bamboo, about a foot long, split
it in half, and on its outer round surface cut a nick, or notch, about
an eighth of an inch broad, circling round the semi-circumference of
the bamboo, shallow toward the edges, but deepening in the center
until a minute slit of about a line in breadth pierces the inner
surface of the bamboo fire-stick. Then a flexible strip of bamboo is
taken, about 11/2 feet long and an eighth of an inch in breadth, to fit
the circling notch, or groove, in the fire-stick. This slip or band is
rubbed with fine dry sand, and then passed round the fire-stick, on
which the operator stands, a foot on either end. Then the slip,
grasped firmly, an end in each hand, is pulled steadily back and
forth, increasing gradually in pressure and velocity as the smoke
comes. By the time the fire-band snaps with the friction there ought
to appear through the slit in the fire-stick some incandescent dust,
and this placed, smouldering as it is, in a nest of dry bamboo
shavings, can be gently blown into a flame.--_The Gardeners'
Chronicle._

       *       *       *       *       *




EXPERIMENTS IN MEMORY.


When we read how one mediaeval saint stood erect in his cell for a week
without sleep or food, merely chewing a plantain-leaf out of humility,
so as not to be too perfect; how another remained all night up to his
neck in a pond that was freezing over; and how others still performed
for the glory of God feats no less tasking to their energies, we are
inclined to think, that, with the gods of yore, the men, too, have
departed, and that the earth is handed over to a race whose will has
become as feeble as its faith. But we ought not to yield to these
instigations, by which the evil one tempts us to disparage our own
generation. The gods have somewhat changed their shape, 'tis true, and
the men their minds; but both are still alive and vigorous as ever for
an eye that can look under superficial disguises. The human energy no
longer freezes itself in fish-ponds, and starves itself in cells; but
near the north pole, in central Africa, on Alpine "couloirs," and
especially in what are nowadays called "psycho-physical laboratories,"
it maybe found as invincible as ever, and ready for every fresh
demand. To most people a north pole expedition would be an easy task
compared with those ineffably tedious measurements of simple mental
processes of which Ernst Heinrich Weber set the fashion some forty
years ago, and the necessity of extending which in every possible
direction becomes more and more apparent to students of the mind.
Think of making forty thousand estimates of which is the heavier of
two weights, or seventy thousand answers as to whether your skin is
touched at two points or at one, and then tabulating and
mathematically discussing your results! Insight is to be gained at no
less price than this. The new sort of study of the mind bears the same
relation to the older psychology that the microscopic anatomy of the
body does to the anatomy of its visible form, and the one will
undoubtedly be as fruitful and as indispensable as the other.

Dr. Ebbinghaus[1] makes an original addition to heroic psychological
literature in the little work whose title we have given. For more than
two years he has apparently spent a considerable time each day in
committing to memory sets of meaningless syllables, and trying to
trace numerically the laws according to which they were retained or
forgotten. Most of his results, we are sorry to say, add nothing to
our gross experience of the matter. Here, as in the case of the
saints, heroism seems to be its own reward. But the incidental results
are usually the most pregnant in this department; and two of those
which Dr. Ebbinghaus has reached seems to us to amply justify his
pains. The first is, that, in _forgetting_ such things as these lists
of syllables, the loss goes on very much more rapidly at first than
later on. He measured the loss by the number of seconds required to
_relearn_ the list after it had been once learned. Roughly speaking,
if it took a thousand seconds to learn the list, and five hundred to
relearn it, the loss between the two learnings would have been
one-half. Measured in this way, full half of the forgetting seems to
occur within the first half-hour, while only four-fifths is forgotten
at the end of a month. The nature of this result might have been
anticipated, but hardly its numerical proportions.

   [Footnote 1: "Ueber das Gedaechtniss. Untersuchungen zur
   experimentellen Psychologie." Von Herm.
   Ebbinghaus. Leipzig: Duncker u. Humblot, 1885. 10+169 pp. 8vo.]

The other important result relates to the question whether ideas are
recalled only by those that previously came immediately before them,
or whether an idea can possibly recall another idea, with which it was
never in _immediate_ contact, without passing through the intermediate
mental links. The question is of theoretic importance with regard to
the way in which the process of "association of ideas" must be
conceived; and Dr. Ebbinghaus' attempt is as successful as it is
original, in bringing two views, which seem at first sight
inaccessible to proof, to a direct practical test, and giving the
victory to one of them. His experiments conclusively show that an idea
is not only "associated" directly with the one that follows it, and
with the rest _through that_, but that it is _directly_ associated
with _all_ that are near it, though in unequal degrees. He first
measured the time needed to impress on the memory certain lists of
syllables, and then the time needed to impress lists of the same
syllables with gaps between them. Thus, representing the syllables by
numbers, if the first list was 1, 2, 3, 4 ... 13, 14, 15, 16, the
second would be 1, 3, 5 ... 15, 2, 4, 6 ... 16, and so forth, with
many variations.

Now, if 1 and 3 in the first list were learned in that order merely by
1 calling up 2, and by 2 calling up 3, leaving out the 2 ought to
leave 1 and 3 with no tie in the mind; and the second list ought to
take as much time in the learning as if the first list had never been
heard of. If, on the other hand, 1 has a _direct_ influence on 3 as
well as on 2, that influence should be exerted even when 2 is dropped
out; and a person familiar with the first list ought to learn the
second one more rapidly than otherwise he could. This latter case is
what actually occurs; and Dr. Ebbinghaus has found that syllables
originally separated by as many as seven intermediaries still reveal,
by the increased rapidity with which they are learned in order, the
strength of the tie that the original learning established between
them, over the heads, so to speak, of all the rest. It may be that
this particular series of experiments is the entering wedge of a new
method of incalculable reach in such questions. The future alone can
show. Meanwhile, when we add to Dr. Ebbinghaus' "heroism" in the
pursuit of true averages, his high critical acumen, his modest tone,
and his polished style, it will be seen that we have a new-comer in
psychology from whom the best may be expected.--_W.J., Science._

       *       *       *       *       *




SINKING OF THE QUIEVRECHAIN WORKING SHAFT.


The sinking of mine shafts in certain Belgian and French basins, where
the coal deposit is covered with thick strata of watery earth, has
from all times been considered as the most troublesome and delicate,
and often the most difficult operation, of the miner's art. Of the few
modern processes that have been employed for this purpose, that of
Messrs. Kind and Chaudron has been found most satisfactory, although
it leaves much to be desired where it is a question of traversing
moving sand. An interesting modification of this well-known process
has recently been described by Mr. E. Chavatte, in the Bulletin de la
Societe Industrielle du Nord de la France. Two years ago the author
had to sink a working shaft at Quievrechain, 111 feet of which was to
traverse a mass of moving and flowing sand, inconsistent earth,
gravel, and marls, and proceeded as follows:

He first put down two beams, A B (Pl. 1, Figs. 2, 3, and 9), each 82
feet in length and of 20x20 inch section in the center, and upon these
placed two others, E F, of 16x16 inch section. Beneath the two first
were inserted six joists, _c c c c c c_, about 82 feet in length and
of 14 or 16 inch section in the center. Finally these were
strengthened at their extremities with two others, _d d_, about 82
feet in length. All these timbers, having been connected by tie bands
and bolts, constituted a rigid structure that covered a surface of
nearly seven hundred square yards.

From the beams, A B and E F, there was suspended a red fir frame by
means of thirty-four iron rods.

Upon this frame, which was entirely immersed in the moving sand, there
was established brick masonry (Figs. 1, 2, and 3). As the ends of the
timbers entered the latter, and were connected by 11/2 inch bolts, they
concurred in making the entire affair perfectly solid. The frame, K K,
was provided with an oaken ring, which was affixed to it with bolts.

After this, a cast iron tubbing, having a cutting edge, and being
composed of rings 3.28 feet wide and made of six segments, was
lowered. This tubbing was perfectly tight, all the surfaces of the
joints having been made even and provided with strips of lead
one-tenth of an inch thick. It weighed 4,000 pounds to the running
foot.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Section through A B. FIG. 2.--Plan. FIG.
3.--Section through C D. FIG. 5.--Section through E F of Fig. 4. FIGS.
6 AND 7.--Work Prepared and finished. FIG. 10.--Section through A B
and C D of Fig. 12. FIGS. 11 6 AND 12.--Arrangement of jack-screw.
FIG. 13.--Section through A B and C D of Fig. 11.

               PLATE I.--SINKING A MINE SHAFT.]

It was first raised to a height of fifteen feet, so as to cause it to
enter the sand by virtue of its own gravity. It thus penetrated to a
depth of about twenty inches. After this the workmen were ordered to
man the windlasses and hoist out some of the sand. This caused the
tubbing to descend about eight inches more, when it came to a
standstill. It was now loaded with 17,000 pounds of pig iron, but in
vain, for it refused to budge. Mr. Chavatte therefore had recourse to
a dredge with vertical axis, constructed as follows:

Upon a square axis, A B (Pl. 2, Figs. 1, 2, and 3), provided with
double cross braces, C D, and strengthened by diagonals, were riveted,
by their upper extremities, two cheeks, G H, whose lower extremities
held the steel plates, I J I' J', which, in turn, were fastened to the
axis, A B, by their other extremities. These plates were so inclined
as to scrape the surface of the ground over which they were moved.
They each carried two bags made of coarse canvas and strengthened by
five strong leather straps (Figs. 2 and 4). To the steel plates were
riveted two plates of iron containing numerous apertures, through
which passed leather straps designed for fastening thereto the lower
part of the mouth of the bags. That portion of the mouth of the latter
that was to remain open was fastened in the same way to two other
plates, X Y, X¹ Y¹ (Fig. 1), held between the lower cross-braces.

When the apparatus was revolved, the plates scraped the earth to be
removed, and descended in measure as the latter entered the bags.
These bags, when full, were hooked, by means of the five rings which
they carried, to the device shown in Fig. 8 (Pl. 2), and raised to the
surface and emptied into cars.

The dredge was set in motion by four oak levers (Figs. 5 and 6). Two
of these were manned by workmen stationed upon the surface flooring,
and the other two by workmen upon the flooring in the tubbing. The
axis was elongated, in measure as the apparatus descended, by rods of
the same dimensions fastened together by cast iron sleeves and bolts
(Fig. 7).

The steel plates were not capable of acting alone, even in cases where
they operated in pure moving sand containing no pebbles, for the sand
was too compact to be easily scraped up by the steel, and so it had to
be previously divided. For this purpose Mr. Chavatte used rakes which
were in form exactly like those of the extirpators, U and V, of Figs.
1, 2, and 3, of Pl. 2, except that the dividers carried teeth that
were not so strong as those of the extirpators, and that were set
closer together. These rakes were let down and drawn up at will. They
were maneuvered as follows:

The dredge descended with the extirpators pointing upward. When their
heads reached the level of the upper floor, the tools were removed.
Then the dredge was raised again. In this way the extirpators lay upon
the floor, and, if the lifting was continued, they placed themselves
in their working position, in which they were fixed by the bolts A" B"
C" (Fig. 1). After this, the apparatus was let down and revolved. The
rakes divided the earth, the scrapers collected it, and the bags
pocketed it.

The great difficulty was to cause the tubbing to descend vertically,
and also to overcome the enormous lateral pressure exerted upon it by
the earth that was being traversed. Water put into the shaft helped
somewhat, but the great stress to be exerted had to be effected by
means of powerful jack screws. These were placed directly upon the
tubbing, and bore against strong beams whose extremities were inserted
into the masonry.

As a usual thing it is not easy to use more than four or six such
jacks, since the number of beams that can be employed is limited,
owing to the danger of obstructing the mouth of the shaft. Yet twelve
were used by Mr. Chavatte, and this number might have been doubled had
it been necessary. As we have seen, the frame, K K (Pl. 1, Fig. 3),
was provided with an oak circle traversed by 32 bolts. The length of
these latter was two inches and a quarter longer than they needed to
have been, or they were provided with wooden collars of that
thickness. Later on, these collars were replaced with iron bars that
held the wood against which the jacks bore in order to press the
tubbing downward (Pl. 1, Figs. 10, 11, 12, and 13).

Mr. Chavatte's great anxiety was to know whether he should succeed in
causing the first section of tubbing to traverse the four feet of
gravel; for in case it did not pass, he would be obliged to employ a
second section of smaller diameter, thus increasing the expense. He
was persuaded that the coarse gravel remaining in the side of the
shaft would greatly retard the descent of the tubbing. So he had
decided to remove such obstructions at the proper moment through
divers or a diving bell. Then an idea occurred to him that dispensed
with all that trouble, and allowed him to continue with the first
section. This was to place upon the dredge two claw-bars, T (Pl. 2,
Fig. 3), which effected the operation of widening with wonderful ease.
To do this it was only necessary to turn up the bags, and revolve the
apparatus during its descent. The claw at the extremity of the bar
pulled out everything within its reach, and thus made an absolutely
free passage for the tubbing.

The sands and gravels were passed by means of a single section of
tubbing 31 feet in length, which was not stopped until it had
penetrated a stratum of white chalk to a depth of two yards. This
chalk had no consistency, although it contained thin plates of quite
large dimensions. These were cut, as if with a punch, by means of the
teeth of the extirpator.

It now remains to say a few words concerning the sinking of the shaft,
which, after the operation of the dredge, was continued by the process
called "natural level" The work was not easy until a depth of 111 feet
had been reached. Up to this point it had been necessary to proceed
with great prudence, and retain the shifting earth by means of four
iron plate tubes weighing 54 tons. Before finding a means of widening
the work already done by the dredge, Mr. Chavatte was certain that he
would have to use two sections of tubbing, and so had given the first
section a diameter of 161/2 feet. He could then greatly reduce the
diameter, and bring it to 153/4 feet as soon as the ground auger was
used.

After two yards of soil had been removed from beneath the edge of the
tubbing, the earth began to give way. Seeing this, Mr. Chavatte let
down a tube 13 feet in length and 15.4 in diameter. The exterior of
this was provided with 12 oak guides, which sliding over the surface
of the tubbing had the effect of causing the tube to descend
vertically. And this was necessary, because this tube had to be driven
down every time an excavation of half a yard had been made.

Afterward, a diameter of 15.35 feet was proceeded with, and the small
central shaft of 41/4 feet diameter was begun. This latter had not as
yet been sunk, for fear of causing a fall of the earth.

Next, the earth was excavated to a depth of 8.2 feet, and a tube 16.4
feet in length was inserted; then a further excavation of 8.2 feet was
made, and the tube driven home.

After this an excavation of 261/4 feet was made, and a tube of the same
length and 141/2 feet in diameter was driven down. Finally, the shifting
soil was finished with a fourth tube 191/2 feet in length and 14 feet in
diameter.

A depth of 111 feet had now been reached, and the material encountered
was solid white chalk. From this point the work proceeded with a
diameter of 13.9 feet to a depth of 450 feet. The small shaft had been
sunk directly to a depth of 475 feet. At 450 feet the diameter was
diminished by three inches. Then an advance of a foot was made, and
the diameter reduced by one and a half inch.

The reason for this reduction in the diameter and change in the mode
of deepening was as follows:

The Chaudron moss-box, when it chances to reach its seat intact, and
can consequently operate well, undoubtedly makes a good wedging. But
how many times does it not happen that it gets injured before reaching
its destination? Besides, as it often rests upon earth that has caved
in upon its seat during the descent of the tubbing, it gets askew, and
later on has to be raised on one side by means of jacks or other
apparatus. Under such circumstances, Mr. Chavatte considered this
moss-box as more detrimental than useful, and not at all
indispensable, and so substituted beton for it, as had previously been
done by Mr. Bourg, director of the Bois-du-Luc coal mines.

[Illustration: FIGS. 1, 2, 3, 6 AND 4.--Details of dredge. FIGS. 5 6
AND 6.--Details of maneuvering lever. FIG. 7.--Mode of lengthening the
axis of the dredge. FIG. 8.--Hooks for lifting the dredge bags. FIG.
9.--Arrangement of valves in the beton box. FIG. 10.--Device for
centering the tubbing.

               PLATE II.]

This engineer likewise suppressed the balancing column, which is often
a source of trouble in the descent of the tubbing, and forced his
tubbing to center itself with the shaft through a guide with four
branches riveted under the false bottom that entered the small shaft
(Pl. 2, Fig. 10). Mr. Bourg so managed that there remained an empty
space of ten inches to fill in with beton. Mr. Chavatte had at first
intended to proceed in the same way, but the two last tubbings, upon
which he had not counted, forced him to reduce the space to 53/4 inches.
Under such circumstances it was not prudent to employ the same means
for guiding the base of the tubbing, because, if the central shaft had
not exactly the same center as the large one, there would have been
danger of throwing the tubbing sideways and causing it to leak. Seeing
which, Mr. Chavatte strengthened the lower part of the base ring and
placed it upon another ring tapering downward, and 271/2 inches in
height (Pl. 1, Fig. 5). The object of this lower ring was to force the
tubbing to remain concentric with the shaft, to form a tight joint
with its upper conical portion, and to form a joint upon the seat with
its lower flange, so as to prevent the beton from flowing into the
small shaft.

After the shaft was pumped out, digging by hand was begun with a
diameter of 12 feet. After descending 20 inches an 8x10 inch curb was
laid, in order to consolidate the earth and prevent any movement of
the tubbing. Then the excavating was continued to a depth of 311/2
inches, and with a diameter of 93/4 feet. At this point another curb was
put in for consolidating the earth. Finally, the bottom was widened
out as shown in Fig. 7, so that three basal wedged curbs could be put
in. This done, the false tubbing was put in place; and finally, when
proceeding upward, the last ring composed of twelve pieces was
reached, the earth was excavated and at once replaced with a collar
composed of twelve pieces of oak tightened up by oak wedges. Each of
these pieces was cemented separately and in measure as they were
assembled.

Through motive of economy no masonry was placed under the base of the
three wedged curbs. In fact, by replacing this with a wedged curb of
wood traversed by six bolts designed to fix the cast iron curb
immediately above, Mr. Chavatte obtained a third curb that he would
have had to have made of cast iron.

       *       *       *       *       *




ON THE ELEMENTARY PRINCIPLES OF THE GAS-ENGINE.[1]

   [Footnote 1: A paper read before the Gas Institute, Manchester,
   June, 1885.]

By DENNY LANE, of Cork.


Among the most useful inventions of the latter half of the nineteenth
century the gas-engine holds a prominent place. While its development
has not been so brilliant or so startling as that which we can note in
the employment of electricity, it holds, among the applications of
heat, the most important place of any invention made within that
period. Even amid the contrivances by which, in recent times, the
other forces of nature have been subdued to the uses of man, there are
only a few which rival the gas-engine in practical importance. With
regard to the steam-engine itself, it is remarkable how little that is
new has really been invented since the time of Watt and Woulfe. In the
specifications of the former can be shown completely delineated, or
fully foreshadowed, nearly every essential condition of the economy
and efficiency attained in our own days; and it is only by a gradual
"survival of the fittest" of the many contrivances which were made to
carry out his broad ideas that the steam-engine of the present has
attained its great economy.

It is but within the last fifty years that the laws of the relation
between the different physical forces were first enunciated by Justice
Grove, and confirmed by the classical researches of Dr. Joule--the one
a lawyer, working hard at his profession, the other a man of business
engaged in manufacture. Both are still living among us; the latter
