[beta] (shown in Plate 1) to indicate the place of the Pole-star, whose
distance from the pointer [alpha] is rather more than three times the
distance of [alpha] from [beta].

Now stand facing the Pole-star. Then all the stars are travelling round
that star _in a direction contrary to that in which the hands of a watch
move_. Thus the stars below the pole are moving _towards the right_,
those above the pole _towards the left_, those to the right of the pole
_upwards_, those to the left of the pole _downwards_.

Next face the south. Then all the stars on our left, that is, towards
the east, are rising slantingly towards the south; those due south are
moving horizontally to the right, that is, towards the west; and those
on our right are passing slantingly downwards towards the west.

It is important to familiarise ourselves with these motions, because it
is through them that objects pass out of the field of view of the
telescope, and by moving the tube in a proper direction we can easily
pick up an object that has thus passed away, whereas if we are not
familiar with the varying motions in different parts of the celestial
sphere, we may fail in the attempt to immediately recover an object, and
waste time in the search for it.

The consideration of the celestial motions shows how advantageous it is,
when using an alt-azimuth, to observe objects as nearly as possible due
south. Of course in many cases this is impracticable, because a
phenomenon we wish to watch may occur when an object is not situated
near the meridian. But in examining double stars there is in general no
reason for selecting objects inconveniently situated. We can wait till
they come round to the meridian, and then observe them more comfortably.
Besides, most objects are higher, and therefore better seen, when due
south.

Northern objects, and especially those within the circle of perpetual
apparition, often culminate (that is, cross the meridian, or north and
south line) at too great a height for comfortable vision. In this case
we should observe them towards the east or west, and remember that in
the first case they are rising, and in the latter they are setting, and
that in both cases they have also a motion from left to right.

If we allow an object to pass right across the field of view (the
telescope being fixed), the apparent direction of its motion is the
exact reverse of the true direction of the star's motion. This will
serve as a guide in shifting the alt-azimuth after a star has passed out
of the field of view.

The following technical terms must be explained. That part of the field
of view towards which the star appears to move is called the _preceding_
part of the field, the opposite being termed the _following_ part. The
motion for all stars, except those lying in an oval space extending from
the zenith to the pole of the heavens, is more or less from right to
left (in the inverted field). Now, if we suppose a star to move along a
diameter of the field so as to divide the field into two semicircles,
then in all cases in which this motion takes places from right to left,
that semicircle which contains the lowest point (apparently) of the
field is the _northern_ half, the other is the _southern_ half. Over the
oval space just mentioned the reverse holds.

Thus the field is divided into four quadrants, and these are termed
_north following_ (_n.f._) and _south following_ (_s.f._); _north
preceding_ (_n.p._), and _south preceding_ (_s.p._). The student can
have no difficulty in interpreting these terms, since he knows which is
the following and which the preceding _semicircle_, which the northern
and which the southern. In the figures of plates 3 and 5, the letters
_n.f._, _n.p._, &c., are affixed to the proper quadrants. It is to be
remembered that the quadrants thus indicated are measured either way
from the point and feather of the diametral arrows.

Next, of the apparent annual motion of the stars. This takes place in
exactly the same manner as the daily motion. If we view the sky at eight
o'clock on any day, and again at the same hour one month later, we shall
find that at the latter observation (as compared with the former) the
heavens appear to have rotated by the _twelfth part_ of a complete
circumference, and the appearance presented is precisely the same as we
should have observed had we waited for two hours (the _twelfth part_ of
a day) on the day of the first observation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our survey of the heavens is supposed to be commenced during the first
quarter of the year, at ten o'clock on the 20th of January, or at nine
on the 5th of February, or at eight on the 19th of February, or at seven
on the 6th of March, or at hours intermediate to these on intermediate
days.

We look first for the Great Bear towards the north-east, as already
described, and thence find the Pole-star; turning towards which we see,
towards the right and downwards, the two guardians of the pole ([beta]
and [gamma] Ursae Minoris). Immediately under the Pole-star is the
Dragon's Head, a conspicuous diamond of stars. Just on the horizon is
Vega, scintillating brilliantly. Overhead is the brilliant Capella, near
which the Milky Way is seen passing down to the horizon on either side
towards the quarters S.S.E. and N.N.W.

For the present our business is with the southern heavens, however.

Facing the south, we see a brilliant array of stars, Sirius
unmistakeably overshining the rest. Orion is shining in full glory, his
leading brilliant, Betelgeuse[2] being almost exactly on the meridian,
and also almost exactly half way between the horizon and the zenith. In
Plate 2 is given a map of this constellation and its neighbourhood.

Let us first turn the tube on Sirius. It is easy to get him in the field
without the aid of a finder. The search will serve to illustrate a
method often useful when a telescope has no finder. Having taking out
the eye-piece--a low-power one, suppose--direct the tube nearly towards
Sirius. On looking through it, a glare of light will be seen within the
tube. Now, if the tube be slightly moved about, the light will be seen
to wax and wane, according as the tube is more or less accurately
directed. Following these indications, it will be found easy to direct
the tube, so that the object-glass shall appear _full of light_. When
this is done, insert the eye-piece, and the star will be seen in the
field.

But the telescope is out of focus, therefore we must turn the small
focussing screw. Observe the charming chromatic changes--green, and
red, and blue light, purer than the hues of the rainbow, scintillating
and coruscating with wonderful brilliancy. As we get the focus, the
excursions of these light flashes diminish until--if the weather is
favourable--the star is seen, still scintillating, and much brighter
than to the naked eye, but reduced to a small disc of light, surrounded
(in the case of so bright a star as Sirius) with a slight glare. If
after obtaining the focus the focussing rack work be still turned, we
see a coruscating image as before. In the case of a very brilliant star
these coruscations are so charming that we may be excused for calling
the observer's attention to them. The subject is not without interest
and difficulty as an optical one. But the astronomer's object is to get
rid of all these flames and sprays of coloured light, so that he has
very little sympathy with the admiration which Wordsworth is said to
have expressed for out-of-focus views of the stars.

We pass to more legitimate observations, noticing in passing that Sirius
is a double star, the companion being of the tenth magnitude, and
distant about ten seconds from the primary. But our beginner is not
likely to see the companion, which is a very difficult object, vowing to
the overpowering brilliancy of the primary.

Orion affords the observer a splendid field of research. It is a
constellation rich in double and multiple stars, clusters, and nebulae.
We will begin with an easy object.

The star [delta] (Plate 3), or _Mintaka_, the uppermost of the three
stars forming the belt, is a wide double. The primary is of the second
magnitude, the secondary of the seventh, both being white.

The star [alpha] (_Betelgeuse_) is an interesting object, on account of
its colour and brilliance, and as one of the most remarkable variables
in the heavens. It was first observed to be variable by Sir John
Herschel in 1836. At this period its variations were "most marked and
striking." This continued until 1840, when the changes became "much less
conspicuous. In January, 1849, they had recommenced, and on December
5th, 1852, Mr. Fletcher observed [alpha] Orionis brighter than Capella,
and actually the largest star in the northern hemisphere." That a star
so conspicuous, and presumably so large, should present such remarkable
variations, is a circumstance which adds an additional interest to the
results which have rewarded the spectrum-analysis of this star by Mr.
Huggins and Professor Miller. It appears that there is decisive evidence
of the presence in this luminary of many elements known to exist in our
own sun; amongst others are found sodium, magnesium, calcium, iron, and
bismuth. Hydrogen appears to be absent, or, more correctly, there are no
lines in the star's spectrum corresponding to those of hydrogen in the
solar spectrum. Secchi considers that there is evidence of an actual
change in the spectrum of the star, an opinion in which Mr. Huggins does
not coincide. In the telescope Betelgeuse appears as "a rich and
brilliant gem," says Lassell, "a rich topaz, in hue and brilliancy
differing from any that I have seen."

Turn next to [beta] (Rigel), the brightest star below the belt. This is
a very noted double, and will severely test our observer's telescope, if
small. The components are well separated (see Plate 3), compared with
many easier doubles; the secondary is also of the seventh magnitude, so
that neither as respects closeness nor smallness of the secondary, is
Rigel a difficult object. It is the combination of the two features
which makes it a test-object. Kitchener says a 1-3/4-inch object-glass
should show Rigel double; in earlier editions of his work he gave
2-3/4-inches as the necessary aperture. Smyth mentions Rigel as a test
for a 4-inch aperture, with powers of from 80 to 120. A 3-inch aperture,
however, will certainly show the companion. Rigel is an orange star, the
companion blue.

Turn next to [lambda] the northernmost of the set of three stars in the
head of Orion. This is a triple star, though an aperture of 3 inches
will show it only as a double. The components are 5" apart, the colours
pale white and violet. With the full powers of a 3-1/2-inch glass a
faint companion may be seen above [lambda].

The star [zeta], the lowest in the belt, may be tried with a 3-1/2-inch
glass. It is a close double, the components being nearly equal, and
about 2-1/2" apart (see Plate 3).

For a change we will now try our telescope on a nebula, selecting the
great nebula in the Sword. The place of this object is indicated in
Plate 2. There can be no difficulty in finding it since it is clearly
visible to the naked eye on a moonless night--the only sort of night on
which an observer would care to look at nebulae. A low power should be
employed.

The nebula is shown in Plate 3 as I have seen it with a 3-inch aperture.
We see nothing of those complex streams of light which are portrayed in
the drawings of Herschel, Bond, and Lassell, but enough to excite our
interest and wonder. What is this marvellous light-cloud? One could
almost imagine that there was a strange prophetic meaning in the words
which have been translated "Canst thou loose the bands of Orion?"
Telescope after telescope had been turned on this wonderful object with
the hope of resolving its light into stars. But it proved intractable to
Herschel's great reflector, to Lassell's 2-feet reflector, to Lord
Rosse's 3-feet reflector, and even partially to the great 6-feet
reflector. Then we hear of its supposed resolution into stars, Lord
Rosse himself writing to Professor Nichol, in 1846, "I may safely say
there can be little, if any, doubt as to the resolvability of the
nebula;--all about the trapezium is a mass of stars, the rest of the
nebula also abounding with stars, and exhibiting the characteristics of
resolvability strongly marked."

It was decided, therefore, that assuredly the great nebula is a
congeries of stars, and not a mass of nebulous matter as had been
surmised by Sir W. Herschel. And therefore astronomers were not a little
surprised when it was proved by Mr. Huggins' spectrum-analysis that the
nebula consists of gaseous matter. How widely extended this gaseous
universe may be we cannot say. The general opinion is that the nebulae
are removed far beyond the fixed stars. If this were so, the dimensions
of the Orion nebula would be indeed enormous, far larger probably than
those of the whole system whereof our sun is a member. I believe this
view is founded on insufficient evidence, but this would not be the
place to discuss the subject. I shall merely point out that the nebula
occurs in a region rich in stars, and if it is not, like the great
nebula in Argo, clustered around a remarkable star, it is found
associated in a manner which I cannot look upon as accidental with a set
of small-magnitude stars, and notably with the trapezium which surrounds
that very remarkable black gap within the nebula. The fact that the
nebula shares the proper motion of the trapezium appears inexplicable if
the nebula is really far out in space beyond the trapezium. A very small
proper motion of the trapezium (alone) would long since have destroyed
the remarkable agreement in the position of the dark gap and the
trapezium which has been noticed for so many years.

But whether belonging to our system or far beyond it, the great nebula
must have enormous dimensions. A vast gaseous system it is, sustained by
what arrangements or forces we cannot tell, nor can we know what
purposes it subserves. Mr. Huggins' discovery that comets have gaseous
nuclei, (so far as the two he has yet examined show) may suggest the
speculation that in the Orion nebula we see a vast system of comets
travelling in extensive orbits around nuclear stars, and so slowly as to
exhibit for long intervals of time an unchanged figure. "But of such
speculations" we may say with Sir J. Herschel "there is no end."

To return to our telescopic observations:--The trapezium affords a
useful test for the light-gathering power of the telescope. Large
instruments exhibit nine stars. But our observer may be well satisfied
with his instrument and his eye-sight if he can see five with a
3-1/2-inch aperture.[3] A good 3-inch glass shows four distinctly. But
with smaller apertures only three are visible.

The whole neighbourhood of the great nebula will well repay research.
The observer may sweep over it carefully on any dark night with profit.
Above the nebula is the star-cluster 362 H. The star [iota] (double as
shown in Plate 3) below the nebula is involved in a strong nebulosity.
And in searching over this region we meet with delicate double, triple,
and multiple stars, which make the survey interesting with almost any
power that may be applied.

Above the nebula is the star [sigma], a multiple star. To an observer
with a good 3-1/2-inch glass [sigma] appears as an octuple star. It is
well seen, however, as a fine multiple star with a smaller aperture.
Some of the stars of this group appear to be variable.

The star [rho] Orionis is an unequal, easy double, the components being
separated by nearly seven seconds. The primary is orange, the smaller
star smalt-blue (see Plate 3).

The middle star of the belt ([epsilon]) has a distant blue companion.
This star, like [iota], is nebulous. In fact, the whole region within
the triangle formed by stars [gamma], [kappa] and [beta] is full of
nebulous double and multiple stars, whose aggregation in this region I
do not consider wholly accidental.

We have not explored half the wealth of Orion, but leave much for future
observation. We must turn, however, to other constellations.

Below Orion is Lepus, the Hare, a small constellation containing some
remarkable doubles. Among these we may note [xi], a white star with a
scarlet companion; [gamma], a yellow and garnet double; and [iota], a
double star, white and pale violet, with a distant red companion. The
star [kappa] Leporis is a rather close double, white with a small green
companion. The intensely red star R Leporis (a variable) will be found
in the position indicated in the map.

Still keeping within the boundary of our map, we may next turn to the
fine cluster 2 H (vii.) in Monoceros. This cluster is visible to the
naked eye, and will be easily found. The nebula 2 H (iv.) is a
remarkable one with a powerful telescope.

The star 11 Monocerotis is a fine triple star described by the elder
Herschel as one of the finest sights in the heavens. Our observer,
however, will see it as a double (see Plate 3). [delta] Monocerotis is
an easy double, yellow and lavender.

We may now leave the region covered by the map and take a survey of the
heavens for some objects well seen at this season.

Towards the south-east, high up above the horizon, we see the twin-stars
Castor and Pollux. The upper is Castor, the finest double star visible
in the northern heavens. The components are nearly equal and rather more
than 5" apart (see Plate 3). Both are white according to the best
observers, but the smaller is thought by some to be slightly greenish.

Pollux is a coarse but fine triple star (in large instruments multiple).
The components orange, grey, and lilac.

There are many other fine objects in Gemini, but we pass to Cancer.

The fine cluster Praesepe in Cancer may easily be found as it is
distinctly visible to the naked eye in the position shown in Plate 1,
Map I. In the telescope it is seen as shown in Plate 3.

The star [iota] Cancri is a wide double, the colours orange and blue.

Procyon, the first-magnitude star between Praesepe and Sirius, is finely
coloured--yellow with a distant orange companion, which appears to be
variable.

Below the Twins, almost in a line with them, is the star [alpha] Hydrae,
called Al Fard, or "the Solitary One." It is a 2nd magnitude variable. I
mention it, however, not on its own account, but as a guide to the fine
double [epsilon] Hydrae. This star is the middle one of a group of three,
lying between Pollux and Al Fard rather nearer the latter. The
components of [epsilon] Hydrae are separated by about 3-1/2" (see Plate
3). The primary is of the fourth, the companion of the eighth magnitude;
the former is yellow, the latter a ruddy purple. The period of [epsilon]
Hydrae is about 450 years.

The constellation Leo Minor, now due east and about midway between the
horizon and the zenith, is well worth sweeping over. It contains several
fine fields.

Let us next turn to the western heavens. Here there are some noteworthy
objects.

To begin with, there are the Pleiades, showing to the naked eye only six
or seven stars. In the telescope the Pleiades appear as shown in Plate
3.

The Hyades also show some fine fields with low powers.

Aldebaran, the principal star of the Hyades, as also of the
constellation Taurus, is a noted red star. It is chiefly remarkable for
the close spectroscopic analysis to which it has been subjected by
Messrs. Huggins and Miller. Unlike Betelgeuse, the spectrum of Aldebaran
exhibits the lines corresponding to hydrogen, and no less than eight
metals--sodium, magnesium, calcium, iron, bismuth, tellurium, antimony,
and mercury, are proved to exist in the constitution of this brilliant
red star.

On the right of Aldebaran, in the position indicated in Plate 1, Map I.,
are the stars [zeta] and [beta] Tauri. If with a low power the observer
sweep from [zeta] towards [beta], he will soon find--not far from [zeta]
(at a distance of about one-sixth of the distance separating [beta] from
[zeta]), the celebrated Crab nebula, known as 1 M. This was the first
nebula discovered by Messier, and its discovery led to the formation of
his catalogue of 103 nebulae. In a small telescope this object appears as
a nebulous light of oval form, no traces being seen of the wisps and
sprays of light presented in Lord Rosse's well known picture of the
nebula.

Here I shall conclude the labours of our first half-hour among the
stars, noticing that the examination of Plate 1 will show what other
constellations besides those here considered are well situated for
observation at this season. It will be remarked that many constellations
well seen in the third half-hour (Chapter IV.) are favourably seen in
the first also, and _vice versa_. For instance, the constellation Ursa
Major well-placed towards the north-east in the first quarter of the
year, is equally well-placed towards the north-west in the third, and
similarly of the constellation Cassiopeia. The same relation connects
the second and fourth quarters of the year.

[Illustration: PLATE III.]




CHAPTER III.

A HALF-HOUR WITH LYRA, HERCULES, CORVUS, CRATER, ETC.
