asked. "And perhaps say a few words for telecast? This last is most
important; we can't explain too many times the purpose of this
experiment. There is still much hostility, arising from fear that we are
testing a nuclear weapon."

The press and telecast services were well represented; there were close
to a hundred correspondents, from all over South America, from South
Africa and Australia, even one from Ceylon. They had three trucks, with
mobile telecast pickups, and when they saw who was approaching, they
released the two rocketry experts they had been quizzing and pounced on
the new victims.

Was there any possibility that negative-proton matter might be used as a
weapon?

"Anything can be used as a weapon; you could stab a man to death with
that lead pencil you're using," Pitov replied. "But I doubt if
negamatter will ever be so used. We're certainly not working on weapons
design here. We started, six years ago, with the ability to produce
negative protons, reverse-spin neutrons, and positrons, and the
theoretical possibility of assembling them into negamatter. We have just
gotten a fifty kilogramme mass of nega-iron assembled. In those six
years, we had to invent all our techniques, and design all our
equipment. If we'd been insane enough to want to build a nuclear weapon,
after what we went through up North, we could have done so from memory,
and designed a better--which is to say a worse--one from memory in a few
days."

"Yes, and building a negamatter bomb for military purposes would be like
digging a fifty foot shaft to get a rock to bash somebody's head in,
when you could do the job better with the shovel you're digging with,"
Richardson added. "The time, money, energy and work we put in on this
thing would be ample to construct twenty thermonuclear bombs. And that's
only a small part of it." He went on to tell them about the magnetic
bottle inside the rocket's warhead, mentioning how much electric current
was needed to keep up the magnetic field that insulated the negamatter
from contact with posimatter.

"Then what was the purpose of this experiment, Doctor Richardson?"

"Oh, we were just trying to find out a few basic facts about natural
structure. Long ago, it was realized that the nucleonic
particles--protons, neutrons, mesons and so on--must have structure of
their own. Since we started constructing negative-proton matter, we've
found out a few things about nucleonic structure. Some rather odd
things, including fractions of Planck's constant."

A couple of the correspondents--a man from La Prensa, and an
Australian--whistled softly. The others looked blank. Pitov took over:

"You see, gentlemen, most of what we learned, we learned from putting
negamatter atoms together. We annihilated a few of them--over there in
that little concrete building, we have one of the most massive steel
vaults in the world, where we do that--but we assembled millions of them
for every one we annihilated, and that chunk of nega-iron inside the
magnetic bottle kept growing. And when you have a piece of negamatter
you don't want, you can't just throw it out on the scrap-pile. We might
have rocketed it into escape velocity and let it blow up in space, away
from the Moon or any of the artificial satellites, but why waste it? So
we're going to have the rocket eject it, and when it falls, we can see,
by our telemetered instruments, just what happens."

"Well, won't it be annihilated by contact with atmosphere?" somebody
asked.

"That's one of the things we want to find out," Pitov said. "We estimate
about twenty percent loss from contact with atmosphere, but the mass
that actually lands on the target area should be about forty kilos. It
should be something of a spectacle, coming down."

"You say you had to assemble it, after creating the negative protons and
neutrons and the positrons. Doesn't any of this sort of matter exist in
nature?"

The man who asked that knew better himself. He just wanted the answer on
the record.

"Oh no; not on this planet, and probably not in the Galaxy. There may be
whole galaxies composed of nothing but negamatter. There may even be
isolated stars and planetary systems inside our Galaxy composed of
negamatter, though I think that very improbable. But when negamatter and
posimatter come into contact with one another, the result is immediate
mutual annihilation."

They managed to get away from the press, and returned as far as the
bunkers, a mile and a half away. Before they went inside, Richardson
glanced up at the sky, fixing the location of a few of the more
conspicuous stars in his mind. There were almost a hundred men and women
inside, each at his or her instruments--view-screens, radar indicators,
detection instruments of a dozen kinds. The reporters and telecast
people arrived shortly afterward, and Eugenio Galvez took them in tow.
While Richardson and Pitov were making their last-minute rounds, the
countdown progressed past minus one hour, and at minus twenty minutes
