and that is this: the harbor-master has taken to hanging around my
cove, and he is attracted by my nurse! I won't have it! I'll blow his
fishy gills out of his head if I ever get a shot at him! I don't care
whether it's homicide or not--anyway, it's a new kind of murder and it
attracts me!"

I gazed at him incredulously, but he was working himself into a
passion, and I did not choose to say what I thought.

"Yes, this slate-colored thing with gills goes purring and grinning
and spitting about after my nurse--when she walks, when she rows, when
she sits on the beach! Gad! It drives me nearly frantic. I won't
tolerate it, I tell you!"

"No," said I, "I wouldn't either." And I rolled over in bed convulsed
with laughter.

The next moment I heard my door slam. I smothered my mirth and rose to
close the window, for the land-wind blew cold from the forest, and a
drizzle was sweeping the carpet as far as my bed.

That luminous glare which sometimes lingers after the stars go out,
threw a trembling, nebulous radiance over sand and cove. I heard the
seething currents under the breakers' softened thunder--louder than I
ever heard it. Then, as I closed my window, lingering for a last look
at the crawling tide, I saw a man standing, ankle-deep, in the surf,
all alone there in the night. But--was it a man? For the figure
suddenly began running over the beach on all fours like a beetle,
waving its limbs like feelers. Before I could throw open the window
again it darted into the surf, and, when I leaned out into the
chilling drizzle, I saw nothing save the flat ebb crawling on the
coast--I heard nothing save the purring of bubbles on seething sands.




V


It took me a week to perfect my arrangements for transporting the
great auks, by water, to Port-of-Waves, where a lumber schooner was to
be sent from Petite Sainte Isole, chartered by me for a voyage to New
York.

I had constructed a cage made of osiers, in which my auks were to
squat until they arrived at Bronx Park. My telegrams to Professor
Farrago were brief. One merely said "Victory!" Another explained that
I wanted no assistance; and a third read: "Schooner chartered. Arrive
New York July 1st. Send furniture-van to foot of Bluff Street."

My week as a guest of Mr. Halyard proved interesting. I wrangled with
that invalid to his heart's content, I worked all day on my osier
cage, I hunted the thimble in the moonlight with the pretty nurse. We
sometimes found it.

As for the thing they called the harbor-master, I saw it a dozen
times, but always either at night or so far away and so close to the
sea that of course no trace of it remained when I reached the spot,
rifle in hand.

I had quite made up my mind that the so-called harbor-master was a
demented darky--wandered from, Heaven knows where--perhaps shipwrecked
and gone mad from his sufferings. Still, it was far from pleasant to
know that the creature was strongly attracted by the pretty nurse.

She, however, persisted in regarding the harbor-master as a
sea-creature; she earnestly affirmed that it had gills, like a fish's
gills, that it had a soft, fleshy hole for a mouth, and its eyes were
luminous and lidless and fixed.

"Besides," she said, with a shudder, "it's all slate color, like a
porpoise, and it looks as wet as a sheet of india-rubber in a
dissecting-room."

The day before I was to set sail with my auks in a cat-boat bound for
Port-of-Waves, Halyard trundled up to me in his chair and announced
his intention of going with me.

"Going where?" I asked.

"To Port-of-Waves and then to New York," he replied, tranquilly.

I was doubtful, and my lack of cordiality hurt his feelings.

"Oh, of course, if you need the sea-voyage--" I began.

"I don't; I need you," he said, savagely; "I need the stimulus of our
daily quarrel. I never disagreed so pleasantly with anybody in my
life; it agrees with me; I am a hundred per cent. better than I was
last week."

I was inclined to resent this, but something in the deep-lined face of
the invalid softened me. Besides, I had taken a hearty liking to the
old pig.

"I don't want any mawkish sentiment about it," he said, observing me
closely; "I won't permit anybody to feel sorry for me--do you
understand?"

"I'll trouble you to use a different tone in addressing me," I
replied, hotly; "I'll feel sorry for you if I choose to!" And our
usual quarrel proceeded, to his deep satisfaction.

By six o'clock next evening I had Halyard's luggage stowed away in the
cat-boat, and the pretty nurse's effects corded down, with the newly
hatched auk-chicks in a hat-box on top. She and I placed the osier
cage aboard, securing it firmly, and then, throwing tablecloths over
the auks' heads, we led those simple and dignified birds down the path
and across the plank at the little wooden pier. Together we locked up
the house, while Halyard stormed at us both and wheeled himself
furiously up and down the beach below. At the last moment she forgot
her thimble. But we found it, I forget where.

"Come on!" shouted Halyard, waving his shawls furiously; "what the
devil are you about up there?"

He received our explanation with a sniff, and we trundled him aboard
without further ceremony.

"Don't run me across the plank like a steamer trunk!" he shouted, as I
shot him dexterously into the cock-pit. But the wind was dying away,
and I had no time to dispute with him then.

The sun was setting above the pine-clad ridge as our sail flapped and
partly filled, and I cast off, and began a long tack, east by south,
to avoid the spouting rocks on our starboard bow.

The sea-birds rose in clouds as we swung across the shoal, the black
surf-ducks scuttered out to sea, the gulls tossed their sun-tipped
wings in the ocean, riding the rollers like bits of froth.

Already we were sailing slowly out across that great hole in the
ocean, five miles deep, the most profound sounding ever taken in the
Atlantic. The presence of great heights or great depths, seen or
unseen, always impresses the human mind--perhaps oppresses it. We were
very silent; the sunlight stain on cliff and beach deepened to
crimson, then faded into sombre purple bloom that lingered long after
the rose-tint died out in the zenith.

Our progress was slow; at times, although the sail filled with the
rising land breeze, we scarcely seemed to move at all.

"Of course," said the pretty nurse, "we couldn't be aground in the
deepest hole in the Atlantic."

"Scarcely," said Halyard, sarcastically, "unless we're grounded on a
whale."

"What's that soft thumping?" I asked. "Have we run afoul of a barrel
or log?"

It was almost too dark to see, but I leaned over the rail and swept
the water with my hand.

Instantly something smooth glided under it, like the back of a great
fish, and I jerked my hand back to the tiller. At the same moment the
whole surface of the water seemed to begin to purr, with a sound like
the breaking of froth in a champagne-glass.

"What's the matter with you?" asked Halyard, sharply.

"A fish came up under my hand," I said; "a porpoise or something--"

With a low cry, the pretty nurse clasped my arm in both her hands.

"Listen!" she whispered. "It's purring around the boat."

"What the devil's purring?" shouted Halyard. "I won't have anything
purring around me!"

At that moment, to my amazement, I saw that the boat had stopped
entirely, although the sail was full and the small pennant fluttered
from the mast-head. Something, too, was tugging at the rudder,
twisting and jerking it until the tiller strained and creaked in my
hand. All at once it snapped; the tiller swung useless and the boat
whirled around, heeling in the stiffening wind, and drove shoreward.

It was then that I, ducking to escape the boom, caught a glimpse of
something ahead--something that a sudden wave seemed to toss on deck
and leave there, wet and flapping--a man with round, fixed, fishy
eyes, and soft, slaty skin.

But the horror of the thing were the two gills that swelled and
relaxed spasmodically, emitting a rasping, purring sound--two gasping,
blood-red gills, all fluted and scolloped and distended.

Frozen with amazement and repugnance, I stared at the creature; I felt
the hair stirring on my head and the icy sweat on my forehead.

"It's the harbor-master!" screamed Halyard.

The harbor-master had gathered himself into a wet lump, squatting
motionless in the bows under the mast; his lidless eyes were
phosphorescent, like the eyes of living codfish. After a while I felt
that either fright or disgust was going to strangle me where I sat,
but it was only the arms of the pretty nurse clasped around me in a
frenzy of terror.

There was not a fire-arm aboard that we could get at. Halyard's hand
crept backward where a steel-shod boat-hook lay, and I also made a
clutch at it. The next moment I had it in my hand, and staggered
forward, but the boat was already tumbling shoreward among the
breakers, and the next I knew the harbor-master ran at me like a
colossal rat, just as the boat rolled over and over through the surf,
spilling freight and passengers among the sea-weed-covered rocks.

When I came to myself I was thrashing about knee-deep in a rocky pool,
blinded by the water and half suffocated, while under my feet, like a
stranded porpoise, the harbor-master made the water boil in his
efforts to upset me. But his limbs seemed soft and boneless; he had no
nails, no teeth, and he bounced and thumped and flapped and splashed
like a fish, while I rained blows on him with the boat-hook that
sounded like blows on a football. And all the while his gills were
blowing out and frothing, and purring, and his lidless eyes looked
into mine, until, nauseated and trembling, I dragged myself back to
the beach, where already the pretty nurse alternately wrung her hands
and her petticoats in ornamental despair.

Beyond the cove, Halyard was bobbing up and down, afloat in his
invalid's chair, trying to steer shoreward. He was the maddest man I
ever saw.

"Have you killed that rubber-headed thing yet?" he roared.

"I can't kill it," I shouted, breathlessly. "I might as well try to
kill a football!"

"Can't you punch a hole in it?" he bawled. "If I can only get at
him--"

His words were drowned in a thunderous splashing, a roar of great,
broad flippers beating the sea, and I saw the gigantic forms of my two
great auks, followed by their chicks, blundering past in a shower of
spray, driving headlong out into the ocean.

"Oh, Lord!" I said. "I can't stand that," and, for the first time in
my life, I fainted peacefully--and appropriately--at the feet of the
pretty nurse.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is within the range of possibility that this story may be doubted.
It doesn't matter; nothing can add to the despair of a man who has
lost two great auks.

As for Halyard, nothing affects him--except his involuntary sea-bath,
and that did him so much good that he writes me from the South that
he's going on a walking-tour through Switzerland--if I'll join him. I
might have joined him if he had not married the pretty nurse. I wonder
whether--But, of course, this is no place for speculation.

In regard to the harbor-master, you may believe it or not, as you
choose. But if you hear of any great auks being found, kindly throw a
table-cloth over their heads and notify the authorities at the new
Zoological Gardens in Bronx Park, New York. The reward is ten thousand
dollars.




VI


Before I proceed any further, common decency requires me to reassure
my readers concerning my intentions, which, Heaven knows, are far from
flippant.

To separate fact from fancy has always been difficult for me, but now
that I have had the honor to be chosen secretary of the Zoological
Gardens in Bronx Park, I realize keenly that unless I give up writing
fiction nobody will believe what I write about science. Therefore it
is to a serious and unimaginative public that I shall hereafter
address myself; and I do it in the modest confidence that I shall
neither be distrusted nor doubted, although unfortunately I still
write in that irrational style which suggests covert frivolity, and
for which I am undergoing a course of treatment in English literature
at Columbia College. Now, having promised to avoid originality and
confine myself to facts, I shall tell what I have to tell concerning
the dingue, the mammoth, and--something else.

For some weeks it had been rumored that Professor Farrago, president
of the Bronx Park Zoological Society, would resign, to accept an
enormous salary as manager of Barnum & Bailey's circus. He was now
with the circus in London, and had promised to cable his decision
before the day was over.

I hoped he would decide to remain with us. I was his secretary and
particular favorite, and I viewed, without enthusiasm, the advent of a
new president, who might shake us all out of our congenial and
carefully excavated ruts. However, it was plain that the trustees of
the society expected the resignation of Professor Farrago, for they
had been in secret session all day, considering the names of possible
candidates to fill Professor Farrago's large, old-fashioned shoes.
These preparations worried me, for I could scarcely expect another
chief as kind and considerate as Professor Leonidas Farrago.

That afternoon in June I left my office in the Administration Building
in Bronx Park and strolled out under the trees for a breath of air.
But the heat of the sun soon drove me to seek shelter under a little
square arbor, a shady retreat covered with purple wistaria and
honeysuckle. As I entered the arbor I noticed that there were three
other people seated there--an elderly lady with masculine features and
short hair, a younger lady sitting beside her, and, farther away, a
rough-looking young man reading a book.

For a moment I had an indistinct impression of having met the elder
lady somewhere, and under circumstances not entirely agreeable, but
beyond a stony and indifferent glance she paid no attention to me. As
for the younger lady, she did not look at me at all. She was very
young, with pretty eyes, a mass of silky brown hair, and a skin as
fresh as a rose which had just been rained on.

With that delicacy peculiar to lonely scientific bachelors, I modestly
sat down beside the rough young man, although there was more room
beside the younger lady. "Some lazy loafer reading a penny dreadful,"
I thought, glancing at him, then at the title of his book. Hearing me
beside him, he turned around and blinked over his shabby shoulder, and
the movement uncovered the page he had been silently conning. The
volume in his hands was Darwin's famous monograph on the monodactyl.

He noticed the astonishment on my face and smiled uneasily, shifting
the short clay pipe in his mouth.

"I guess," he observed, "that this here book is too much for me,
mister."

"It's rather technical," I replied, smiling.

"Yes," he said, in vague admiration; "it's fierce, ain't it?"

After a silence I asked him if he would tell me why he had chosen
Darwin as a literary pastime.

"Well," he said, placidly, "I was tryin' to read about annermals, but
I'm up against a word-slinger this time all right. Now here's a
gum-twister," and he painfully spelled out m-o-n-o-d-a-c-t-y-l,
breathing hard all the while.

"Monodactyl," I said, "means a single-toed creature."

He turned the page with alacrity. "Is that the beast he's talkin'
