
A warning buzzer rasped in Benson's brain. He nodded, poker-faced.

"I can see that," he agreed. "You wouldn't dare do anything to change
the past. That was always one of the favorite paradoxes in time-travel
fiction.... Well, I think I have the general picture. You have a
dictator who is tyrannizing you; you want to get rid of him; you can't
kill him yourselves. I'm opposed to dictators, myself; that--and the
Selective Service law, of course--was why I was a soldier. I have no
moral or psychological taboos against killing dictators, or anybody
else. Suppose I cooperate with you; what's in it for me?"

There was a long silence. Walter and Carl looked at one another
inquiringly; the others dithered helplessly. It was Carl who answered.

"Your return to your own time and place."

"And if I don't cooperate with you?"

"Guess when and where else we could send you," Walter said.

Benson dropped his cigarette and tramped it.

"Exactly the same time and place?" he asked.

"Well, the structure of space-time demands...." Paula began.

"The spatio-temporal displacement field is capable of identifying that
spot--" Gregory pointed to a ten-foot circle in front of a bank of
sleek-cabineted, dial-studded machines "--with any set of space-time
coordinates in the universe. However, to avoid disruption of the
structure of space-time, we must return you to approximately the same
point in space-time."

Benson nodded again, this time at the confirmation of his earlier
suspicion. Well, while he was alive, he still had a chance.

"All right; tell me exactly what you want me to do."

       *       *       *       *       *

A third outbreak of bedlam, this time of relief and frantic explanation.

"Shut up, all of you!" For so thin a man, Carl had an astonishing voice.
"I worked this out, so let me tell it." He turned to Benson. "Maybe I'm
tougher than the rest of them, or maybe I'm not as deeply conditioned.
For one thing, I'm tone-deaf. Well, here's the way it is. Gregory can
set the machine to function automatically. You stand where he shows you,
press the button he shows you, and fifteen seconds later it'll take you
forward in time five seconds and about a kilometer in space, to The
Guide's office. He'll be at his desk now. You'll have forty-five seconds
to do the job, from the time the field collapses around you till it
rebuilds. Then you'll be taken back to your own time again. The whole
thing's automatic."

"Can do," Benson agreed. "How do I kill him?"

"I'm getting sick!" Paula murmured weakly. Her face was whiter than her
gown.

"Take care of her, Samuel. Both of you'd better get out of here,"
Gregory said.

"The Lord of Hosts is my strength, He will.... Uggggh!" Samuel gasped.

"Conditioning's getting him, too; we gotta be quick," Carl said. "Here.
This is what you'll use." He handed Benson a two-inch globe of black
plastic. "Take the damn thing, quick! Little button on the side; press
it, and get it out of your hand fast...." He retched. "Limited-effect
bomb; everything within two-meter circle burned to nothing; outside
that, great but not unendurable heat. Shut your eyes when you throw it.
Flash almost blinding." He dropped his cigar and turned almost green in
the face. Walter had a drink poured and handed it to him. "Uggh! Thanks,
Walter." He downed it.

"Peculiar sort of thing for a non-violent people to manufacture," Benson
said, looking at the bomb and then putting it in his jacket pocket.

"It isn't a weapon. Industrial; we use it in mining. I used plenty of
them, in Walter's iron mines."

He nodded again. "Where do I stand, now?" he asked.

"Right over here." Gregory placed him in front of a small panel with
three buttons. "Press the middle one, and step back into the small red
circle and stand perfectly still while the field builds up and
collapses. Face that way."

       *       *       *       *       *

Benson drew his pistol and checked it; magazine full, a round in the
chamber, safety on.

"Put that horrid thing out of sight!" Anthony gasped. "The ... the other
thing ... is what you want to use."

"The bomb won't be any good if some of his guards come in before the
field re-builds," Benson said.

"He has no guards. He lives absolutely alone. We told you...."

"I know you did. You probably believed it, too. I don't. And by the way,
you're sending me forward. What do you do about the fact that a
time-jump seems to make me pass out?"

"Here. Before you press the button, swallow it." Gregory gave him a
small blue pill.

"Well, I guess that's all there is," Gregory continued. "I hope...." His
face twitched, and he dropped to the floor with a thud. Carl and Walter
came forward, dragged him away from the machine.

"Conditioning got him. Getting me, too," Walter said. "Hurry up, man!"

Benson swallowed the pill, pressed the button and stepped back into the
red circle, drawing his pistol and snapping off the safety. The blue
mist closed in on him.

       *       *       *       *       *

This time, however, it did not thicken into blackness. It became
luminous, brightening to a dazzle and dimming again to a colored mist,
and then it cleared, while Benson stood at raise pistol, as though on a
target range. He was facing a big desk at twenty feet, across a
thick-piled blue rug. There was a man seated at the desk, a white-haired
man with a mustache and a small beard, who wore a loose coat of some
glossy plum-brown fabric, and a vividly blue neck-scarf.

The pistol centered on the v-shaped blue under his chin. Deliberately,
Benson squeezed, recovered from the recoil, aimed, fired, recovered,
aimed, fired. Five seconds gone. The old man slumped across the desk,
his arms extended. Better make a good job of it, six, seven, eight
seconds; he stepped forward to the edge of the desk, call that fifteen
seconds, and put the muzzle to the top of the man's head, firing again
and snapping on the safety. There had been something familiar about The
Guide's face, but it was too late to check on that, now. There wasn't
any face left; not even much head.

A box, on the desk, caught Benson's eye, a cardboard box with an
envelope, stamped _Top Secret! For the Guide Only!_ taped to it. He
holstered his pistol and caught that up, stuffing it into his pocket, in
obedience to an instinct to grab anything that looked like intelligence
matter while in the enemy's country. Then he stepped back to the spot
where the field had deposited him. He had ten seconds to spare; somebody
was banging on a door when the blue mist began to gather around him.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was crouching, the spherical plastic object in his right hand, his
thumb over the button, when the field collapsed. Sure enough, right in
front of him, so close that he could smell the very heat of it, was the
big tank with the red star on its turret. He cursed the sextet of
sanctimonious double-crossers eight thousand miles and fifty years away
in space-time. The machine guns had stopped--probably because they
couldn't be depressed far enough to aim at him, now; that was a
notorious fault of some of the newer Pan-Soviet tanks--and he rocked
back on his heels, pressed the button, and heaved, closing his eyes. As
the thing left his fingers, he knew that he had thrown too hard. His
muscles, accustomed to the heavier cast-iron grenades of his experience,
had betrayed him. For a moment, he was closer to despair than at any
other time in the whole phantasmagoric adventure. Then he was hit, with
physical violence, by a wave of almost solid heat. It didn't smell like
the heat of the tank's engines; it smelled like molten metal, with
undertones of burned flesh. Immediately, there was a multiple explosion
that threw him flat, as the tank's ammunition went up. There were no
screams. It was too fast for that. He opened his eyes.

The turret and top armor of the tank had vanished. The two massive
treads had been toppled over, one to either side. The body had collapsed
between them, and it was running sticky trickles of molten metal. He
blinked, rubbed his eyes on the back of his hand, and looked again. Of
all the many blasted and burned-out tanks, Soviet and UN, that he had
seen, this was the most completely wrecked thing in his experience. And
he'd done that with one grenade....

