glances of surprise. Loudons dropped his hand to the grip of his slung
auto-carbine, and Altamont sidled unobtrusively away from him, his
hand moving as by accident toward the butt of his pistol. The same
thought was in both men's minds, that these people might feel, as a
heritage of the war of two centuries ago, a hostility to science and
scientists. There was no hostility, however, in their manner as the
old man advanced and held out his hand.

"I am Tenant Mycroft Jones, the Toon Leader here," he said. "This is
Stamford Rawson, our Reader, and Verner Hughes, our Toon Sarge. This
is his son, Murray Hughes, the Toon Sarge of the Irregulars. But come
into the Aitch-Cue House, gentlemen. We have much to talk about."

       *       *       *       *       *

By this time, the villagers had begun to emerge from the log cabins
and rubble-walled houses around the plaza and the old church. Some of
them, mostly young men, were carrying rifles, but the majority of them
were unarmed. About half of them were women, in short deerskin or
homespun dresses; there were a number of children, the younger ones
almost completely naked.

"Sarge," the old man told one of the youths, "post a guard over this
flying machine; don't let anybody meddle with it. And have all the
noncoms and techs report here, on the double." He turned and shouted
up at the truncated steeple: "Atherton, sound 'All Clear!'"

A horn, up in the belfry, began blowing, to advise the people who had
run from the fields into the woods that there was no danger.

They went through the open doorway of the old stone church, and
entered the big room inside. The building had evidently been gutted by
fire, two centuries before, and portions of the wall had been
restored. Now there was a rough plank floor, and a plank ceiling at
about twelve feet; the room was apparently used as a community center.
There were a number of benches and chairs, all very neatly made, and
along one wall, out of the way, ten or fifteen long tables had been
stacked, the tops in a pile and the trestles on them. The walls were
decorated with trophies of weapons--a number of old M-12 rifles and
M-16 submachine guns, all in good clean condition, a light machine
rifle, two bazookas. Among them were stone and metal-tipped spears and
crude hatchets and knives and clubs, the work of the wild men of the
woods. A stairway led to the second floor, and it was up this that the
man who bore the title of Toon Leader conducted them, to a small room
furnished with a long table, a number of chairs, and several big
wooden chests bound with iron.

"Sit down, gentlemen," the Toon Leader invited, going to a cupboard
and producing a large bottle stopped with a corncob and a number of
small cups. "It's a little early in the day," he said, "but this is a
very special occasion. You smoke a pipe, I take it?" he asked
Altamont. "Then try some of this; of our own growth and curing." He
extended a doeskin moccasin, which seemed to be the tobacco-container.

Altamont looked at the thing dubiously, then filled his pipe from it.
The oldster drew his pistol, pushed a little wooden plug into the
vent, added some tow to the priming, and, aiming at the wall, snapped
it. Evidently, at times the formality of plugging the vent had been
overlooked; there were a number of holes in the wall there. This time,
however, the pistol didn't go off. He shook out the smoldering tow,
blew it into flame, and lit a candle from it, offering the light to
Altamont. Loudons got out a cigar and lit it from the candle; the
others filled and lighted pipes. The Toon Leader reprimed his pistol,
then holstered it, took off his belt and laid it aside, an example the
others followed.

They drank ceremoniously, and then seated themselves at the table. As
they did, two more men came into the room; they were introduced as
Alexander Barrett, the gunsmith, and Stanley Markovitch, the
distiller.

"You come, then, from the west?" the Toon Leader began by asking.

"Are you from Utah?" the gunsmith interrupted, suspiciously.

"Why, no; we're from Arizona. A place called Fort Ridgeway," Loudons
said.

The others nodded, in the manner of people who wish to conceal
ignorance; it was obvious that none of them had ever heard of Fort
Ridgeway, or Arizona either.

"We've been in what used to be Utah," Altamont said. "There's nobody
there but a few Indians, and a few whites who are even less
civilized."

"You say you come from a fort? Then the wars aren't over, yet?" Sarge
Hughes asked.

"The wars have been over for a long time. You know how terrible they
were. You know how few in all the country were left alive," Loudons
said.

"None that we know of, beside ourselves and the Scowrers until you
came," the Toon Leader said.

"We have found only a few small groups, in the whole country, who have
managed to save anything of the Old Times. Most of them lived in
little villages and cultivated land. A few had horses, or cows. None,
that we have ever found before, made guns and powder for themselves.
But they remembered that they were men, and did not eat one another.
Whenever we find a group of people like this, we try to persuade them
to let us help them."

"Why?" the Toon Leader asked. "Why do you do this for people you've
never met before? What do you want from them--from us--in return for
your help?" He was speaking to Altamont, rather than to Loudons; it
seemed obvious that he believed Altamont to be the leader and Loudons
the subordinate.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Because we're trying to bring back the best things of the Old Times,"
Altamont told him. "Look; you've had troubles, here. So have we, many
times. Years when the crops failed; years of storms, or floods;
troubles with these beast-men in the woods. And you were alone, as we
were, with no one to help. We want to put all men who are still men in
touch with one another, so that they can help each other in trouble,
and work together. If this isn't done soon, everything which makes men
different from beasts will soon be no more."

"He's right. One of us, alone, is helpless," the Reader said. "It is
only in the Toon that there is strength. He wants to organize a Toon
of all Toons."

"That's about it. We are beginning to make helicopters like the one
Loudons and I came here in. We'll furnish your community with one or
more of them. We can give you a radio, so that you can communicate
with other communities. We can give you rifles and machine guns and
ammunition, to fight the ... the Scowrers, did you call them? And we
can give you atomic engines, so that you can build machines for
yourselves."

"Some of our people--Alex Barrett, here, the gunsmith, and Stan
Markovitch, the distiller, and Harrison Grant, the iron worker--get
their living by making things. How'd they make out, after your
machines came in here?" Verner Hughes asked.

"We've thought of that; we had that problem with other groups we've
helped," Loudons said. "In some communities, everybody owns everything
in common; we don't have much of a problem, there. Is that the way you
do it, here?"

"Well, no. If a man makes a thing, or digs it out of the ruins, or
catches it in the woods, it's his."

"Then we'll work out some way. Give the machines to the people who are
already in a trade, or something like that. We'll have to talk it over
with you and with the people who'd be concerned."

"How is it you took so long finding us," Alex Barrett asked. "It's
been two hundred or so years since the Wars."

"Alex! You see but you do not observe!" The Toon Leader rebuked.
"These people have their flying machines, which are highly complicated
mechanisms. They would have to make tools and machines to make them,
and tools and machines to make those tools and machines. They would
have to find materials, often going far in search of them. The marvel
is not that they took so long, but that they did it so quickly."

"That's right," Altamont said. "Originally, Fort Ridgeway was a
military research and development center. As the country became
disorganized, the Government set this project up, to develop ways of
improvising power and transportation and communication methods and
extracting raw materials. If they'd had a little more time, they might
have saved the country. As it was, they were able to keep themselves
alive and keep something like civilization going at the Fort, while
the whole country was breaking apart around them. Then, when the
rockets stopped falling, they started to rebuild. Fortunately, more
than half the technicians at the Fort were women; there was no
