Heldenfeld, to touch Kato Sugihara on the shoulder.

"Come on outside, Kato," he whispered. "I want to talk to you."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Japanese nodded and rose, following him outside onto the roof above
the laboratories. They walked over to the edge and stopped at the
balustrade.

"Kato, when you write up your stuff, I want you to falsify everything
you can. Put it in such form that the data will be absolutely worthless,
but also in such form that nobody, not even Team members, will know it
has been falsified. Can you do that?"

Kato's almond-shaped eyes widened. "Of course I can, Dunc," he replied.
"But why--?"

"I hate to say this, but we have a traitor in the Team. One of those
people back in the dining room is selling us out to the Fourth
Komintern. I know it's not Karen, and I know it's not you, and that's as
much as I do know, now."

The Japanese sucked in his breath in a sharp hiss. "You wouldn't say
that unless you were sure, Dunc," he said.

"No. At about 1000 this morning, Dr. Weissberg, the civilian director,
called me to his office. I found him very much upset. He told me that
General Nayland is accusing us--by which he meant this Team--of
furnishing secret information on our subproject to Komintern agents. He
said that British Intelligence agents at Smolensk had learned that the
Red Triumph laboratories there were working along lines of research
originated at MacLeod Team Center here. They relayed the information to
Western Union Central Intelligence, and WU passed it on to United States
Central Intelligence, and now Counter Espionage is riding Nayland about
it, and he's trying to make us the goat."

"He would love to get some of us shot," Kato said. "And that could
happen. They took a long time getting tough about espionage in this
country, but when Americans get tough about something, they get tough
right. But look here; we handed in our progress-reports to Felix
Weissberg, and he passed them on to Nayland. Couldn't the leak be right
in Nayland's own HQ?"

"That's what I thought, at first," MacLeod replied. "Just wishful
thinking, though. Fact is, I went up to Nayland's HQ and had it out with
him; accused him of just that. I think I threw enough of a scare into
him to hold him for a couple of days. I wanted to know just what it was
the Komintern was supposed to have got from us, but he wouldn't tell me.
That, of course, was classified-stuff."

"Well?"

"Well then, Karen and I got our digestive tracts emptied and went in to
town, where I could use a phone that didn't go through a military
switch-board, and I put through a call to Allan Hartley, President
Hartley's son. He owes us a break, after the work we did in Puerto Rico.
I told him all I wanted was some information to help clear ourselves,
and he told me to wait a half an hour and then call Counter Espionage
Office in Washington and talk to General Hammond."

"Ha! If Allan Hartley's for us, what are we worried about?" Kato asked.
"I always knew he was the power back of Associated Enterprises and his
father was the front-man: I'll bet it's the same with the Government."

"Allan Hartley's for us as long as our nose is clean. If we let it get
dirty, we get it bloodied, too. We have to clean it ourselves," MacLeod
told him. "But here's what Hammond gave me: The Komintern knows all
about our collapsed-matter experiments with zinc, titanium and nickel.
They know about our theoretical work on cosmic rays, including Suzanne's
work up to about a month ago. They know about that effect Sir Neville
and Heym discovered two months ago." He paused. "And they know about the
photon-neutrino-electron interchange."

Kato responded to this with a gruesome double-take that gave his face
the fleeting appearance of an ancient samurai war mask.

"That wasn't included in any report we ever made," he said. "You're
right: the leak comes from inside the Team. It must be Sir Neville, or
Suzanne, or Heym ben-Hillel, or Adam Lowiewski, or Rudolf von
Heldenfeld, or--No! No, I can't believe it could be Farida!" He looked
at MacLeod pleadingly. "You don't think she could have--?"

"No, Kato. The Team's her whole life, even more than it is mine. She
came with us when she was only twelve, and grew up with us. She doesn't
know any other life than this, and wouldn't want any other. It has to be
one of the other five."

"Well, there's Suzanne," Kato began. "She had to clear out of France
because of political activities, after the collapse of the Fourth
Republic and the establishment of the Rightist Directoire in '57. And
she worked with Joliot-Curie, and she was at the University of Louvain
in the early '50s, when that place was crawling with Commies."

"And that brings us to Sir Neville," MacLeod added. "He dabbles in
spiritualism; he and Suzanne do planchette-seances. A planchette can be
manipulated. Maybe Suzanne produced a communication advising Sir Neville
to help the Komintern."

"Could be. Then, how about Lowiewski? He's a Pole who can't go back to
Poland, and Poland's a Komintern country." Kato pointed out. "Maybe he'd
sell us out for amnesty, though why he'd want to go back there, the way
things are now--?"

"His vanity. You know, missionary-school native going back to the
village wearing real pants, to show off to the savages. Used to be a
standing joke, down where I came from." MacLeod thought for a moment.
"And Rudolf: he's always had a poor view of the democratic system of
government. He might feel more at home with the Komintern. Of course,
the Ruskis killed his parents in 1945--"

"So what?" Kato retorted. "The Americans killed my father in 1942, but
I'm not making an issue out of it. That was another war; Japan's a
Western Union country, now. So's Germany----How about Heym, by the way?
Remember when the Komintern wanted us to come to Russia and do the same
work we're doing here?"

"I remember that after we turned them down, somebody tried to kidnap
Karen," MacLeod said grimly. "I remember a couple of Russians got rather
suddenly dead trying it, too."

"I wasn't thinking of that. I was thinking of our round-table argument
when the proposition was considered. Heym was in favor of accepting. Now
that, I would say, indicates either Communist sympathies or an
overtrusting nature," Kato submitted. "And a lot of grade-A traitors
have been made out of people with trusting natures."

MacLeod got out his pipe and lit it. For a long time, he stared out
across the mountain-ringed vista of sagebrush, dotted at wide intervals
with the bulks of research-centers and the red roofs of the villages.

"Kato, I think I know how we're going to find out which one it is," he
said. "First of all, you write up your data, and falsify it so that it
won't do any damage if it gets into Komintern hands. And then--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day started in an atmosphere of suppressed excitement and
anxiety, which, beginning with MacLeod and Karen and Kato Sugihara,
seemed to communicate itself by contagion to everybody in the MacLeod
Team's laboratories. The top researchers and their immediate assistants
and students were the first to catch it; they ascribed the tension under
which their leader and his wife and the Japanese labored to the recent
developments in the collapsed-matter problem. Then, there were about a
