autohypno and recover memories brought back from the future moment
and buried in the subconscious mind."

"That's right," Verkan Vall told him. "And even without the autohypno,
a lot of precognitive matter leaks out of the subconscious and into
the conscious mind, usually in distorted forms, or else inspires
'instinctive' acts, the motivation for which is not brought to the level
of consciousness. For instance, suppose, you're walking along North
Promenade, in Dhergabar, and you come to the Martian Palace Cafe, and
you go in for a drink, and meet some girl, and strike up an acquaintance
with her. This chance acquaintance develops into a love affair, and
a year later, out of jealousy, she rays you half a dozen times with
a needler."

"Just about that happened to a friend of mine, not long ago," the pilot
said. "Go on, sir."

"Well, in the microsecond or so before you die--or afterward, for that
matter, because we know that the extraphysical component survives
physical destruction--your EPC slips back a couple of years, and
re-connects at some point pastward of your first meeting with this
girl, and carries with it memories of everything up to the moment of
detachment, all of which are indelibly recorded in your subconscious
mind. So, when you re-experience the event of standing outside the
Martian Palace with a thirst, you go on to the Starway, or Nhergal's,
or some other bar. In both cases, on both time-lines, you follow the
line of maximum probability; in the second case, your subconscious
future memories are an added causal factor."

"And when I back-slip, after I've been needled, I generate a new
time-line? Is that it?"

Verkan Vall made a small sound of impatience. "No such thing!" he
exclaimed. "It's semantically inadmissible to talk about the total
presence of time with one breath and about generating new time-lines
with the next. _All_ time-lines are totally present, in perpetual
co-existence. The theory is that the EPC passes from one moment, on one
time-line, to the next moment on the next line, so that the true passage
of the EPC from moment to moment is a two-dimensional diagonal. So, in
the case we're using, the event of your going into the Martian Palace
exists on one time-line, and the event of your passing along to the
Starway exists on another, but both are events in real existence.

"Now, what we do, in paratime transposition, is to build up a
hypertemporal field to include the time-line we want to reach, and then
shift over to it. Same point in the plenum; same point in primary
time--plus primary time elapsed during mechanical and electronic lag
in the relays--but a different line of secondary time."

"Then why don't we have past-future time travel on our own time-line?"
the pilot wanted to know.

That was a question every paratimer has to answer, every time he talks
paratime to the laity. Verkan Vall had been expecting it; he answered
patiently.

"The Ghaldron-Hesthor field-generator is like every other mechanism; it
can operate only in the area of primary time in which it exists. It can
transpose to any other time-line, and carry with it anything inside its
field, but it can't go outside its own temporal area of existence, any
more than a bullet from that rifle can hit the target a week before it's
fired," Verkan Vall pointed out. "Anything inside the field is supposed
to be unaffected by anything outside. _Supposed to be_ is the way to put
it; it doesn't always work. Once in a while, something pretty nasty gets
picked up in transit." He thought, briefly, of the man in the black
tunic. "That's why we have armed guards at terminals."

"Suppose you pick up a blast from a nucleonic bomb," the pilot asked,
"or something red-hot, or radioactive?"

"We have a monument, at Paratime Police Headquarters, in Dhergabar,
bearing the names of our own personnel who didn't make it back. It's a
large monument; over the past ten thousand years, it's been inscribed
with quite a few names."

"You can have it; I'll stick to rockets!" the pilot replied. "Tell me
another thing, though: What's all this about levels, and sectors, and
belts? What's the difference?"

"Purely arbitrary terms. There are five main probability levels, derived
from the five possible outcomes of the attempt to colonize this planet,
seventy-five thousand years ago. We're on the First Level--complete
success, and colony fully established. The Fifth Level is the
probability of complete failure--no human population established on this
planet, and indigenous quasi-human life evolved indigenously. On the
Fourth Level, the colonists evidently met with some disaster and lost
all memory of their extraterrestrial origin, as well as all
extraterrestrial culture. As far as they know, they are an indigenous
race; they have a long pre-history of stone-age savagery.

"Sectors are areas of paratime on any level in which the prevalent
culture has a common origin and common characteristics. They are divided
more or less arbitrarily into sub-sectors. Belts are areas within
sub-sectors where conditions are the result of recent alternate
probabilities. For instance, I've just come from the Europo-American
Sector of the Fourth Level, an area of about ten thousand parayears in
depth, in which the dominant civilization developed on the North-West
Continent of the Major Land Mass, and spread from there to the Minor
Land Mass. The line on which I was operating is also part of a
sub-sector of about three thousand parayears' depth, and a belt
developing from one of several probable outcomes of a war concluded
about three elapsed years ago. On that time-line, the field at the
Hagraban Synthetics Works, where we took off, is part of an abandoned
farm; on the site of Hagraban City is a little farming village. Those
things are there, right now, both in primary time and in the plenum.
They are about two hundred and fifty thousand parayears perpendicular
to each other, and each is of the same general order of reality."

The red light overhead flashed on. The pilot looked into his visor and
put his hands to the manual controls, in case of failure of the robot
controls. The rocket landed smoothly, however; there was a slight jar
as it was grappled by the crane and hoisted upright, the seats turning
in their gimbals. Pilot and passenger unstrapped themselves and hurried
through the refrigerated outlet and away from the glowing-hot rocket.

       *       *       *       *       *

An air-taxi, emblazoned with the device of the Paratime Police, was
waiting. Verkan Vall said good-by to the rocket-pilot and took his seat
beside the pilot of the aircab; the latter lifted his vehicle above the
building level and then set it down on the landing-stage of the Paratime
Police Building in a long, side-swooping glide. An express elevator took
Verkan Vall down to one of the middle stages, where he showed his sigil
to the guard outside the door of Tortha Karf's office and was admitted
at once.

The Paratime Police chief rose from behind his semicircular desk, with
its array of keyboards and viewing-screens and communicators. He was a
big man, well past his two hundredth year; his hair was iron-gray and
thinning in front, he had begun to grow thick at the waist, and his calm
features bore the lines of middle age. He wore the dark-green uniform
of the Paratime Police.

"Well, Vall," he greeted. "Everything secure?"

"Not exactly, sir." Verkan Vall came around the desk, deposited his
rifle and bag on the floor, and sat down in one of the spare chairs.
"I'll have to go back again."

"So?" His chief lit a cigarette and waited.

"I traced Gavran Sarn." Verkan Vall got out his pipe and began to fill
it. "But that's only the beginning. I have to trace something else.
Gavran Sarn exceeded his Paratime permit, and took one of his pets
along. A Venusian nighthound."

Tortha Karf's expression did not alter; it merely grew more intense.
He used one of the short, semantically ugly terms which serve, in place
of profanity, as the emotional release of a race that has forgotten all
the taboos and terminologies of supernaturalistic religion and
sex-inhibition.

"You're sure of this, of course." It was less a question than
a statement.

Verkan Vall bent and took cloth-wrapped objects from his bag, unwrapping
them and laying them on the desk. They were casts, in hard black
plastic, of the footprints of some large three-toed animal.

"What do these look like, sir?" he asked.

Tortha Karf fingered them and nodded. Then he became as visibly angry
as a man of his civilization and culture-level ever permitted himself.

"What does that fool think we have a Paratime Code for?" he demanded.
"It's entirely illegal to transpose any extraterrestrial animal or
object to any time-line on which space-travel is unknown. I don't care
if he is a green-seal thavrad; he'll face charges, when he gets back,
for this!"

"He _was_ a green-seal thavrad," Verkan Vall corrected. "And he won't be
coming back."

"I hope you didn't have to deal summarily with him," Tortha Karf said.
"With his title, and social position, and his family's political
importance, that might make difficulties. Not that it wouldn't be all
right with me, of course, but we never seem to be able to make either
the Management or the public realize the extremities to which we are
forced, at times." He sighed. "We probably never shall."

