"My compliments, Mr. Haljan. I hope you have no strong religious
convictions, else we will make your table here very miserable!"

The third passenger had evidently kept out of the argument. Snap
introduced him as Rance Rankin. An American--a quiet, blond fellow of
thirty-five or forty.

I ordered my breakfast and let the argument go on.

"Won't make me miserable," said Snap. "I love an argument. You said,
Sir Arthur--"

"I mean to say, I think I said too much. Mr. Rankin, you are more
diplomatic."

Rankin laughed. "I am a magician," he said to me. "A theatrical
entertainer. I deal in tricks--how to fool an audience--" His keen,
amused gaze was on Ob Hahn. "This gentleman from Venus and I have too
much in common to argue."

"A nasty one!" the Englishman exclaimed. "By Jove! Really, Mr. Rankin,
you're a bit too cruel!"

I could see we were doomed to have turbulent meals this voyage. I
like to eat in quiet; arguing passengers always annoy me. There were
still three seats vacant at our table; I wondered who would occupy
them. I soon learned the answer--for one seat at least. Rankin said
calmly:

"Where is the little Venus girl this meal?" His glance went to the
empty seat at my right hand. "The Venza, isn't that her name? She and
I are destined for the same theater in Ferrok-Shahn."

So Venza was to sit beside me. It was good news. Ten days of a
religious argument three times a day would be intolerable. But the
cheerful Venza would help.

"She never eats the midday meal," said Snap. "She's on the deck,
having orange juice. I guess it's the old gag about diet, eh?"

My attention wandered about the salon. Most of the seats were
occupied. At the Captain's table I saw the objects of my search:
George Prince and his sister, one on each side of the Captain. I saw
George Prince in the life now as a man who looked hardly twenty-five.
He was at this moment evidently in a gay mood. His clean-cut, handsome
profile, with its poetic dark curls, was turned toward me. There
seemed little of the villain about him.

And I saw Anita Prince now as a dark-haired, black-eyed little beauty,
in feature resembling her brother very strongly. She presently
finished her meal. She rose, with him after her. She was dressed in
Earth-fashion--white blouse and dark jacket, wide, knee-length
trousers of gray, with a red sash her only touch of color. She went
past me, flashed me a smile.

My heart was pounding. I answered her greeting, and met George
Prince's casual gaze. He, too, smiled, as though to signify that his
sister had told him of the service I had done her. Or was his smile an
ironical memory of how he had eluded me this morning when I chased
him?

I gazed after his small white-suited figure as he followed Anita from
the salon. And thinking of her, I prayed that Carter and Halsey might
be wrong. Whatever plotting against the Grantline Expedition might be
going on, I hoped that George Prince was innocent of it. Yet I knew in
my heart it was a futile hope. Prince had been the eavesdropper
outside the radio room. I could not doubt it. But that his sister must
be ignorant of what he was doing, I was sure.

My attention was brought suddenly back to the reality of our table. I
heard Ob Hahn's silky voice. "We passed quite close to the Moon last
night, Mr. Dean."

"Yes," said Snap. "We did, didn't we? Always do--it's a technical
problem of the exigencies of interstellar navigation. Explain it to
them, Gregg. You're an expert."

I waved it away with a laugh. There was a brief silence. I could not
help noticing Sir Arthur Coniston's queer look, and I have never seen
so keen a glance as Rance Rankin shot at me. Were all three people
aware of Grantline's treasure on the Moon? It suddenly seemed so. I
wished fervently at that instant that the ten days of this voyage were
over. Captain Carter was right. Coming back we should have a cordon of
Interplanetary Police aboard.

Sir Arthur broke the awkward silence. "Magnificent sight, the Moon,
from so close--though I was too much afraid of pressure sickness to be
up to see it."

I had nearly finished my hasty meal when another incident shocked me.
The two other passengers at our table came in and took their seats. A
Martian girl and man. The girl had the seat at my left, with the man
beside her. All Martians are tall. The girl was about my own height.
That is, six feet, two inches. The man was seven feet or more. Both
wore the Martian outer robe. The girl flung hers back. Her limbs were
encased in pseudomail. She looked, as all Martians like to look, a
very warlike Amazon. But she was a pretty girl. She smiled at me with
a keen-eyed, direct gaze.

"Mr. Dean said at breakfast that you were big and handsome. You are."

They were brother and sister, these Martians. Snap introduced them as
_Set_ Miko and _Setta_ Moa--the Martian equivalent of Mr. and Miss.

This Miko was, from our Earth standards, a tremendous, brawny giant.
Not spindly, like most Martians, this fellow, for all his seven feet
in height was almost heavy set. He wore a plaited leather jerkin
beneath his robe and knee pants of leather out of which his lower legs
showed as gray, hairy pillars of strength. He had come into the salon
with a swagger, his sword ornament clanking.

"A pleasant voyage so far," he said to me as he started his meal. His
voice had the heavy, throaty rasp characteristic of the Martian. He
spoke perfect English--both Martians and Venus people are by heritage
extraordinary linguists. Miko and his sister Moa, had a touch of
Martian accent, worn almost away by living for some years in Greater
New York.

The shock to me came within a few minutes. Miko, absorbed in attacking
his meal, inadvertently pushed back his robe to bare his forearm. An
instant only, then it dropped to his wrist. But in that instant I had
seen, upon the gray flesh, a thin sear turned red. A very recent
burn--as though a pencil ray of heat had caught his arm.

My mind flung back. Only last night in the city corridor, Snap and I
had been followed by a Martian. I had shot at him with a heat ray: I
thought I had hit him on the arm. Was this the mysterious Martian who
had followed us from Halsey's office?




V


Shortly after that midday meal I encountered Venza sitting on the
starlit deck. I had been in the bow observatory; taken my routine
castings of our position and worked them out. I was, I think, of the
_Planetara's_ officers the most expert handler of the mathematical
calculators. The locating of our position and charting the trajectory
of our course was, under ordinary circumstances, about all I had to
do. And it took only a few minutes every twelve hours.

I had a moment with Carter in the isolation of his chart room.

"This voyage! Gregg, I'm getting like you--too fanciful. We've a normal
group of passengers apparently, but I don't like the look of any of
them. That Ob Hahn, at your table--"

"Snaky looking fellow," I commented. "He and the Englishman are great
on arguments. Did you have Princes' cabin searched?"

My breath hung on his answer.

"Yes. Nothing unusual among his things. We searched both his room and
his sister's."

I did not follow that up. Instead I told him about the burn on Miko's
thick arm.

He stared. "I wish we were at Ferrok-Shahn. Gregg, tonight when the
passengers are asleep, come here to me. Snap will be here, and Dr.
Frank. We can trust him."

"He knows about--about the Grantline treasure?"

"Yes. And so do Balch and Blackstone." Balch and Blackstone were our
first and second officers.

"We'll all meet here, Gregg--say about the zero hour. We must take
some precautions."

Then he dismissed me.

I found Venza seated alone in a starlit corner of the secluded deck. A
porthole, with the black heavens and the blazing stars was before her.
There was an empty seat nearby.

She greeted me with the Venus form of jocular, intimate greeting:

"Hola-lo, Gregg! Sit here with me. I have been wondering when you
would come after me."

I sat down beside her. "Why are you going to Mars, Venza? I'm glad to
see you."

"Many thanks. But I am glad to see you, Gregg. So handsome a man. Do
you know, from Venus to Earth, and I have no doubt on all of Mars, no
man will please me more."

"Glib tongue," I laughed. "Born to flatter the male--every girl of
your world." And I added seriously, "You don't answer my question.
What takes you to Mars?"

"Contract. By the stars, what else? Of course, a chance to make a
voyage with you--"

"Don't be silly, Venza."

I enjoyed her. I gazed at her small, slim figure reclining in the deck
chair. Her long, gray robe parted by design, I have no doubt, to
display her shapely, satin-sheathed legs. Her black hair was coiled in
a heavy knot at the back of her neck; her carmine lips were parted
with a mocking, alluring smile. The exotic perfume of her enveloped
me.

She glanced at me sidewise from beneath her sweeping black lashes.

"Be serious," I added.

"I am serious. Sober. Intoxicated by you, but sober."

I said, "What sort of a contract?"

"A theater in Ferrok-Shahn. Good money, Gregg. I'll be there a year."
She sat up to face me. "There's a fellow here on the _Planetara_,
Rance Rankin, he calls himself. At our table--a big, good-looking
blond American. He says he is a magician. Ever hear of him?"

"That's what he told me. No, I never heard of him."

"Nor did I. And I thought I had heard of everyone of importance. He is
listed for the same theater I am. Nice sort of fellow." She paused,
then added, "If he's a professional entertainer, I'm a motor oiler."

It startled me. "Why do you say that?"

Instinctively my gaze swept the deck. An Earth woman and child and a
small Venus man were in sight, but not within earshot.

"Why do you look so furtive?" she retorted. "Gregg, there's something
strange about this voyage. I'm no fool, nor you, so you must know it
as well as I do."

"Rance Rankin--" I prompted.

She leaned closer toward me. "He could fool you. But not me--I've
known too many magicians." She grinned. "I challenged him to trick
me. You should have seen him evading!"

"Do you know Ob Hahn?" I interrupted.

She shook her head. "Never heard of him. But he told me plenty at
breakfast. By Satan, what a flow of words that devil driver can
muster! He and the Englishman don't mesh very well, do they?"

She stared at me. I had not answered her grin; my mind was too busy
with queer fancies. Halsey's words: "Things are not always what they
seem--" Were these passengers masqueraders? Were they put here by
George Prince? And then I thought of Miko the Martian, and the burn
upon his arm.

"Come back, Gregg! Don't go wandering off like that!" She dropped her
voice to a whisper. "I'll be serious. I want to know what in hell is
going on aboard this ship. I'm a woman and I'm curious. You tell me."

"What do you mean?" I parried.

"I mean a lot of things. What we've just been talking about. And what
was the excitement you were in just before breakfast this morning?"

"Excitement?"

"Gregg, you may trust me." For the first time she was wholly serious.
Her gaze made sure no one was within hearing. She put her hand on my
arm. I could barely hear her whisper: "I know they might have a ray
upon us. I'll be careful."

"They?"

"Anyone. Something's going on. You know it. You are in it. I saw you
this morning, Gregg. Wild-eyed, chasing a phantom--"

"You?"

"And I heard the phantom! A man's footsteps. A magnetic, deflecting,
invisible cloak. You couldn't fool an audience with that, it's too
commonplace. If Rance Rankin tried--"

I gripped her. "Don't ramble, Venza! You saw me?"

"Yes. My stateroom door was open. I was sitting with a cigarette. I
saw the purser in the smoking room. He was visible from--"

"Wait! Venza, that prowler went through the smoking room!"

"I know he did. I could hear him."

"Did the purser hear him?"

"Of course. The purser looked up, followed the sound with his gaze. I
thought that was queer. He never made a move. And then you came along
and he acted innocent. Why? What's going on, that's what I want to
know?"

I held my breath. "Venza, where did the prowler run to? Can you--"

She whispered calmly, "Into A20. I saw the door open and close. I even
thought I could see his blurred outline." She added, "Why should
George Prince be sneaking around with you after him? And the purser
acting innocent? And who is this George Prince, anyway?"

The huge Martian, Miko, with his sister Moa came strolling along the
deck. They nodded as they passed us.

I whispered, "I can't explain anything now. But you're right, Venza:
there is something going on. Listen! Whatever you learn--whatever you
encounter which looks unusual--will you tell me? I ... well, I do
trust you. Really I do, but the whole thing isn't mine to tell."

The somber pools of her eyes were shining. "You are very lovable,
Gregg. I won't question you." She was trembling with excitement.
"Whatever it is, I want to be in on it. Here's something I can tell
you now. We've two high class gold leaf gamblers aboard. Do you know
that?"

"Who are they?"

"Shac and Dud Ardley. Every detective in Greater New York knows them.
They had a wonderful game with that Englishman, Sir Arthur, this
morning. Stripped him of half a pound of eight-inch leaves--a neat
little stack. A crooked game, of course. Those fellows are more
nimble-fingered than Rance Rankin ever dared to be!"

I sat staring at her. She was a mine of information, this girl.

"And Gregg, I tried my charms on Shac and Dud. Nice men, but dumb.
Whatever's going on, they're not in it. They wanted to know what kind
of a ship this was. Why? Because Shac has a cute little eavesdropping
microphone of his own. He had it working last night. He overheard
George Prince and that giant Miko arguing about the Moon!"

I gasped, "Venza! Softer--"

Against all propriety of this public deck she pretended to drape
herself upon me. Her hair smothered my face as her lips almost touched
my ear.

"Something about treasure on the Moon. Shac couldn't understand what.
And they mentioned you. Then the purser joined them." Her whispered
