The word, it seemed, was, "_Fwoonk_."

His three companions agreed that that was the word for self,
but that was as far as the agreement went. They rendered it,
respectively, as "_Pwink_," "_Tweelt_" and "_Kroosh_."

Gofredo gave a barking laugh. He was right; anything that could go
wrong would go wrong. Lillian used a word; it was not a ladylike
word at all. The Svants looked at them as though wondering what
could possibly be the matter. Then they went into a huddle, arguing
vehemently. The argument spread, like a ripple in a pool; soon
everybody was twittering vocally or blowing on flutes and Panpipes.
Then the big horn started blaring. Immediately, Gofredo snatched the
hand-phone of his belt radio and began speaking urgently into it.

"What are you doing, Luis?" Meillard asked anxiously.

"Calling the reserve in. I'm not taking chances on this." He spoke
again into the phone, then called over his shoulder: "Rienet; three
one-second bursts, in the air!"

A Marine pointed a submachine gun skyward and ripped off a string of
shots, then another, and another. There was silence after the first
burst. Then a frightful howling arose.

"Luis, you imbecile!" Meillard was shouting.

Gofredo jumped onto the top of an airjeep, where they could all
see him; drawing his pistol, he fired twice into the air.

"Be quiet, all of you!" he shouted, as though that would do any good.

It did. Silence fell, bounced noisily, and then settled over the
crowd. Gofredo went on talking to them: "Take it easy, now; easy."
He might have been speaking to a frightened dog or a fractious
horse. "Nobody's going to hurt you. This is nothing but the great
noise-magic of the Terrans...."

"Get the presents unloaded," Meillard was saying. "Make a big show
of it. The table first."

The horn, which had started, stopped blowing. As they were getting
off the long table and piling it with trade goods, another lorry
came in, disgorging twenty Marine riflemen. They had their bayonets
fixed; the natives looked apprehensively at the bare steel, but
went on listening to Gofredo. Meillard pulled the (Lord Mayor?
Archbishop? Lord of the Manor?) aside, and began making sign-talk
to him.

When quiet was restored, Howell put a pick and shovel into a
wheelbarrow and pushed them out into the space that had been cleared
in front of the table. He swung the pick for a while, then shoveled
the barrow full of ground. After pushing it around for a while, he
dumped it back in the hole and leveled it off. Two Marines brought
out an eight-inch log and chopped a couple of billets off it with
an ax, then cut off another with one of the saws, split them up,
and filled the wheelbarrow with the firewood.

[Illustration: _We can't use the computer till we can tell it what
the data is data about!_]

The knives, jewelry and other small items would be no problem; they
had enough of them to go around. The other stuff would be harder to
distribute, and Paul Meillard and Karl Dorver were arguing about how
to handle it. If they weren't careful, a lot of new bowie knives
would get bloodied.

"Have them form a queue," Anna suggested. "That will give them the
idea of equal sharing, and we'll be able to learn something about
their status levels and social hierarchy and agonistic relations."

       *       *       *       *       *

The one with the staff took it as a matter of course that he would
go first; his associates began falling in behind him, and the rest
of the villagers behind them. Whether they'd gotten one the day
before or not, everybody was given a knife and a bandanna and one
piece of flashy junk-jewelry, also a stainless steel cup and mess
plate, a bucket, and an empty bottle with a cork. The women didn't
carry sheath knives, so they got Boy Scout knives on lanyards. They
were all lavishly supplied with Extee Three and candy. Any of the
children who looked big enough to be trusted with them got knives
too, and plenty of candy.

Anna and Karl were standing where the queue was forming, watching
how they fell into line; so was Lillian, with an audiovisual camera.
Having seen that the Marine enlisted men were getting the presents
handed out properly, Howell strolled over to them. Just as he came
up, a couple approached hesitantly, a man in a breechclout under a
leather apron, and a woman, much smaller, in a ragged and soiled
tunic. As soon as they fell into line, another Svant, in a blue
robe, pushed them aside and took their place.

"Here, you can't do that!" Lillian cried. "Karl, make him step back."

Karl was saying something about social status and precedence. The
couple tried to get into line behind the man who had pushed them
aside. Another villager tried to shove them out of his way. Howell
advanced, his right fist closing. Then he remembered that he didn't
know what he'd be punching; he might break the fellow's neck, or
his own knuckles. He grabbed the blue-robed Svant by the wrist with
both hands, kicked a foot out from under him, and jerked, sending
him flying for six feet and then sliding in the dust for another
couple of yards. He pushed the others back, and put the couple
into place in the line.

"Mark, you shouldn't have done that," Dorver was expostulating.
"We don't know...."

The Svant sat up, shaking his head groggily. Then he realized what
had been done to him. With a snarl of rage, he was on his feet, his
knife in his hand. It was a Terran bowie knife. Without conscious
volition, Howell's pistol was out and he was thumbing the safety off.

The Svant stopped short, then dropped the knife, ducked his head,
and threw his arms over it to shield his comb. He backed away a few
steps, then turned and bolted into the nearest house. The others,
including the woman in the ragged tunic, were twittering in alarm.
Only the man in the leather apron was calm; he was saying,
tonelessly, "_Ghrooogh-ghrooogh_."

Luis Gofredo was coming up on the double, followed by three of
his riflemen.

"What happened, Mark? Trouble?"

"All over now." He told Gofredo what had happened. Dorver was still
objecting:

"... Social precedence; the Svant may have been right, according
to local customs."

"Local customs be damned!" Gofredo became angry. "This is a Terran
Federation handout; we make the rules, and one of them is, no
pushing people out of line. Teach the buggers that now and we won't
have to work so hard at it later." He called back over his shoulder,
"Situation under control; get the show going again."

The natives were all grimacing heartbrokenly with pleasure. Maybe
the one who got thrown on his ear--no, he didn't have any--was not
one of the more popular characters in the village.

"You just pulled your gun, and he dropped the knife and ran?"
Gofredo asked. "And the others were scared, too?"

"That's right. They all saw you fire yours; the noise scared them."

Gofredo nodded. "We'll avoid promiscuous shooting, then. No use
letting them find out the noise won't hurt them any sooner than
we have to."

Paul Meillard had worked out a way to distribute the picks and
shovels and axes. Considering each house as representing a family
unit, which might or might not be the case, there were picks and
shovels enough to go around, and an ax for every third house. They
took them around in an airjeep and left them at the doors. The
houses, he found, weren't adobe at all. They were built of logs,
plastered with adobe on the outside. That demolished his theory
that the houses were torn down periodically, and left the mound
itself unexplained.

The wheelbarrows and the grindstone and the two crosscut saws
were another matter. Nobody was quite sure that the (nobility?
capitalist-class? politicians? prominent citizens?) wouldn't simply
appropriate them for themselves. Paul Meillard was worried about
that; everybody else was willing to let matters take their course.
Before they were off the ground in their vehicles, a violent dispute
had begun, with a bedlam of jabbering and shrieking. By the time
they were landing at the camp, the big laminated leather horn had
begun to bellow.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the huts had been fitted as contact-team headquarters, with
all the view and communication screens installed, and one end
partitioned off and soundproofed for Lillian to study recordings in.
It was cocktail time when they returned; conversationally, it was a
continuation from lunch. Karl Dorver was even more convinced than
ever of his telepathic hypothesis, and he had completely converted
Anna de Jong to it.

"Look at that." He pointed at the snooper screen, which gave a view
of the plaza from directly above. "They're reaching an agreement
already."

So they seemed to be, though upon what was less apparent. The horn
had stopped, and the noise was diminishing. The odd thing was that
peace was being restored, or was restoring itself, as the uproar had
begun--outwardly from the center of the plaza to the periphery of
the crowd. The same thing had happened when Gofredo had ordered the
submachine gun fired, and, now that he recalled, when he had dealt
with the line-crasher.

"Suppose a few of them, in the middle, are agreed," Anna said.
"They are all thinking in unison, combining their telepathic
powers. They dominate those nearest to them, who join and amplify
their telepathic signal, and it spreads out through the whole
group. A mental chain-reaction."

"That would explain the mechanism of community leadership, and I'd
been wondering about that," Dorver said, becoming more excited.
"It's a mental aristocracy; an especially gifted group of telepaths,
in agreement and using their powers in concert, implanting their
opinions in the minds of all the others. I'll bet the purpose of the
horn is to distract the thoughts of the others, so that they can be
more easily dominated. And the noise of the shots shocked them out
of communication with each other; no wonder they were frightened."

Bennet Fayon was far from convinced. "So far, this telepathy theory
is only an assumption. I find it a lot easier to assume some
fundamental difference between the way they translate sound into
sense-data and the way we do. We _think_ those combs on top of their
heads are their external hearing organs, but we have no idea what's
back of them, or what kind of a neural hookup is connected to them.
I wish I knew how these people dispose of their dead. I need a
couple of fresh cadavers. Too bad they aren't warlike. Nothing like
a good bloody battle to advance the science of anatomy, and what we
don't know about Svant anatomy is practically the entire subject."

"I should imagine the animals hear in the same way," Meillard said.
"When the wagon wheels and the hoes and the blacksmith tools come
down from the ship, we'll trade for cattle."

"When they make the second landing in the mountains, I'm going to do
a lot of hunting," Loughran added. "I'll get wild animals for you."

"Well, I'm going to assume that the vocal noises they make are
meaningful speech," Lillian Ransby said. "So far, I've just been
trying to analyze them for phonetic values. Now I'm going to analyze
them for sound-wave patterns. No matter what goes on inside their
private nervous systems, the sounds exist as waves in the public
atmosphere. I'm going to assume that the Lord Mayor and his stooges
were all trying to say the same thing when they were pointing to
themselves, and I'm going to see if all four of those sounds have
any common characteristic."

By the time dinner was over, they were all talking in circles, none
of them hopefully. They all made recordings of the speech about the
slithy toves in the Malemute Saloon; Lillian wanted to find out what
was different about them. Luis Gofredo saw to it that the camp
itself would be visible-lighted, and beyond the lights he set up
more photoelectric robot sentries and put a couple of snoopers to
circling on contragravity, with infra-red lights and receptors. He
also insisted that all his own men and all Dave Questell's Navy
construction engineers keep their weapons ready to hand. The natives
in the village were equally distrustful. They didn't herd the cattle
