entering was stacked with tallow-wax waiting to be loaded onto the
_Cape Canaveral_ when she came in; it was vacuum-packed in plastic
skins, like big half-ton Bologna sausages, each one painted with the
blue and white emblem of the Hunters' Co-operative. He was quite
interested in that, and was figuring, mentally, how much wax there was
here and how much it was worth.

"Who does this belong to?" he wanted to know. "The Hunters'
Co-operative?"

Tom had been letting me do the talking up to now, but he answered that
question, very emphatically.

"No, it doesn't. It belongs to the hunters," he said. "Each ship crew
owns the wax they bring in in common, and it's sold for them by the
Co-op. When the captain gets paid for the wax he's turned over to the
Co-op, he divides the money among the crew. But every scrap of this
belongs to the ships that took it, up till it's bought and paid for by
Kapstaad Chemical."

"Well, if a captain wants his wax back, after it's been turned over
for sale to the Co-op, can he get it?" Murell asked.

"Absolutely!"

Murell nodded, and we went on. The roustabout who had been following
us with the lifter had stopped to chat with a couple of his fellows.
We went on slowly, and now and then a vehicle, usually a lorry, would
pass above us. Then I saw Bish Ware, ahead, sitting on a sausage of
wax, talking to one of the Spaceport Police. They were both smoking,
but that was all right. Tallow-wax will burn, and a wax fire is
something to get really excited about, but the ignition point is 750 deg. C.,
and that's a lot hotter than the end of anybody's cigar. He must
have come out the same way we did, and I added that to the
"wonder-why" file. Pretty soon, I'd have so many questions to wonder
about that they'd start answering each other. He saw us and waved to
us, and then suddenly the spaceport cop's face got as white as my
shirt and he grabbed Bish by the arm. Bish didn't change color; he
just shook off the cop's hand, got to his feet, dropped his cigar, and
took a side skip out into the aisle.

"Murell!" he yelled. "Freeze! On your life; don't move a muscle!"

Then there was a gun going off in his hand. I didn't see him reach for
it, or where he drew it from. It was just in his hand, firing, and the
empty brass flew up and came down on the concrete with a jingle on the
heels of the report. We had all stopped short, and the roustabout who
was towing the lifter came hurrying up. Murell simply stood gaping at
Bish.

"All right," Bish said, slipping his gun back into a shoulder holster
under his coat. "Step carefully to your left. Don't move right at
all."

Murell, still in a sort of trance, obeyed. As he did I looked past his
right shin and saw what Bish had been shooting at. It was an irregular
gray oval, about sixteen inches by four at its widest and tapering up
in front to a cone about six inches high, into which a rodlike member,
darker gray, was slowly collapsing and dribbling oily yellow stuff.
The bullet had gone clear through and made a mess of dirty gray and
black and green body fluids on the concrete.

It was what we call a tread-snail, because it moves on a double row of
pads like stumpy feet and leaves a trail like a tractor. The
fishpole-aerial thing it had erected out of its head was its stinger,
and the yellow stuff was venom. A tenth of a milligram of it in your
blood and it's "Get the Gate open, St. Peter; here I come."

Tom saw it as soon as I did. His face got the same color as the cop's.
I don't suppose mine looked any better. When Murell saw what had been
buddying up to him, I will swear, on a warehouse full of Bibles,
Korans, Torah scrolls, Satanist grimoires, Buddhist prayer wheels and
Thoran Grandfather-God images, that his hair literally stood on end.
I've heard that expression all my life; well, this time I really saw
it happen. I mentioned that he seemed to have been reading up on the
local fauna.

I looked down at his right leg. He hadn't been stung--if he had, he
wouldn't be breathing now--but he had been squirted, and there were a
couple of yellow stains on the cloth of his trouser leg. I told him to
hold still, used my left hand to pull the cloth away from his leg, and
got out my knife and flipped it open with the other hand, cutting away
the poisoned cloth and dropping it on the dead snail.

Murell started making an outcry about cutting up his trousers, and
said he could have had them cleaned. Bish Ware, coming up, told him to
stop talking like an imbecile.

"No cleaner would touch them, and even if they were cleaned, some of
the poison would remain in the fabric. Then, the next time you were
caught in the rain with a scratch on your leg, Walt, here, would
write you one of his very nicest obituaries."

Then he turned to the cop, who was gabbling into his belt radio, and
said: "Get an ambulance, quick. Possible case of tread-snail skin
poisoning." A moment later, looking at Murell's leg, he added, "Omit
'possible.'"

There were a couple of little spots on Murell's skin that were
beginning to turn raw-liver color. The raw poison hadn't gotten into
his blood, but some of it, with impurities, had filtered through the
cloth, and he'd absorbed enough of it through his skin to make him
seriously ill. The cop jabbered some more into the radio, and the
laborer with the lifter brought it and let it down, and Murell sat
down on his luggage. Tom lit a cigarette and gave it to him, and told
him to remain perfectly still. In a couple of minutes, an ambulance
was coming, its siren howling.

The pilot and his helper were both jackleg medics, at least as far as
first aid. They gave him a drink out of a flask, smeared a lot of gunk
on the spots and slapped plasters over them, and helped him into the
ambulance, after I told him we'd take his things to the _Times_
building.

By this time, between the shot and the siren, quite a crowd had
gathered, and everybody was having a nice little recrimination party.
The labor foreman was chewing the cop out. The warehouse
superintendent was chewing him out. And somebody from the general
superintendent's office was chewing out everybody indiscriminately,
and at the same time mentioning to me that Mr. Fieschi, the
superintendent, would be very much pleased if the _Times_ didn't
mention the incident at all. I told him that was editorial policy,
and to talk to Dad about it. Nobody had any idea how the thing had
gotten in, but that wasn't much of a mystery. The Bottom Level is full
of things like that; they can stay active all the time because the
temperature is constant. I supposed that eventually they'd pick the
dumbest day laborer in the place and make him the patsy.

Tom stood watching the ambulance whisk Murell off, dithering in
indecision. The poisoning of Murell seemed like an unexpected blow to
him. That fitted what I'd begun to think. Finally, he motioned the
laborer to pick up the lifter, and we started off toward where he had
parked his jeep, outside the spaceport area.

Bish walked along with us, drawing his pistol and replacing the fired
round in the magazine. I noticed that it was a 10-mm Colt-Argentine
Federation Service, commercial type. There aren't many of those on
Fenris. A lot of 10-mm's, but mostly South African Sterbergs or
Vickers-Bothas, or Mars-Consolidated Police Specials. Mine, which I
wasn't carrying at the moment, was a Sterberg 7.7-mm Olympic Match.

"You know," he said, sliding the gun back under his coat, "I would be
just as well pleased as Mr. Fieschi if this didn't get any publicity.
If you do publish anything about it, I wish you'd minimize my own part
in it. As you have noticed, I have some slight proficiency with lethal
hardware. This I would prefer not to advertise. I can usually avoid
trouble, but when I can't, I would like to retain the advantage of
surprise."

We all got into the jeep. Tom, not too graciously, offered to drop
Bish wherever he was going. Bish said he was going to the _Times_, so
Tom lifted the jeep and cut in the horizontal drive. We got into a
busy one-way aisle, crowded with lorries hauling food-stuffs to the
refrigeration area. He followed that for a short distance, and then
turned off into a dimly lighted, disused area.

Before long, I began noticing stacks of tallow-wax, put up in the
regular outside sausage skins but without the Co-op markings. They
just had the names of hunter-ships--_Javelin_, _Bulldog_, _Helldiver_,
_Slasher_, and so on.

"What's that stuff doing in here?" I asked. "It's a long way from the
docks, and a long way from the spaceport."

"Oh, just temporary storage," Tom said. "It hasn't been checked in
with the Co-op yet."

That wasn't any answer--or maybe it was. I let it go at that. Then we
came to an open space about fifty feet square. There was a jeep, with
a 7-mm machine gun mounted on it, and half a dozen men in boat-clothes
were playing cards at a table made out of empty ammunition boxes. I
noticed they were all wearing pistols, and when a couple of them saw
us, they got up and grabbed rifles. Tom let down and got out of the
jeep, going over and talking with them for a few minutes. What he had
to tell them didn't seem to bring any noticeable amount of sunlight
into their lives. After a while he came back, climbed in at the
controls, and lifted the jeep again.




4

MAIN CITY LEVEL


The ceiling on Main City Level is two hundred feet high; in order to
permit free circulation of air and avoid traffic jams, nothing is
built higher than a hundred and fifty feet except the square
buildings, two hundred yards apart, which rest on foundations on the
Bottom Level and extend up to support the roof. The _Times_ has one of
these pillar-buildings, and we have the whole thing to ourselves. In a
city built for a quarter of a million, twenty thousand people don't
have to crowd very closely on one another. Naturally, we don't have a
top landing stage, but except for the buttresses at the corners and
solid central column, the whole street floor is open.

Tom hadn't said anything after we left the stacks of wax and the men
guarding them. We came up a vehicle shaft a few blocks up Broadway,
and he brought the jeep down and floated it in through one of the
archways. As usual, the place was cluttered with equipment we hadn't
gotten around to repairing or installing, merchandise we'd taken in
exchange for advertising, and vehicles, our own and everybody else's.
A couple of mechanics were tinkering on one of them. I decided, for
the oomptieth time, to do something about cleaning it up. Say in
another two or three hundred hours, when the ships would all be in
port and work would be slack, and I could hire a couple of good men to
help.

We got Murell's stuff off the jeep, and I hunted around till I found a
hand-lifter.

"Want to stay and have dinner with us, Tom?" I asked.

"Uh?" It took him a second or so to realize what I'd said. "Why, no,
thanks, Walt. I have to get back to the ship. Father wants to see me
before the meeting."

"How about you, Bish? Want to take potluck with us?"

"I shall be delighted," he assured me.

Tom told us good-by absent-mindedly, lifted the jeep, and floated it
out into the street. Bish and I watched him go; Bish looked as though
he had wanted to say something and then thought better of it. We
floated Murell's stuff and mine over to the elevator beside the
central column, and I ran it up to the editorial offices on the top
floor.

We came out in a big room, half the area of the floor, full of
worktables and radios and screens and photoprinting machines. Dad, as
usual, was in a gray knee-length smock, with a pipe jutting out under
his ragged mustache, and, as usual, he was stopping every minute or so
to relight it. He was putting together the stuff I'd transmitted in
for the audiovisual newscast. Over across the room, the rest of the
_Times_ staff, Julio Kubanoff, was sitting at the composing machine,
his peg leg propped up and an earphone on, his fingers punching
rapidly at the keyboard as he burned letters onto the white plastic
sheet with ultraviolet rays for photographing. Julio was an old
hunter-ship man who had lost a leg in an accident and taught himself
his new trade. He still wore the beard, now white, that was
practically the monster-hunters' uniform.

"The stuff come in all right?" I asked Dad, letting down the lifter.

"Yes. What do you think of that fellow Belsher?" he asked. "Did you
ever hear such an impudent string of lies in your life?" Then, out of
the corner of his eye, he saw the lifter full of luggage, and saw
somebody with me. "Mr. Murell? Please excuse me for a moment, till I
get this blasted thing together straight." Then he got the film
spliced and the sound record matched, and looked up. "Why, Bish?
Where's Mr. Murell, Walt?"

"Mr. Murell has had his initiation to Fenris," I said. "He got
squirted by a tread-snail almost as soon as he got off the ship. They
have him at the spaceport hospital; it'll be 2400 before they get all
the poison sweated out of him."

I went on to tell him what had happened. Dad's eyes widened slightly,
and he took the pipe out of his mouth and looked at Bish with
something very reasonably like respect.

"That was mighty sharp work," he said. "If you'd been a second slower,
we'd be all out of visiting authors. That would have been a nice
business; story would have gotten back to Terra, and been most
unfortunate publicity for Fenris. And, of course," he afterthoughted,
"most unfortunate for Mr. Murell, too."

"Well, if you give this any publicity, I would rather you passed my
own trifling exploit over in silence," Bish said. "I gather the
spaceport people wouldn't be too happy about giving the public the
impression that their area is teeming with tread-snails, either. They
have enough trouble hiring shipping-floor help as it is."

"But don't you want people to know what you did?" Dad demanded,
incredulously. Everybody wanted their names in print or on 'cast; that
was one of his basic articles of faith. "If the public learned about
this--" he went on, and then saw where he was heading and pulled up
short. It wouldn't be tactful to say something like, "Maybe they
wouldn't think you were just a worthless old soak."

Bish saw where Dad was heading, too, but he just smiled, as though he
were about to confer his episcopal blessing.

"Ah, but that would be a step out of character for me," he said. "I
must not confuse my public. Just as a favor to me, Ralph, say nothing
about it."

"Well, if you'd rather I didn't.... Are you going to cover this
meeting at Hunters' Hall, tonight, Walt?" he asked me.

"Would I miss it?"

He frowned. "I could handle that myself," he said. "I'm afraid this
meeting's going to get a little rough."

I shook my head. "Let's face it, Dad," I said. "I'm a little short of
eighteen, but you're sixty. I can see things coming better than you
can, and dodge them quicker."

Dad gave a rueful little laugh and looked at Bish.

"See how it goes?" he asked. "We spend our lives shielding our young
and then, all of a sudden, we find they're shielding us." His pipe had
gone out again and he relit it. "Too bad you didn't get an audiovisual
of Belsher making that idiotic statement."

"He didn't even know I was getting a voice-only. All the time he was
talking, I was doodling in a pad with a pencil."

"Synthetic substitutes!" Dad snorted. "Putting a synthetic tallow-wax
molecule together would be like trying to build a spaceship with a
jackknife and a tack hammer." He puffed hard on his pipe, and then
excused himself and went back to his work.

Editing an audiovisual telecast is pretty much a one-man job. Bish
wanted to know if he could be of assistance, but there was nothing
either of us could do, except sit by and watch and listen. Dad handled
the Belsher thing by making a film of himself playing off the
recording, and interjecting sarcastic comments from time to time. When
it went on the air, I thought, Ravick wasn't going to like it. I would
have to start wearing my pistol again. Then he made a tape on the
landing of the _Peenemuende_ and the arrival of Murell, who he said had
met with a slight accident after leaving the ship. I took that over to
Julio when Dad was finished, along with a tape on the announced
tallow-wax price cut. Julio only grunted and pushed them aside. He was
setting up the story of the fight in Martian Joe's--a "local bar," of
course; nobody ever gets shot or stabbed or slashed or slugged in
anything else. All the news _is_ fit to print, sure, but you can't
give your advertisers and teleprinter customers any worse name than
they have already. A paper has to use some judgment.

Then Dad and Bish and I went down to dinner. Julio would have his a
little later, not because we're too good to eat with the help but
because, around 1830, the help is too busy setting up the next paper
to eat with us. The dining room, which is also the library, living
room, and general congregating and loafing place, is as big as the
editorial room above. Originally, it was an office, at a time when a
lot of Fenris Company office work was being done here. Some of the
furniture is original, and some was made for us by local cabinetmakers
out of native hardwood. The dining table, big enough for two ships'
crews to eat at, is an example of the latter. Then, of course, there
are screens and microbook cabinets and things like that, and a
refrigerator to save going a couple of hundred feet to the pantry in
case anybody wants a snack.

I went to that and opened it, and got out a bulb of concentrated fruit
juice and a bottle of carbonated water. Dad, who seldom drinks, keeps
a few bottles around for guests. Seems most of our "guests" part with
information easier if they have something like the locally made
hydroponic potato schnapps inside them for courage.

"You drink Baldur honey-rum, don't you, Bish?" he said, pawing among
