icy still. "I shall be quite content to wait until you come back. Really
I feel quite sleepy."

"That's the effect of the elevation on the dear old lady's nerves,"
Redgrave whispered to Zaidie as he helped her up the narrow stairway
which led to the glass-domed conning-tower, in which in days to come she
was destined to pass some of the most delightful and the most terrible
moments of her life.

"Then why doesn't it affect me that way?" said Zaidie, as she took her
place in the little chamber, steel-walled and glass-roofed, and half
filled with instruments of which she, Vassar girl and all as she was,
could only guess the use.

"Well, to begin with, you are younger, which is an absolutely
unnecessary observation; and in the second place, perhaps you were
thinking about something else."

"By which I suppose you mean your lordship's noble self."

This was said in such a tone and with such an indescribable smile that
there immediately ensued a gap in the conversation, and a silence which
was a great deal more eloquent than any words could have made it.

When Miss Zaidie had got free again she put her hands up to her hair,
and while she was patting it into something like shape again she said:

"But I thought you brought me here to show me some experiments, and not
to----"

"Not to take advantage of the first real opportunity of tasting some of
the dearest delights that mortal man ever stole from earth or sea? Do
you remember that day when we were coming down from the big
glacier--when your foot slipped and I just caught you and saved a
sprained ankle?"

"Yes, you wretch, and went away next day and left something like a
broken heart behind you! Why didn't you--Oh what idiots you men can be
when you put your minds to it!"

"It wasn't quite that, Zaidie. You see, I'd promised your father the day
before--of course I was only a younger son then--that I wouldn't say
anything about realising _my_ ideal until I had realised his, and
so----"

"And so I might have gone to Europe with Uncle Russell's millions to buy
that man Byfleet's coronet, and pay the price----"

"Don't, Zaidie, don't! That is quite too horrible to think of, and as
for the coronet, well, I think I can give you one about as good as his,
and one that doesn't want re-gilding. Good Lord, fancy you married to a
thing like that! What could have made you think of it?"

"I didn't think," she said angrily; "I didn't think and I didn't feel.
Of course I thought that I'd dropped right out of your life, and after
that I didn't care. I was mad right through, and I'd made up my mind to
do what others did--take a title and a big position, and have the
outside as bright as I could get it, whatever the inside might be like.
I'd made up my mind to be a society queen abroad, and a miserable woman
at home--and, Lenox, thank God and you, that I wasn't!"

Then there was another interlude, and at the end of it Redgrave said:

"Wait till we've finished our honeymoon in space, and come back to
earth. You won't want any coronets then, although you'll have one, for
all the lands of earth won't hold another woman like yourself--your own
sweet self! Of course it doesn't now, but--there, you know what I mean.
You'll have been to other worlds, you'll have made the round trip of the
Solar System, so to say, and----"

"And I think, dear, that is about promise of wonders enough, and of
other things too--no, you are really quite too exacting. I thought you
brought me here to show me some of the wonders that this marvellous ship
of yours can work."

"Then just one more and I'll show you. Now you stand up there on that
step so that you can see all round, and watch with all your eyes,
because you are going to see something that no woman ever saw before."




CHAPTER IV


Above a tiny little writing-desk fixed to the wall of the conning-tower
there was a square mahogany board with six white buttons in pairs. On
one side of the board hung a telephone and on the other a speaking-tube.
To the right hand opposite where Zaidie stood were two nickel-plated
wheels and behind each of them a white disc, one marked off into 360
degrees, and the other into 100 with subdivisions of tens. Overhead hung
an ordinary tell-tale compass, and compactly placed on other parts of
the wall were barometers, thermometers, barographs, and, in fact,
practically every instrument that the most exacting of aeronauts or
Space-explorers could have asked for.

"You see, Zaidie, this is what one might call the cerebral chamber of
the _Astronef_, and, granted that my engines worked all right, I could
make her do anything I wanted without moving out of here, but as a rule,
of course, Murgatroyd is in the engine-room. If he wasn't the most
whole-souled Wesleyan that Yorkshire ever produced, I believe he'd
become an idolater and worship the _Astronef's_ engines."

"And who is Murgatroyd, please?"

"In the first place he is what I might call an hereditary retainer of
the House of Redgrave. His ancestors have served mine for the last seven
hundred years. When my ancestors were burglar-barons, his were
men-at-arms. When we went on the Crusades they went too; when we raised
a regiment for the King against the Parliament they were naturally the
first to enlist in it; and as we gradually settled down into peaceful
respectability they did the same. Lastly, when we went into trade as
ironmasters and engineers they went in too. This Murgatroyd, for
instance, was master-foreman of my works at Smeaton, and he was the only
man I dared trust with the secrets of the _Astronef_, and the only one I
would trust myself on board her with, and that's why we're a crew of
two. You see the command of a vessel like this is a fairly big business,
and if it got into the wrong sort of hands----"

"Yes, I see," said Zaidie with a little nod. "It would be just too awful
to think about. Why you might keep the world in terror with it; but I
know you wouldn't do that, because, for one thing, I wouldn't let you."

"Gently, gently, Ma'm'selle; permit me most humbly to remind you that
you are still my prisoner, and that I am still Commander of the
_Astronef_."

"Oh, very well then," said Zaidie, interrupting him with a pretty little
gesture of impatience, "and now suppose you let me see what the
_Astronef's_ commander can do with her."

"Certainly," replied Redgrave, "and with the greatest pleasure--but, by
the way, that reminds me you haven't paid your footing yet."

When due payment had been given and taken, or perhaps it would be more
correct to say taken and given, Redgrave put his finger on one of the
buttons.

Immediately Zaidie heard the swish of the air past the smooth wall of
the conning-tower grow fainter and fainter. Then there came a little
check which nearly upset her balance, and presently the clouds beneath
them began to take shape and great white continents of them with grey
oceans in between went sweeping silently and swiftly away behind them.

Redgrave turned the wheel in front of the 100-degree disc a little to
the left. The next instant the clouds rose up. For a moment Zaidie could
see nothing but white mist on all sides. Then the atmosphere cleared
again, and she saw far below her what looked like a vast expanse of
ocean that had been suddenly frozen solid.

There were the long Atlantic rollers tipped with snowy foam. Here and
there at wide intervals were little black dots, some of them with brown
trails behind them, others with little patches of white which showed up
distinctly against the dark grey-blue of the sea. Every moment they grew
bigger. Then the white-crested waves began to move, and the big ocean
steamers and full-rigged sailing ships looked less and less like toys.
Just under them there was a very big one with four funnels pouring out
dense volumes of black smoke. Redgrave took up a pair of glasses, looked
at her for a moment and said:

"That's the _Deutschland_, the new Hamburg-American record-breaker.
Suppose we go down and have a lark with her. I wonder if she's taking
news of the war. We're in with Germany, and they may know something
about it."

"That would be just too lovely!" said Zaidie. "Let's go and show them
how _we_ can break records. I suppose they've seen us by this time and
are just wondering with all their wits what we are. I guess they'll feel
pretty tired about poor Count Zeppelin's balloon when they see _us_."

Redgrave noted the "we" and the "us" with much secret satisfaction.

"All right," he said, "we'll go and give them a bit of a startler."

In front of the conning-tower there was a steel flagstaff about ten feet
high, with halliards rove through a sheer in the top. He took a little
roll of bunting out of a locker under the desk, opened a glass slide,
brought in the halliards and bent the flag on.

Meanwhile the long shape of the great liner was getting bigger and
bigger. Her decks were black, with people staring up at this strange
apparition which was dropping upon them from the clouds. Another minute
and the _Astronef_ had dropped to within five hundred feet of the water,
and about half a mile astern of the _Deutschland_. Redgrave turned the
wheel back two or three inches and touched a second button.

The _Astronef_ stopped her descent instantly, and then she shot forward.
The new greyhound was making her twenty-two and a half knots, hurling a
broad white torrent of foam away from under her counters. But in half a
minute the _Astronef_ was alongside her.

Redgrave ran the roll of bunting up to the top of the flagstaff, pulled
one of the halliards, and the White Ensign of England floated out.
Almost at the same moment the German flag went up to the staff at the
stern of the _Deutschland_, and they heard a roar of cheers, mingled
with cries of wonder, come up from her swarming decks.

Each flag was dipped thrice in due course. Redgrave took off his cap and
bowed to the Captain on the bridge. Zaidie nodded and fluttered her
handkerchief in reply to hundreds of others that were waving on the
decks. Mrs. Van Stuyler woke up in wonder and waved hers instinctively,
half longing to change crafts. In fact, if it hadn't been for her
absolute devotion to the proprieties she would have obeyed her first
impulse and asked Lord Redgrave to put her on board the steamer.

While the officers and crew and passengers of the _Deutschland_ were
staring wide-eyed and open-mouthed at the graceful glittering shape of
the _Astronef_, Redgrave touched the first button in the second row
once, moved the 100-degree wheel on a few degrees, and then gave the
other a quarter turn. Then he closed the window slide, and the next
moment Zaidie saw the great liner sink down beneath them in a curious
twisting sort of way. She seemed to stop still and then spin round on
her centre, getting smaller and smaller every moment.

"What's the matter, Lenox?" she said, with a little gasp. "What's the
_Deutschland_ doing? She seems to be spinning round on her own axis like
a top."

"That's only the point of view, dear. She's just plugging along straight
on her way to New York, and we've been making rings round her and going
up all the time. But of course you don't notice the motion here any more
than you would if you were in a balloon."

"But I thought you were going to speak them. Surely you don't mean to
say that you intended that just as a little bit of showing off?"

"That's about what it comes to, I suppose, but you must not think it was
altogether vanity. You see the German Government has bought Count
Zeppelin's air-ship or steerable balloon, as it ought to be called,
always supposing that they can steer it in a wind, and of course their
idea is to make a fighting machine of it. Now Germany is engaged to
stand by us in this trouble that's coming, and by way of cementing the
alliance I thought it was just as well to let the wily Teuton know that
there's something flying the British flag which could make very small
mincemeat of their gas-bags."

"And what about Old Glory?" said Miss Zaidie. "The _Astronef_ was built
with English money and English skill, but----"

"She is the creature of American genius. Of course she is. In fact she
is the first concrete symbol of the Anglo-American Alliance, and when
the daughter of her creator has gone into partnership with the man who
made her we'll have two flagstaff's, and the Jack and Old Glory will
float side by side."

"And meanwhile where are we going?" asked Zaidie, after a moment's
interval. "Ah, there we are through the clouds again. What makes us
rise? Is that the force that Pop told me he discovered?"

"I'll answer the last question first," said Redgrave. "That was the
greatest of your father's discoveries. He got at the secret of
gravitation, and was able to analyse it into two separate forces just as
Volta did with electricity--positive and negative, or, to put it better,
attractive and repulsive.

"Three out of the five sets of engines in the _Astronef_ develop the R.
Force, as I call it for short. This wheel with the hundred degrees
marked behind it regulates the development. The further I turn it this
way to the right, the more the R. Force overcomes the attractive force
of the earth or any other planet that we may visit. Turn it back, and
gravitation asserts itself. If I put this arrow-head on the wheel
opposite zero the weight of the _Astronef_ is about a hundred and fifty
tons, and of course she would go down like a stone, and a very big one
at that. At ten she weighs nothing; that is to say the R. Force exactly
counteracts gravitation. At eleven she begins to rise. At a hundred she
would be hurled away from the earth like a shell from a twelve-inch gun,
or even faster. Now, watch."

He took up the speaking-tube. "Is she all tight everywhere, Andrew?"

"Yes, my Lord," came gurgling through the tube.

Then Redgrave slowly turned the wheel till the indicator pointed to
twenty-five. Zaidie, all eyes and wonder, saw a vast sea of glittering
white spread out beneath them, an ocean of snow with grey-blue patches
here and there. It sank away from under them till the patches became
spots and the sunlit clouds a vast, luminous blur. The air about them
grew marvellously clear and limpid. The sun blazed down on them with a
tenfold intensity of light, but Zaidie was astonished to find that very
little heat penetrated the glass walls and roof of the conning-tower.

"What an awful height!" she exclaimed, looking round at him with
something like fear in her eyes. "How high are we, Lenox?"

"You'll find afterwards that the _Astronef_ doesn't take any account of
high or low or up or down," he replied, looking at the dial of an
aneroid barometer by the side of him. "Roughly speaking, we're rather
over 60,000 feet--say ten miles--from the surface of the Atlantic.
That's why I asked Andrew whether everything was tight. You see we
couldn't breathe the air there is outside there--too thin and cold--and
so the _Astronef_ makes her own atmosphere as we go along. But I won't
spoil what you're going to see by any more of this. So if you please,
we'll go down now and get along to Washington. Anyhow, I hope I've
convinced you so far that I've kept my promise."

"Yes, dear, you have, and splendidly! I've only one regret. If _he_ was
only here now, what a happy man he'd be! Still, I daresay he knows all
about it and is just as happy. In fact he must be. I feel certain he
must. The very soul of his intellect was in the dream of this ship, and
now that it's a reality he must be here still. Isn't it part of himself?
Isn't it his mind that's working in these wonderful engines of yours,
and isn't it his strength that lifts us up from the earth and takes us
down again just as you please to turn that wheel?"

"There's little doubt about that, Zaidie," said Redgrave quietly, but
earnestly. "You know we North-country folk all have our traditions and
our ghosts; and what more likely than that the spirit of a dead man or a
man gone to other worlds should watch over the realisation of his
greatest work on earth? Why shouldn't we believe that, we who are going
away from this world to other ones?"

"Why not?" interrupted Zaidie, "why, of course we will. And now suppose
we come down in more ways than one and go and give poor Mrs. Van Stuyler
something to eat and drink. The dear old girl must be frightened half
out of her wits by this time."

"Very well," replied Redgrave; "but we'll come down literally first, so
that we can get the propellers to work."

He turned the wheel back till the indicator pointed to five. The
cloud-sea came up with a rush. They passed through it, and stopped about
a thousand feet above the sea. Redgrave touched the first button twice,
and then the next one twice. The air began to hiss past the walls of the
conning-tower. The crest-crowned waves of the Atlantic seemed to sweep
in a hurrying torrent behind them, and then Redgrave, having made sure
that Murgatroyd was at the after-wheel, gave him the course for
Washington, and then went down to induct his bride-elect into the art
and mystery of cooking by electricity as it was done in the kitchen of
the _Astronef_.




CHAPTER V


As this narrative is the story of the personal adventures of Lord
Redgrave and his bride, and not an account of events at which all the
world has already wondered, there is no necessity to describe in any
detail the extraordinary sequence of circumstances which began when the
_Astronef_ dropped without warning from the clouds in front of the White
House at Washington, and his lordship, after paying his respects to the
President, proceeded to the British Embassy and placed the copy of the
Anglo-American agreement in Lord Pauncefote's hands.

Mrs. Van Stuyler's spirits had risen as the _Astronef_ descended towards
the lights of Washington, and when the President and Lord Pauncefote
paid a visit to the wonderful craft, the joint product of American
genius and English capital and constructive skill, she immediately
assumed, at Redgrave's request, the position of lady of the house _pro
tem._, and described the "change of plans," as she called it, which led
to their transfer from the _St. Louis_ to the _Astronef_ with an
imaginative fluency which would have done credit to the most
enterprising of American interviewers.

"You see, my dear," she said to Zaidie afterwards, "as everything turned
out so very happily, and as Lord Redgrave behaved in such a splendid
way, I thought it was my duty to make everything appear as pleasant to
the President and Lord Pauncefote as I could."

"It was real good of you, Mrs. Van," said Zaidie. "If I hadn't been
paralysed with admiration I believe I should have laughed. Now if you'll
just come with us on our trip, and write a book about it afterwards just
as you told--I mean as you described what happened between the _St.
Louis_ and Washington, to the President and Lord Pauncefote, you'd make
a million dollars out of it. Say now, won't you come?"

"My dear Zaidie," Mrs. Van Stuyler replied, "you know that I am very
