instinctive intelligence. That boy soaks up knowledge like a sponge."

"Facile mind--quick to grasp the essentials." She smiled again. "Seems
to me I remember a few years back when a young lieutenant successfully
put down a mutiny in space, and at his promotion to captain, the
citation included the fact that he was quick to grasp the essentials."

Strong grinned sheepishly. A routine flight to Titan had misfired into
open rebellion by the crew. Using a trick picked up in ancient history
books of sea-roving pirates in the seventeenth century, he had joined
the mutiny, gained control of the ship, sought out the ring-leaders and
restored discipline.

"And Manning," asked Strong. "What about Manning?"

"One of the hardest, brightest minds I've come across in the Academy. He
has a brain like a steel trap. He never misses."

"Then, do you think he's acting up because Corbett is the nominal head
of the unit? Does he feel that he should be the command cadet in the
control deck instead of Corbett?"

"No," replied Dr. Dale. "Not at all. I'm sure he intentionally missed
problems about control deck and command in his classification test. He
concentrated on astrogation, communications and signal radar. He wanted
to be assigned to the radar deck. And he turned in the best paper I've
ever read from a cadet to get the post."

Strong threw up his hands. "Then what is it? Here we have a unit, on
paper at least, that could be number one. A good combination of brains,
experience and knowledge. Everything that's needed. And what is the
result? Friction!"

Suddenly a buzzer sounded, and on Steve Strong's desk a small teleceiver
screen glowed into life. Gradually the stern face of Commander Walters
emerged.

"Sorry to disturb you, Steve. Can you spare me a minute?"

"Of course, Commander," replied Strong. "Is anything wrong?"

"Very wrong, Steve. I've been looking over the daily performance reports
on Unit 42-D."

"Dr. Dale and I have just been discussing that situation, sir." A
relieved expression passed over the commander's face.

"Good! I wanted to get your opinions before I broke up the unit."

"No, sir!" said Strong quickly. "Don't do that!"

"Oh?" replied the commander. On the screen he could be seen settling
back in his chair.

"And why not?"

"Well, Joan--er--Dr. Dale and myself feel that the boys of Unit 42-D
make it potentially the best in the Academy--if they stay together,
sir."

Walters considered this for a moment and then asked thoughtfully, "Give
me one good reason why the unit shouldn't be washed out."

"The academy needs boys like this, sir," Steve answered flatly. "Needs
their intelligence, their experience. They may be a problem now, but if
they're handled right, they'll turn out to be ace spacemen, they'll--"

The commander interrupted. "You're pretty sold on them, aren't you,
Steve?"

"Yes, sir, I am."

"You know, tomorrow all the units will be assigned to their personal
instructors."

"Yes, sir. And I've selected Lieutenant Wolcheck for this unit. He's
tough and smart. I think he's just the man for the job."

"I don't agree, Steve. Wolcheck is a fine officer and with any other
unit there'd be no question. But I think we have a better man for the
job."

"Whom do you suggest, sir?"

The commander leaned forward in his chair.

"You, Steve."

"Me?"

"What do you think, Joan?"

"I wanted to make the same suggestion, Commander," smiled Joan. "But I
didn't know if Steve really would want the assignment."

"Well, what about it, Steve?" asked the commander. "This is no
reflection on your present work. But if you're so convinced that 42-D is
worth the trouble, then take them over and mold them into spacemen.
Otherwise, I'll have to wash them out."

Strong hesitated a moment. "All right, sir. I'll do my best."

On the screen the stern lines in Commander Walters' face relaxed and he
smiled approvingly.

"Thanks, Steve," he said softly. "I was hoping you'd say that. Keep me
posted."

The screen blacked out abruptly and Captain Strong turned to Joan Dale,
a troubled frown wrinkling his brow.

"Huh. I really walked into that one, didn't I?" he muttered.

"It isn't going to be easy, Steve," she replied.

"Easy!" He snorted and walked over to the window to stare blankly at the
quadrangle below. "I'd almost rather try a landing on the hot side of
Mercury. It would be icy compared to this situation!"

"You can do it, Steve. I know you can." Joan moved to his side to place
a reassuring hand on his arm.

The Solar Guard officer didn't answer immediately. He kept on staring at
the Academy grounds and buildings spread out before him. When he finally
spoke, his voice rang with determination.

"I've got to do it, Joan. I've got to whip those boys into a unit. Not
only for their sakes--but for the sake of the Academy!"




CHAPTER 4


The first three weeks of an Earthworm's life at Space Academy are filled
with never-ending physical training and conditioning to meet the rigors
of rocket flight and life on distant planets. And under the grueling
pressure of fourteen-hour days, filled with backbreaking exercises and
long forced marches, very few of the boys can find anything more
desirable than sleep--and more sleep.

Under this pressure the friction in Unit 42-D became greater and
greater. Roger and Astro continually needled each other with insults,
and Tom gradually slipped into the role of arbiter.

Returning from a difficult afternoon of endless marching in the hot sun
with the prospect of an evening of free-fall wrestling before them, the
three cadets dragged themselves wearily onto the slidestairs leading to
their quarters, their muscles screaming for rest.

"Another day like this," began Astro listlessly, "and I'm going to melt
down to nothing. Doesn't McKenny have a heart?"

"No, just an asteroid," Tom grumbled. "He'll never know how close he
came to getting a space boot in the face when he woke us up this
morning. Oh, man! Was I tired!"

"Stop complaining, will you?" snarled Roger. "All I've heard from you
two space crawlers is gripes and complaints."

"If I wasn't so tired, Roger," said Astro, "I'd give you something to
gripe about. A flat lip!"

"Knock it off, Astro," said Tom wearily. The role of keeping them apart
was getting tiresome.

"The trouble with you, Astro," pursued Roger, "is that you think with
your muscles instead of your head."

"Yeah, I know. And you've got an electronic calculator for a brain. All
you have to do is push a button and you get the answers all laid out for
you."

They had reached their quarters now and were stripping off their
sweat-soaked uniforms in preparation for a cool shower.

"You know, Roger," continued Astro, "you've got a real problem ahead of
you."

"Any problem you think I have is no problem at all," was the cool reply.

"Yes, it is," insisted Astro. "When you're ready for your first hop in
space, you won't be able to make it!"

"Why not?"

"They don't have a space helmet in the Academy large enough to fit that
overinflated head of yours!"

Roger turned slowly and spoke to Tom without looking at him. "Close the
door, Corbett!"

"Why?" asked Tom, puzzled.

"Because I don't want any interruptions. I'm going to take that big hunk
of Venusian space junk apart."

"Anything you say, you bigmouthed squirt!" roared Astro.

"Hey--knock it off!" yelled Tom, jumping between them and grabbing
Astro's arm. "If you guys don't lay off each other, you're going to be
thrown out of the Academy, and I'll be thrown out with you! I'll be
blasted if I'll suffer for your mistakes!"

"That's a very interesting statement, Corbett!" A deep voice purred
from the doorway and the three boys whirled to see Captain Strong walk
into the room, his black and gold uniform fitting snugly across the
shoulders betraying their latent strength. "Stand to--all of you!"

As the boys quickly snapped to attention, Strong eyed them slowly and
then moved casually around the room. He picked up a book, looked out of
the window port, pushed a boot to one side and, finally, removed Tom's
sweat-stained uniform from a chair and sat down. The cadets held their
rigid poses, backs stiff, eyes looking straight ahead.

"Corbett?" snapped Strong.

"Yes, sir?"

"What was the meaning of that little speech I heard a moment ago?"

"I--ah--don't quite understand what you mean, sir," stumbled Tom.

"I think you do," said Strong. "I want to know what provoked you to make
such a statement."

"I'd rather not answer that, sir."

"Don't get cute, Corbett!" barked Strong. "I know what's going on in
this unit. Were Manning and Astro squaring off to fight?"

"Yes, sir," replied Tom slowly.

"All right. At ease all of you," said Strong. The three boys relaxed and
faced the officer.

"Manning, do you want to be a successful cadet here at Space Academy?"

"Yes, sir," answered Roger.

"Then why don't you act like it?" asked Strong.

"Is there something wrong with my work, sir?" Tom recognized the smooth
Manning confidence begin to appear, and he wondered if Captain Strong
would be taken in.

"Everything's wrong with your work," barked Strong. "You're too smart!
Know too much!" He stopped short and then added softly with biting
sarcasm, "Why do you know so much, Cadet Manning?"

Roger hesitated. "I've studied very hard. Studied for years to become a
Space Cadet," he replied.

"Just to be a cadet or a successful cadet _and_ a Solar Guard officer?"

"To be successful at both, sir."

"Tell me, Manning, do you have any ideas on life?"

"That's a pretty general question, sir. Do you mean life as a whole or a
specific part of life?" They're fencing with each other, thought Tom. He
held his breath as Strong eyed the relaxed, confident cadet.

"A spaceman is supposed to have but one idea in life, Manning. And that
idea is _space_!"

"I see, sir," replied Roger, as a faraway look came into his eyes.

"Yes, sir, I have some ideas about life in space."

"I'd like to hear them!" requested Strong coldly.

"Very well, sir." Roger relaxed his shoulders and leaned against the
bunk. "I believe space is the last frontier of man--Earthman. It's the
last place for man to conquer. It is the greatest adventure of all time
and I want to be a part of that adventure."

"Thank you, Manning." Strong's voice was even colder than before. "But
as it happens, I can read too. That was a direct quote from the closing
paragraph of Jon Builker's book on his trip to the stars!" He paused.
"Couldn't you think of anything original to say?"

Roger flushed and gritted his teeth. Tom could hardly keep himself from
laughing. Captain Strong had scored heavily!

The Solar Guard officer then turned his attention to Astro.

"Astro, where in the name of the universe did you get the idea you could
be an officer in the Solar Guard?"

"I can handle anything with push in it, sir!" Astro smiled his
confidence.

"Know anything about hyperdrive?"

"Uhh--no, sir."

"Then you can't handle everything with, as you say, push in it!" snapped
Strong.

"Er--no, sir," answered Astro, his face clouding over.

There was a long moment of silence while Strong lifted one knee, swung
it over the arm of his chair, and looked steadily at the two half-naked
boys in front of him. He smiled lazily.

"Well, for two Earthworms, you've certainly been acting like a couple of
space aces!"

He let that soak in while he toyed with the gleaming Academy ring on his
finger. He allowed it to flash in the light of the window port, then
slipped it off and flipped it over to Corbett.

"Know what that is?" he asked the curly-haired cadet.

"Yes, sir," replied Tom. "Your Academy graduation ring."

"Uh-huh. Now give it to our friend from Venus." Tom gingerly handed
Astro the ring.

"Try it on, Astro," invited Strong.

The big cadet tried it on all of his fingers but couldn't get it past
the first joint.

"Give it to Manning."

Roger accepted the ring and held it in the palm of his hand. He looked
at it with a hard stare, then dropped it in the outstretched hand of the
Solar Guard officer. Replacing it on his finger, Strong spoke casually.

"All units design their own rings. There are only three like this in the
universe. One is drifting around in space on the finger of Sam Jones.
Another is blasting a trail to the stars on the finger of Addy Garcia."
He held up his finger. "This is the third one."

Strong got up and began to pace in front of the boys.

"Addy Garcia couldn't speak a word of English when he first came to the
Academy. And for eight weeks Sam and I sweated to figure out what he was
talking about. I think we spent over a hundred hours in the galley doing
KP because Addy kept getting us fouled up. But that didn't bother us
because we were a unit. Unit 33-V. Class of 2338."

Strong turned to face the silent cadets.

"Sam Jones was pretty much like you, Astro. Not as big, but with the
same love for that power deck. He could always squeeze a few extra
pounds of thrust out of those rockets. What he knew about astrogation
and control, you could stick on the head of a pin. On long flights he
wouldn't even come up to the control deck. He just sat in the power hole
singing loud corny songs about the Arkansas mountains to those atomic
motors. He was a real power-deck man. But he was a _unit_ man first! The
only reason I'm here to tell you about it is because he never forgot the
unit. He died saving Addy and myself."

The room was still. Down the long hall, the lively chatter of other
cadets could be heard as they showered and prepared for dinner. In the
distance, the rumble of the slidewalks and test firing of rockets at the
spaceport was dim, subdued, powerful.

"The unit is the backbone of the Academy," continued Strong. "It was set
up to develop three men to handle a Solar Guard rocket cruiser. Three
men who could be taught to think, feel and act as one intelligent brain.
Three men who would respect each other and who could depend on each
other. Tomorrow you begin your real education. You will be supervised
and instructed personally.

"Many men have contributed to the knowledge that will be placed in
front of you--brave, intelligent men, who blasted through the atmosphere
with a piece of metal under them for a spaceship and a fire in their
tail for rockets. But everything they accomplished goes to waste if the
unit can't become a single personality. It must be a single personality,
or it doesn't exist. The unit is the ultimate of hundreds of years of
research and progress. But you have to fight to create it and keep it
living. Either you want it, or you get out of the Academy!"

Captain Strong turned away momentarily and Tom and Astro looked at Roger
significantly.

"Stand to!"

The three boys snapped to attention as the wide-shouldered captain
addressed them again.

"Tomorrow you begin to learn how to think as a single brain. To act with
combined intelligence as one person. You either make up your minds to
start tomorrow or you report to Commander Walters and resign. There
isn't any room here for individuals."

He stepped to the door and paused.

"One more thing. I've been given the job of making you over into
spacemen. I'm your unit commander. If you're still here in the morning,
I'll accept that as your answer. If you think you can't take"--he
paused--"what I'm going to dish out, then you know what you can do. And
if you stay, you'll _be_ the best unit, or I'll break you in two in the
attempt. Unit dis ... missed!" And he was gone.

The three cadets stood still, not knowing quite what to do or say.
Finally Tom stepped before Astro and Roger.

"Well," he said quietly, "how about it, you guys? Are you going to lay
off each other now?"

Astro flushed, but Roger eyed Corbett coolly.

"Were you really taken in with that space gas, Tom?" He turned to the
shower room. "If you were, then you're more childish than I thought."

"A man died to save another man's life, Roger. Sam Jones. I never knew
him. But I've met Captain Strong, and I believe that he would have done
the same thing for Jones."

