Erskyll, beside him, had been silent. He had been looking at the
crescent-shaped industrial city, like a servile gorget around
Zeggensburg's neck.

"The way they've been crowded together!" he said. "And the buildings; no
space between. And all that smoke! They must be using fossil-fuel!"

"It's probably too hard to process fissionables in large quantities,
with what they have."

"You were right, last evening. These people have deliberately halted
progress, even retrogressed, rather than give up slavery."

Halting progress, to say nothing of retrogression, was an unthinkable
crime to him. Like freedom, progress was a Good Thing, anywhere, at all
times, and without regard to direction.

Colonel Ravney met them when they left the launch. The top landing-stage
was swarming with Imperial troops.

"Convocation Chamber's three stages down," he said. "About two thousand
of them there now; been coming in all morning. We have everything set
up." He laughed. "They tell me slaves are never permitted to enter it.
Maybe, but they have the place bugged to the ceiling all around."

"Bugged? What with?" Shatrak asked, and Erskyll was wanting to know what
he meant. No doubt he thought Ravney was talking about things crawling
out of the woodwork.

"Screen pickups, radio pickups, wired microphones; you name it and it's
there. I'll bet every slave in the Citadel knows everything that happens
in there while it's happening."

Shatrak wanted to know if he had done anything about them. Ravney shook
his head.

"If that's how they want to run a government, that's how they have a
right to run it. Commander Douvrin put in a few of our own, a little
better camouflaged than theirs."

There were more troops on the third stage down. They formed a procession
down a long empty hallway, a few scared-looking slaves peeping from
doorways at them. There were more troops where the corridor ended in
great double doors, emblazoned with a straight broad-sword diagonally
across an eight-pointed star. Emblematology of planets conquered by the
Space Vikings always included swords and stars. An officer gave a
signal; the doors started to slide apart, and within, from a
screen-speaker, came a fanfare of trumpets.

At first, all he could see was the projection-screen, far ahead, and the
tessellated aisle stretching toward it. The trumpets stopped, and they
advanced, and then he saw the Lords-Master.

They were massed, standing among benches on either side, and if anything
Pyairr Ravney had understated their numbers. They all wore black,
trimmed with gold; he wondered if the coincidence that these were also
the Imperial colors might be useful. Queer garments, tightly fitted
tunics at the top which became flowing robes below the waist, deeply
scalloped at the edges. The sleeves were exaggeratedly wide; a knife or
a pistol, and not necessarily a small one, could be concealed in every
one. He was sure that thought had entered Vann Shatrak's mind. They were
armed, not with dress-daggers, but with swords; long, straight
cross-hilted broadswords. They were the first actual swords he had ever
seen, except in museums or on the stage.

There was a bench of gold and onyx at the front, where, normally the
seven-man Presidium sat, and in front of it were thronelike seats for
the Chiefs of Managements, equivalent to the Imperial Council of
Ministers. Because of the projection screen that had been installed,
they had all been moved to an improvised dais on the left. There was
another dais on the right, under a canopy of black and gold velvet,
emblazoned with the gold sun and superimposed black cogwheel of the
Empire. There were three thrones, for himself, Shatrak, and Erskyll,
and a number of lesser but still imposing chairs for their staffs.

       *       *       *       *       *

They took their seats. He slipped the earplug of his memophone into his
left ear and pressed the stud in the middle of his Grand Star of the
Order of Odin. The memophone began giving him the names of the Presidium
and of the Chiefs of Managements. He wondered how many upper-slaves had
been gunbutted to produce them.

"Lords and Gentlemen," he said, after he had greeted them and introduced
himself and the others, "I speak to you in the name of his Imperial
Majesty, Rodrik III. His Majesty will now greet you in his own voice, by
recording."

He pressed a button on the arm of his chair. The screen lighted,
flickered, and steadied, and the trumpets blared again. When the fanfare
ended, a voice thundered:

"_The Emperor speaks!_"

Rodrik III compromised on the beard question with a small mustache. He
wore the stern but kindly expression the best theatrical directors in
Asgard had taught him; Public Face Number Three. He inclined his head
slightly and stiffly, as a man wearing a seven-pound crown must.

"We greet our subjects of Aditya to the fellowship of the Empire. We
have long had good reports of you, and we are happy now to speak to you.
Deserve well of us, and prosper under the Sun and Cogwheel."

Another fanfare, as the image vanished. Before any of the Lords-Master
could find voice, he was speaking to them:

"Well, Lords and Gentlemen, you have been welcomed into the Empire by
his Majesty. I know, there hasn't been a ship in or out of this system
for five centuries, and I suppose you have a great many questions to ask
about the Galactic Empire. Members of the Presidium and Chiefs of
Managements may address me directly; others will please address the
chairman."

Olvir Nikkolon, the owner of Tchall Hozhet, was on his feet at once. He
had a loose-lipped mouth and a not entirely straight nose and pale eyes
that were never entirely still.

"What I want to know is; why did you people have to come here to take
our planet away from us? Isn't the rest of the Galaxy big enough for
you?"

"No, Lord Nikkolon. The Galaxy is not big enough for any competition of
sovereignty. There must be one and only one completely sovereign power.
The Terran Federation was once such a power. It failed, and vanished;
you know what followed. Darkness and anarchy. We are clawing our way up
out of that darkness. We will not fail. We will create a peaceful and
unified Galaxy."

He talked to them, about the collapse of the old Federation, about the
interstellar wars, about the Neobarbarians, about the long night. He
told them how the Empire had risen on a few planets five thousand
light-years away, and how it had spread.

"We will not repeat the mistakes of the Terran Federation. We will not
attempt to force every planetary government into a common pattern, or
dictate the ways in which they govern themselves. We will foster in
every way peaceful trade and communication. But we will not again permit
the plague of competing sovereignties, the condition under which war is
inevitable. The first attempt to set up such a sovereignty in
competition with the Empire will be crushed mercilessly, and no planet
inhabited by any sapient race will be permitted to remain outside the
Empire.

"Lords and Gentlemen, permit me to show you a little of what we have
already accomplished, in the past three hundred years."

He pressed another button. The screen flickered, and the show started.
It lasted for almost two hours; he used a handphone to interject
comments and explanations. He showed them planet after planet--Marduk,
where the Empire had begun, Baldur, Vishnu, Belphegor, Morglay, whence
their ancestors had come, Amaterasu, Irminsul, Fafnir, finally Odin, the
Imperial Planet. He showed towering cities swarming with aircars;
spaceports where the huge globes of interstellar ships landed and lifted
out; farms and industries; vast crowds at public celebrations;
troop-reviews and naval bases and fleet-maneuvers; historical views of
the battles that had created Imperial power.

"That, Lords and Gentlemen, is what you have an opportunity to bring
your planet into. If you accept, you will continue to rule Aditya under
the Empire. If you refuse, you will only put us to the inconvenience of
replacing you with a new planetary government, which will be annoying
for us and, probably, fatal for you."

Nobody said anything for a few minutes. Then Rovard Javasan, the Chief
of Administration and the owner of the mountainous Khreggor Chmidd,
rose.

"Lords and Gentlemen, we cannot resist anything like this," he said. "We
cannot even resist the force they have here; that was tried yesterday,
and you all saw what happened. Now, Prince Trevannion; just to what
extent will the Mastership retain its sovereignty under the Empire?"

"To practically the same extent as at present. You will, of course,
acknowledge the Emperor as your supreme ruler, and will govern subject
to the Imperial Constitution. Have you any colonies on any of the other
planets of this system?"

"We had a shipyard and docks on the inner moon, and we had mines on the
fourth planet of this system, but it is almost airless and the colony
was limited to a couple of dome-cities. Both were abandoned years ago."

"Both will be reopened before long, I daresay. We'd better make the
limits of your sovereignty the orbit of the outer planet of this system.
You may have your own normal-space ships, but the Empire will control
all hyperdrive craft, and all nuclear weapons. I take it you are the
sole government on this planet? Then no other will be permitted to
compete with you."

[Illustration]

"Well, what are they taking away from us, then?" somebody in the rear
asked.

"I assume that you are agreed to accept the sovereignty of his Imperial
Majesty? Good. As a matter of form, Lord Nikkolon, will you take a vote?
His Imperial Majesty would be most gratified if it were unanimous."

Somebody insisted that the question would have to be debated, which
meant that everybody would have to make a speech, all two thousand of
them. He informed them that there was nothing to debate; they were
confronted with an accomplished fact which they must accept. So Nikkolon
made a speech, telling them at what a great moment in Adityan history
they stood, and concluded by saying:

"I take it that it is the unanimous will of this Convocation that the
sovereignty of the Galactic Emperor be acknowledged, and that we, the
'Mastership of Aditya' do here proclaim our loyal allegiance to his
Imperial Majesty, Rodrik the Third. Any dissent? Then it is ordered so
recorded."

Then he had to make another speech, to inform the representatives of his
new sovereign of the fact. Prince Trevannion, in the name of the
Emperor, delivered the well-worn words of welcome, and Lanze Degbrend
got the coronet out of the black velvet bag under his arm and the
Imperial Proconsul, Obray, Count Erskyll, was crowned. Erskyll's
charge-d'affaires, Sharll Ernanday, produced the scroll of the Imperial
Constitution, and Erskyll began to read.

Section One: The universality of the Empire. The absolute powers of the
Emperor. The rules of succession. The Emperor also to be Planetary King
of Odin.

Section Two: Every planetary government to be sovereign in its own
internal affairs.... Only one sovereign government upon any planet, or
within normal-space travel distance.... All hyperspace ships, and all
nuclear weapons.... No planetary government shall make war ... enter
into any alliance ... tax, regulate or restrain interstellar trade or
communication.... Every sapient being shall be equally protected....

Then he came to Article Six. He cleared his throat, raised his voice,
and read:

"_There shall be no chattel-slavery or serfdom anywhere in the Empire;
no sapient being, of any race whatsoever, shall be the property of any
being but himself._"

The Convocation Chamber was silent, like a bomb with a defective fuse,
for all of thirty seconds. Then it blew up with a roar. Out of the
corner of his eye, he saw the doors slide apart and an airjeep,
bristling with machine guns, float in and rise to the ceiling. The first
inarticulate roar was followed by a babel of voices, like a tropical
cloudburst on a prefab hut. Olvir Nikkolon's mouth was working as he
shouted unheard.

He pressed another of the row of buttons on the arm of his chair. Out of
the screen-speaker a voice, as loud, by actual sound-meter test, as an
anti-vehicle gun, thundered:

"SILENCE!"

Into the shocked stillness which it produced, he spoke, like a
schoolmaster who has returned to find his room in an uproar:

"Lord Nikkolon; what is this nonsense? You are Chairman of the
Presidium; is this how you keep order here? What is this, a planetary
parliament or a spaceport saloon?"

"You tricked us!" Nikkolon accused. "You didn't tell us about that
article when we voted. Why, our whole society is based on slavery!"

Other voices joined in:

"That's all right for you people, you have robots...."

"Maybe you don't know it, but there are twenty million slaves on this
planet...."

"Look, you can't free slaves! That's ridiculous. A slave's a _slave_!"

"Who'll do the work? And who would they belong to? They'd have to belong
to somebody!"

"What I want to know," Rovard Javasan made himself heard, is, "_how_ are
you going to free them?"

There was an ancient word, originating in one of the lost languages of
Pre-Atomic Terra--_sixtifor_. It meant, the basic, fundamental,
question. Rovard Javasan, he suspected, had just asked the sixtifor. Of
course, Obray, Count Erskyll, Planetary Proconsul of Aditya, didn't
realize that. He didn't even know what Javasan meant. Just free them.
Commodore Vann Shatrak couldn't see much of a problem, either. He would
have answered, Just free them, and then shoot down the first two or
three thousand who took it seriously. Jurgen, Prince Trevannion, had no
intention whatever of attempting to answer the sixtifor.

"My dear Lord Javasan, that is the problem of the Adityan Mastership.
They are your slaves; we have neither the intention nor the right to
free them. But let me remind you that slavery is specifically prohibited
by the Imperial Constitution; if you do not abolish it immediately, the
Empire will be forced to intervene. I believe, toward the last of those
audio-visuals, you saw some examples of Imperial intervention."

They had. A few looked apprehensively at the ceiling, as though
expecting the hellburners and planet-busters and nega-matter-bombs at
any moment. Then one of the members among the benches rose.

"We don't know how we are going to do it, Prince Trevannion," he said.
"We will do it, since this is the Empire law, but you will have to tell
