With a surgeon's precision, Goat plunged the sharp point between Brute's
ribs and into the heart.

_Shock swept over Brute's mind._

_Father kills me!_

_Reject! Reject!_

_Father, all kindness, all hope, all wisdom and love, wants me no more.
Father rejects me! Father kills me!_

_Despair!_

_Reject! Reject!_

_Blackness swept fading through Brute's despairing brain._

One agonized note of pleading in the pale-blue eyes, and they closed in
acceptance. Brute swayed and fell forward, crashing to the floor,
driving the knife into his chest to the hilt.

Brute shuddered and rolled over on his back. He lay sprawled, arms flung
out limply, the knife hilt protruding upward. He sighed, and his
breathing stopped.

Goat stared down at him. He picked up Brute's wrist and held it. There
was no pulse.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shortly after dawn, Maya awoke. Remembering what she had seen dimly the
night before, she went curiously to the window.

There were two of them now. They were bodies, human bodies, naked and
unquestionably dead. In the night, the dry, vampirish Martian air had
dessicated them. They were skeletons, parchment skin stretched tightly
over the lifeless bones.

Even as she stood and looked, a group of figures appeared on the horizon
and came slowly nearer. They were Martians--monstrous creatures,
huge-chested, humpbacked, with tremendously long, thin legs and arms,
their big-eyed, big-eared heads mere excrescences in front of their
humps.

Trailing slowly through the desert toward Aurorae Sinus, they passed
near the skeleton bodies. One of the Martians saw them. He boomed
excitedly at the others, loudly enough for Maya to hear through the
double window.

The Martians stopped and gathered around the bodies.

What, she wondered, could interest them in two corpses? There was no
guessing. Martian motives and thought processes were alien and
incomprehensible, even to one who had lived among them and communicated
with them as a child.

One of the Martians picked up one of the corpses, and the whole group
moved away toward the lowland, the Martian carrying the body easily with
one long-fingered hand. Wisps of sandy dust trailed them as they
dwindled and slowly vanished.

The second body lay where they had left it. A gaping wound in its throat
seemed to mock her.




4


Fancher Laddigan made his way down a long dim corridor in the rear
portion of the Childress Barber College, in Mars City's eastern quarter.
He stopped and hesitated, with some trepidation, before an unmarked door
near the end of the corridor.

Completely bald, bespectacled and well up in years, Fancher looked like
a clerk and he had the instincts of a clerk. Yet he utilized that
appearance and those instincts in a perilous cause.

Fancher knocked timidly on the door. On receiving an indistinct
invitation from inside, he pushed it open and entered.

Fancher had a tendency to shiver every time he had occasion to see the
Chief, whose real name was unknown to Fancher and to most others here at
the barber college.

Small as a child in body, wagging a thin-haired head larger than
lifesize, the Chief surveyed Fancher with icy green eyes. The eyes were
large and round as a child's, but there was nothing childlike about
their expression. As though to deny his physical smallness, he smoked
one of the fragrant, foot-long cigars produced only in the Hadriacum
Lowlands.

"Sit down," commanded the Chief in a high, piping voice.

Fancher swallowed and sat, facing his superior across the big desk. The
Chief opened a drawer, took out another of the long cigars, and handed
it to Fancher. Fancher did not like cigars, but he had never dared say
so to the Chief. He lit it gingerly, coughed at his first inhalation,
and smoked at it dutifully and unhappily.

"You recognized this man certainly as Dark Kensington?" asked the Chief.

"Well ..." Fancher began, and started coughing again. The Chief fixed
him with an unwinking green stare. When the coughing spell ended,
Fancher sat silent, his eyes stinging with tears, fumbling at what he
wanted to say.

"You knew Dark Kensington before his disappearance twenty-five years
ago," said the Chief, with a trace of impatience in his tone. "I am told
that you saw this man and talked to him. You are qualified to recognize
Dark Kensington. Is this man Dark Kensington, or not?"

"Well," said Fancher again, "the man was walking alone across the
desert, and when someone picked him up he asked how he could find the
Childress Barber College, and of course our men heard of it and went out
to--"

"I have received a full report on the man's appearance and our initial
contact with him. I asked you a question."

"Well, Chief, it's a peculiar thing. If this man, as he is now, had
reappeared twenty-five years ago, I'd _know_ it was Dark Kensington. But
he looks exactly as Dark did when he disappeared, not one day older. And
he doesn't remember a thing beyond his disappearance except events of
the past two weeks, he says.

"Yet his memories of Dark's activities before his disappearance are
unquestionably accurate and clear. It's as though Dark had been put on
ice at the time of his disappearance and just now thawed out, without
any aging or memory during the interim."

"Perhaps he was," said the Chief dryly. "But is it possible that this
man, looking so much like Dark Kensington, could have studied
Kensington's personality and activities carefully and be posing as
Kensington?"

"No, sir," said Fancher promptly. "Dark and I were very close friends at
one time. He remembers that, although he had difficulty recognizing me
since I'm so much older. We went through some experiences together that
I never told to anyone, and I'm sure he didn't. He remembers them in
every detail. Like the way we trapped a sage-rabbit once when we'd run
out of supplies out in Hadriacum."

Fancher chuckled.

"Then we couldn't eat the thing," he reminisced.

"Very well, if you're sure of his identity, that's all I wish to know,"
said the Chief. "I don't want to be trapped by a Marscorp trick with
plastic surgery. But if this man is Dark Kensington, it's the best
fortune the Phoenix has met with in a long time."

He fell silent, and busied himself with papers on his desk, paying no
more attention to Fancher. Fancher waited, then concluded reasonably
that the interview was at an end. And, since the long cigar agonized
him, he rose and moved quietly toward the door.

"I have not given you permission to leave," said the Chief, without
raising either his eyes or his voice. "Kensington is due to arrive in a
few moments, and I want you here when I talk to him. If any of his words
or actions appear inconsistent in any way to you, I want you to let me
know."

Fancher sighed silently, returned to his chair and puffed disconsolately
on the cigar.

Some five minutes passed. Then there was a firm rap on the door.

"Come in!" called the Chief in his reedy voice.

The door opened, and in walked a man whose entire presence radiated
strength, confidence and the potentiality of instant violence. Dark
Kensington was tall and broad-shouldered, clad in dark-blue tunic and
baggy trousers. His face was darkly tanned, strong, handsome. His hair
was black as midnight. His eyes were startlingly pale in the dark face;
eyes of pale blue, remote and filled with light.

"I'm Dark Kensington," he said, striding up to the Chief's desk. "You're
the man known as the Chief?"

"Yes," answered the Chief, and waited.

Dark nodded to Fancher. Fancher, feeling rather green about the gills,
returned the greeting.

Dark turned his attention back to the Chief, and he, also, waited. There
was a long silence. The Chief broke it first.

"What do you know about Dr. G. O. T. Hennessey--Goat Hennessey?" asked
the Chief calmly.

Fancher blinked at this unexpected line of questioning. A cloud passed
over Dark's face, as though the name had triggered something in him
that he could not quite remember.

"He was a very good friend of mine," answered Dark, "although it seems
that something happened between us that I can't quite recollect. He was
one of the most brilliant geneticists of Earth, and came to Mars with an
experimental group that was to try to develop a human type that could
live more comfortably under Martian conditions. The project was backed
by the government."

He stopped. It was the Chief who added:

"Then Marscorp stepped in."

The expression on Dark's face was blank.

"You don't know what Marscorp is, do you?" asked the Chief curiously.

"The name's familiar," replied Dark. "It's a spaceline, isn't it?"

"If your amnesia is genuine, you might very well react in such a
fashion," said the Chief reflectively. "Marscorp is the Mars
Corporation, and it's the only spaceline that serves Mars now. It's a
giant combine on Earth which has a virtual monopoly on the spacelines
and exports and imports between Earth and all the colonized planets.

"Marscorp is against any development of human beings who can live under
natural extraterrestrial conditions, because that would end the
colonies' dependence on Marscorp for supplies. As it is, the colonies
literally can't live without Marscorp. Marscorp controls enough senators
and delegates in the World Congress to block other important projects if
the Earth government refuses to co-operate with it, so the
government--that is to say, Marscorp--put a ban on the experiments by
Hennessey and other scientists here."

"I remember the government ban on the projects, but I wasn't aware that
Marscorp had anything to do with it," said Dark. "Goat Hennessey was one
of a group of us who retired to the desert to continue work despite the
government ban."

"Goat sold out," said the Chief. "Perhaps your memory doesn't include
that important point, but Fancher remembers it well. It was a little
before my time. Goat sold out, and betrayed the others to the
government in return for assistance in carrying out more limited
experiments. Some of the group escaped and formed the nucleus of the
rebel movement which now is centered here at the Childress Barber
College. We call ourselves the Order of the Phoenix."

The Chief allowed himself the luxury of a very faint smile.

"Marscorp and the government call us the Desert Rats," he said. "Very
appropriate. They consider us in the same category as rats."

Dark had been standing, casually at ease, before the Chief's desk, with
the air of a man who does not tire from standing. Now he did something
Fancher would not have dared: without the Chief's invitation, Dark sat
down in a comfortable chair, leaned back and stretched out his legs in
relaxation.

"It's a little hard for me to realize there's a twenty-five-year gap in
my memory," he said. "It seems to me that it has been less than a month
ago that Goat and I were together, with other refugees from the
government edict, in the Icaria Desert. Why did you ask me about Goat?"

"Because the government brought him back to Mars City not three months
ago," answered the Chief. "None of us had any idea where he was, but it
turns out that the government has had him working under surveillance
some place in the Xanthe Desert north of Solis Lacus. Since it was not
far from Solis Lacus that you were picked up, I wondered if you had had
any contact with him."

"Not that I remember," said Dark. "Do you have another of those cigars?"

"Why, yes," answered the Chief, startled. He produced another Hadriacum
cigar and handed it to Dark. Dark lit it and puffed the fragrant smoke
with evident enjoyment.

"As I say, the last time I remember seeing Goat was in the Icaria
Desert, in a dome we had set up there," said Dark. "The next thing I
remember is waking up in the midst of some sort of cave in a different
part of Icaria, surrounded by Martians.

"I could communicate with them in a fashion--something I was never able
to do before--and they were able to write the name of the Childress
Barber College so I could read it. But they evidently don't
differentiate our dome cities by name. I had no idea the college was
here in Mars City until your men contacted me; I just assumed it was at
Solis Lacus."

"You'd have waged a merry search for it, clear on the other side of
Mars," remarked the Chief. "What was your purpose in finding it?"

"I don't know that I had any specific purpose," replied Dark easily. "I
gathered from the Martians that here I could find someone who concurred
with my philosophy of resisting the government edict against seeking
self-sufficiency on Mars, and this was more or less confirmed by your
two men who contacted me at Solis Lacus."

"I'll see to it that in the future they're not quite so frank until
they're sure of their man," said the Chief darkly. He looked quizzically
at Fancher, and Fancher nodded slightly. "But it's true. As a matter of
fact, the Phoenix follows the path toward self-sufficiency that you
recommended, rather than the one sought by Goat Hennessey."

"That's the wrong way to approach it," said Dark promptly. "Goat and the
other scientists were following a line offering valid possibilities in
their genetic research. The only reason the rest of us chose to attempt
the extrasensory powers--particularly teleportation--was that we were
not qualified in genetic research and this seemed a field in which we
stood a chance to contribute along alternate lines. The effort should be
followed along both lines."

"The government managed to capture all the scientists at the time of
your disappearance, and it was assumed that you had been captured, too,"
said the Chief. "We don't have any scientists in the Phoenix who are
capable of doing Goat Hennessey's type of research."

"You say he's in Mars City? I wonder if it would do any good for me to
contact him."

"I told you that he was the one who betrayed the whole thing to the
government, and he's been working under government supervision these
last twenty-five years. I wouldn't trust him."

The Chief surveyed Dark's strong face with speculative green eyes, then
added:

"As a matter of fact, we've made a certain amount of progress following
your line of research. Since there are probably a good many things you
discovered in this work that we haven't stumbled on yet, we could use
your help in developing it, if you're interested."
