To my left, and some distance away, a vast number of blunt and ugly
towers rose against the sinister skyline, but no form of animal life
seemed in evidence. Wonderingly, my head whirling, whether from my
strange experience or from the shock of finding myself in what was
obviously another world, I do not know, I turned toward the city. And as
I took my first step, there materialized suddenly out of the thin and
ill-smelling air, the figures of perhaps a dozen monstrous creatures.

They were, in effect, men. That is, they had a head, a torso, two arms
and two legs apiece. But they were not human. Those huge round eyes,
unblinking and browless, were not human, nor were their slitted, sunken
mouths. They were not human beings; they were images of despair.

Their thin legs seemed to buckle at the knees, their arms drooped from
their shoulders, their mouths sagged at the corners, even their huge
ears hung down like a hound's. Their round, dark eyes, deeply recessed,
were caverns of despair.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were clothed in some coarse, black stuff that bristled as though
loosely woven of stiff hair, and yet which was not a true fabric, for it
seemed to move within itself, and scintillate, as though composed of
billions of restless motes. And as the strange creatures closed in
quickly, I saw that theirs was not solid flesh, but, like the clothing
that partially covered them, an attenuated substance that was not quite
real.

Have you ever sat close to the screen in a motion picture theatre, so
that the graininess of the moving film was visible? These creatures were
like such shadows, seen in three dimensions.

I retreated two or three swift steps, jerking the revolver from my
pocket.

"Back!" I warned, hoping they would understand the tone of voice if not
the words. "Back--or I'll pot a couple of you!"

They glanced at each other, swiftly, almost as though they understood.
It seemed to me that their mouths lifted; that they almost smiled. Then
they rushed at me.

I had only one box of cartridges, besides those in the cylinder of my
gun. I didn't know what might be in store for me, and I took no chances.

My first shot sent one of the creatures spinning to the ground. Two more
were almost upon me before I could level the weapon and pull the trigger
again. I got them both.

The rest of that unholy crew were grinning, and their eyes were shining
with anticipation. They closed in upon me eagerly, each apparently doing
everything in his power to invite my attention. It was bewildering, and
I watched them warily, suspecting a trick. There were only three more
cartridges left in my gun, and I did not dare replace the fired shells
for fear they would rush me when the action was open and the gun
momentarily useless.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was just about to risk one more cartridge when another figure
materialized in the ranks of the enemy; a taller, commanding figure,
with a shining jewel, perhaps a mark of authority, dangling from his
corded brown throat.

The others fell back instantly, and the newcomer approached me swiftly,
holding out his hands as though in supplication.

So I was to receive a cordial welcome after all! I breathed a sigh of
relief, and pocketed the weapon--and instantly the dark eyes flashed
angrily. I held out both hands, to show that they were empty, trying to
express my willingness to be friends.

He hesitated, and then uttered a high-pitched sound that I presumed to
be a word of command. Before I could free the gun again, the creatures
had me, and while their flesh looked more unnatural and unreal than
ever, at close range, their long fingers gripped me like talons of
steel. The being which had uttered the command disappeared, and my
captors led me, struggling and protesting, toward the black, ugly
towers of the city.

Over the barren, rocky ground we hurried; past the wretched hovels on
the outskirts of the city, and through crooked, dismal streets, toward
the center of the city.

A great crowd of creatures similar to my captors hemmed us in. Before
us, they thinned into nothingness as we approached, only to swarm into
being in some other spot. It was terrifying; an unbelievable experience
that made me question my sanity. The only vestige of comfort left me was
the hope that they were taking me to Hope and Vic.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the entrance of one of the huge misshapen black buildings, the
creature with the brilliant stone at his throat appeared as suddenly as
a light flashes up in the darkness. With him were two others, each
wearing a similar jewel of authority. They stood aside for us to enter,
and then followed us down a long corridor which was not lighted by any
device I could discern, and yet which was not dark.

A broad door swung open, and I was thrust through the doorway.

"Pete!" shouted a familiar voice, and I scrambled to my feet. There was
Vic, his red hair tousled, and his face gray with worry. Behind him, her
big blue eyes brimming, her lips quivering, was Hope.

"Vic! Well, here I am. And Hope, dear...."

My voice trailed off. These were not Vic and Hope before me; they were
unreal creatures, like the beings which had captured me. I could
recognize the face and the figure of the woman I loved and of her
brother; but they seemed to have no substance.

Hope suddenly put her arms about me. She was sobbing.

"Don't, Peter!" she whispered.

"Don't look at me like that. I know how you feel. You--you and Vic--you
aren't real to me, either! We're just shadows--lost souls...."

"Buck up, Hope!" Vic's voice was kindly, yet firm and gravely
commanding. "We're all right. Only--temporarily--we're Infra-Medians.
Sit down, Pete, and let's talk. It may be that there's no time to lose
in making some plans."

       *       *       *       *       *

"First of all," I insisted, "tell me where we are; what's happened to
us. Do you know?"

"Where we are? Surely. Looking at it in one way, we're less than a mile
