
"The information has not been kept from the United States Senate," Brent
corrected. "Let's say it has been kept from certain United States
Senators on the theory that the interests of the nation can best be
served by a closed-door policy on this matter until it becomes
clarified."

Whether they agreed or not, the men present accepted this as coming from
the top, and they would automatically abide by it.

"I suppose," Pender said, "that every effort is being made to apprehend
the missing pair."

"Every effort of which we are capable."

"What conclusions have you drawn from the fact that these ten creatures
are identical?"

"That they are not human beings, in the strictest sense of the word,"
Brent replied gravely.

"Then what are they?"

"We believe they are androids."

"And what the hell is an android?" Jones snapped.

"A synthetic." Brent smiled just slightly. "In this case, men not born
of women. All this is detailed in the confidential report that will be
handed to you when you leave. The report, incidentally, is slanted in a
way that obscures its vital nature, but on the basis of what has been
said at this meeting, I'm sure you'll find all your answers."

Brent paused, waiting for questions. When none came, he said, "I guess
that about covers it, gentlemen--at least, all that we have at the
moment. You'll be kept informed. The meeting is adjourned."

He glanced around. "Oh, by the way, as you'll note in the confidential
report, this project will be identified as 'Operation Blue Sky.'"

"Where did they get that one?" Jones snorted.

"I don't know. The term originated higher up. Possibly," Brent murmured,
"because somewhere out in the blue sky lies the answer." His manner
changed and he glanced briskly around. "Would anyone care for a cup of
coffee?"

No one was interested in coffee and the group filed out.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ten minutes later, the white-coated waiter came to pick up the things.
He crossed to the coffeepot, lifted it, and took a tiny device out of
the hidden space formed by the pot's legs and its bottom. This, he
slipped into his pocket before picking up the tray and going out as he'd
come.




3


Frank Corson got what was possibly the greatest shock of his life when
he walked into Ward Five and saw William Matson lying in bed. It wasn't
so much that he hadn't expected it. He had, because he was too firmly
locked in reality to believe the man he saw on the Upper East Side could
possibly have been the broken-legged Matson. Still, seeing Matson in bed
had the effect of bringing unreality into a realm where he had to cope
with it. Perhaps, during the trip back to the hospital, he'd been
mystically apprised of what lay ahead and wanted subconsciously to avoid
it. Perhaps his shock was a cringing away from facing a problem.

At the moment, of course, he didn't know what the problem was. There was
a mystery here, but only that, and his first thought was to report it to
higher authority--the business about the two hearts--and have it
investigated. With this thought in mind, he walked down the corridor and
reached for the knob of the door marked _Superintendent_.

But quite suddenly he stopped, reversed himself, and went back to Ward
Five. He approached Matson's bed and looked down at him. Matson, empty
of expression, stared back, and again Frank Corson sensed rather than
saw the emptiness behind the eyes.

"How are you feeling?"

"I feel very--well."

"It wasn't a bad break. How would you like to leave the hospital?"

"I would like to leave the--hospital."

Frank felt an odd, inner frustration. What in the devil was wrong with
the man? He sounded like a child just learning the language. Yet there
was nothing else to indicate backwardness. He looked pretty much like a
self-sufficient, self-contained adult.

"I can sign you out--get you a pair of crutches. By the way, I don't
think the hospital got your home address."

"My home--address?"

"Yes. The place you live." There was a pause, and finally Frank realized
the man wasn't going to answer. "Your home, man. Where you live."

"I'm looking for a--home."

"Oh, I see. New in town?"

"Yes, new in--town."

"I have a place," Frank said, and it seemed to him as though someone
else were talking from within him--that he was only a listener. "You can
crowd in with me until you get settled somewhere."

"I can crowd in with--you?"

"Okay?"

"Okay."

"Fine, I'll see that you're signed out. Ever walk on crutches before?"

"I never walked on--crutches."

"Nothing much to it. You'll get the knack."

Frank left the bed and headed toward the office, asking himself as he
went, _Why in hell did I do that?_ Then he found the reason--or at least
a reason that would suffice.

The discovery of a man with two hearts might be worth something. At
least, it would put Frank Corson, unknown intern, into the spotlight for
a while. This was pretty vague thinking but it made a kind of sense and
Frank settled for it in lieu of trying to analyze the strange
compulsion, the odd foreboding deep within him.

_Here's a thing that might do me some good_, he told himself. _Why not
take advantage of it?_

Perhaps he was rigidly blocking out the cause of his unrest--that he was
more or less dependent upon Rhoda Kane for the luxuries that were
involved in seeing her, having a relationship with her. He could neither
ask her to dine with him on his level, at some place like Nedick's, nor
could he refuse to go with her to The Forum or the Four Seasons. He
could not take her to his miserable furnished room on East 13th Street,
nor refuse rendezvous in her Upper East Side apartment.

He was trapped and was thus desperately looking for a way out.

And somehow, grotesquely, there were indications that a man with two
hearts might help to provide the answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

The tape recorder stuck to the bottom of the Taber conference coffeepot
had cost Senator Crane a hundred dollars. He had now listened to it four
times and was pacing the floor of his office, scowling darkly at the
walls. An android! What in hell was an android? What kind of a stupid,
impossible thing was this?

In a flash of panic, Crane wondered if it was all a diabolical
machination of Brent Taber's. Maybe Taber knew all about the recorder.
Maybe the whole meeting was an elaborate plant to maneuver an earnest,
alert senator into making a public fool of himself. Taber was certainly
capable of such a thing.

And that was how it had begun to look. Still, that was ridiculous. The
Army, the Navy, the Air Force--they were all involved. Only
Congress--the true representatives of the people--had been ignored. And,
by God, he'd do something about it!

Crane stopped pacing but continued to scowl at the wall. Now, what
department of research could find him some data on androids?

       *       *       *       *       *

Les King was awakened by a knock on his door. He rolled over, blinked
and looked at his watch. A little after two in the afternoon, which was
equivalent to midnight for Les. He pulled on his robe and went to the
door and opened it.

He blinked.

Sure, no doubt about it. The man standing there was the one he'd snapped
on Park Avenue the other A.M., lying among a bunch of pigeons,
with a broken leg. But evidently that hadn't been the case because his
legs were okay now. It couldn't even have been a sprain, judging by the
way he was standing there. He was a fairly tall, good-looking guy in his
middle forties maybe--brown hair, blue eyes with a kind of vacant look
about them.

And there was something else, goddamn it; something that kept evading
Les; something that had bothered him when he'd first developed the
print. _Let's see, what is this guy's name? The ambulance intern found
it in his jacket pocket on a half-torn identification card. William
Matson._

But, damn it, there was something else.

"Mr. Lester--King?"

"Right. What can I do for you?"

"I had trouble in locating--you. I wish to make a--purchase."

Queer duck. Damned queer. "What can I sell you?"

"You are a--photographer. You took a picture of a man injured on
Park--Avenue. I wish to buy that--picture."

Les knotted his robe and stepped back. "Sure. Come on in."

The man entered the room and stood silent while Les got out his file.
"What do you want it for?" he asked.

"It is for my personal--use."

"Sure." Les handed the glossy to the man he identified in his own mind
as Matson. "That the one?"

After a grave inspection, the other replied, "Yes. How much does it
cost--me?"

"Ten bucks?"

Without comment, the man sorted a ten-dollar bill from a skimpy roll he
took from his pocket and handed it to Les. With that, he turned and
walked out, closing the door after him and leaving several questions in
Les King's mind. Was this a vanity operation? Had the guy merely wanted
a glossy of himself? He hadn't impressed Les as being that kind of man.
Was there a reason for wanting the pic off the market? That didn't make
sense either because he hadn't asked for the negative.

Quite suddenly, in answer to the really important, the nagging,
question, Les snapped his fingers. The hem of his dressing gown flapped
around his skinny legs as he dived to his old file rack and went back
where the dust was thick. He brought out an envelope, dug into it, and
found what he was looking for--an old newspaper clipping dated some ten
years back. It consisted of a headline:

  LOCAL POLITICIAN DISAPPEARS

The clipping was from the Kenton, New York, _Chronicle_, an upstate
weekly, and the news story told how Judge Sam Baker had vanished on a
fishing trip to a nearby lake. Accidental drowning had been the verdict
but, as yet, the body had not been recovered.

Les King stared at the clipping. The body, as he remembered it, never
was recovered, either, but the drowning verdict stood intact and the
judge had been gradually forgotten.

Les King's interest in the affair had been financial. He'd gone to
Kenton, talked Baker's widow out of a couple of family photographs, and
had hiked back to New York, hoping for a sale to a big daily.

But the story hadn't caught on even though it well might have, because
Baker's power extended into Albany and could thus have interested New
York City. All in all, it had been a profitless speculation on Les
King's part.

Now, however, it seemed to be coming to life again. Les stared at the
photo under the headline. It was a good one--exceptionally clear.

And beyond a shadow of a doubt, it was the man who had just come to Les
King's room to purchase a glossy of himself for ten dollars. No wonder
the sight of that stranger had nagged at Les. He'd seen that face
before.

"Now just what in the hell have we got here?" Les mused. Something
definitely worth looking into, that was for sure.

He reached for his pants.




4


Dr. Rudolph Entman, one of the world's foremost neurologists, stripped
off his rubber gloves and scowled at the strange body that lay on the
table before him.

"Goddamn it," he fumed, "it's artificially constructed. It's been
hand-made--manufactured. And there's one thing I'd give a few years of
my life to know."

Brent Taber stared moodily into Entman's myopic little eyes and asked,
"What's that, Doctor?"

"How in hell did they do it?"

"Who do you suppose _they_ are?"

Entman looked ceilingward in a manner that indicated he might either be
hunting for _them_ somewhere out beyond, or sending a prayer heavenward
in a plea for Divine counsel and guidance.

"Some form of entity with far greater intelligence than we possess."

"You can tell me more than that, can't you?" Brent asked sharply. And
when Doctor Entman looked up in surprise, he added, "Sorry for the tone.
My nerves have gotten a little edgy lately."

Entman smiled understandingly. "I don't wonder. As to this living
machine--no ... it's not a machine because it did _live_. Let's see what
we can figure out. What's it made of? The material used in its
construction is--oh, hell--how can I put it? This way, maybe. Take a
wool blanket and call it genuine flesh, blood and bone. Now, take a
blanket made of one of the new synthetics--Dacron or any one of the
other equally serviceable materials--call that the material this
creature is made of. Figuring it that way--"

"You mean our visitor's body is constructed of things that feel and look
like flesh, blood and bone--work as well, but aren't. Right?"

"Right. But, of course, that doesn't tell you anything you didn't know
before."

"But what about their potentials, their capabilities? They're
_human_--in the sense that they're exact duplicates of humans--and they
_live_, but what about emotions? If we accept the somewhat unscientific
theory that it's a soul which is responsible for feelings and emotions,
these ... these ... creatures would be handicapped." Brent paused as if
uncertain of his ground. "Wouldn't they?" he asked lamely. "I mean, they
couldn't--theoretically, at least--react to situations ... or other
people's emotions."

Doctor Entman nodded his head and murmured, "I would be inclined to
agree. Except that we're obviously dealing with superior
intelligence--I'm speaking about the "people" responsible for these
androids--and we have no idea how far they might have progressed in
duplicating that indefinable something we call a soul."

For a moment he lapsed into silence. Then looked up at Brent abruptly.
