fused through the glass, the ends of the wires within the tube being
separated by a space of 2 mm or 3 mm. The tube is entirely filled with
mercury and inverted in a vessel of the same liquid. Pure hydrogen is
passed into the tube until it is about one fourth filled. The volume of
the gas is then read off on the scale and reduced to standard
conditions. Approximately an equal volume of pure oxygen is then
introduced and the volume again read off and reduced to standard
conditions. This gives the total volume of the two gases. From this the
volume of the oxygen introduced may be determined by subtracting from
it the volume of the hydrogen. The combination of the two gases is now
brought about by connecting the two platinum wires with an induction
coil and passing a spark from one wire to the other. Immediately a
slight explosion occurs. The mercury in the tube is at first depressed
because of the expansion of the gases due to the heat generated, but at
once rebounds, taking the place of the gases which have combined to form
water. The volume of the water in the liquid state is so small that it
may be disregarded in the calculations. In order that the temperature of
the residual gas and the mercury may become uniform, the apparatus is
allowed to stand for a few minutes. The volume of the gas is then read
off and reduced to standard conditions, so that it may be compared with
the volumes of the hydrogen and oxygen originally taken. The residual
gas is then tested in order to ascertain whether it is hydrogen or
oxygen, experiments having proved that it is never a mixture of the two.
From the information thus obtained the composition of the water may be
calculated. Thus, suppose the readings were as follows:

Volume of hydrogen taken                                          20.3 cc.
Volume of hydrogen and oxygen                                     38.7
Volume of oxygen                                                  18.4
Volume of gas left after combination has taken place (oxygen)      8.3

The 20.3 cc. of hydrogen have combined with 18.4 cc. minus 8.3 cc. (or
10.1 cc.) of oxygen; or approximately 2 volumes of hydrogen have
combined with 1 of oxygen. Since oxygen is 15.88 times as heavy as
hydrogen, the proportion by weight in which the two gases combine is 1
part of hydrogen to 7.94 of oxygen.

~Precaution.~ If the two gases are introduced into the eudiometer in the
exact proportions in which they combine, after the combination has taken
place the liquid will rise and completely fill the tube. Under these
conditions, however, the tube is very likely to be broken by the sudden
upward rush of the liquid. Hence in performing the experiment care is
taken to introduce an excess of one of the gases.

~A more convenient form of eudiometer.~ A form of eudiometer (Fig. 21)
different from that shown on page 43 is sometimes used to avoid the
calculations necessary in reducing the volumes of the gases to the same
conditions of temperature and pressure in order to make comparisons.
With this apparatus it is possible to take the readings of the volumes
under the same conditions of temperature and pressure, and thus compare
them directly. The apparatus (Fig. 21) is filled with mercury and the
gases introduced into the tube A. The experiment is carried out as in
the preceding one, except that before taking the reading of the gas
volumes, mercury is either added to the tube B or withdrawn from it by
means of the stopcock C, until it stands at exactly the same height in
both tubes. The gas inclosed in tube A is then under atmospheric
pressure; and since but a few minutes are required for performing the
experiment, the conditions of temperature and pressure may be regarded
as constant. Hence the volumes of the hydrogen and oxygen and of the
residual gas may be read off from the tube and directly compared.

[Illustration: Fig. 21]

~Method used by Berzelius and Dumas.~ The method used by these
investigators enables us to determine directly the proportion by weight
in which the hydrogen and oxygen combine. Fig. 22 illustrates the
apparatus used in making this determination. B is a glass tube
containing copper oxide. C and D are glass tubes filled with calcium
chloride, a substance which has great affinity for water. The tubes B
and C, including their contents, are carefully weighed, and the
apparatus connected as shown in the figure. A slow current of pure
hydrogen is then passed through A, and that part of the tube B which
contains copper oxide is carefully heated. The hydrogen combines with
the oxygen present in the copper oxide to form water, which is absorbed
by the calcium chloride in tube C. The calcium chloride in tube D
prevents any moisture entering tube C from the air. The operation is
continued until an appreciable amount of water has been formed. The
tubes B and C are then weighed once more. The loss of weight in the
tube B will exactly equal the weight of oxygen taken up from the
copper oxide in the formation of the water. The gain in weight in the
tube C will exactly equal the weight of the water formed. The
difference in these weights will of course equal the weight of the
hydrogen present in the water formed.

[Illustration: Fig. 22]

~Dumas' results.~ The above method for the determination of the
composition of water was first used by Berzelius in 1820. The work was
repeated in 1843 by Dumas, the average of whose results is as follows:

Weight of water formed                  236.36 g.
Oxygen given up by the copper oxide     210.04
                                        ------
Weight of hydrogen present in water      26.32

According to this experiment the ratio of hydrogen to oxygen in water is
therefore 26.32 to 210.04, or as l to 7.98

~Morley's results.~ The American chemist Morley has recently determined
the composition of water, extreme precautions being taken to use pure
materials and to eliminate all sources of error. The hydrogen and oxygen
which combined, as well as the water formed, were all accurately
weighed. According to Morley's results, 1 part of hydrogen by weight
combines with 7.94 parts of oxygen to form water.

~Comparison of results obtained.~ From the above discussions it is easy to
see that it is by experiment alone that the composition of a compound
can be determined. Different methods may lead to slightly different
results. The more accurate the method chosen and the greater the skill
with which the experiment is carried out, the more accurate will be the
results. It is generally conceded by chemists that the results obtained
by Morley in reference to the composition of water are the most accurate
ones. In accordance with these results, then, _water must be regarded as
a compound containing hydrogen and oxygen in the proportion of 1 part by
weight of hydrogen to 7.94 parts by weight of oxygen_.

~Relation between the volume of aqueous vapor and the volumes of the
hydrogen and oxygen which combine to form it.~ When the quantitative
synthesis of water is carried out in the eudiometer as described above,
the water vapor formed by the union of the hydrogen and oxygen at once
condenses. The volume of the resulting liquid is so small that it may be
disregarded in making the calculations. If, however, the experiment is
carried out at a temperature of 100 deg. or above, the water-vapor formed is
not condensed and it thus becomes possible to compare the volume of the
vapor with the volumes of hydrogen and oxygen which combined to form it.
This can be accomplished by surrounding the arm A of the eudiometer
(Fig. 23) with the tube B through which is passed the vapor obtained
by boiling some liquid which has a boiling point above 100 deg.. In this way
it has been proved that 2 volumes of hydrogen and 1 volume of oxygen
combine to form exactly 2 volumes of water vapor, the volumes all being
measured under the same conditions of temperature and pressure. It will
be noted that the relation between these volumes may be expressed by
whole numbers. The significance of this very important fact will be
discussed in a subsequent chapter.

[Illustration: Fig. 23]

~Occurrence of water.~ Water not only covers about three fourths of the
surface of the earth, and is present in the atmosphere in the form of
moisture, but it is also a common constituent of the soil and rocks and
of almost every form of animal and vegetable organism. The human body is
nearly 70% water. This is derived not only from the water which we drink
but also from the food which we eat, most of which contains a large
percentage of water. Thus potatoes contain about 78% of water, milk 85%,
beef over 50%, apples 84%, tomatoes 94%.

~Impurities in water.~ Chemically pure water contains only hydrogen and
oxygen. Such a water never occurs in nature, however, for being a good
solvent, it takes up certain substances from the rocks and soil with
which it comes in contact. When such waters are evaporated these
substances are deposited in the form of a residue. Even rain water,
which is the purest form occurring in nature, contains dust particles
and gases dissolved from the atmosphere. The foreign matter in water is
of two kinds, namely, _mineral_, such as common salt and limestone, and
_organic_, that is the products of animal and vegetable life.

     ~Mineral matter in water.~ The amount and nature of the mineral
     matter present in different waters vary greatly, depending on
     the character of the rocks and soil with which the waters come
     in contact. The more common of the substances present are
     common salt and compounds of calcium, magnesium, and iron. One
     liter of the average river water contains about 175 mg. of
     mineral matter. Water from deep wells naturally contains more
     mineral matter than river water, generally two or three times
     as much, while sea water contains as much as 35,000 mg. to the
     liter.

~Effect of impurities on health.~ The mineral matter in water does not,
save in very exceptional cases, render the water injurious to the human
system. In fact the presence of a certain amount of such matter is
advantageous, supplying the mineral constituents necessary for the
formation of the solid tissues of the body. The presence of organic
matter, on the other hand, must always be regarded with suspicion. This
organic matter may consist not only of the products of animal and
vegetable life but also of certain microscopic forms of living organisms
which are likely to accompany such products. Contagious diseases are
known to be due to the presence in the body of minute living organisms
or germs. Each disease is caused by its own particular kind of germ.
Through sewage these germs may find their way from persons afflicted
with disease into the water supply, and it is principally through the
drinking water that certain of these diseases, especially typhoid fever,
are spread. It becomes of great importance, therefore, to be able to
detect such matter when present in drinking water as well as to devise
methods whereby it can be removed or at least rendered harmless.

     ~Analysis of water.~ The mineral analysis of a water is, as the
     name suggests, simply the determination of the mineral matter
     present. Sanitary analysis, on the other hand, is the
     determination of the organic matter present. The physical
     properties of a water give no conclusive evidence as to its
     purity, since a water may be unfit for drinking purposes and
     yet be perfectly clear and odorless. Neither can any reliance
     be placed on the simple methods often given for testing the
     purity of water. Only the trained chemist can carry out such
     methods of analysis as can be relied upon.

[Illustration: Fig. 24]

~Purification of water.~ Three general methods are used for the
purification of water, namely, _distillation_, _filtration_, and
_boiling_.

1. _Distillation._ The most effective way of purifying natural waters is
by the process of distillation. This consists in boiling the water and
condensing the steam. Fig. 24 illustrates the process of distillation,
as commonly conducted in the laboratory. Ordinary water is poured into
the flask A and boiled. The steam is conducted through the condenser
B, which consists essentially of a narrow glass tube sealed within a
larger one, the space between the two being filled with cold water,
which is admitted at C and escapes at D. The inner tube is thus kept
cool and the steam in passing through it is condensed. The water formed
by the condensation of the steam collects in the receiver E and is
known as _distilled_ water. Such water is practically pure, since the
impurities are nonvolatile and remain in the flask A.

     ~Commercial distillation.~ In preparing distilled water on a
     large scale, the steam is generated in a boiler or other metal
     container and condensed by passing it through a pipe made of
     metal, generally tin. This pipe is wound into a spiral and is
     surrounded by a current of cold water. Distilled water is used
     by the chemist in almost all of his work. It is also used in
     the manufacture of artificial ice and for drinking water.

     ~Fractional distillation.~ In preparing distilled water, it is
     evident that if the natural water contains some substance which
     is volatile its vapor will pass over and be condensed with the
     steam, so that the distillate will not be pure water. Even such
     mixtures, however, may generally be separated by repeated
     distillation. Thus, if a mixture of water (boiling point 100 deg.)
     and alcohol (boiling point 78 deg.) is distilled, the alcohol,
     having the lower boiling point, tends to distill first,
     followed by the water. The separation of the two is not
     perfect, however, but may be made nearly so by repeated
     distillations. The process of separating a mixture of volatile
     substances by distillation is known as _fractional
     distillation_.

2. _Filtration._ The process of distillation practically removes all
nonvolatile foreign matter, mineral as well as organic. In purifying
water for drinking purposes, however, it is only necessary to eliminate
the latter or to render it harmless. This is ordinarily done either by
filtration or boiling. In filtration the water is passed through some
medium which will retain the organic matter. Ordinary charcoal is a
porous substance and will condense within its pores the organic matter
in water if brought in contact with it. It is therefore well adapted to
the construction of filters. Such filters to be effective must be kept
clean, since it is evident that the charcoal is useless after its pores
are filled. A more effective type of filter is the Chamberlain-Pasteur
filter. In this the water is forced through a porous cylindrical cup,
the pores being so minute as to strain out the organic matter.

     ~City filtration beds.~ For purifying the water supply of cities,
     large filtration beds are prepared from sand and gravel, and
     the water is allowed to filter through these. Some of the
     impurities are strained out by the filter, while others are
     decomposed by the action of certain kinds of bacteria present
     in the sand. Fig. 25 shows a cross section of a portion of the
     filter used in purifying the water supply of Philadelphia. The
     water filters through the sand and gravel and passes into the
     porous pipe A, from which it is pumped into the city mains.
     The filters are covered to prevent the water from freezing in
     cold weather.

[Illustration: Fig. 25]

3. _Boiling._ A simpler and equally efficient method for purifying water
for drinking purposes consists in boiling the water. It is the germs in
water that render it dangerous to health. These germs are living forms
of matter. If the water is boiled, the germs are killed and the water
rendered safe. While these germs are destroyed by heat, cold has little
effect upon them. Thus Dewar, in working with liquid hydrogen, exposed
some of these minute forms of life to the temperature of boiling
hydrogen (-252 deg.) without killing them.

~Self-purification of water.~ It has long been known that water
contaminated with organic matter tends to purify itself when exposed to
the air. This is due to the fact that the water takes up a small amount
of oxygen from the air, which gradually oxidizes the organic matter
present in the water. While water is undoubtedly purified in this way,
the method cannot be relied upon to purify a contaminated water so as to
render it safe for drinking purposes.

~Physical properties.~ Pure water is an odorless and tasteless liquid,
colorless in thin layers, but having a bluish tinge when observed
through a considerable thickness. It solidifies at 0 deg. and boils at 100 deg.
under the normal pressure of one atmosphere. If the pressure is
increased, the boiling point is raised. When water is cooled it steadily
contracts until the temperature of 4 deg. is reached: it then expands. Water
is remarkable for its ability to dissolve other substances, and is the
best solvent known. Solutions of solids in water are more frequently
employed in chemical work than are the solid substances, for chemical
action between substances goes on more readily when they are in solution
than it does when they are in the solid state.

~Chemical properties.~ Water is a very stable substance, or, in other
words, it does not undergo decomposition readily. To decompose it into
its elements by heat alone requires a very high temperature; at 2500 deg.,
for example, only about 5% of the entire amount is decomposed. Though
very stable towards heat, water can be decomposed in other ways, as by
the action of the electrical current or by certain metals.

     ~Heat of formation and heat of decomposition are equal.~ The fact
     that a very high temperature is necessary to decompose water
     into hydrogen and oxygen is in accord with the fact that a
     great deal of heat is evolved by the union of hydrogen and
     oxygen; for it has been proved that the heat necessary to
     decompose a compound into its elements (heat of decomposition)
     is equal to the heat evolved in the formation of a compound
     from its elements (heat of formation).

~Water of crystallization.~ When a solid is dissolved in water and the
resulting solution is allowed to evaporate, the solid separates out,
often in the form of crystals. It has been found that the crystals of
many compounds, although perfectly dry, give up a definite amount of
water when heated, the substance at the same time losing its crystalline
form. Such water is called _water of crystallization_. This varies in
amount with different compounds, but is perfectly definite for the same
compound. Thus, if a perfectly dry crystal of copper sulphate is
strongly heated in a tube, water is evolved and condenses on the sides
of the tube, the crystal crumbling to a light powder. The weight of the
water evolved is always equal to exactly 36.07% of the weight of copper
sulphate crystals heated. The water must therefore be in chemical
combination with the substance composing the crystal; for if simply
mixed with it or adhering to it, not only would the substance appear
moist but the amount present would undoubtedly vary. The combination,
however, must be a very weak one, since the water is often expelled by
even a gentle heat. Indeed, in some cases the water is given up on
simple exposure to air. Such compounds are said to be _efflorescent_.
Thus a crystal of sodium sulphate (Glauber's salt) on exposure to air
crumbles to a fine powder, owing to the escape of its water of
crystallization. Other substances have just the opposite property: they
absorb moisture when exposed to the air. For example, if a bit of dry
calcium chloride is placed in moist air, in the course of a few hours it
will have absorbed sufficient moisture to dissolve it. Such substances
are said to be _deliquescent_. A deliquescent body serves as a good
drying or _desiccating_ agent. We have already employed calcium chloride
as an agent for absorbing the moisture from hydrogen. Many substances,
as for example quartz, form crystals which contain no water of
crystallization.

     ~Mechanically inclosed water.~ Water of crystallization must be
     carefully distinguished from water which is mechanically
     inclosed in a crystal and which can be removed by powdering the
     crystal and drying. Thus, when crystals of common salt are
     heated, the water inclosed in the crystal is changed into steam
     and bursts the crystal with a crackling sound. Such crystals
     are said to _decrepitate_. That this water is not combined is
     proved by the fact that the amount present varies and that it
     has all the properties of water.

~Uses of water.~ The importance of water in its relation to life and
commerce is too well known to require comment. Its importance to the
chemist has also been pointed out. It remains to call attention to the
fact that it is used as a standard in many physical measurements. Thus
0 deg. and 100 deg. on the centigrade scale are respectively the freezing and
the boiling points of water under normal pressure. The weight of 1 cc.
of water at its point of greatest density is the unit of weight in the
metric system, namely, the gram. It is also taken as the unit for the
determination of the density of liquids and solids as well as for the
measurement of amounts of heat.


HYDROGEN DIOXIDE

~Composition.~ As has been shown, 1 part by weight of hydrogen combines
with 7.94 parts by weight of oxygen to form water. It is possible,
however, to obtain a second compound of hydrogen and oxygen differing
from water in composition in that 1 part by weight of hydrogen is
combined with 2 x 7.94, or 15.88 parts, of oxygen. This compound is
called _hydrogen dioxide_ or _hydrogen peroxide_, the prefixes _di-_ and
_per-_ signifying that it contains more oxygen than hydrogen oxide,
which is the chemical name for water.

~Preparation.~ Hydrogen dioxide cannot be prepared cheaply by the direct
union of hydrogen and oxygen, and indirect methods must therefore be
used. It is commonly prepared by the action of a solution of sulphuric
acid on barium dioxide. The change which takes place may be indicated as
follows:

sulphuric acid +  barium dioxide =  barium sulphate + hydrogen dioxide
--------------    --------------    ---------------   ----------------
  hydrogen          barium           barium             hydrogen
  sulphur           oxygen           sulphur            oxygen
  oxygen                             oxygen

In other words, the barium and hydrogen in the two compounds exchange
places. By this method a dilute solution of the dioxide in water is
obtained. It is possible to separate the dioxide from the water by
fractional distillation. This is attended with great difficulties,
however, since the pure dioxide is explosive. The distillation is
carried on under diminished pressure so as to lower the boiling points
as much as possible; otherwise the high temperature would decompose the
dioxide.

~Properties.~ Pure hydrogen dioxide is a colorless sirupy liquid having a
density of 1.49. Its most characteristic property is the ease with which
it decomposes into water and oxygen. One part by weight of hydrogen is
capable of holding firmly only 7.94 parts of oxygen. The additional 7.94
parts of oxygen present in hydrogen dioxide are therefore easily
evolved, the compound breaking down into water and oxygen. This
decomposition is attended by the generation of considerable heat. In
dilute solution hydrogen dioxide is fairly stable, although such a
solution should be kept in a dark, cool place, since both heat and light
aid in the decomposition of the dioxide.

~Uses.~ Solutions of hydrogen dioxide are used largely as oxidizing
agents. The solution sold by druggists contains 3% of the dioxide and is
used in medicine as an antiseptic. Its use as an antiseptic depends upon
its oxidizing properties.


EXERCISES

1. Why does the chemist use distilled water in making solutions, rather
than filtered water?

2. How could you determine the total amount of solid matter dissolved in
a sample of water?

3. How could you determine whether a given sample of water is distilled
water?

4. How could the presence of air dissolved in water be detected?

5. How could the amount of water in a food such as bread or potato be
determined?

6. Would ice frozen from impure water necessarily be free from disease
germs?

7. Suppose that the maximum density of water were at 0 deg. in place of 4 deg.;
what effect would this have on the formation of ice on bodies of water?

8. Is it possible for a substance to contain both mechanically inclosed
water and water of crystallization?

9. If steam is heated to 2000 deg. and again cooled, has any chemical change
taken place in the steam?

10. Why is cold water passed into C instead of D (Fig. 24)?

11. Mention at least two advantages that a metal condenser has over a
glass condenser.

12. Draw a diagram of the apparatus used in your laboratory for
supplying distilled water.

13. 20 cc. of hydrogen and 7 cc. of oxygen are placed in a eudiometer
and the mixture exploded. (a) How many cubic centimeters of aqueous
vapor are formed? (b) What gas and how much of it remains in excess?

14. (a) What weight of water can be formed by the combustion of 100 L
of hydrogen, measured under standard conditions? (b)What volume of
oxygen would be required in (a)? (c)What weight of potassium
chlorate is necessary to prepare this amount of oxygen?

15. What weight of oxygen is present in 1 kg. of the ordinary hydrogen
dioxide solution? In the decomposition of this weight of the dioxide
into water and oxygen, what volume of oxygen (measured under standard
conditions) is evolved?




CHAPTER V

THE ATOMIC THEORY


~Three fundamental laws of matter.~ Before we can gain any very definite
idea in regard to the structure of matter, and the way in which
different kinds of substances act chemically upon each other, it is
necessary to have clearly in view three fundamental laws of matter.
These laws have been established by experiment, and any conception which
may be formed concerning matter must therefore be in harmony with them.
The laws are as follows:

~Law of conservation of matter.~ This law has already been touched upon in
the introductory chapter, and needs no further discussion. It will be
recalled that it may be stated thus: _Matter can neither be created nor
destroyed, though it can be changed from one form into another._

~Law of definite composition.~ In the earlier days of chemistry there was
much discussion as to whether the composition of a given compound is
always precisely the same or whether it is subject to some variation.
Two Frenchmen, Berthollet and Proust, were the leaders in this
discussion, and a great deal of most useful experimenting was done to
decide the question. Their experiments, as well as all succeeding ones,
have shown that the composition of a pure chemical compound is always
exactly the same. Water obtained by melting pure ice, condensing steam,
burning hydrogen in oxygen, has always 11.18% hydrogen and 88.82% oxygen
in it. Red oxide of mercury, from whatever source it is obtained,
contains 92.6% mercury and 7.4% oxygen. This truth is known as _the law
of definite composition_, and may be stated thus: _The composition of a
chemical compound never varies._

~Law of multiple proportion.~ It has already been noted, however, that
hydrogen and oxygen combine in two different ratios to form water and
hydrogen dioxide respectively. It will be observed that this fact does
not contradict the law of definite composition, for entirely different
substances are formed. These compounds differ from each other in
composition, but the composition of each one is always constant. This
ability of two elements to unite in more than one ratio is very
frequently observed. Carbon and oxygen combine in two different ratios;
nitrogen and oxygen combine to form as many as five distinct compounds,
each with its own precise composition.

In the first decade of the last century John Dalton, an English
school-teacher and philosopher, endeavored to find some rule which holds
between the ratios in which two given substances combine. His studies
brought to light a very simple relation, which the following examples
will make clear. In water the hydrogen and oxygen are combined in the
ratio of 1 part by weight of hydrogen to 7.94 parts by weight of oxygen.
In hydrogen dioxide the 1 part by weight of hydrogen is combined with
15.88 parts by weight of oxygen. The ratio between the amounts of oxygen
which combine with the same amount of hydrogen to form water and
hydrogen dioxide respectively is therefore 7.94: 15.88, or 1: 2.

[Illustration: JOHN DALTON (English) (1766-1844)

Developed the atomic theory; made many studies on the properties and the
composition of gases. His book entitled "A New System of Chemical
Philosophy" had a large influence on the development of chemistry]

Similarly, the element iron combines with oxygen to form two oxides, one
of which is black and the other red. By analysis it has been shown that
the former contains 1 part by weight of iron combined with 0.286 parts
by weight of oxygen, while the latter contains 1 part by weight of iron
combined with 0.429 parts by weight of oxygen. Here again we find that
the amounts of oxygen which combine with the same fixed amount of iron
to form the two compounds are in the ratio of small whole numbers, viz.,
2:3.

Many other examples of this simple relation might be given, since it has
been found to hold true in all cases where more than one compound is,
formed from the same elements. Dalton's law of multiple proportion
states these facts as follows: _When any two elements,_ A _and_ B,
_combine to form more than one compound, the amounts of_ B _which unite
with any fixed amount of_ A _bear the ratio of small whole numbers to
each other_.

~Hypothesis necessary to explain the laws of matter.~ These three
generalizations are called _laws_, because they express in concise
language truths which are found by careful experiment to hold good in
all cases. They do not offer any explanation of the facts, but merely
state them. The human mind, however, does not rest content with the mere
bare facts, but seeks ever to learn the explanation of the facts. A
suggestion which is offered to explain such a set of facts is called an
_hypothesis_. The suggestion which Dalton offered to explain the three
laws of matter, called the _atomic hypothesis_, was prompted by his view
of the constitution of matter, and it involves three distinct
assumptions in regard to the nature of matter and chemical action.
Dalton could not prove these assumptions to be true, but he saw that if
they were true the laws of matter become very easy to understand.

~Dalton's atomic hypothesis.~ The three assumptions which Dalton made in
regard to the nature of matter, and which together constitute the atomic
hypothesis, are these:

1. All elements are made up of minute, independent particles which
Dalton designated as _atoms_.

2. All atoms of the same element have equal masses; those of different
elements have different masses; in any change to which an atom is
subjected its mass does not change.

3. When two or more elements unite to form a compound, the action
consists in the union of a definite small number of atoms of each
element to form a small particle of the compound. The smallest particles
of a given compound are therefore exactly alike in the number and kinds
of atoms which they contain, and larger masses of the substances are
simply aggregations of these least particles.

~Molecules and atoms.~ Dalton applied the name atom not only to the minute
particles of the elements but also to the least particles of compounds.
Later Avogadro, an Italian scientist, pointed out the fact that the two
