trailin' it from the air. They were comin', natural, for me, because I
was between them an' it. Then my pants caught on fire--"

"What?"

"My pants caught on fire," said Sergeant Walpole, woodenly. "I was
sittin' on the monocycle, tryin' to figure out which way to duck. An' my
pants caught on fire. The bike was gettin' hot. I climbed off it an' it
blew up. My rifle was hot, too, an' I chucked it away. Then I saw a ship
go down, on fire. The Wabbly'd stopped still an' it didn't fire a shot.
I'll swear to that. Just my monocycle got hot an' caught on fire, an'
then a ship busted out in flames an' went down. A couple more eggs come
down an' three ships dropped. Didn't hit 'em. The concussion blew the
fabric off 'em. Another one caught fire an' crashed. Then another one. I
looked, an' saw the next one catch. Then the next. It was like a
searchlight beam hittin' 'em. They flamed up, blew up, an' that was
that. The last two tried to get away, but they lit up an' crashed."

       *       *       *       *       *

The pilot's hand flicked up and down, interminably. There was the steady
fierce down-beat of the slip-stream from the vertical propellers. The
helicopter swept forward in a swooping dash.

"The whole east coast's gone crazy," said the 'copter man drily. "Crazy
fools trying to run away. Roads jammed. Work stopped. It leaked out
about the planes being wiped out to-day, and everybody in three states
has heard those eggs going off. You're the only living man who's seen
that crawling thing and lived to tell about it. I've sent your stuff
back. What's that about the thing on top?"

"I hid," said Sergeant Walpole, woodenly. "The Wabbly sent over
gas-shells where the ships landed. Then it went on. Headin' west. It's
got a crazy-lookin' dinkus on top like a searchlight. That moved, while
the ships were catchin' fire an' crashin'. Just like a searchlight, it
moved an' the ships went down. But the Wabbly didn't fire a shot."

The helicopter man's wrist flexed swiftly....

"Gawd!" said Sergeant Walpole in sudden agony. "Drop! Quick!"

The helicopter went down like a stone. A propeller shrieked away into
space. Metalwork up aloft glowed dully red. Then there were whipping,
lashing branches closing swiftly all around the helicopter. A jerk. A
crash. Stillness. The smell of growing things all about.

"Well?" said the 'copter pilot.

"They turned it on us--whatever it is," said Sergeant Walpole. "They
near got us, too."

       *       *       *       *       *

A match scratched. A cigarette glowed. The Sergeant fumbled for a smoke
for himself.

"I'm waiting for that metal to cool off," said the helicopter pilot.
"Maybe we can take off again. They located us with a loop while I was
sending your stuff. Damn! I see what they've got!"

"What?"

"A way of transmitting real power in a radio beam," said the 'copter
man. "You've seen eddy-current stoves. Everybody cooks with 'em
nowadays. A coil with a high-frequency current. You can stick your hand
in it and nothing happens. But you stick an iron pan down in the coil
and it gets hot and cooks things. Hysteresis. The same thing that used
to make transformer-cores get hot. The same thing happens near any beam
transmitter, only you have to measure the heating effect with a
thermo-couple. The iron absorbs the radio waves and gets hot. The chaps
in the Wabbly can probably put ten thousand horsepower in a damned beam.
We can't. But any iron in the way will get hot. It blows up a ship at
once. Your monocycle and your rifle too. Damn!"

He knocked the ash off his cigarette.

"Scientific, those chaps. I'll see if that metal's cool."

Something whined overhead, rising swiftly to a shriek as it descended.
Sergeant Walpole cowered, with his hands to his ears. But it was not an
earth-shaking concussion. It was an explosion, yes, but subtly different
from the rending snap of hexynitrate.

"Gas," said the Sergeant dully, and fumbled for his mask.

"No good," said the 'copter man briefly. "Vesicatory. Smell it? I guess
they've got us. No sag-suits. Not even sag-paste."

The Sergeant lit a match. The flame bent a little from the vertical.

"There's a wind. We got a chance."

"Get going, then," said the 'copter man. "Run upwind."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sergeant Walpole slid over the side and ran. A hundred yards. Two
hundred. Pine-woods have little undergrowth. He heard the helicopter's
engines start. The ship tried to lift. He redoubled his speed. Presently
he broke out into open ploughed land.

In the starlight he saw a barn, and he raced toward that. Someone else
plunged out of the woods toward him. The helicopter-engine was still
roaring faintly in the distance. Then a thin whine came down from
aloft....

When the echoes of the explosion died away the pilot was grinning
queerly. The helicopter's engine was still.

"I said it could be done! Pack of fat-heads at Headquarters!"

"Huh?"

"Picking up a ship by its spark-plugs, with a loop. They're doing that
up aloft. There's a ship up there, forty thousand feet or so. Maybe half
a dozen ships. Refueling in air, I guess, and working with the thing you
call a Wabbly. When I started the 'copter's engine they got the
spark-impulses and sighted on them. We'd better get away from here."

"Horses in here," said Sergeant Walpole. "The Wabbly came by. No people
left."

They brought the animals out. The horses reared and plunged as there
were other infinitely sharp, deadly explosions of the eggs coming down
eight miles through darkness.

"Let's go. After the Wabbly?" said the 'copter man.

"O' course," said Sergeant Walpole. "Somebody's got to find out how to
lick it."

They went clattering through darkness. It was extraordinary what
desolation, what utter lack of human life they moved through. They came
to a town, and there was a taint of gas in the air. No lights burned in
that town. It was dead. The Wabbly had killed it.




PART IV

    "... which panic was enhanced by the destruction of a
    second flight of fighting planes. However, the
    destruction of Bendsboro completed civilian
    demoralization.... A newscasting company re-broadcast
    a private television contact with the town at the
    moment the Wabbly entered it. Practically all the
    inhabitants of the Atlantic Coast heard and saw the
    annihilation of the town--hearing the cries of '_Gas!_'
    and the screams of the people, and hearing the
    crashings as the Wabbly crushed its way inexorably
    across the city, spreading terror everywhere....
    Frenzied demands were made upon the Government for the
    recall of troops from the front to offer battle to the
    Wabbly.... It is considered that at that time the one
    Wabbly had a military effect equal to at least half a
    million men." (_Strategic Lessons of the War of
    1941-43._--U. S. War College. Pp. 83-84.)


They did not enter the town. There was just enough of starlight to show
that the Wabbly had gone through it, and then crashed back and forth
ruthlessly. There was a great gash through the center of the buildings
nearest the edge, and there were other gashes visible here and there.
Everything was crushed down utterly flat in two eight-foot paths; and
there was a mass of crumbled debris four feet high at its highest in
between the tread-marks.

They looked, silently, and went on. They reached a railroad track, the
quadruple track of a branch-line from New York to Philadelphia. The
Wabbly was going along that right-of-way. There was no right-of-way left
where it had been. Rails were crushed flat. Culverts were broken
