A sudden blur seen from the corner of his eyes pulled his gaze
back to the desk. The other orange had vanished.

_Phwup_!

It dropped to the floor before Harper, but now it was a squashy
mess, the insides standing out like petals, the juice running
from it.

The other orange slipped from Harper's nerveless fingers, rolled
along the desk top. Harper pounced on the squashy thing on the
floor, feverishly pushed back the projecting insides, closely
examined it. He looked up wide-eyed at Pillbot.

"Turned inside out," he gasped hoarsely, "without breaking its
skin!"

Pillbot's expression indicated that the scientific attitude was
slowly replacing his former fright. He snapped his fingers.

"Imitation again!" he said, half to himself. He looked at Harper.
"When you bent the paper figure this--this fourth dimensional
entity imitated your action by bending the Professor. Now, as you
started to peel the orange, your action was again imitated--in a
four dimensional manner--by this entity turning the other orange
inside out."

His voice dropped, as he muttered, "Imitativeness--the mark of a
mind of low evolutionary order, or of ..." his words faded off,
his expression thoughtful.

More white showed around Harper's eyes. "You--you mean I am being
specially watched by this Being--that He--It--imitates everything
I do...?"

"That's it," clipped Pillbot. "Because you possess this strange
perception of Its realm the Being has been especially attracted
to you, imitates whatever you do, but in a four dimensional
manner. A Being of inexplicable powers and prerogatives, with
weird power over matter, but with a mentality that is either very
primitive, or--"

Harper leaped into the air with a yell, as Professor Gault's
abbreviated body sidled up to him from behind. As he leaped, the
inside out orange flew out of his grasp.

"I just know," he quavered, "that Professor Gault wants me to do
something, is probably barking orders at me from that other
dimension--oh dear, I've dropped the orange on the Professor's--where
his stomach should be!"

The squashy orange had landed on the area of Gault that was the line
of demarkation between his visible and invisible portions--the area
that his stomach would occupy normally. It rested there in plain
sight of the two startled men.

"I--I'd better remove it," said Harper weakly. He moved with a
dreadful compulsion toward the swaying half-figure, one slender
hand extended tremblingly toward the inverted orange.

Abruptly, the orange vanished. Harper halted like he'd run into a
brick wall. Staring blankly ahead, he put his hands to his
stomach, moaning faintly.

"What's the matter?" cried Pillbot.

"The orange--it's in my--stomach!"

"See, what did I tell you," exulted Pillbot. "Another act of
imitativeness. It saw you drop the orange on Gault's--where his
stomach should be, and imitated by putting the orange in your
stomach. It proves I'm right about the Being--glug!" With a loud
belch, Pillbot broke off. He stared blankly at Harper, then his
hands slowly came up to clutch at his stomach.

Harper looked quickly at the desk top.

"The other orange," he gasped. "It's gone!"

"Into--my--stomach!" groaned Pillbot. "Be--be careful what you
do! My God, don't do anything. Don't even think. This--this four
dimensional creature will surely imitate whatever you do in some
weird manner."

Rubbing his stomach, Pillbot glanced about at the various
articles of furniture. He blanched. "I wouldn't want any of that
stuff inside of me," he yammered.

Harper flicked a despairing glance at the half-body, now gliding
along in the vicinity of the paper cutout.

"We--we must do something to get the Professor back," he said
worriedly.

       *       *       *       *       *

He thought incongruously of a restaurant where he used to order
lemon pie--and invariably get apple. Finally he found that he
could get lemon by ordering peach. Now the problem was, what did
he have to "order" to get his employer extricated from being
stuck between dimensions, like a pig under a fence? Anything he
did would be imitated in a manner that might prove tragic.

The upright portion of the cutout was leaning over backward, the
head drooping down like a wilted flower, as the tension at the
crease slowly lessened.

Gathering together what resolution he could, Harper determined to
take the bull by the horns. He would get the Professor returned
by pressing the upper portion of the cutout flatly onto the desk
surface. With trembling hands, he pressed down on it--then sprang
back with a muffled yell.

Three feet above the half-body, the Professor's head had flashed
into visibility.

"You only pressed the head onto the desk," said Pillbot
disgustedly, "so the Being only impressed Galt's head back into
