"They'll fix you up," he assured the spaceman. "They're quite good at
it, even if the sight of one does make you think a little of an iguana.
Rest up, now; and I'll come back again when you're feeling better."

For the next three weeks, Kinton flew back and forth from his own town
nearly every day. He felt that he should not neglect the few meetings
which were the only way he could repay the Tepoktans for all they did
for him. On the other hand, the chance to see and talk with one of his
own kind drew him like a magnet to the hospital.

The doctors operated upon Birken's leg, inserting a metal rod inside the
bone by a method they had known before Kinton described it. The new
arrival expected to be able to walk, with care, almost any day; although
the pin would have to be removed after the bone had healed. Meanwhile,
Birken seemed eager to learn all Kinton could tell him about the planet,
Tepokt.

About himself, he was remarkably reticent. Kinton worried about this.

"I think we should not expect too much of this Terran," he warned Klaft
uneasily. "You, too, have citizens who do not always obey, your laws,
who sometimes ... that is--"

"Who are born to die under the axe, as we say," interrupted Klaft, as if
to ease the concern plain on Kinton's face. "In other words, criminals.
You suspect this Albirken is such a one, George?"

"It is not impossible," admitted Kinton unhappily. "He will tell me
little about himself. It may be that he was caught in Tepokt's gravity
while fleeing from justice."

To himself, he wished he had not told Birken about the spaceship. He
didn't think the man exactly believed his explanation of why there was
no use taking off in it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Yet he continued to spend as much time as he could visiting the other
man. Then, as his helicopter landed at the city airport one gray dawn,
the news reached him.

"The other Terran has gone," Klaft reported, turning from the
breathless messenger as Kinton followed him from the machine.

"Gone? Where did they take him?"

Klaft looked uneasy, embarrassed. Kinton repeated his question,
wondering about the group of armed police on hand.

"In the night," Klaft hissed and clucked, "when none would think to
watch him, they tell me ... and quite rightly, I think--"

"Get on with it, Klaft! Please!"

"In the night, then, Albirken left the chamber in which he lay. He can
walk some now, you know, because of Dr. Chuxolkhee's metal pin. He--he
stole a ground car and is gone."

"He did?" Kinton had an empty feeling in the pit of his stomach. "Is it
known where he went? I mean ... he has been curious to see some of
Tepokt. Perhaps--"

He stopped, his own words braying in his ears. Klaft was clicking two
claws together, a sign of emphatic disagreement.

"Albirken," he said, "was soon followed by three police constables in
another vehicle. They found him heading in the direction of our town."

"Why did he say he was traveling that way?" asked Kinton, thinking to
himself of the spaceship! Was the man crazy?

"He did not say," answered Klaft expressionlessly. "Taking them by
surprise, he killed two of the constables and injured the third before
fleeing with one of their spears."

"_What?_"

Kinton felt his eyes bulging with dismay.

"Yes, for they carried only the short spears of their authority, not
expecting to need fire weapons."

       *       *       *       *       *

Kinton looked from him to the messenger, noticing for the first time
that the latter was an under-officer of police. He shook his head
distractedly. It appeared that his suspicions concerning Birken had been
only too accurate.

Why was it one like him who got through? he asked himself in silent
anguish. After ten years. The Tepoktans had been thinking well of
Terrans, but now--

He did not worry about his own position. That was well enough
established, whether or not he could again hold up his head before the
purple-scaled people who had been so generous to him.

Even if they had been aroused to a rage by the killing, Kinton told
himself, he would not have been concerned about himself. He had reached
a fairly ripe age for a spaceman. In fact, he had already enjoyed a
decade of borrowed time.

But they were more civilized than that wanton murderer, he realized.

He straightened up, forcing back his early-morning weariness.

"We must get into the air immediately," he told Klaft. "Perhaps we may
