but a short time under the force of my transmissions. They have stopped
sending thought impressions entirely, and are using only their
"clacking" code signals, which they seem to realize I cannot understand.

I feel that they are undertaking some sort of campaign against me. For
hours they congregate, closely packed, their antennae stiffly pointed
straight up. Their thought currents seem to be flowing into and merging
with the bell tone, which grows stronger and more penetrating day by
day.

In my back yard, there are four large ant hills, and at each hill,
curiously, there is no activity except the same mass concentration of
the ants. Have they, too, been affected by my radiations and joined
forces with the original colony against myself?

The bell tone continues to grow stronger.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Feb. 11_

Mrs. Winslow, the middle-aged widow, who comes to clean my house and
laboratory twice a week, was here this morning.

She is short, dumpy, and inclined to be stout. As she went about her
work, I noticed particularly the fat firm flesh of her neck, just below
the jaw. I felt an uncontrollable desire to sink my teeth deep into that
flesh, and enjoy the taste of the warm fresh blood.

I had actually risen from my chair to accomplish my desire, when the
telephone rang ... and my mind cleared.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Feb. 14._

I have decided to stop my experiments with the ants.

As they refuse to send any more thought impressions, there is nothing
further I can learn from them. Somehow, I feel that they are gaining a
hold upon my mind, and that every time I listen in on the receiver, that
hold becomes stronger. I firmly believe that I would have attacked poor
Mrs. Winslow, had not the ringing of the 'phone so opportunely
interrupted me. I have sent word for her to stay away ... as I cannot
trust myself.

I keep a box of fresh earth on the table in my laboratory. I often run
my hands through it, and taste it. It is remarkable how much this
soothes my nerves.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Feb. 16._

It is too late!

For two days, I have kept my apparatus shut off. I have not so much as
looked at the ants, but still that confounded bell tone rings in my ears
with all the insistence of African tom-toms. Hour by hour ... the tone
becomes more penetrating. I cannot sleep, and can eat but little.

As a last resort, I destroyed my ant colony. I even went so far as to
pour boiling water on the four ant hills in my yard.

Still ... the bell tone persists. I can stand it no longer!

Perhaps if I were to dig ... again in the yard ... in the soothing
