
"Sit down and relax," Costa told him. "Everything is in the green so
far. The ship wasn't spotted on the way down. Now all we have to do is
wait for transportation."

In theory at least, Adao Costa was Neel's assistant. In practice he took
complete charge of moving their equipment and getting it under cover in
the capital city of Kitezh. Men and trucks appeared to help them, and
vanished as soon as their work was done. Within twenty hours they were
installed in a large loft, all of the machines uncrated and plugged in.
Neel took a no-sleep and began tuning checks on all the circuits, glad
of something to do. Costa locked the heavy door behind their last silent
helper, then dropped gratefully onto one of the bedding rolls.

"How did the gadgets hold up?" he asked.

"I'm finding out now. They're built to take punishment--but being
dropped twelve feet into mud soup, then getting baked by rockets isn't
in the original specs."

"They crate things well these days," Costa said unworriedly, sucking on
a bottle of the famous Himmelian beer. "When do you go to work?"

"We're working right now," Neel told him, pulling a folder of papers out
of the file. "Before we left I drew up a list of current magazines and
newspapers I would need. You can start on these. I'll have a sampling
program planned by the time you get back."

Costa groaned hollowly and reached for the papers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once the survey was in operation it went ahead of its own momentum. Both
men grabbed what food and sleep they could. The computers gulped down
Neel's figures and spat out tape-reels of answers that demanded even
more facts. Costa and his unseen helpers were kept busy supplying the
material.

Only one thing broke the ordered labors of the week. Neel blinked twice
at Costa before his equation-fogged brain assimilated an immediate and
personal factor.

"You've a bandage on your head," he said. "A _blood-stained_ bandage!"

"A little trouble in the streets. Mobs. And that's an incredible feat of
observation," Costa marveled. "I had the feeling that if I came in here
stark naked, you wouldn't notice it."

"I ... I get involved," Neel said. Dropping the papers on a table and
kneading the tired furrow between his eyes. "Get wrapped up in the
computation. Sorry. I tend to forget about people."

"Don't feel sorry to me," Costa said. "You're right. Doing the job. I'm
supposed to help you, not pose for the _before_ picture in Home Hospital
ads. Anyway--how are we doing? Is there going to be a war? Certainly
seems like one brewing outside. I've seen two people lynched who were
only suspected of being Earthies."

"Looks don't mean a thing," Neel said, opening two beers. "Remember the
analogy of the pile. It boils liquid metal and cooks out energy from the
infrared right through to hard radiation. Yet it keeps on generating
power at a nice, steady rate. But your A-bomb at zero minus one second
looks as harmless as a fallen log. It's the k-factor that counts, not
surface appearance. This planet may look like a dictator's dream of
glory, but as long as we're reading in the negative things are fine."

"And how are things? How's our little k-factor?"

"Coming out soon," Neel said, pointing at the humming computer. "Can't
tell about it yet. You never can until the computation is complete.
There's a temptation to try and guess from the first figures, but
they're meaningless. Like trying to predict the winner of a horse race
by looking at the starters lined up at the gate."

"Lots of people think they can."

"Let them. There are few enough pleasures in this life without taking
away all delusions."

Behind them the computer thunked and was suddenly still.

"This is it," Neel said, and pulled out the tape. He ran it quickly
through his fingers, mumbling under his breath. Just once he stopped and
set some figures into his hand computer. The result flashed in the
window and he stared at it, unmoving.

"Good? Bad? What is it?"

Neel raised his head and his eyes were ten years older.

"Positive. Bad. Much worse than it was when we left Earth."

"How much time do we have?"

"Don't know for certain," Neel shrugged. "I can set it up and get an
approximation. But there is no definite point on the scale where war
_has_ to break out. Just a going and going until, somewhere along the
line--"

"I know. Gone." Costa said, reaching for his gun. He slid it into his
side pocket. "Now it's time to stop looking and start doing. What do I
do?"

"Going to kill War Marshal Lommeord?" Neel asked distastefully. "I
thought we had settled that you can't stop a war by assassinating the
top man."

"We also settled that _something_ can be done to change the k-factor.
The gun is for my own protection. While you're radioing results back to
Earth and they're feeling bad about it, I'm going to be doing something.
Now _you_ tell me what that something is."

This was a different man from the relaxed and quietly efficient Adao
Costa of the past week. All of his muscles were hard with the restrained
energy of an animal crouching to leap. The gun, ready in his pocket, had
a suddenly new significance. Neel looked away, reaching around for
words. This was all very alien to him and suddenly a little frightening.
It was one thing to work out a k-problem in class, and discuss the
theory of correction.

It was something entirely different to direct the operation.

"Well?" Costa's voice knifed through his thoughts.

"You can ... well ... it's possible to change one of the peak population
curves. Isolate individuals and groups, then effect status and location
changes--"

"You mean get a lot of guys to take jobs in other towns through the
commercial agents?"

Neel nodded.

"Too slow." Costa withered the idea with his voice. "Fine in the long
run, but of absolutely no value in an emergency." He began to pace back
and forth. Too quickly. It was more of a bubbling-over than a
relaxation. "Can't you isolate some recent key events that can be
reversed?"

"It's possible." Neel thought about it, quickly. "It wouldn't be a final
answer, just a delaying action."

"That's good enough. Tell me what to do."

Neel flipped through his books of notes, checking off the Beta-13's.
These were the reinforcers, the individuals and groups who were k-factor
amplifiers. It was a long list which he cut down quickly by crossing off
the low increment additions and multiple groups. Even while the list was
incomplete, Neel began to notice a pattern. It was an unlikely one, but
it was there. He isolated the motivator and did a frequency check. Then
sat back and whistled softly.

"We have a powerhouse here," he said, flipping the paper across the
table. "Take this organization out of the equations and you might even
knock us negative."
