for food, although he himself could pronounce neither. He knew the names
of a few plants, a few parts of the body. And he learned a few names of
people. The red-green haired old man was, as close as he could make the
sounds, Yanyoo. He took the trouble to notice that the prettiest girl
was Aoooya.

       *       *       *       *       *

At first everything had been exceedingly peaceful. But about a week
after his arrival--he couldn't be sure exactly how many days had passed,
because he hadn't kept count--he learned of some of the dangers they
faced.

It was while they were holding the morning ceremony that the thing came
out of the forest. At first he thought that a tree had moved. It was
green, with reddish blotches like clusters of needle leaves, and it
seemed to ooze forward toward them from among the trees. Aoooya noticed
it first, and pointed and screamed. It was the size of a tiger, thought
Bradley, and might be even more dangerous. He had difficulty keeping
his eyes on the rapidly moving creature through the goggles of his
helmet. He was aware of gleaming eyes, of two rows of dull green teeth,
and of muscles that rippled under the green fur.

Several of the men had little blowpipes, through which they released a
shower of darts. But the darts bounced off the fur, and the thing came
on. Bradley fumbled for his gun, and almost dropped it in his
excitement. When he finally brought it up into aiming position, his hand
was trembling, and his finger could hardly catch the trigger.

The thing leaped into the air at the old man, Yanyoo, just as the gun
went off. The body vaporized first, leaving for a fraction of a second
the fierce head and the powerful legs apparently supporting themselves
in the air. Then part of the head went, and the rest fell to the ground.
But sheer momentum carried the green smoky vapor on, so that it
surrounded first the old man, then several of the girls, and after them,
Bradley himself. They were all yelling, all but Bradley, who put away
his gun and muttered to himself in relief, and then the wind began to
dissipate the vapor, and on the ground there was left only part of a
head and six torn legs.

They were bowing to him and raising their voices high in thanks. It was
easy, thought Bradley. Really, it was a cinch to be a god. The beasts
that were such great dangers to them were mere trifles to him. To him,
with a gun loaded with a thousand thermal charges each of which was
capable of blasting armor plate. The thing wouldn't even have come close
if he himself hadn't been such a timid, cowardly fool. Put Malevski in
his place, and the detective would have got the creature as it came out
of the trees. He wasn't Malevski.

It was a good thing for him that they couldn't know that. Now his
position was completely secure. Now he could relax and enjoy his divine
life.

He didn't realize that a much greater danger was yet to come. He found
that out after the evening ceremony.

       *       *       *       *       *

The group that came to see him this time was bigger than ever.
Evidently, to honor him they had dropped all other work. Yanyoo seemed
to have constituted himself Bradley's priest. He made a tremendously
long and rhapsodic-sounding speech, but at the end there was no donation
of the usual food and flowers. Instead, Yanyoo backed away, all the
others doing the same, and looking at Bradley as if expecting him to
follow them.

He followed. In this manner, with his worshippers walking respectfully
backwards, they arrived at what seemed to Bradley to be an ordinary
small hut. Outside the hut was what he took for a curiously shaped log
of wood. The inside of the hut was in shadow, but as his eyes became
accustomed to the dimness, he saw something in one corner. It was a
weird-looking head, also of wood.

It struck him then. The log of wood had been the old god, good enough to
worship until he had come along and shown them what a god could really
do. Now it had been contemptuously deposed and decapitated. The hut was
a shrine. It was all his.

He _had_ been promoted after all. The thought didn't please him in the
least. Suppose _he_ failed them too--and that was very possible, for he
had no idea of what miracles they expected of him. Then he would be
deposed and--he gagged at the thought, but he knew that he had to finish
it--decapitated.

But for the moment there was no thought of deposing him. The gifts they
offered were more lavish than ever. And in addition to the food and
flowers, there was something new. A jug, filled with a warm,
sweetish-smelling liquid. He could get the odor faintly through the
intake valve of his helmet. Later on, when his worshippers were gone and
he had his helmet off, he realized that it smelled up the entire hut.

It couldn't be harmful. Nothing that they had offered him so far was
harmful. He took a sip--and sighed with content. This was one of the few
things he had been lacking. There was alcohol, and there were flavors
and essences that reminded him of the drinks he had encountered on a
dozen planets. But this was first class stuff, not diluted or
adulterated with the thousand and one synthetics that were put in to
stretch a good thing as far as it could go.

Without realizing the danger, he downed the entire contents of the jug.

       *       *       *       *       *

He felt good. He hadn't felt so good in years, not since his mother had
made him a special cake for his birthday when he was--let me see now,
was it eight or nine? No matter, it had been many years ago, and the
occasion had been notable for the fact that she had let him drink some
of the older people's punch, made with a tiny bit of some alcoholic
drink. He felt _very_ good. He picked up his helmet and put it on his
head, and stuck the stem of a green flower rakishly through the exit
valve of the helmet, so that the flower seemed to dance every time he
exhaled, and staggered out of his hut.
