"Assume that it isn't--it probably won't be," the Chief grunted.

"I accelerate or decelerate--"

"Solving new equations all the while?"

"Sure--don't interrupt so--until at zero time the activity, extrapolated
to zero time, matches one of my bombs. I cut that bomb loose, shoot
myself off in a sharp curve, and Z-W-E-E-E-T--POWIE! She's out!" With an
expressive, sweeping gesture.

"You hope," the Lensman was frankly dubious. "And there you are, right
in the middle of that explosion, with two duodec bombs outside your
armor--or just inside your flitter."

"Oh, no. I've shot them away several seconds ago, so that they explode
somewhere else, nowhere near me."

"_I_ hope. But do you realize just how busy a man you are going to be
during those ten or twelve seconds?"

"Fully." Cloud's face grew somber. "But I will be in full control. I
won't be afraid of anything that can happen--_anything_. And," he went
on, under his breath, "that's the hell of it."

"QX," the Lensman admitted finally, "you can go. There are a lot of
things you haven't mentioned, but you'll probably be able to work them
out as you go along. I think I'll go out and work with the boys in the
lookout station while you're doing your stuff. When are you figuring on
starting?"

"How long will it take to get the flitter ready?"

"A couple of days. Say we meet you there Saturday morning?"

"Saturday the tenth, at eight o'clock. I'll be there."

       *       *       *       *       *

And again Neal Cloud and Babe, the big blue ox, hit the road. And as he
rolled the physicist mulled over in his mind the assignment to which he
had set himself.

Like fire, only worse, intra-atomic energy was a good servant, but a
terrible master. Man had liberated it before he could really control it.
In fact, control was not yet, and perhaps never would be, perfect. Up to
a certain size and activity, yes. They, the millions upon millions of
self-limiting ones, were the servants. They could be handled, fenced in,
controlled; indeed, if they were not kept under an exciting bombardment
and very carefully fed, they would go out. But at long intervals, for
some one of a dozen reasons--science knew _so_ little, fundamentally, of
the true inwardness of the intra-atomic reactions--one of these small,
tame, self-limiting vortices flared, nova-like, into a large, wild,
self-sustaining one. It ceased being a servant then, and became a
master. Such flare-ups occurred, perhaps, only once or twice in a
century on Earth; the trouble was that they were so utterly, damnably
_permanent_. They never went out. And no data were ever secured: for
every living thing in the vicinity of a flare-up died; every instrument
and every other solid thing within a radius of a hundred feet melted
down into the reeking, boiling slag of its crater.

Fortunately, the rate of growth was slow--as slow, almost, as it was
persistent--otherwise Civilization would scarcely have had a planet
left. And unless something could be done about loose vortices before
too many years, the consequences would be really serious. That was why
his laboratory had been established in the first place.

Nothing much had been accomplished so far. The tractor beam that would
take hold of them had never been designed. Nothing material was of any
use; it melted. Pressors worked, after a fashion: it was by the use of
these beams that they shoved the vortices around, off into the waste
places--unless it proved cheaper to allow the places where they had come
into being to remain waste places. A few, through sheer luck, had been
blown into self-limiting bits by duodec. Duodecaplylatomate, the most
powerful, the most frightfully detonant explosive ever invented upon all
the known planets of the First Galaxy. But duodec had taken an awful
toll of life. Also, since it usually scattered a vortex instead of
extinguishing it, duodec had actually caused far more damage than it had
cured.

No end of fantastic schemes had been proposed, of course; of varying
degrees of fantasy. Some of them sounded almost practical. Some of them
had been tried; some of them were still being tried. Some, such as the
perennially-appearing one of building a huge hemispherical hull in the
ground under and around the vortex, installing an inertialess drive, and
shooting the whole neighborhood out into space, were perhaps feasible
from an engineering standpoint. They were, however, potentially so
capable of making things worse that they would not be tried save as
last-ditch measures. In short, the control of loose vortices was very
much an unsolved problem.

       *       *       *       *       *

Number One vortex, the oldest and worst upon Tellus, had been pushed out
into the Badlands; and there, at eight o'clock on the tenth, Cloud
started to work upon it.

The "lookout station," instead of being some such ramshackle structure
as might have been deduced from the Lensman's casual terminology, was in
fact a fully-equipped observatory. Its staff was not large--eight men
worked in three staggered eight-hour shifts of two men each--but the
instruments! To develop them had required hundreds of man-years of time
and near-miracles of research, not the least of the problems having been
that of developing shielded conductors capable of carrying truly through
five-ply screens of force the converted impulses of the very radiations
against which those screens were most effective. For the observatory,
and the one long approach to it as well, had to be screened heavily;
without such protection no life could exist there.

This problem and many others had been solved, however, and there the
instruments were. Every phase and factor of the vortex's existence and
activity were measured and recorded continuously, throughout every
minute of every day of every year. And all of these records were summed
up, integrated, into the "Sigma" curve. This curve, while only an
incredibly and senselessly tortuous line to the layman's eye, was a
veritable mine of information to the initiate.

Cloud glanced along the Sigma curve of the previous forty-eight hours
and scowled, for one jagged peak, scarcely an hour old, actually punched
through the top line of the chart.

"Bad, huh, Frank?" he grunted.

"Plenty bad, Storm, and getting worse," the observer assented. "I
wouldn't wonder if Carlowitz were right, after all--if she ain't getting
ready to blow her top I'm a Zabriskan fontema's maiden aunt."

"No periodicity--no equation, of course." It was a statement, not a
question. The Lensman ignored as completely as did the observer, if not
as flippantly, the distinct possibility that at any moment the
observatory and all that it contained might be resolved into their
component atoms.

"None whatever," came flatly from Cloud. He did not need to spend hours
