half an inch in diameter.  The axis of the larger tube is 3.5 inches
above the table at the point of support, and is inclined to the
horizontal at an angle of 12 deg..  The axis of the smaller tube is 2.5
inches above the surface of the table, and is inclined to the
horizontal at the same angle as the larger one.

The air jets are simply pieces of glass tube held in position by
corks.  The gas supply is regulated by a well-bored tap.  The air
supply is regulated by treading the bellows--no tap is requisite.
The bellows employed are ordinary smiths' bellows, measuring 22 inches
long by 13 inches wide in the widest part.  They are weighted by lead
weights, weighing 26 lbs.  The treadle is connected to the bellows by
a small steel chain, for the length requires to be invariable.  As the
treadle only acts in forcing air from the lower into the upper chamber
of the bellows, a weight of 13 lbs.  is hung on to the lower cover, so
as to open the bellows automatically.

The air jets which have hitherto been found convenient are:
for the small gas tube

(1) a tube 0.12 inch diameter drawn down to a jet of 0.032 inch
diameter for small work;

(2) plain tubes not drawn down of 0.14 inch, 0.127 inch, and -0.245
inch diameter, and for the large gas tube, plain tubes up to 0.3 inch
in diameter.

The table is placed in such a position that the operator sits with his
back to a window and has the black calico screen in front of him and
to his right.  The object of the screen is to protect the workman
against draughts.  The table is purposely left unscreened to the left
of the workman, so that long tubes may be treated.

Sec. 17.  Other appliances which will be required for glass-blowing are
of the simplest character.

(1) Small corks for closing the ends of tubes.

(2) Soft wax--a mixture of bees' wax and resin softened by linseed
oil to the proper consistency, easily found by trial, also used for
temporarily closing tubes.

(3) A bottle of vaseline for lubricating.

(4) An old biscuit tin filled with asbestos in shreds, and an asbestos
towel or cloth for annealing glass after removal from the flame.  As
asbestos absorbs moisture, which would defeat its use as an annealing
material, it must be dried if necessary.

(5) A Glass-Cutter's Knife. This is best made out of a fine
three-cornered file, with the file teeth almost ground out, but not
quite;  it should be about 2 inches long.  After the surface has been
ground several times, it may be necessary to reharden the steel.  This
is best done by heating to a full red and quenching in mercury.  The
grindstone employed for sharpening the knife should be "quick," so as
to leave a rough edge.  I have tried many so-called glass knives "made
in Germany," but, with one exception, they were nothing like so good
as a small French or Sheffield file.  In this matter I have the
support of Mr. Shenstone's experience.

(6) A wire nail, about 2 inches long, mounted very accurately in a
thin cylindrical wooden handle about 5 inches long by one-quarter of
an inch diameter, or, better still, a bit of pinion wire 6 inches
long, of which 1.5 inches are turned down as far as the cylindrical
core, An old dentists' chisel or filling tool is also a very good
form of instrument.

(7) A bit of charcoal about 3.5 inches long and 2 wide, and of any
thickness, will be found very useful in helping to heat a very large
tube.  The charcoal block is provided with a stout wire handle, bent
in such a manner that the block can be held close above a large glass
tube on which the flames impinge.  In some cases it is conveniently
held by a clip stand.  By the use of such a slab of charcoal the
temperature obtainable over a large surface can be considerably
increased.

I have seen a wine-glass (Venetian sherry-glass) worked on a table
with four blow-pipes, such as is here described, with the help of a
block of hard wood held over the heated glass, and helping the
attainment of a high temperature by its own combustion.

(8) Several retort stands with screw clips.

(9) Some blocks of wood about 5" X 2" X 2" with V-shaped notches cut
in from the top.

(10) A strong pair of pliers.

(11) An apparatus for cleaning and drying the breath, when blowing
directly by the mouth is not allowable.  The apparatus consists of a
solid and heavy block of wood supporting a calcium-chloride tube
permanently connected with a tube of phosphorus pentoxide divided into
compartments by plugs of glass wool.  Care should be taken to arrange
these tubes so as to occupy the smallest space, and to have the stand
particularly stable.  The exit tube from the phosphorus pentoxide
should be drawn down to form a nozzle, from, say, half an inch to
one-eighth of an inch in diameter, so as to easily fit almost any bit
of rubber tube.  The entry to the calcium chloride should be
permanently fitted to about a yard of fine soft rubber tubing, as
light as possible.  The ends of this tube should terminate in a glass
mouthpiece, which should not be too delicate.

As an additional precaution against dust, I sometimes add a tube
containing a long plug of glass wool, between the phosphorus pentoxide
and the delivery tube, and also a tube containing stick potash on the
entry side of the calcium chloride tube, but it may safely be left to
individual judgment to determine when these additions require to be
made.  In practice I always keep the affair set up with these
additions.  The communication between all the parts should be
perfectly free, and the tubes should be nearly filled with reagents,
so as to avoid having a large volume of air to compress before a
pressure can be got up.

The arrangement will be clear by a reference to Fig.  8, which
illustrates the apparatus in use for joining two long tubes.  I have
tried blowing-bags, etc, but, on the whole, prefer the above
arrangement, for, after a time, the skill one acquires in regulating
the pressure by blowing by the mouth and lips is such an advantage
that it is not to be lightly foregone.

Fig. 8.

Sec. 18.  The Table.

The system of four blow-pipes is, of course, a fixture.  In this case
the table may be about a yard square, and may be covered with asbestos
mill-board neatly laid down, but this is not essential.  The table
should have a rim running round it about a quarter of an inch high.
The tools should be laid to the right of the worker, and for this
purpose the blow-pipes are conveniently fixed rather to the left of
the centre of the table, but not so far as to make the leg of the
table come so close to the operator as to make him uncomfortable, for
a cheerful and contented spirit ought to be part of the glass-worker's
outfit.

The most convenient height for a blow-pipe table--with the blow-pipes
about 2 inches above the table top--is 3 feet 2 inches.  Nothing is
so convenient to sit upon as a rough music-stool with a good range of
adjustment.  The advantage of an adjustable seat lies in the fact that
for some operations one wants to be well over the work, while in
others the advantage of resting the arms against the table is more
important.

Sec. 19.  Special Operations.

The preliminary to most operations before the blow-pipe, is to draw
down a tube and pull it out to a fine point.  This is also the
operation on which a beginner should exercise himself in the first
instance.  I will suppose that it is desired to draw out a tube about
one-quarter of an inch in diameter, with the object of closing it,
either permanently or temporarily, and leaving a handle for future
operations in the shape of the point, thin enough to cool quickly and
so not delay further work.

For this simple operation most of the glass-blower's skill is
required.  The tube must be grasped between the first finger and thumb
of both hands, and held so that the part to be operated on lies evenly
between the two hands.  The distance between the operator's thumbs may
conveniently vary from 2.5 to 4 inches.  Releasing the grip of the
left hand, let the operator assure himself of his ability to easily
rotate the tube about its axis--by the right thumb and finger--he
will incidentally observe by the "feel" whether the tube is straight
or not.

A good deal of progress can be made from this point before the tube is
heated at all.  The operator can acquire a habit of instinctively
rotating the tube by both hands, however the tube itself be moved
about in space, or however it be pushed or pulled.  The habit of
constant and instinctive rotation is literally about one-third of the
whole art of glassblowing.  It is unlikely, however, that the beginner
will discover that he has not got this habit, until a few failures
draw his attention to it.

The glass tube being held in position lightly yet firmly, and the
operator being sure that he feels comfortable and at his ease, and
that the blow-pipe flame (a single flame in this instance) is well
under control, the preliminary heating may be commenced.  With a tube
of the dimensions given this is a very simple affair.  Turn the air
partly off, or blow gently, to get a partly luminous gas flame; hold
the tube about an inch from the end of this flame, and turn it round
and round till it commences to soften.

In the case of soda glass it is usual to employ the gas flame only,
but I find that it is better in most cases to use the hot air of a
gently-blown flame, rather than have the disadvantage of the soot
deposited in the alternative operation.  When the glass begins to
soften, or even before, it may be moved right into the blow-pipe
flame, and the latter may be properly urged.

It is not possible to give quite explicit and definite instructions,
applicable to every case, as to when the time is ripe for passing the
work into the flame, but the following notes will indicate the general
rules to be observed:-

(1) A thick tube must be warmed more slowly and raised to a higher
temperature than a thin tube.

(2) The same remark applies to a tube of large diameter, as compared
with one of small diameter, whatever the thickness.

(3) In the case of very large or thick tubes the hot air is
advantageously employed at first, and to complete the preliminary
heating, the luminous flame alone may be used.  The object of this is
to enable the operator to judge, by the presence of soot, its
inability to deposit--or its burning off if deposited--of the
temperature of the glass, and of the equality of this temperature all
over the surface, for a large and thick tube might be heated quite
enough to enable it to be safely exposed to the full heat before it is
appreciably yielding to the fingers.  In general, when the soot burns
off freely, or lead glass begins to show the faintest sign of
reduction, or soda glass begins to colour the flame, it is more than
safe to proceed.

In order to turn on the full flame the operator will form a habit of
holding the work in the left hand only, and he will also take care not
to let anything his right hand may be doing cause him to stop rotating
the tube with his left thumb and finger.

The preliminary adjustment of air or oxygen supply will enable the
change to a flame of maximum power to be made very quickly.  The tube
having been introduced with constant rotation, it will soon soften
sufficiently to be worked.  The beginner will find it best to decide
the convenient degree of softness by trial.

With soda glass it does not much matter how soft the glass becomes,
for it remains viscous, but with lead glass the viscosity persists for
a longer time and then suddenly gives place to a much greater degree
of fluidity.  [Footnote: This is only drawn from my impressions
acquired in glass-working.  I have never explicitly tested the matter
experimentally.]

It is just at this point that a beginner will probably meet with his
first difficulty.  As soon as the glass gets soft he will find that he
no longer rotates the glass at the same speed by the right and left
hand, and, moreover, he will probably unconsciously bend the tube, and
even deform it, by pushing or pulling.

The second third of the art of the glass-blower consists in being able
to move both hands about, rotating a tube with each thumb and finger,
and keeping the distance between the hands, and also the speed of
rotation, constant.  Nothing but long practice can give this facility,
but it is essential that it be acquired to some extent, or no progress
can be made.  Some people acquire a moderate proficiency very quickly,
others, of whom the writer is one, only become reasonably proficient
by months, or even years, of practice.

Supposing that the tube is now ready to be drawn down, the operator
will remove it from the flame, and will gently pull the ends apart,
interrupting his turning as little as possible.  If the tube be pulled
too hard, or if the area heated be too small (about three-eighths of
an inch in length in the case given would be proper), it will be found
that the ends of the two portions of the tube will be nearly closed at
a very sharp angle (nearly a right angle to the length of the tube),
that the ends will be thin, and that a long length of very fine tube
will be produced.  To heat a short length of tube and pull hard and
suddenly is the proper way to make a very fine capillary tube, but, in
general, this is what we want to avoid.

If the operation be successfully performed, the drawn-down tube will
have the appearance exhibited, which is suitable either for
subsequently closing or handling by means of the drawn-down portion.
The straightness of the point can be obtained by a little practice in
"feeling" the glass when the tube is rotated as it cools just before
it loses its viscous condition.

When the operation is carried out properly the shoulder of the "draw"
should be perfectly symmetrical and of even thickness, and its axis
regarded as that of a cone should lie in the axis of the tube
produced.  The operation should be repeated till the student finds
that he can produce this result with certainty, and he should not be
discouraged if this takes several days, or even weeks.  Of course, it
is probable that within the first hour he will succeed in making a
tolerable job, but it is his business to learn never to make anything
else.

Fig. 9.

Fig. 10. Diagram of a folded end.

Sec. 20.  Closing and blowing out the End of a Tube.

When it is desired to close the end of a particular bit of tube, this
is easily done by heating the end, and at the same time heating the
end of a waste bit of tube or rod;  the ends, when placed in contact,
stick together, and a point can be drawn down as before.  [Footnote:
"Point" is here used in the technical sense, i.e.  it is a thin tail
of glass produced by drawing down a tube.]  Having got a point, it
will be found that the thin glass cools enough to allow of the point
being handled after a few moments.

The most convenient way of reducing the point to a suitable length
(say 1.5 inch) is to fuse it off in the flame, but this must be done
neatly;  if a tail is left it may cause inconvenience by catching, or
even piercing the finger and breaking off.  The blow-pipe flame being
turned down to a suitable size, and the shoulder of the "draw" having
been kept warm meanwhile, let the tip of the flame impinge on a point
where the diameter is about half that of the undrawn tube, and let the
temperature be very high (Fig.  11).  The tube is to be inclined to
the flame so that the latter strikes the shoulder normally, or
nearly so.  Then, according to circumstances, little or much of the
glass can be removed at will by drawing off the tail (Fig.  12), till,
finally, a small drop of melted glass only, adheres to the end of the
now closed tube (Fig.  13).

Fig. 11.

Fig.  12.

Fig.  13.

Fig. 14.

When this is satisfactorily accomplished, heat the extreme end of the
tube most carefully and equally, holding it in such a position that
the glass will tend to flow from the bead back on to the tube, i.e.
hold the closed end up to the flame, the tube being, say, at 45
degrees to the horizontal.  Then when the temperature is such as to
indicate complete softness lift the tube to the mouth, still holding
the tube pointing with its closed end a little above the horizontal,
and blow gently.  A beginner almost always blows too hard.

What is wanted, of course, is a continued pressure, to give the
viscous glass time to yield gradually, if it is uniform;  or else
intermittent puffs to enable the thinner parts, if there are any, to
cool more, and hence become more resisting than the thicker ones.  In
any case a little practice will enable the operator to blow out a
round and even end--neither thicker nor thinner than the rest of the
tube.

Sec. 21.  To make a Weld.

To begin with, try on two bits of glass of the same size, i.e.  cut a
seven-inch length of glass in half by scratching it with the knife,
and pulling the ends apart with a slight inclination away from the
scratch.  In other words, combine a small bending moment with a
considerable tensional stress.  It is important to learn to do this
properly.  If the proportions are not well observed, the tube will
break with difficulty, and the section will not be perpendicular to
the main length.  If the knife is in good order it will make a fine
deep scratch--the feel of the glass under the knife will enable the
operator to decide when the scratch is made.  The operation of cutting
large tubes will be treated further on.  The two halves of the tube
being held one in each hand, and one tube closed at one end, the
extremities to be united will be warmed, and then put in the flame as
before.

Fig. 16.

There are many ways of proceeding--perhaps the easiest is as follows.
As soon as the glass shows signs of melting at the ends--and care
should be taken that much more is not heated--take both bits out of
