it, Paul. That's it. Now another."

"In pretty bad shape, isn't he?"

Nurse Peters turned to look at the man who had walked up behind her. It
was Dr. Benwick, the new interne.

"He's worthless to himself and anyone else," she said. "It's a shame,
too; he'd be rather nice looking if there were any personality behind
that face." She shoveled another spoonful of mashed asparagus into the
gaping mouth. "Now swallow it, Paul."

"How long has he been here?" Benwick asked, eyeing the scars that showed
through the dark hair on the patient's head.

"Nearly six years," Miss Peters said.

"Hmmh! But they outlawed lobotomies back in the sixties."

"Open your mouth, Paul." Then, to Benwick: "This was an accident. Bullet
in the head. You can see the scar on the other side of his head."

       *       *       *       *       *

The doctor moved around to look at the left temple. "Doesn't leave much
of a human being, does it?"

"It doesn't even leave much of an animal," Miss Peters said. "He's
alive, but that's the best you can say for him. (Now swallow, Paul.
That's it.) Even an ameba can find food for itself."

"Yeah. Even a single cell is better off than he is. Chop out a man's
forebrain and he's nothing. It's a case of the whole being _less_ than
the sum of its parts."

"I'm glad they outlawed the operation on mental patients," Miss Peters
said, with a note of disgust in her voice.

Dr. Benwick said: "It's worse than it looks. Do you know why the
anti-lobotomists managed to get the bill passed?"

"Let's drink some milk now, Paul. No, Doctor; I was only a little girl
at that time."

"It was a matter of electro-encephalographic records. They showed that
there was electrical activity in the prefrontal lobes even after the
nerves had been severed, which could mean a lot of things; but the A-L
supporters said that it indicated that the forebrain was still capable
of thinking."

Miss Peters looked a little ill. "Why--that's _horrible_! I wish you'd
never told me." She looked at the lump of vegetablized human sitting
placidly at the table. "Do you suppose he's actually _thinking_,
somewhere, deep inside?"

"Oh, I doubt it," Benwick said hastily. "There's probably no real
self-awareness, none at all. There couldn't be."

"I suppose not," Miss Peters said, "but it's not pleasant to think of."

"That's why they outlawed it," said Benwick.


RONDO--ANDANTE MA NON POCO

Insanity is a retreat from reality, an escape within the mind from the
reality outside the mind. But what if there is no detectable reality
outside the mind? What is there to escape from? Suicide--death in any
form--is an escape from life. But if death does not come, and can not be
self-inflicted, what then?

And when the pressure of nothingness becomes too great to bear, it
becomes necessary to escape; a man under great enough pressure will take
the easy way out. But if there is no easy way? Why, then a man must take
the hard way.

For Paul Wendell, there was no escape from his dark, senseless Gehenna
by way of death, and even insanity offered no retreat; insanity in
itself is senseless, and senselessness was what he was trying to flee.
The only insanity possible was the psychosis of regression, a fleeing
into the past, into the crystallized, unchanging world of memory.

So Paul Wendell explored his past, every year, every hour, every second
of it, searching to recall and savor every bit of sensation he had ever
experienced. He tasted and smelled and touched and heard and analyzed
each of them minutely. He searched through his own subjective thought
processes, analyzing, checking and correlating them.

_Know thyself._ Time and time again, Wendell retreated from his own
memories in confusion, or shame, or fear. But there was no retreat from
himself, and eventually he had to go back and look again.

He had plenty of time--all the time in the world. How can subjective
time be measured when there is no objective reality?

       *       *       *       *       *

Eventually, there came the time when there was nothing left to look at;
nothing left to see; nothing to check and remember; nothing that he had
not gone over in every detail. Again, boredom began to creep in. It was
not the boredom of nothingness, but the boredom of the familiar.
Imagination? What could he imagine, except combinations and permutations
of his own memories? He didn't know--perhaps there might be more to it
than that.

