uh, well, Daniel Stern had been in the country for a couple of years,
and he had ... well, sort of advised. So the king----"

Don looked out the window again.

With this weather, the ranch would be quiet. Hands would be all in the
bunkhouses, crowding around the stoves. Oh, well, he and Dad could fool
around down in the range. Since Mom had---- He jerked his head around
to face the instructor.

Mr. Barnes was looking at him.

"Um-m-m, yes. That's good, Mara," he said. "Michaels, suppose you go on
from there."

Don glanced across at the student who had just finished her recitation,
but she merely gave him a blankly unfriendly stare. He looked back at
the instructor.

"I lost the last few sentences," he admitted. "Sorry."

Barnes smiled sardonically. "Well, there's an honest admission," he
said. "What's the last you picked up?"

Don shrugged resignedly.

"The appointment of Daniel Stern as Minister of Finance," he said.
"That would be in eight twelve."

"You didn't miss too much." Barnes nodded. "You just got a little
ahead. Take it from there."

"After a few months, the financial affairs of the kingdom began to
improve," Don commenced.

"By the middle of eight thirteen, the tax reforms were in full effect.
There was strong opposition to the elimination of the old system--both
from the old nobility, who had profited by it, and from some of the
colonists. But an Enforcement Corps was formed to see that the new
taxes were properly administered and promptly paid. And the kingdom
became financially stable." He paused.

Actually, he realized with a start, it had been Stern who had founded
and trained the Enforcement Corps--first to enforce the revenue taxes,
and later as a sort of national police force. And it had always been
Stern who had controlled the Enforcement Corps. It was almost a private
army, in fact. Maybe Pete---- He continued his recitation.

"Then Prime Minister Delon died rather ... rather suddenly, and the
king appointed Mr. Stern to the vacancy. And when King Weronar himself
died a little more than four years ago, Prime Minister Stern was
acclaimed as prince regent." Don paused thoughtfully.

                    *      *      *      *      *

Delon's death had been sudden--and a little suspicious. But no one had
questioned Stern or any of his people about it. And the death of the
king and queen themselves--now there was.... Again, he got back to his
recitation.

"There was opposition to Mr. Stern's confirmation as Regent, of course,
since he was a galactic and not native to the planet. But he was the
prime minister, and therefore the logical person to take the reins." He
frowned.

"The claims to the throne were--and still are--pretty muddled. No one
of the claimants supported by the major tribes is clearly first in line
for the throne, and no compromise has been reached." The frown
deepened.

"Traditionally," he went on, "the Star Throne should never be vacant
for more than five years. So we can expect to see a full conclave of
the tribes within a few months, to choose among the claimants and
select one to be either head of the clan Onar, or the founder of a new
royal line."

Barnes nodded. "Yes, that's fairly clear. But we must remember, of
course, that the tradition you mention is no truly binding law or
custom. It's merely a superstitious belief, held to by some of the
older people, and based on ... well----" He smiled faintly.

"Actually, under the present circumstances, with no claimant clearly in
line, and with the heraldic branch still sifting records, it is far
more practical and sensible to recognize the need for a continued
regency." He took a step back and propped himself against his desk.

"In any event, most of the claimants of record are too young for
independent rule, so the regency will be forced to carry on for some
time."

He looked for a fleeting instant at the inconspicuous monitor speaker
on the wall.

"As matters stand now, the tribes might find it impossible to decide on
any of the claimants. As you said, there is no truly clear line. King
Weronar died childless, you remember, and his queen didn't designate a
foster son." He shrugged.

"Well, we shall see," he added. "Now, suppose we go back a little,
Michaels. You said there was some opposition from the colonists to the
tax reforms of eight twelve. Can you go a little more into detail on
that?"

Don touched his face. He'd been afraid of that. Somehow, neither the
book nor the lectures really jibed with some of the things he'd heard
his father talk about. Something about the whole situation just didn't
make full sense. He shrugged mentally. Well....

The door opened and a student runner came into the room. Don watched
him walk up to Mr. Barnes with some relief. Maybe, after the
interruption, someone else would be picked to carry on.

The youngster came to the desk and handed a slip to the instructor, who
read it, then looked up.

"Michaels," he said, "you seem to have some business at the
self-government office. You may be excused to take care of it."

                    *      *      *      *      *

Al Wells looked up as Don entered the office.

"What's the---- Oh, Michaels. Got some questions for you on that row
you stopped in the locker room yesterday."

"Oh? I thought my write-up was pretty clear. What's up?"

The self-government chairman leaned back.

"You said this Gerry Kelton banged into this kid, Waern, started
pushing him around, and struck him once. That right?"

Don nodded. "That's about what happened, yes."

"And there was no provocation?"

"None that I saw."

"And you saw the whole affair?"

"Everything that happened in the locker room. Yes."

"Uh huh. And you said that two guys, Walt Kelton and Maurie VanSickle,
pinned this kid's arms while Gerry started to slug him. That it?"

Don smiled. "He only got in one slap before I mixed in," he said. "Had
his fist all cocked for more, though."

Wells nodded, looking curiously at Don.

"But they quit and turned the kid loose when you told them to?"

"That's right."

"Didn't give you any trouble?"

[Illustration]

"No." Don shook his head. "Just some talk. Gave their names and class
numbers. Oh, yeah, they squawked a little, sure. Then they took off for
class."

Wells looked at Michaels appraisingly.

"Know anything about this Gerry Kelton?"

Don shook his head. "Heard a rumor or so last night," he admitted.
"Never heard of him before then."

Wells laughed shortly. "We have. He's only got one year in this school,
but we've had him in here several times. Know him pretty well by now.
He got set back quite a bit in Primary, so he's some older than most of
the Lower School bunch." He waved a hand.

"Oh, he's a brawler. We know that. But he doesn't start fights. He
finishes them."

"He started this one."

"That right? And he quit when you told him to?"

"He did."

"Oh, no. That's not the Kelton. Last guy tried to stop him was out of
classes for three days. Took five guys to bring Kelton in here." Wells
shook his head.

"Look, we got him in here and he told us his story. The other two came
up with the same thing later. Makes sense, too--if you know Kelton.
It seems he and his brother ran into this kid, Waern, outside the
auditorium right after Aud Call. They were talking about the newscast.
And this kid came up and started an argument. Tried to slap Walt. They
pushed him off and went on their way. VanSickle went with them. He'd
been in the crowd." Wells leaned forward.

"Got four witnesses to that, too, beside the three of them."

Don moved his head indifferently. "I wouldn't know about that. I wasn't
there. All I know is what I saw in the locker room."

"Yeah. Yeah, sure. Then, they say they went on down to the locker room,
after talking to some other students. When they got there, the Waern
kid came flying at them again. Tried to bite and kick. They say you
helped Maurie pull him off Gerry, and told 'em you'd take it from
there. So they went on to class. They can't figure out where you got
the idea of writing them up over it. Didn't know they'd been written up
till we sent some guys up and pulled them out of their classes." Wells
flipped his hands out, palms upward.

"So there's their story. How about it?"

Don shook his head. "Pretty well worked out. Fits the situation, too.
Only one trouble. There's almost no truth in it. Pete Waern made no
effort to hit any of those three while I was watching. And I didn't
touch any of the four myself."

Wells laughed shortly. "That's what you're telling me. I've got a batch
of statements telling the other story."

Don looked at the other for a moment. "Now wait a minute," he said
slowly. "Are you trying to tell me what I saw and did?"

Wells shook his head. "Just trying to fill you in. This isn't my
problem any more. Dr. Rayson's picked it up. Wants to see you. He's got
Mr. Masterson with him and they're waiting for you to show up so they
can talk things over with you." He tilted his head.

"I don't know. I've heard about some funny things these Khlorisanu can
pull off if they can get a guy's attention for a while. And that kid's
the real thing--from way back. Better think things over a little,
maybe. See if you can remember any dizzy spells or anything."

"Oh, now check your synchs, Wells." Don waggled his head disgustedly.
"I've heard those yarns too--down here. Look. All my life, I've been
living on a ranch out in the mountains. Got Khlorisanu all over the
place. They work for us up there." He grinned.

"Isn't a thing they can do that you and I can't do, too. They've got no
special powers, believe me. I know."

"You'd find it pretty hard to tell that one to Doc Rayson and make it
stick," Wells told him. "And he's the guy you've got to talk to." He
reached into a basket on his desk and took out a stack of papers.

"Look, I've told you more'n I was supposed to all ready. Suppose you go
over and talk to them for a while. They're waiting for you over in room
Five."

Don looked at him for a moment, then went out.

                    *      *      *      *      *

He swung about and examined the closed door thoughtfully, then massaged
the back of his neck.

"What's wrong with these people?" he asked himself. "Don't they know
how to break down a rigged story? Or can't they recognize one when they
hear it?"

He crossed the hall.

"I'm Donald Michaels," he told the secretary. "I believe Dr. Rayson
wants to see me."

The woman looked at him curiously.

"Oh, yes," she said. "Just a minute."

She got up and went into an inner room. After a moment, she came out
and reclaimed her seat behind her desk.

"He's busy right now," she said. "I'll let you know when you can go
in."

Don shrugged and sat down in one of the chairs that lined the wall. It
wasn't a very comfortable chair.

"The anxious seat," he growled to himself. "Nice, time-tested trick."

There was no reading material at hand, and the walls of the oddly
shaped room were blank. He amused himself by directing a blank stare
toward the secretary. After a few minutes, she looked up from her work
and jerked her head indignantly.

"Stop that," she ordered.

"Stop what?" Don looked innocent.

"Stop staring at me like that."

"Not staring at you," he told her. "I have to look somewhere and the
chair faces your way. That's all."

The woman moved her hands. "Well, then face some other way."

"But I'd have to move the chair, and that would disturb your
arrangements," Don told her reasonably. He continued his blank stare.

The woman resumed her work, then twitched her shoulders and looked at
him resentfully for a few seconds. Finally, she got up and went to the
inner office again. Don waited.

Again, she came out.

"They'll see you now," she said.

Don got up.

"Thank you."

He went through the door.

To his right, a man sat behind a wide, highly polished desk. The other
was across the room, at a smaller desk. Both looked up as the door
opened.
