production demands on the colonies. Nor does it farm out systems for
personal exploitation."

The captain smiled. "The Colonization Board, as you call it, has
undergone a slight reorganization," he said.

"_Reorganization!_ It's a top-level board in the Earth Government!
Nothing could reorganize it but a wholesale--" He broke off, his jaw
sagging as the implication sank in.

"You're rather out on a limb, you see," said the captain coolly. "Poor
communications and all that. The fact is that the entire Earth
Government has undergone a slight reorganization also."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Dustie knew that something had happened.

Pete didn't know how he knew. The Dusties couldn't talk, couldn't make
_any_ noise, as far as Pete knew. But they always seemed to know when
something unusual was happening. It was wrong, really, to consider them
unintelligent animals. There are other sorts of intelligence than human,
and other sorts of communication, and other sorts of culture. The Baron
IV colonists had never understood the queer perceptive sense that the
Dusties seemed to possess, any more than they knew how many Dusties
there were, or what they ate, or where on the planet they lived. All
they knew was that when they landed on Baron IV, the Dusties were there.

At first the creatures had been very timid. For weeks the men and women,
busy with their building, had paid little attention to the skittering
brown forms that crept down from the rocky hills to watch them with big,
curious eyes. They were about half the size of men, and strangely
humanoid in appearance, not in the sense that a monkey is humanoid (for
they did _not_ resemble monkeys) but in some way the colonists could not
quite pin down. It may have been the way they walked around on their
long, fragile hind legs, the way they stroked their pointed chins as
they sat and watched and listened with their pointed ears lifted
alertly, watching with soft gray eyes, or the way they handled objects
with their little four-fingered hands. They were so remarkably
human-like in their elfin way that the colonists couldn't help but be
drawn to the creatures.

That whole first summer, when the colonists were building the village
and the landing groove for the ships, the Dusties were among them,
trying pathetically to help, so eager for friendship that even
occasional rebuffs failed to drive them away. They _liked_ the colony.
They seemed, somehow, to savor the atmosphere, moving about like solemn,
fuzzy overseers as the work progressed through the summer. Pete Farnam
thought that they had even tried to warn the people about the winter.
But the colonists couldn't understand, of course. Not until later. The
Dusties became a standing joke, and were tolerated with considerable
amusement--until the winter struck.

It had come with almost unbelievable ferocity. The houses had not been
completed when the first hurricanes came, and they were smashed into
toothpicks. The winds came, vicious winds full of dust and sleet and
ice, wild erratic twisting gales that ripped the village to shreds,
tearing off the topsoil that had been broken and fertilized--merciless,
never-ending winds that wailed and screamed the planet's protest. The
winds drove sand and dirt and ice into the heart of the generators, and
the heating units corroded and jammed and went dead. The jeeps and
tractors and bulldozers were scored and rusted. The people began dying
by the dozens as they huddled down in the pitiful little pits they had
dug to try to keep the winds away.

Few of them were still conscious when the Dusties had come silently, in
the blizzard, eyes closed tight against the blast, to drag the people up
into the hills, into caves and hollows that still showed the fresh marks
of carving tools. They had brought food--what kind of food nobody knew,
for the colony's food had been destroyed by the first blast of the
hurricane--but whatever it was it had kept them alive. And somehow, the
colonists had survived the winter which seemed never to end. There were
frozen legs and ruined eyes; there was pneumonia so swift and virulent
that even the antibiotics they managed to salvage could not stop it;
there was near-starvation--but they were kept alive, until the winds
began to die, and they walked out of their holes in the ground to see
the ruins of their first village.

From that winter on, nobody considered the Dusties funny any more. What
had motivated them no one knew, but the colony owed them their lives.
The Dusties tried to help the people rebuild. They showed them how to
build windshields that would keep houses intact and anchored to the
ground when the winds came again. They built little furnaces out of dirt
and rock which defied the winds and gave great heat. They showed the
colonists a dozen things they needed to know for life on the rugged
planet. The colonists in turn tried to teach the Dusties something about
Earth, and how the colonists had lived, and why they had come. But there
was a barrier of intelligence that could not be crossed. The Dusties
learned simple things, but only slowly and imperfectly. They seemed
content to take on their mock overseer's role, moving in and about the
village, approving or disapproving, but always trying to help. Some
became personal pets, though "pet" was the wrong word, because it was
more of a strange personal friendship limited by utter lack of
communication, than any animal-and-master relationship. The colonists
made sure that the Dusties were granted the respect due them as rightful
masters of Baron IV. And somehow the Dusties perceived this attitude,
and were so grateful for the acceptance and friendship that there seemed
nothing they wouldn't do for the colonists.

There had been many discussions about them. "You'd think they'd resent
our moving in on them," Jack Mario had said one day. "After all, we
_are_ usurpers. And they treat us like kings. Have you noticed the way
they mimic us? I saw one chewing tobacco the other day. He hated the
stuff, but he chewed away, and spat like a trooper."

One of the Dusties had been sitting on Pete's knee when Captain Varga
had been talking, and he had known that something terrible was wrong.
Now he sat on the desk in the office, moving uneasily back and forth as
Pete looked up at Mario's dark face, and then across at John Tegan and
Mel Dorfman. John's face was dark with anger as he ran his fingers
through the heavy gray beard that fell to his chest. Mel sat stunned,
shaking his head helplessly. Mario was unable to restrain himself. His
