
He moved his hand back smoothly, in a professional manner that drew no
attention to it. The model lifted from the table--then crashed back
down.

"The thread broke," Kaner said.

"You jerked it, instead of pulling smoothly," Biff said and knotted the
broken thread. "Here let me show you how to do it."

The thread broke again when Biff tried it, which got a good laugh that
made his collar a little warm. Someone mentioned the poker game.

This was the only time that poker was mentioned or even remembered that
night. Because very soon after this they found that the thread would
lift the model only when the switch was on and two and a half volts
flowing through the joke coils. With the current turned off the model
was too heavy to lift. The thread broke every time.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I still think it's a screwy idea," the young man said. "One week
getting fallen arches, demonstrating those toy ships for every brat
within a thousand miles. Then selling the things for three bucks when
they must have cost at least a hundred dollars apiece to make."

"But you _did_ sell the ten of them to people who would be interested?"
the older man asked.

"I think so, I caught a few Air Force officers and a colonel in missiles
one day. Then there was one official I remembered from the Bureau of
Standards. Luckily he didn't recognize me. Then those two professors you
spotted from the university."

"Then the problem is out of our hands and into theirs. All we have to do
now is sit back and wait for results."

"_What_ results?! These people weren't interested when we were hammering
on their doors with the proof. We've patented the coils and can prove to
anyone that there is a reduction in weight around them when they are
operating...."

"But a small reduction. And we don't know what is causing it. No one can
be interested in a thing like that--a fractional weight decrease in a
clumsy model, certainly not enough to lift the weight of the generator.
No one wrapped up in massive fuel consumption, tons of lift and such is
going to have time to worry about a crackpot who thinks he has found a
minor slip in Newton's laws."

"You think they will now?" the young man asked, cracking his knuckles
impatiently.

"I _know_ they will. The tensile strength of that thread is correctly
adjusted to the weight of the model. The thread will break if you try to
lift the model with it. Yet you can lift the model--after a small
increment of its weight has been removed by the coils. This is going to
bug these men. Nobody is going to ask them to solve the problem or
concern themselves with it. But it will nag at them because they know
this effect can't possibly exist. They'll see at once that the
magnetic-wave theory is nonsense. Or perhaps true? We don't know. But
they will all be thinking about it and worrying about it. Someone is
going to experiment in his basement--just as a hobby of course--to find
the cause of the error. And he or someone else is going to find out what
makes those coils work, or maybe a way to improve them!"
