
"No, sir," he answered. "I'm taping it, so I can go to work on it."

Mannion was our language and code man. I hoped he was good.

"What does it sound like," I asked. "Tune me in."

After a moment a high hum came from the speaker. Through it I could hear
harsh chopping consonants, a whining intonation. I doubted that Mannion
would be able to make anything of that gargle.

Our Bogie closed steadily. At four hundred twenty-five miles he reversed
relative directions, and began matching our speed, moving closer to our
course. There was no doubt he planned to parallel us.

I made a brief announcement to all hands describing the status of the
action. Clay worked over his televideo, trying to clear the image. I
watched as the blob on the screen swelled and flickered. Suddenly it
flashed into clear stark definition. Against a background of sparkling
black, the twin spheres gleamed faintly in reflected starlight.

There were no visible surface features; the iodine-colored forms and
their connecting shaft had an ancient and alien look.

We held our course steadily, watching the stranger maneuver. Even at
this distance it looked huge.

"Captain," Clay said, "I've been making a few rough calculations. The
two spheres are about 800 yards in diameter, and at the rate the
structure is rotating it's pulling about six gravities."

That settled the question of human origin of the ship. No human crew
would choose to work under six gee's.

Now, paralleling us at just over two hundred miles, the giant ship spun
along, at rest relative to us. It was visible now through the direct
observation panel, without magnification.

       *       *       *       *       *

I left Clay in charge on the bridge, and I went down to the Com Section.

Joyce sat at his board, reading instruments and keying controls. So he
was back on the job. Mannion sat, head bent, monitoring his recorder.
The room was filled with the keening staccato of the alien transmission.

"Getting anything on video?" I asked. Joyce shook his head. "Nothing,
Captain. I've checked the whole spectrum, and this is all I get. It's
coming in on about a dozen different frequencies; no FM."

"Any progress, Mannion?" I said.

He took off his headset. "It's the same thing, repeated over and over,
just a short phrase. I'd have better luck if they'd vary it a little."

"Try sending," I said.

Joyce tuned the clatter down to a faint clicking, and switched his
transmitter on. "You're on, Captain," he said.

"This is Captain Greylorn, UNACV Galahad; kindly identify yourself." I
repeated this slowly, half a dozen times. It occurred to me that this
was the first known time in history a human being had addressed a
non-human intelligence. The last was a guess, but I couldn't interpret
our guest's purposeful maneuverings as other than intelligent.

I checked with the bridge; no change. Suddenly the clatter stopped,
leaving only the carrier hum.

"Can't you tune that whine out, Joyce?" I asked.

"No, sir," he replied. "That's a very noisy transmission. Sounds like
maybe their equipment is on the blink."

We listened to the hum, waiting. Then the clatter began again.

"This is different," Mannion said. "It's longer."

I went back to the bridge, and waited for the next move from the
stranger, or for word from Mannion. Every half hour I transmitted a call
identifying us, followed by a sample of our language. I gave them
English, Russian, and Standard Interlingua. I didn't know why, but
somehow I had a faint hope they might understand some of it.

I stayed on the bridge when the watch changed. I had some food sent up,
and slept a few hours on the OD's bunk.

Fine replaced Kramer on his watch when it rolled around. Apparently
Kramer was out of circulation. At this point I did not feel inclined to
pursue the point.

We had been at General Quarters for twenty-one hours when the wall
annunciator hummed.

"Captain, this is Mannion. I've busted it...."

"I'll be right there," I said, and left at a run.

Mannion was writing as I entered ComSection. He stopped his recorder and
offered me a sheet. "This is what I've got so far, Captain," he said.

I read: INVADER; THE MANCJI PRESENCE OPENS COMMUNICATIONS.

"That's a highly inflected version of early Interlingua, Captain,"
Mannion said. "After I taped it, I compensated it to take out the
rise-and-fall tone, and then filtered out the static. There were a few
sound substitutions to figure out, but I finally caught on. It still
doesn't make much sense, but that's what it says."

"I wonder what we're invading," I said. "And what is the 'Mancji
Presence'?"

"They just repeat that over and over," Mannion said. "They don't answer
our call."

"Try translating into old Interlingua, adding their sound changes, and
then feeding their own rise-and-fall routine to it," I said. "Maybe that
will get a response."

I waited while Mannion worked out the message, then taped it on top of
their whining tone pattern. "Put plenty of horse-power behind it," I
said. "If their receivers are as shaky as their transmitter, they might
not be hearing us."

We sent for five minutes, then tuned them back in and waited. There was
a long silence from their side, then they came back with a long
spluttering sing-song.

Mannion worked over it for several minutes. "They must have understood
us, here's what I get," he said:

     THAT WHICH SWIMS IN THE MANCJI SEA; WE ARE AWARE THAT YOU HAVE THIS
     TRADE TONGUE. YOU RANGE FAR. IT IS OUR WHIM TO INDULGE YOU; WE ARE
     AMUSED THAT YOU PRESUME HERE; WE ACKNOWLEDGE YOUR INSOLENT DEMANDS.

"It looks like we're in somebody's back yard," I said. "They acknowledge
our insolent demands, but they don't answer them." I thought a moment.
"Send this," I said. "We'll out-strut them:"

     THE MIGHTY WARSHIP GALAHAD REJECTS YOUR JURISDICTION.

     TELL US THE NATURE OF YOUR DISTRESS AND WE MAY CHOOSE TO OFFER AID.

Mannion raised an eyebrow. "That ought to rock them," he said.

"They were eager to talk to us," I said. "That means they want
something, in my opinion. And all the big talk sounds like a bluff of
our own is our best line."

"Why do you want to antagonize them, Captain?" Joyce asked. "That ship
is over a thousand times the size of this can."

"Joyce, I suggest you let me forget you're around," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Mancji whine was added to my message, and it went out. Moments later
this came back:

     MANCJI HONOR DICTATES YOUR SAFE-CONDUCT; TALK IS WEARYING; WE FIND
     IT CONVENIENT TO SOLICIT A TRANSFER OF ELECTROSTATIC FORCE.

"What the devil does that mean?" I said. "Tell them to loosen up and
explain themselves."

Mannion wrote out a straight query, and sent it. Again we waited for a
reply.

It came, in a long windy paragraph stating that the Mancji found
electro-static baths amusing, and that "crystallization" had drained
their tanks. They wanted a flow of electrons from us to replenish their
supply.

"This sounds like simple electric current they're talking about,
Captain," Mannion said. "They want a battery charge."

"They seem to have power to burn," I said. "Why don't they generate
their own juice? Ask them; and find out where they learned Interlingua."

Mannion sent again; the reply was slow in coming back. Finally we got
it:

     THE MANCJI DO NOT EMPLOY MASSIVE GENERATION-PIECE WHERE
     ACCUMULATOR-PIECE IS SUFFICIENT. THIS SIMPLE TRADE SPEECH IS OF OLD
     KNOWLEDGE. WE SELECT IT FROM SYMBOLS WE ARE PLEASED TO SENSE
     EMPATTERNED ON YOUR HULL.

That made some sort of sense, but I was intrigued by the reference to
Interlingua as a trade language. I wanted to know where they had learned
it. I couldn't help the hope I started building on the idea that this
giant knew our colony, in spite of the fact that they were using an
antique version of the language, predating Omega by several centuries.

I sent another query, but the reply was abrupt and told nothing except
that Interlingua was of "old knowledge."

Then Mannion entered a long technical exchange, getting the details of
the kind of electric power they wanted.

"We can give them what they want, no sweat, Captain," he said after half
an hour's talk. "They want DC; 100 volt, 50 amp will do."

"Ask them to describe themselves," I directed. I was beginning to get an
idea.

Mannion sent, got his reply. "They're molluscoid, Captain," he said. He
looked shocked. "They weigh about two tons each."

"Ask them what they eat," I said.

I turned to Joyce as Mannion worked over the message. "Get Kramer up
here, on the double," I said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kramer came in five minutes later, looking drawn and rumpled. He stared
at me sullenly.

"I'm releasing you from arrest temporarily on your own parole, Major," I
said. "I want you to study the reply to our last transmission, and tell
me what you can about it."

"Why me?" Kramer said. "I don't know what's going on." I didn't answer
him.

There was a long tense half hour wait before Mannion copied out the
reply that came in a stuttering nasal. He handed it to me.

As I had hoped, the message, after a preliminary recital of the
indifference of the Mancji to biological processes of ingestion, recited
a list of standard biochemical symbols.

"Can we eat this stuff?" I asked Kramer, handing him the sheet.

He studied it, and some of his accustomed swagger began to return. "I
don't know what the flowery phrases are all about, but the symbols refer
to common proteins, lipins, carbohydrates, vitamins, and biomins," he
said. "What is this, a game?"

"All right, Mannion," I said. I was trying to hold back the excitement.
"Ask them if they have fresh sources of these substances aboard."

The reply was quick; they did.

"Tell them we will exchange electric power for a supply of these foods.
Tell them we want samples of half a dozen of the natural substances."

Again Mannion coded and sent, received and translated, sent again.

"They agree, Captain," he said at last. "They want us to fire a power
lead out about a mile; they'll come in close and shoot us a specimen
case with a flare on it. Then we can each check the other's
merchandise."

"All right," I said. "We can use a ground-service cable; rig a pilot
light on it, and kick it out, as soon as they get in close."

"We'll have to splice a couple of extra lengths to it," Mannion said.

"Go to it, Mannion," I said. "And send two of your men out to make the
pick-up." This wasn't a communications job, but I wanted a reliable man
handling it.

I returned to the bridge and keyed for Bourdon, directed him to arm two
of his penetration missiles, lock them onto the stranger, and switch
over to my control. With the firing key in my hand, I stood at the
televideo screen and watched for any signs of treachery. The ship moved
in, came to rest filling the screen.

Mannion's men reported out. I saw the red dot of our power lead move
away, then a yellow point glowed on the side of the vast iodine-colored
wall looming across the screen.

Nothing else emerged from the alien ship. The red pilot drifted across
the face of the sphere. Mannion reported six thousand feet of cable out
before the pilot disappeared abruptly.

"Captain," Mannion reported, "they're drawing power."

"O.K.," I said. "Let them have a sample, then shut down."

