glove, digging into his flesh in an amazingly powerful grip. Farmer
hunched his shoulders, trying to break loose, and then he saw what Ray
was staring at.

Garf had left them, and was strolling around the launch as if he had
just bought it--looking down his nose at it; at the same time, acting as
if he could afford not to give a damn how badly he'd been stung. But the
startling thing was that he had picked up the boathook and was twirling
it unconcernedly. He had not only picked it up, however--he had also
tied it in a knot.

It should have splintered in his hands, assuming he was strong enough to
bend it at all. It hadn't; it was in perfect shape, except for the knot.
Or so it seemed, at least, for even as Ray started forward with
outstretched hand, obviously hoping to examine the thing, Garf gave it a
final twirl and scaled it carelessly overboard.

John Andrew began to feel quick-frozen again. Being alone at sea in a
rickety craft with a possible madman had been bad enough. To have a
weird creature with superhuman powers, and an impossible pet monster,
added to the crew was a little too much.

       *       *       *       *       *

Garf turned his attention to the television set, which was still
presenting its hysterical vaudeville. "Great-uncle's gills!" he
exclaimed, and lapsed into a fascinated silence. He studied the
proceedings carefully, holding the arms-crossed pose again. Finally he
turned to Ray.

"Weren't you saying something about civilization a while ago, finless?"
he asked. His voice was sneering.

Ray frowned, and said something about mass-appeal. "Pay no attention to
_that_," he continued. "Just listen to _me_. I'll tell you about our
civilization, and our science, and...."

His voice broke off as if he had been struck in the face. In a way, he
had; Garf had deliberately turned his back on the old fellow. The
Judge's bloodshot little eyes darted about as if he wanted to pick up
something heavy and hit Garf on the crest with it.

John Andrew's brain had finally resumed normal operations; he was
thinking slowly, but clearly. He examined the evidence with care. He
decided that Garf's superior attitude and powers boded no good; that if
the fishman once became slightly irritated he would sic the nonapus on
Ray and himself. (Probably, in fact, Garf would try to conquer the world
anyway; that was how it went in stories as corny as this situation.)
Farmer further decided that Ray was too egocentrically eccentric to be
trusted to get them out of this fix; he decided he'd have to do
something himself.

Having decided all this, Farmer went back over the territory to see if
he could find any flaws in it--or any other way out. It still made
sense, and he added a decision to get the boat back to shore as fast as
possible. He approached the engine.

As he did so, the engine melted into a solid, irregular lump of metal.
John Andrew gulped, and put out a tentative hand toward the fused mess.
It was not particularly warm--but it had melted.

Farmer looked at Garf again with fear and awe, and the fishman looked
back with cold amusement. But not for long. Garf turned to the Judge's
invention--and started to show some genuine interest for the first time
since he had showed up.

He stood over the thing, webbed hands on scaly hips, peering at it
intently. After a long silence, he knelt, and started feeling over the
machine with his webbed hands. Finally he placed his fingers on the
largest of the control switches--then changed his mind and gestured
imperatively to Judge Ray.

"You--the 'intelligent' one," he said. The quotes around 'intelligent'
were clear in his intonation. "Explain this to me. It's obviously what
reactivated the gate--but whoever made it did a screwball job. There are
all sorts of things that don't seem to belong, and even the parts that
should be there seem wrong, somehow...."

He paused. "Of course," he added, smugly, "I'm not a transportation
expert. If I were, I'd have made my own activator long ago, and done
some visiting on the closed worlds before this. Not that they'd have
kept me from getting bored for long, but yours looks as if it's going to
be slightly amusing, at least."

A struggle showed in Ray's face. Farmer saw insulted anger, hurt pride,
a desire to brag about his gadgetry, a question about Garf's last words,
and a caution that was not too far from fear. John Andrew had stopped
trying to hide his own fear, and though he had plenty of questions of
his own, he was mainly concerned with looking for a means of escape.

Garf was rising again, looking impatient. Ray reached a decision, said
"Go to hell!", and turned his back on the fishman. Garf looked
astonished, then angry, and raised a hand. Ray jumped, not very far
because of the heavy diving suit, stumbled on oddly twisted legs, and
collapsed on the deck, writhing, moaning, and turning red in the face.
The diving helmet clattered on the planks.

Farmer got mad. He started to charge across the deck at Garf, but his
own feet went out from under him and he landed flat on his nose. There
were waves of fire chasing each other around his body, and his stomach
was trying to turn itself inside out.

       *       *       *       *       *

As instantaneously as it had come, the pain left him. It left him weak
and quivering, and John Andrew Farmer lay on his back waiting for his
strength to seep back. As the red haze drifted from before his eyes, he
realized that the launch had acquired another occupant.

In appearance, she could easily have been Garf's sister--or his wife.
Her figure was lithe and nicely curved. Her scales stopped in
eye-catching points just above her distinctly mammalian bosom; from
