substitute for the rest of the week; I was going to be busy.

Then I started working in the machine shop in Farnsworth's basement,
trying to turn out a working model of a device that, by means of a
crankshaft, oleo dampers and a reciprocating cylinder, would pick up
some of that random kinetic energy from the bouncing ball and do
something useful with it, like turning a drive shaft. I was just
working out a convection-and-air pump system for circulating hot air
around the ball when Farnsworth came in.

He had tucked carefully under his arm a sphere of about the size of a
basketball and, if he had made it to my specifications, weighing
thirty-five pounds. He had a worried frown on his forehead.

"It looks good," I said. "What's the trouble?"

"There seems to be a slight hitch," he said. "I've been testing for
conductivity. It seems to be quite low."

"That's what I'm working on now. It's just a mechanical problem of
pumping enough warm air back to the ball. We can do it with no more
than a twenty per cent efficiency loss. In an engine, that's nothing."

"Maybe you're right. But this material conducts heat even less than
rubber does."

"The little ball yesterday didn't seem to have any trouble," I said.

"Naturally not. It had had plenty of time to warm up before I started
it. And its mass-surface area relationship was pretty low--the larger
you make a sphere, of course, the more mass inside in proportion to
the outside area."

"You're right, but I think we can whip it. We may have to honeycomb
the ball and have part of the work the machine does operate a big hot
air pump; but we can work it out."

       *       *       *       *       *

All that day, I worked with lathe, milling machine and hacksaw. After
clamping the new big ball securely to a workbench, Farnsworth pitched
in to help me. But we weren't able to finish by nightfall and
Farnsworth turned his spare bedroom over to me for the night. I was
too tired to go home.

And too tired to sleep soundly, too. Farnsworth lived on the edge of
San Francisco, by a big truck by-pass, and almost all night I wrestled
with the pillow and sheets, listening half-consciously to those heavy
trucks rumbling by, and in my mind, always, that little gray ball,
bouncing and bouncing and bouncing....

At daybreak, I came abruptly fully awake with the sound of crashing
echoing in my ears, a battering sound that seemed to come from the
basement. I grabbed my coat and pants, rushed out of the room, almost
knocked over Farnsworth, who was struggling to get his shoes on out in
the hall, and we scrambled down the two flights of stairs together.

The place was a chaos, battered and bashed equipment everywhere, and
on the floor, overturned against the far wall, the table that the ball
had been clamped to. The ball itself was gone.

I had not been fully asleep all night, and the sight of that mess, and
what it meant, jolted me immediately awake. Something, probably a
heavy truck, had started a tiny oscillation in that ball. And the ball
had been heavy enough to start the table bouncing with it until, by
dancing that table around the room, it had literally torn the clamp
off and shaken itself free. What had happened afterward was obvious,
with the ball building up velocity with every successive bounce.

But where was the ball now?

Suddenly Farnsworth cried out hoarsely, "Look!" and I followed his
outstretched, pudgy finger to where, at one side of the basement, a
window had been broken open--a small window, but plenty big enough for
something the size of a basketball to crash through it.

There was a little weak light coming from outdoors. And then I saw the
ball. It was in Farnsworth's back yard, bouncing a little sluggishly
on the grass. The grass would damp it, hold it back, until we could
get to it. Unless....

I took off up the basement steps like a streak. Just beyond the back
yard, I had caught a glimpse of something that frightened me. A few
yards from where I had seen the ball was the edge of the big six-lane
highway, a broad ribbon of smooth, hard concrete.

[Illustration]

I got through the house to the back porch, rushed out and was in the
back yard just in time to see the ball take its first bounce onto
