responsibility now--not mine."

Philip sat back down again. "You can start explaining any time," he
said.

"It's very simple. The property owners of Valleyview signed all of their
houses and places of business over to me. I, in turn, have signed all of
them over to you--with the qualification, of course, that after selling
them you will be entitled to no more than your usual commission." She
withdrew a paper from one of the manila envelopes. "After selling them,"
she went on, "you are to divide the proceeds equally among the four
charities specified in this contract." She handed him the paper. "Do you
understand now why I tried so hard to find a trustworthy agent?"

Philip was staring at the paper, unable, in his astonishment, to read
the words it contained. "Suppose," he said presently, "that
circumstances should make it impossible for me to carry out my end of
the agreement?"

"In case of illness, you will already have taken the necessary steps to
transfer the property to another agent who, in your opinion, is as
completely honest as you are, and in case of death, you will already
have taken the necessary steps to bequeath the property to the same
agent; and he, in both cases, will already have agreed to the terms laid
down in the contract you're holding in your hands. Why don't you read
it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Now that his astonishment had abated somewhat, Philip found that he
could do so. "But this still doesn't make sense," he said a short while
later. "Obviously you and the rest of the owners have purchased new
houses. Would it be presumptuous of me to ask how you're going to pay
for them when you're virtually giving your old houses away?"

"I'm afraid it would be, Mr. Myles." She withdrew another paper from the
envelope and handed it to him. "This is the other copy. If you'll kindly
affix your signature to both, we can bring our business to a close. As
you'll notice, I've already signed."

"But if you're going to be incommunicado," Philip pointed out, anger
building up in him despite all he could do to stop it, "what good will
your copy do you?"

Judith's countenance took on a glacial quality. So did her voice. "My
copy will go into the hands of a trusted attorney, sealed in an envelope
which I have already instructed him not to open till five years from
this date. If, at the time it is opened, you have violated the terms of
our agreement, he will institute legal proceedings at once. Fortunately,
although the Valleyview post office is closed, a mail truck passes
through every weekday evening at eight. It's not that I don't trust you,
Mr. Myles--but you are a man, you know."

Philip was tempted to tear up the two copies then and there, and toss
the pieces into the air. But he didn't, for the very good reason that he
couldn't afford to. Instead, he bore down viciously on his pen and
brought his name to life twice in large and angry letters. He handed
Judith one copy, slipped the other into his breast pocket and got to his
feet. "That," he said, "brings our official business to a close. Now I'd
like to add an unofficial word of advice. It seems to me that you're
exacting an exorbitant price from the world for your husband's having
sold you out for a brunette and a redhead and a pint of Scotch. I've
been sold out lots of times for less than that, but I found out long ago
that the world doesn't pay its bills even when you ask a fair price for
the damages done to you. I suggest that you write the matter off as a
bad debt and forget about it; then maybe you'll become a human being
again."

She had risen to her feet and was standing stiffly before him. She put
him in mind of an exquisite and fragile statue, and for a moment he had
the feeling that if he were to reach out and touch her, she would
shatter into a million pieces. She did not move for some time, nor did
he; then she bent down, picked up three of the manila envelopes,
straightened, and handed them to him. "Two of these contain the deeds,
maps and other records you will need," she said in a dead voice. "The
third contains the keys to the houses and business places. Each key is
tagged with the correct address. Good-by, Mr. Myles."

"Good-by," Philip said.

He looked around the room intending to say good-by to Zarathustra, but
Zarathustra was nowhere to be seen. Finally he went into the hall,
opened the front door and stepped out into the night. A full moon was
rising in the east. He walked down the moonlit walk, climbed into his
car and threw his brief case and the manila envelopes into the back
seat. Soon, Valleyview was far behind him.

But not as far as it should have been. He couldn't get the green rose
out of his mind. He couldn't get Judith Darrow out of his mind either.
Nor could he exorcise the summer breeze that kept wafting through the
crevices in his common sense.

A green rose and a grass widow and a breeze with a green breath. A whole
town taking off for greener pastures....

He reached into his coat pocket and touched the rose. It was no more
than a stem and a handful of petals now, but its reality could not be
denied. But roses do not bloom in autumn, and green roses do not bloom
at all--

"Ruf!"

He had turned into the new highway some time ago, and was driving along
it at a brisk sixty-five. Now, disbelievingly, he slowed, and pulled
over onto the shoulder. Sure enough, he had a stowaway in the back
seat--a tawny-haired stowaway with golden eyes, over-sized ears, and a
restless, white-tipped tail. "Zarathustra!" he gasped. "How in the
dickens did you get in there?"

"Ruf," Zarathustra replied.

Philip groaned. Now he would have to go all the way back to Valleyview.
Now he would have to see Judith Darrow again. Now he would have to--He
paused in midthought, astonished at the abrupt acceleration of his
heartbeat. "Well I'll be damned!" he said, and without further preamble
transferred Zarathustra to the front seat, U-turned, and started back.

       *       *       *       *       *

The gasoline lantern had been moved out of the living-room window, but a
light still showed beyond the panes. He pulled over to the curb and
turned off the ignition. He gave one of Zarathustra's over-sized ears a
playful tug, absently noting a series of small nodules along its lower
extremity. "Come on, Zarathustra," he said. "I may as well deliver you
personally while I'm at it."

After locking the car, he started up the walk, Zarathustra at his heels.
He knocked on the front door. Presently he knocked again. The door
creaked, swung partially open. He frowned. Had she forgotten to latch
it? he wondered. Or had she deliberately left it unlatched so that
Zarathustra could get in? Zarathustra himself lent plausibility to the
latter conjecture by rising up on his hind legs and pushing the door the
rest of the way open with his forepaws, after which he trotted into the
hall and disappeared.

Philip pounded on the panels. "Miss Darrow!" he called. "Judith!"

No answer. He called again. Still no answer.

A summer breeze came traipsing out of the house and engulfed him in the
scent of roses. What kind of roses? he wondered. Green ones?

He stepped into the hall and closed the door behind him. He made his way
into the living room. The two chairs were gone, and so was the coffee
table. He walked through the living room and into the library; through
the library and into the dining room. The gasoline lantern burned
brightly on the dining-room table, its harsh white light bathing bare
floors and naked walls.

The breeze was stronger here, the scent of roses almost cloying. He saw
then that the double door that had thwarted him that morning was open,
and he moved toward it across the room. As he had suspected, it gave
access to the kitchen. Pausing on the threshold, he peered inside. It
was an ordinary enough kitchen. Some of the appliances were gone, but
the stove and the refrigerator were still there. The back doorway had an
odd bluish cast that caused the framework to shimmer. The door itself
was open, and he could see starlight lying softly on fields and trees.

Wonderingly he walked across the room and stepped outside. There was a
faint sputtering sound, as though live wires had been crossed, and for a
