that he had a weapon of some kind. Even a knife would have made him feel
better.

But there had been no chance of that, of course. Prisoners of war are
hardly allowed to carry weapons with them, so none had been available.

He wondered what sort of men lived in this fantastic city. So far, he
had seen no one. The streets below had been filled with moving vehicles
of some kind, but it had been difficult to tell whether there had been
anyone walking down there from this height.

Contarini had said that it would be ... how had he said it? "Like
sleeping for hundreds of years and waking up in a strange world."

Well, it was that, all right.

Did anyone know he was here? He had the uneasy feeling that hidden,
unseen eyes were watching his every move, and yet he could detect
nothing. There was no sound except the faint humming from the device in
the room behind him, and a deeper, almost inaudible, rushing, rumbling
sound that seemed to come from far below.

His wish for a weapon came back, stronger than before. The very fact
that he had seen no one set his nerves on edge even more than the sight
of a known enemy would have done.

He was suddenly no longer interested in his surroundings. He felt
trapped in this strange, silent room. He could see a light shining
through a door at the far end of the room--perhaps it was a way out. He
walked toward it, trying to keep his footsteps as silent as possible as
he moved.

The door had a pane of translucent glass in it, and there were more of
the unreadable characters on it. He wished fervently that he could
decipher them; they might tell him where he was.

Carefully, he grasped the handle of the door, twisted it, and pulled.
And, careful as he had been, the door swung inward with surprising
rapidity. It was a great deal thinner and lighter than he had supposed.

He looked down at it, wondering if there were any way the door could be
locked. There was a tiny vertical slit set in a small metal panel in the
door, but it was much too tiny to be a keyhole. Still--

It didn't matter. If necessary, he could smash the glass to get through
the door. He stepped out into what was obviously a hallway beyond the
door.

       *        *       *       *       *

The hallway stretched away to either side, lined with doors similar to
the one he had just come through. How did a man get out of this place,
anyway? The door behind him was pressing against his hand with a patient
insistence, as though it wanted to close itself. He almost let it close,
but, at the last second, he changed his mind.

_Better the devil we know than the devil we don't_, he thought to
himself.

He went back into the office and looked around for something to prop the
door open. He found a small, beautifully formed porcelain dish on one of
the desks, picked it up, and went back to the door. The dish held the
door open an inch or so. That was good enough. If someone locked the
door, he could still smash in the glass if he wanted to, but the absence
of the dish when he returned would tell him that he was not alone in
this mysterious place.

He started down the hallway to his right, checking the doors as he went.
They were all locked. He knew that he could break into any of them, but
he had a feeling that he would find no exit through any of them. They
all looked as though they concealed more of the big rooms.

None of them had any lights behind them. Only the one door that he had
come through showed the telltale glow from the other side. Why?

He had the terrible feeling that he had been drawn across time to this
place for a purpose, and yet he could think of no rational reason for
believing so.

He stopped as another memory came back. He remembered being in the
stone-walled dungeon, with its smelly straw beds, lit only by the faint
shaft of sunlight that came from the barred window high overhead.

Contarini, the short, wiry little Italian who was in the next cell,
looked at him through the narrow opening. "I still think it can be done,
my friend. It is the mind and the mind alone that sees the flow of time.
The body experiences, but does not see. Only the soul is capable of
knowing eternity."
