"Miss Thompson," Dr. Harman said. His bedside manner had cracked through
and his voice was harsh and strained. "Please."

"Oh, all right," she said, a little petulantly. "If you want to keep all
that private."

Malone broke in suddenly, fascinated. "Why didn't you prove you were
telepathic before now?" he said.

The little old lady smiled at him. "Why, because you wouldn't have
believed me," she said. She dropped her knitting neatly in her lap and
folded her hands over it. "None of you _wanted_ to believe me," she
said, and sniffed. Miss Wilson moved nervously and she looked up. "And
don't tell me it's going to be all right. I know it's going to be all
right. I'm going to make sure of that."

Malone felt a sudden chill. But it was obvious, he told himself, that
the little old lady didn't mean what she was saying. She smiled at him
again, and her smile was as sweet and guileless as the smile on the face
of his very own sainted grandmother.

Not that Malone remembered his grandmother; she had died before he'd
been born. But if he'd had a grandmother, and if he'd remembered her, he
was sure she would have had the same sweet smile.

So she couldn't have meant what she'd said. Would Malone's own
grandmother make things difficult for him? The very idea was ridiculous.

Dr. Harman opened his mouth, apparently changed his mind, and shut it
again. The little old lady turned to him.

"Were you going to ask why I bothered to prove anything to Mr. Malone?"
she said. "Of course you were, and I shall tell you. It's because Mr.
Malone _wanted_ to believe me. He _wants_ me. He _needs_ me. I'm a
telepath, and that's enough for Mr. Malone. Isn't it?"

"Gur," Malone said, taken by surprise. After a second he added: "I guess
so."

"You see, doctor?" the little old lady said.

"But you--" Dr. Harman began.

"I read minds," the little old lady said. "That's right, doctor. That's
what makes me a telepath."

Malone's brain was whirling rapidly, like a distant galaxy. "Telepath"
was a nice word, he thought. How did you telepath from a road?

Simple.

A road is paved.

Malone thought that was pretty funny, but he didn't laugh. He thought he
would never laugh again. He wanted to cry, a little, but he didn't think
he'd be able to manage that either.

He twisted his hat, but it didn't make him feel any better. Gradually,
he became aware that the little old lady was talking to Dr. Harman
again.

"But," she said, "since it will make you feel so much better, doctor, we
give you our Royal permission to retire, and to speak to Mr. Malone
alone."

"Malone alone," Dr. Harman muttered. "Hm-m-m. My. Well." He turned and
seemed to be surprised that Malone was actually standing near him.
"Yes," he said. "Well. Mr. Alone ... Malone ... please, whoever you are,
just come into my office, please?"

Malone looked at the little old lady. One of her eyes closed and opened.
It was an unmistakable wink.

Malone grinned at her in what he hoped was a cheerful manner. "All
right," he said to the psychiatrist, "let's go." He turned with the
barest trace of regret, and Boyd followed him. Leaving the little old
lady and, unfortunately, the startling Miss Wilson, behind, the
procession filed back into Dr. Harman's office.

       *       *       *       *       *

The doctor closed the door, and leaned against it for a second. He
looked as though someone had suddenly revealed to him that the world was
square. But when he spoke his voice was almost even.

"Sit down, gentlemen," he said, and indicated chairs. "I really ...
well, I don't know what to say. All this time, all these years, she's
been reading my mind! My mind. She's been reading ... looking right into
my mind, or whatever it is."

"Whatever what is?" Malone asked, sincerely interested. He had dropped
gratefully into a chair near Boyd's, across the desk from Dr. Harman.

"Whatever my _mind_ is," Dr. Harman said. "Reading it. Oh, my."

"Dr. Harman," Malone began, but the psychiatrist gave him a bright blank
stare.

"Don't you understand?" he said. "She's a telepath."

"We--"

The phone on Dr. Harman's desk chimed gently. He glanced at it and said:
"Excuse me. The phone." He picked up the receiver and said: "Hello?"

There was no image on the screen.

But the voice was image enough. "This is Andrew J. Burris," it said. "Is
Kenneth J. Malone there?"

"Mr. Malone?" the psychiatrist said. "I mean, Mr. Burris? Mr. Malone is
here. Yes. Oh, my. Do you want to talk to him?"

"No, you idiot," the voice said. "I just want to know if he's all tucked
in."

"Tucked in?" Dr. Harman gave the phone a sudden smile. "A joke," he
said. "It _is_ a joke, isn't it? The way things have been happening, you
never know whether--"

"A joke," Burris' voice said. "That's right. Yes. Am I talking to one of
the patients?"

Dr. Harman gulped, got mad, and thought better of it. At last he said,
very gently: "I'm not at all sure," and handed the phone to Malone.

The FBI agent said: "Hello, chief. Things are a little confused."

Burris' face appeared on the screen. "Confused, sure," he said. "I feel
confused already." He took a breath. "I called the San Francisco office,
and they told me you and Boyd were out there. What's going on?"

Malone said cautiously: "We've found a telepath."

Burris' eyes widened slightly. "Another one?"

"What are you talking about, another one?" Malone said. "We have one.
Does anybody else have any more?"

"Well," Burris said, "we just got a report on another one--maybe.
Besides yours, I mean."

"I hope the one you've got is in better shape than the one I've got,"
Malone said. He took a deep breath, and then spat it all out at once:
"The one we've found is a little old lady. She thinks she's Queen
Elizabeth I. She's a telepath, sure, but she's nuts."

"Queen Elizabeth?" Burris said. "Of England?"

"That's right," Malone said. He held his breath.

"Damn it," Burris exploded, "they've already got one."

Malone sighed. "This is another one," he said. "Or, rather, the original
one. She also claims she's immortal."

"Lives forever?" Burris said. "You mean like that?"

"Immortal," Malone said. "Right."

Burris nodded. Then he looked worried. "Tell me, Malone," he said. "She
_isn't_, is she?"

"Isn't immortal, you mean?" Malone said. Burris nodded. Malone said
confidently: "Of course not."

There was a little pause. Malone thought things over.

Hell, maybe she was immortal. Stranger things had happened, hadn't they?

He looked over at Dr. Harman. "How about that?" he said. "Could she be
immortal?"

The psychiatrist shook his head decisively. "She's been here for over
forty years, Mr. Malone, ever since her late teens. Her records show all
that, and her birth certificate is in perfect order. Not a chance."

Malone sighed and turned back to the phone. "Of course she isn't
immortal, chief," he said. "She couldn't be. Nobody is. Just a nut."

"I was afraid of that," Burris said.

"Afraid?" Malone said.

Burris nodded. "We've got another one--if he checks out," he said.
"Right here in Washington--St. Elizabeths."

"Another nut?"

"Strait-jacket case," Burris said. "Delusions of persecution. Paranoia.
And a lot of other things I can't pronounce. But I'm sending him on out
to Yucca Flats anyhow, under guard. You might find a use for him."

"Oh, sure," Malone said.

"We can't afford to overlook a thing," Burris said.

Malone sighed. "I know," he said. "But all the same--"

"Don't worry about a thing, Malone," Burris said with a palpably false
air of confidence. "You get this Queen Elizabeth of yours out of there
and take her to Yucca Flats, too."

Malone considered the possibilities. Maybe they would find more
telepaths. Maybe all the telepaths would be nuts. It didn't seem
unlikely. Imagine having a talent that nobody would believe you had. It
might very easily drive you crazy to be faced with a situation like
that.

And there they would be in Yucca Flats. Kenneth J. Malone, and a
convention of looney-bin inhabitants.

Fun!

Malone began to wonder why he had gone into FBI work in the first place.

"Listen, chief," he said. "I--"

"Sure, I understand," Burris said quickly. "She's batty. But what else
can we do? Malone, don't do anything you'll regret."

"What?"

"I mean, don't resign."

"Chief, how did you know--you're not telepathic too, are you?"

"Of course not," Burris said. "But that's what I would do in your place.
And don't do it."

"Look, chief," Malone said. "These nuts--"

"Malone, you've done a wonderful job so far," Burris said. "You'll get a
raise and a better job when all this is over. Who else would have
thought of looking in the twitch-bins for telepaths? But you did,
Malone, and I'm proud of you, and you're stuck with it. We've got to use
them now. We have to find that spy!" He took a breath. "On to Yucca
Flats!" he said.

Malone gave up. "Yes, sir," he said. "Anything else?"

"Not right now," Burris said. "If there is, I'll let you know."

       *       *       *       *       *

Malone hung up unhappily as the image vanished. He looked at Dr. Harman.
"Well," he said, "that's that. What do I have to do to get a release for
Miss Thompson?"

Harman stared at him. "But, Mr. Malone," he said, "that just isn't
possible. Really. Miss Thompson is a ward of the state, and we couldn't
possibly allow her release without a court order."

Malone thought that over. "O.K.," he said at last. "I can see that." He
turned to Boyd. "Here's a job for you, Tom," he said. "Get one of the
judges on the phone. You'll know which one will do us the most good,
fastest."

"Hm-m-m," Boyd said. "Say Judge Dunning," he said. "Good man. Fast
worker."

"I don't care who," Malone said. "Just get going, and get us a release
for Miss Thompson." He turned back to the doctor. "By the way," he said,
"has she got any other name? Besides Elizabeth Tudor, I mean," he added
hurriedly.

"Her full name," Dr. Harman said, "is Rose Walker Thompson. She is not
Queen Elizabeth I, II, or XXVIII, and she is not immortal."

"But she is," Malone pointed out, "a telepath. And that's why I want
her."

"She may," Dr. Harman said, "be a telepath." It was obvious that he had
partly managed to forget the disturbing incidents that had happened a
few minutes before. "I don't even want to discuss that part of it."

"O.K., never mind it," Malone said agreeably. "Tom, get us a court order
for Rose Walker Thompson. Effective yesterday--day before, if possible."

Boyd nodded, but before he could get to the phone Dr. Harman spoke
again.

"Now, wait a moment, gentlemen," he said. "Court order or no court
order, Miss Thompson is definitely not a well woman, and I can't see my
way clear to--"

"I'm not well myself," Malone said. "I need sleep and I probably have a
cold. But I've got to work for the national security, and--"

"This is important," Boyd put in.

"I don't dispute that," Dr. Harman said. "Nevertheless, I--"

The door that led into the other room suddenly burst open. The three men
turned to stare at Miss Wilson, who stood in the doorway for a long
second and then stepped into the office, closing the door quietly behind
her.

"I'm sorry to interrupt," she said.

"Not at all," Malone said. "It's a pleasure to have you. Come again
soon." He smiled at her.

She didn't smile back. "Doctor," she said, "you better talk to Miss
Thompson. I'm not at all sure what I can do. It's something new."

"New?" he said. The worry lines on his face were increasing, but he
spoke softly.

"The poor dear thinks she's going to get out of the hospital now," Miss
Wilson said. "For some reason, she's convinced that the FBI is going to
get her released, and--"

As she saw the expressions on three faces, she stopped.

"What's wrong?" she said.

"Miss Wilson," Malone said, "we ... may I call you by your first name?"

"Of course, Mr. Malone," she said.

There was a little silence.

"Miss Wilson," Malone said, "what _is_ your first name?"

She smiled now, very gently. Malone wanted to walk through mountains, or
climb fire. He felt confused, but wonderful. "Barbara," she said.

"Lovely," he said. "Well, Barbara ... and please call me Ken. It's short
for Kenneth."

The smile on her face broadened. "I thought it might be," she said.

"Well," Malone said softly, "it is. Kenneth. That's my name. And you're
Barbara."

Boyd cleared his throat.

"Ah," Malone said. "Yes. Of course. Well, Barbara ... well, that's just
what we intend to do. Take Miss Thompson away. We need her--badly."

Dr. Harman had said nothing at all, and had barely moved. He was staring
at a point on his desk. "She couldn't possibly have heard us," he
muttered. "That's a soundproof door. She couldn't have heard us."

"But you can't take Miss Thompson away," Miss Wilson said.

"We have to, Barbara," Malone said gently. "Try to understand. It's for
the national security."

"She heard us thinking," Dr. Harman muttered. "That's what; she heard us
thinking. Behind a soundproof door. She can see inside their minds. She
can even see inside _my_ mind."

"She's a sick woman," Barbara said.

"But you have to understand--"

"Vital necessity," Boyd put in. "Absolutely vital."

"Nevertheless--" Barbara said.

"She can read minds," Dr. Harman whispered in an awed tone. "She knows.
Everything. She _knows_."

"It's out of the question," Barbara said. "Whether you like it or not.
Miss Thompson is not going to leave this hospital. Why, what could she
do outside these walls? She hasn't left in over forty years! And
furthermore, Mr. Malone--"

"Kenneth," Malone put in, as the door opened again. "I mean Ken."

       *       *       *       *       *

The little old lady put her haloed head into the room. "Now, now,
Barbara," she said. "Don't you go spoiling things. Just let these nice
men take me away and everything will be fine, believe me. Besides, I've
been outside more often than you imagine."

"Outside?" Barbara said.

"Of course," the little old lady said. "In other people's minds. Even
yours. I remember that nice young man ... what was his name?"

"Never mind his name," Barbara said, flushing furiously.

Malone felt instantly jealous of every nice young man he had ever even
heard of. _He_ wasn't a nice young man; he was an FBI agent, and he
liked to drink and smoke cigars and carouse.

All nice young men, he decided, should be turned into ugly old men as
soon as possible. That'd fix them!

He noticed the little old lady smiling at him, and tried to change his
thoughts rapidly. But the little old lady said nothing at all.

"At any rate," Barbara said, "I'm afraid that we just can't--"

Dr. Harman cleared his throat imperiously. It was a most impressive
noise, and everyone turned to look at him. His face was a little gray,
but he looked, otherwise, like a rather pudgy, blond, crew-cut Roman
emperor.

"Just a moment," he said with dignity, "I think you're doing the United
States of America a grave injustice, Miss Wilson--and that you're doing
an injustice to Miss Thompson, too."

"What do you mean?" she said.

"I think it would be nice for her to get away from me--I mean from
here," the psychiatrist said. "Where did you say you were taking her?"
he asked Malone.

"Yucca Flats," Malone said.

"Ah." The news seemed to please the psychiatrist. "That's a long
distance from here, isn't it? It's quite a few hundred miles away.
Perhaps even a few thousand miles away. I feel sure that will be the
best thing for me ... I mean, of course, for Miss Thompson. I shall
recommend that the court so order."

"Doctor--" But even Barbara saw, Malone could tell, that it was no good
arguing with Dr. Harman. She tried a last attack. "Doctor, who's going
to take care of her?"

A light the size and shape of North America burst in Malone's mind. He
almost chortled. But he managed to keep his voice under control. "What
she needs," he said, "is a trained psychiatric nurse."

Barbara Wilson gave him a look that had carloads of U{235} stacked away
in it, but Malone barely minded. She'd get over it, he told himself.

"Now, wasn't that sweet of you to think of that," the little old lady
said. Malone looked at her and was rewarded with another wink.

"I'm certainly glad you thought of Barbara," the little old lady went
on. "You will go with me won't you, dear? I'll make you a duchess.
Wouldn't you like to be a duchess, dear?"

Barbara looked from Malone to the little old lady, and then she looked
at Dr. Harman. Apparently what she saw failed to make her happy.

"We'll take good care of her, Barbara," Malone said.

She didn't even bother to give him an answer. After a second Boyd said:
"Well, I guess that settles it. If you'll let me use your phone, Dr.
Harman, I'll call Judge Dunning."

"Go right ahead," Dr. Harman said. "Go right ahead."

The little old lady smiled softly without looking at anybody at all.
"Won't it be wonderful?" she whispered. "At last I've been recognized.
My country is about to pay me for my services. My loyal subjects--" She
stopped and wiped what Malone thought was a tear from one
cornflower-blue eye.

"Now, now, Miss Thompson," Barbara said.

"I'm not sad," the little old lady said, smiling up at her. "I'm just so
very happy. I am about to get my reward, my well-deserved reward at
last, from all of my loyal subjects. You'll see." She paused and Malone
felt a faint stirring of stark, chill fear.

"Won't it be wonderful?" said the little old lady.




IV


"You're _where_?" Andrew J. Burris said.

Malone looked at the surprised face on the screen and wished he hadn't
called. He had to report in, of course--but, if he'd had any sense, he'd
have ordered Boyd to do the job for him.

Oh, well, it was too late for that now. "I'm in Las Vegas," he said. "I
tried to get you last night, but I couldn't, so I--"

"Las Vegas," Burris said. "Well, well. Las Vegas." His face darkened and
his voice became very loud. "Why aren't you in Yucca Flats?" he
screamed.

"Because she insisted on it," Malone said. "The old lady. Miss Thompson.
She says there's another telepath here."

Burris closed his eyes. "Well, that's a relief," he said at last.
"Somebody in one of the gambling houses, I suppose. Fine, Malone." He
went right on without a pause: "The boys have uncovered two more in
various parts of the nation. Not one of them is even close to sane." He
opened his eyes. "Where's this one?" he said.

Malone sighed. "In the looney bin," he said.

Burris' eyes closed again. Malone waited in silence. At last Burris
said: "All right. Get him out."

"Right," Malone said.

"Tell me," Burris said. "Why did Miss Thompson insist that you go to Las
Vegas? Somebody else could have done the job. You could have sent Boyd,
couldn't you?"

"Chief," Malone said slowly, "what sort of mental condition are those
other telepaths in?"

"Pretty bad," Burris said. "As a matter of fact, very bad. Miss Thompson
may be off her trolley, but the others haven't even got any tracks." He
paused. "What's that got to do with it?" he said.

"Well," Malone said, "I figured we'd better handle Miss Thompson with
kid gloves--at least until we find a better telepath to work with." He
didn't mention Barbara Wilson. The chief, he told himself, didn't want
to be bothered with details.

[Illustration]

"Doggone right you'd better," Burris said. "You treat that old lady as
if she were the Queen herself, understand?"

"Don't worry," Malone said unhappily. "We are." He hesitated. "She says
she'll help us find our spy, all right, but we've got to do it her
way--or else she won't co-operate."

"Do it her way, then," Burris said. "That spy--"

"Chief, are you sure?"

Burris blinked. "Well, then," he said, "what _is_ her way?"

Malone took a deep breath. "First," he said, "we had to come here and
pick this guy up. This William Logan, who's in a private sanitarium just
outside of Las Vegas. That's number one. Miss Thompson wants to get all
the telepaths together, so they can hold mental conversations or
something."

"And all of them batty," Burris said.

"Sure," Malone said. "A convention of nuts--and me in the middle.
Listen, chief--"

"Later," Burris said. "When this is over we can all resign, or go
fishing, or just plain shoot ourselves. But right now the national
security is primary, Malone. Remember that."

"O.K.," Malone sighed. "O.K. But she wants all the nuts here."

"Go along with her," Burris snapped. "Keep her happy. So far, Malone,
she's the only lead we have on the guy who's swiping information from
Yucca Flats. If she wants something, Malone, you do it."

"But, chief--"
