attention. But then an event occurred which bore directly upon Pop Young
and Sattell and Pop Young's missing years.

Somebody back on Earth promoted a luxury passenger-line of spaceships
to ply between Earth and Moon. It looked like a perfect set-up. Three
spacecraft capable of the journey came into being with attendant reams
of publicity. They promised a thrill and a new distinction for the rich.
Guided tours to Lunar! The most expensive and most thrilling trip in
history! One hundred thousand dollars for a twelve-day cruise through
space, with views of the Moon's far side and trips through Lunar City
and a landing in Aristarchus, plus sound-tapes of the journey and fame
hitherto reserved for honest explorers!

It didn't seem to have anything to do with Pop or with Sattell. But it
did.

There were just two passenger tours. The first was fully booked. But the
passengers who paid so highly, expected to be pleasantly thrilled and
shielded from all reasons for alarm. And they couldn't be. Something
happens when a self-centered and complacent individual unsuspectingly
looks out of a spaceship port and sees the cosmos unshielded by mists or
clouds or other aids to blindness against reality. It is shattering.

A millionaire cut his throat when he saw Earth dwindled to a mere
blue-green ball in vastness. He could not endure his own smallness in
the face of immensity. Not one passenger disembarked even for Lunar
City. Most of them cowered in their chairs, hiding their eyes. They were
the simple cases of hysteria. But the richest girl on Earth, who'd had
five husbands and believed that nothing could move her--she went into
catatonic withdrawal and neither saw nor heard nor moved. Two other
passengers sobbed in improvised strait jackets. The first shipload
started home. Fast.

The second luxury liner took off with only four passengers and turned
back before reaching the Moon. Space-pilots could take the strain of
space-flight because they had work to do. Workers for the lunar mines
could make the trip under heavy sedation. But it was too early in the
development of space-travel for pleasure-passengers. They weren't
prepared for the more humbling facts of life.

Pop heard of the quaint commercial enterprise through the micro-tapes
put off at the shack for the men down in the mine. Sattell probably
learned of it the same way. Pop didn't even think of it again. It seemed
to have nothing to do with him. But Sattell undoubtedly dealt with it
fully in his desperate writings back to Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pop matter-of-factly tended the shack and the landing field and the
stores for the Big Crack mine. Between-times he made more drawings in
pursuit of his own private objective. Quite accidentally, he developed a
certain talent professional artists might have approved. But he was not
trying to communicate, but to discover. Drawing--especially with his
mind on Sattell--he found fresh incidents popping up in his
recollection. Times when he was happy. One day he remembered the puppy
his children had owned and loved. He drew it painstakingly--and it was
his again. Thereafter he could remember it any time he chose. He did
actually recover a completely vanished past.

He envisioned a way to increase that recovery. But there was a marked
shortage of artists' materials on the Moon. All freight had to be hauled
from Earth, on a voyage equal to rather more than a thousand times
around the equator of the Earth. Artists' supplies were not often
included. Pop didn't even ask.

He began to explore the area outside the shack for possible material no
one would think of sending from Earth. He collected stones of various
sorts, but when warmed up in the shack they were useless. He found no
strictly lunar material which would serve for modeling or carving
portraits in the ground. He found minerals which could be pulverized and
used as pigments, but nothing suitable for this new adventure in the
recovery of lost youth. He even considered blasting, to aid his search.
He could. Down in the mine, blasting was done by soaking carbon
black--from CO{2}--in liquid oxygen, and then firing it with a spark. It
exploded splendidly. And its fumes were merely more CO{2} which an
air-apparatus handled easily.

He didn't do any blasting. He didn't find any signs of the sort of
mineral he required. Marble would have been perfect, but there is no
marble on the Moon. Naturally! Yet Pop continued to search absorbedly
for material with which to capture memory. Sattell still seemed
necessary, but--

Early one lunar morning he was a good two miles from his shack when he
saw rocket-fumes in the sky. It was most unlikely. He wasn't looking for
anything of the sort, but out of the corner of his eye he observed that
something moved. Which was impossible. He turned his head, and there
were rocket-fumes coming over the horizon, not in the direction of Lunar
City. Which was more impossible still.

He stared. A tiny silver rocket to the westward poured out monstrous
masses of vapor. It decelerated swiftly. It curved downward. The rockets
checked for an instant, and flamed again more violently, and checked
once more. This was not an expert approach. It was a faulty one. Curving
surface-ward in a sharply changing parabola, the pilot over-corrected
and had to wait to gather down-speed, and then over-corrected again. It
was an altogether clumsy landing. The ship was not even perfectly
vertical when it settled not quite in the landing-area marked by silvery
triangles. One of its tail-fins crumpled slightly. It tilted a little
when fully landed.

Then nothing happened.

Pop made his way toward it in the skittering, skating gait one uses in
one-sixth gravity. When he was within half a mile, an air-lock door
opened in the ship's side. But nothing came out of the lock. No
