chemistry. It has nothing to do with the invention, either. I am
claiming a new kind of lens holder, and I point out that the interior of
the holder may be coated if desired with a plasticized synthetic resin
coating. My, I don't know what the Office is coming to. The Patent
Office is the only institution in the world that does not know the
meaning of the phrase 'room temperature'. Some day.... What's the
matter, Mr. Saddle?"

I had pulled up a chair and hunched down in it. Mr. Spardleton
recognized the symptoms. He put down the offending Office Action and
settled back and waited for me to tell him my troubles.

I said, "I've got a hot invention. It is a paper that will replace
cloth, strong, flexible, cheap too. We've only made one version of it,
though, and I have to file an application right away because one of
Callahan's technicians left, and we can't risk waiting."

He nodded, and I went on, describing to him all the details of the
invention and the situation. When I finished I stared morosely at the
floor. Mr. Spardleton said, "What's the problem? File a quick
application now, and later on when you have more information, abandon it
and file a good, full-scale application."

[Illustration]

I looked at him in surprise and said, "But somebody else has just as
much information as we have, and he may start to experiment right away.
That technician knows as much as we do. In another six months they could
file a complete application and beat us out on dates; they'd be first
with the complete application."

"Well, what do you propose to do about it?"

I shrugged. "I'll have to make up as good an application as I can right
now. We'll make some guesses at how the research would go, and put it
in."

"Oh now, look. You don't know"--he began ticking off the points on his
fingers--"if you really need the trialkyl aluminum, or the
mercury-treated glass surface, or the heat, or the radiation, or any
combination of them. You don't have any idea of the conditions that are
necessary to produce this paper."

"I know."

"All you've got is a single example that works. If you make your claims
broader than that one example, the Examiner will reject you for lack of
disclosure. This is basic in patent law. Ex parte Cameron, Rule 71, and
35 U.S.C. 112 will do for a starter."

But I hadn't worked with Mr. Spardleton for nine years for nothing, and
he had taught me how to play this game pretty well. I sat up straighter
in my chair and said, "Yes, but in Ex parte Dicke and Moncrieff the
disclosure of nitric acid as a shrinking agent for yarns was enough to
support a claim for shrinking agents broadly; the claim did not have to
be limited to nitric acid."

"Only because nitric acid was already known to be a shrinking agent for
yarns."

I said, "Well, adipic acid is a known polyester ingredient."

"And all the other ingredients?"

I did then what he had carefully taught me to do when I was losing an
argument: I quickly shifted to another point. "In Ex parte Tabb the
applicant merely disclosed raisins and raisin oil, but that was enough
to support claims to 'dried fruit' and 'edible oil'."

"But in that case the Board of Appeals said they allowed such
terminology only because the equivalency of the substances could be
foreseen by those skilled in the art, foreseen with certainty, too. Can
you say that about your substances?"

I hesitated before I answered, and that was all he needed to take over.
"A large number of ingredients was recited in In re Ellis, and since
there was no evidence to show that they all would not work, the
applicant was allowed broad claims. But you'd have trouble making your
guessed-at ingredients stick. In the case of Corona Cord Tire Company v.
Dovan, the court said the patentee was entitled to his broader claims
because he proved he had tested a reasonable number of the members of a
chemical class. Have you?"

I started to answer, but Mr. Spardleton was in full swing now, and he
said to me, "No, sir, you haven't. You are not ready to put in broad
claims on a half-baked invention."

It was the "half-baked" that did it. Controlling my temper I rose to my
feet and said in a purposeful, quiet voice, "I think I see clearly how
this case should be handled in this situation. I shall prepare it in
that manner, and file it, and prosecute it, and obtain a strong patent
on a pathfinder invention. I'll keep you posted." I turned and walked
out. Just as I passed through the door I thought I heard him say softly,
"Attaboy, Carl," but I must have been mistaken. Mr. Spardleton never
calls me Carl.

       *       *       *

I got right at it the very next morning. I opened the office myself and
began studying my notes to see how broad a claim I could write for the
Tearproof Paper Case. I listed all the ingredients in one column, and
then filled up the adjacent columns with all the possible substitutes I
could think of. I didn't even know it when Susan arrived at the office,
stood in my doorway for a moment, and then tip-toed away. Later on Mr.
Spardleton looked in on me, and I wasn't aware of that, either. It was
ten o'clock before I finally came up for air, and then I dashed out to
the Marchare Laboratory for another talk with Callahan. I explained how
I was going to handle the case to make sure we got a good, broad patent
application into the Patent Office.

"Can you do that?" he asked.

"Oh, yes. We can put in all the things we think will work, but if we are
wrong we are in some degree of trouble. But I feel that with both of us
working on this we ought to be able to turn out a good sound job. I'll
keep sending you drafts out in San Francisco until we finally get one we
think good enough to file. But we can't waste time. This is a hot one,
and we want to get it in as soon as possible."

He shrugged his shoulders, and we sat down to work on my lists. Neither
one of us realized it when lunch time came and went. But that's the way
it is with world-beater inventions; they sweep you along. Early that
afternoon I dictated my first draft to Susan. Callahan and I went over
the draft, and then he left for San Francisco. The next time around we
had to use air mail. With each new draft we added more to the basic
information we had, rounding out the invention in ever greater detail. I
