"Leave it on," Johnny snapped.

"But we can't move fast enough in these things...."

"Leave it on all the same. If they split the hull open, you'll be dead
in ten seconds without a suit."

Somewhere below they heard the steady _clang-clang-clang_ of the
emergency-station's bell ... already one of the compartments somewhere
had been breached, and was pouring its air out into the vacuum of space.
"But what can we do?" Greg said. "They could tear us apart!"

"First, we see what they've already done," Johnny said, spinning the
wheel on the inner lock. "If they plan to tear us apart, we're done for,
but they may want to try to board us.... We'll wait and see."

An orbit-ship under fire was completely vulnerable. One well-placed
shell could rip it open like a balloon.

Tom and Greg followed Johnny to where the control cabin was located. In
control they found alarm lights flashing in three places on the
instrument panel. Another muffled crash roared through the ship, and a
new row of lights sprang on along the panel.

"How are the engines?" Greg said, staring at the flickering lights.

"Can't tell. Looks like they're firing at the main jets, but they've
ripped open three storage holds, too. They're trying to disable us...."

"What about the _Scavenger_?"

Johnny checked a gauge. "The airlock compartment is all right, so the
scout ships haven't been touched. They couldn't fire on them without
splitting the whole ship down the middle." Johnny leaned forward,
flipped on the viewscreen, and an image came into focus.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a Class I Ranger, and there was no doubt of its origin. Like the
one they had seen berthing at the Sun Lake City racks, this ship had a
glossy black hull, with the golden triangle-and-J insignia standing out
in sharp relief in the dim sunlight.

"It's our friends, all right," Johnny said.

"But what are they trying to do?" Tom said.

Even as they watched, a pair of scooters broke from the side of the
Ranger and slid down toward the sun side of the asteroid. "I don't
know," Johnny said. "I think they intended to stay hidden, until Tom
lost control of his bumper, and got far enough around there to spot
them." He frowned as the first scooter touched down on the asteroid
surface.

"Can't we fire on them?" Greg said angrily.

"Not the way this tub is lurching around. They've got our main gyros,
and the auxilliaries aren't powerful enough to steady us. Another blast
or two could send us spinning like a top, and we'd have nothing to
stabilize us...."

There was another flash from the Ranger's hull, and the ship jerked
under their feet. "Well, we're a sitting duck here," Greg said. "Maybe
those engines will still work." He slid into the control seat, flipped
the drive switches to fire the side jets in opposite pairs. They fired,
steadying the lurching of the ship somewhat, but there was no response
from the main engines. "No good. We couldn't begin to run from them.
We're stuck here."

"They could outrun us anyway," Tom said, watching the viewscreen. "And
they're moving in closer now."

"They're going to board us," Tom said.

Johnny nodded, his eyes suddenly bright. "I think you're right. And if
they do, we may have a chance. But we've got to split up.... Greg, you
take the control cabin here, try to keep them out if you can. Tom can
cover the main corridor to the storage holds, and I'll take the engine
room section. That will sew up the entrances to control, here, and give
us a chance to stop them."

"They may have a dozen men," Tom said. "They could just shoot us down."

"I don't think so," Johnny said. "They want _us_, not the ship, or they
wouldn't bother to board us. We may not be able to hold them off, but we
can try."

"What about making a run for it in the _Scavenger_?" Greg said.

Johnny chuckled grimly. "It'd be a mighty short run. That Ranger's got
homing shells that could blow the _Scavenger_ to splinters if we tried
it. Our best bet is to put up such a brawl that they think twice about
taking us."

They parted in the corridor outside control, Johnny heading down for the
engine room corridors, while Tom ran up toward the main outer-shell
corridor, a Markheim stunner in his hand. The entire outer shell of the
ship was storage space, each compartment separately sealed and connected
with the two main corridors that circled the ship. On each side these
corridors came together to join the short entry corridors from the
scout-ship airlocks.

Tom knew that the only way the ship could be boarded was through those
locks; a man stationed at the place where the main corridors joined
could block any entry from the locks ... as long as he could hold his
position. Tom reached the junction of the corridors, and crouched close
to the wall. By peering around the corner, he had a good view of the
airlock corridor.

Tom gripped the Markheim tightly, and he dialed it down to a narrow
beam. Nobody had ever been killed by a stunner ... but a direct hit with
a narrow beam could paralyze a man for three days.

There was movement at the far end of the airlock corridor. A helmeted
head peered around the turn in the corridor; then two men in pressure
suits moved into view, walking cautiously, weapons in hand. Tom shrank
back against the wall, certain they had not seen him. He waited until
they were almost to the junction with the main corridor; then he took
aim and pressed the trigger stud on his Markheim. There was an ugly
ripping sound as the gun jerked in his hand. The two men dropped as
though they had been pole-axed.

A shout, a scrape of metal against metal, and a shot ripped back at him
from the end of the corridor. Tom jerked back fast, but not quite fast
enough. He felt a sledge-hammer blow on his shoulder, felt his arm jerk
in a cramping spasm while the corridor echoed the low rumble of
sub-sonics. He flexed his arm to work out the spasm ... they were using
a wide beam, hardly strong enough to stun a man. His heart pounded. They
were being careful, very careful....

Two more men rounded the bend in the corridor. Tom fired, but they hit
the deck fast, and the beam missed. The first one jerked to his feet,
charged up the corridor toward him, dodging and sliding. Tom followed
him in his sights, fired three times as the Markheim heated up in his
hand. The beam hit the man's leg, dumping him to the deck, and bounced
off to catch the second one.

But now there was another sound, coming from the corridor behind him.
Voices, shouts, clanging of boots. He pressed against the wall,
listening. The sounds were from below. They must have gotten past
Johnny ... probably the men on the scooters. Tom looked around
helplessly. If they came up behind him, he was trapped in a crossfire.
But if he left his position, more men could come in through the airlock.
Even now two more came around the bend, starting up the corridor for
him....

Quite suddenly, the lights went out.

The men stopped. Sound stopped. The corridor was pitch black. Tom fired
wildly down the corridor, heard shouts and oaths from the men, but he
could see nothing. Then, ahead, a flicker of light as a headlamp went
on. The men from the airlock were close, moving in on him, and from
behind he saw light bouncing off the corridor walls....

He jerked open the hatch to a storage hold, ducked inside, and slammed
the hatch behind him. He pressed against the wall, panting.

He waited.

Suddenly an idea flickered in Tom's mind.

It was a chance ... a long chance ... but it was something. If they were
going to be captured in spite of anything they could do, even a long
chance would be worth trying....

He waited in the darkness, tried to think it through. It was a wild
idea, an utterly impossible idea, he had never heard of it being tried
before ... but _any_ chance was better than none. He remembered what
Johnny had said in the control cabin. The Ranger ship would have homing
shells. An attempt to make a run with the _Scavenger_ might be
disastrous.

He thought about it, trying to reason it out. The Jupiter Equilateral
men obviously wanted them alive. They did not dare to kill Roger
Hunter's sons, because Roger Hunter might have told them where the
bonanza was. And Jupiter Equilateral would not dare let anyone of them
break away. If one of them got back to Mars, the whole U.N. Patrol would
be out in the Belt....

The plan became clear in his mind, but he had to let Greg know. He
fingered the control of his helmet radio. The boarding party would have
a snooper, but if he was quick, they wouldn't have time to nail him. He
buzzed an attention code. "Greg? Can you hear me?"

Silence. He buzzed again, and waited. What was wrong? Had they already
broken through to the control cabin and taken Greg? He buzzed again.
"Greg! Sound off if you can hear me."

More silence. Then a click. "Tom?"

"Here. Are you all right?"

"So far. You?"

"They got past me, but they didn't hit me. How's Johnny?"

"I don't know," Greg said. "I think he's been hurt. Tom, you'd better
get off, they'll have snoopers...."

"All right, listen," Tom said. "How does it look to you?"

"Bad. We're outnumbered, they'll be through to here any minute."

"All right, I've got an idea. It's risky, but it might let us pull
something out of this mess. I'll need some time, though."

"How much?"

"Ten, fifteen minutes."

There was an edge to Greg's voice. "What are you planning?"

"I can't tell you, they're listening in. But if it works...."

"Look, don't do anything stupid."

"I can't hear you," Tom said. "You try to hold them for fifteen
minutes ... and don't worry. Take care of yourself."

Tom snapped off the speaker and moved to the hatchway. The corridor was
empty, and pitch black. He started down toward the airlock, then stopped
short at the sound of voices and the flicker of headlamps up ahead.

He crouched back, but the lights were not moving. Guards at the lock,
making certain that nobody tried to board their own ship. Tom grinned to
himself. They weren't missing any bets, he thought.

Except one. There was one bet they wouldn't even think of.

He backtracked to the storage hold, crossed through it, and out into the
far corridor. He followed the gentle curve of the deck a quarter of the
way around the ship. Twice along the way he stumbled in the darkness,
but saw no sign of the raiders. At last he reached the far side, and the
corridor leading to No. 2 airlock. Again he could see the lamps of the
guards around the bend; they were stationed directly inside their own
lock.

Inching forward, he peered into blackness. Each step made a muffled
clang on the deck plates. He edged his boots along as quietly as
possible, reaching along the wall with his hand until he felt the lip of
a hatchway.

The lights and voices seemed nearer now. In the dim reflected light he
saw the sign on the door of the hatchway:

     No. 2 Airlock
     BE SURE PRESSURE GAUGE IS AT ZERO BEFORE OPENING HATCH

He checked the gauge, silently spun the wheel. There was a _ping_ as the
seals broke. He pulled the hatch open just enough to squeeze into the
lock, then closed it behind him. Then he switched on the pumps, waiting
impatiently until the red "all clear" signal flashed on. Then he opened
the outside lock.

Just beyond, he could see the sleek silvery lines of the _Scavenger_.

It was their only chance.

He took a deep breath, and jumped across the gap to the open lock of the
_Scavenger_.




6. The Last Run of the Scavenger


To Greg Hunter the siege of the orbit-ship had been a nerve-wracking
game of listening and waiting for something to happen.

In the darkness of the control cabin he stretched his fingers, cramped
from gripping the heavy Markheim stunner, and checked the corridor
outside again. There was no sound in the darkness there, no sign of
movement. Somewhere far below he heard metal banging on metal; minutes
before he thought he had heard the sharp ripping sound of a stunner
blast overhead, but he wasn't sure. Wherever the fighting was going on,
it was not here.

He shook his head as his uneasiness mounted. Why hadn't Johnny come
back? He'd gone off to try and disable the Ranger ship leaving Greg to
guard the control cabin. Why no sign of the marauders in the control
cabin corridor? This should have been the first place they would head
for, if they planned to take the ship, but there had been nothing but
silence and darkness. Johnny had been gone near 15 minutes already. Greg
became more uneasy.

He waited. Suddenly, bitterly, he realized the hopelessness of it. Even
if Johnny did manage to damage the Ranger ship, what difference would it
make? They had been fools to come out here, idiots to ignore Tawney's
warning, the three of them. Tawney had told them in so many words that
there would be trouble, and they had come out anyway, just begging for
it.

Well, now they had what they'd begged for. Greg slammed his fist into
his palm angrily. What had they expected? That the big company would
step humbly aside for them, with a fortune hanging in the balance? If
they had even begun to think it through before they started....

But they hadn't, and now it was too late. They were under attack; Johnny
was off on a fool's errand, gone too long for comfort, and Tom ... Greg
glanced at his watch. It had been ten minutes since Tom's call. What had
he meant by it? A plan, he said. A long chance.

He couldn't shake off the cold feeling in his chest when he thought
about Tom. What if something happened to him....

Greg remembered how he had grown to resent his brother. The time when
they were very young and Tom had been struck by the sickness, a native
Martian virus they called it. He remembered the endless nights of
attention given to Tom alone. From then on somehow they weren't friends
any more. But now all that seemed to disappear and Greg only wished that
Tom would appear down the corridor....

A sound startled him. He tensed, gripping the stunner, peering into the
darkness. Had he heard something? Or was it his own foot scraping on
the deck plate? He held his breath, listening, and the sound came
again, louder.

Someone was moving stealthily up the corridor.

Greg waited, covered by the edge of the hatchway. It might be Johnny
returning, or maybe even Tom ... but there was no sign of recognition.
Whoever it was was coming silently....

Then a beam of light flared from a headlamp, and he saw the blue crackle
of a stunner. He jerked back as the beam bounced off the metal walls.
Then he was firing point blank down the corridor, his stunner on a tight
beam, a deadly pencil of violent energy. He heard a muffled scream and a
bulk loomed up in front of him, crashed to the deck at his feet.

He fired again. Another crash, a shout, and then the sound of footsteps
retreating. He waited, his heart pounding, but there was nothing more.

The first attempt on the control cabin had failed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Five minutes later the second attempt began. This time there was no
warning sound. A sudden, ear-splitting crash, a groan of tortured metal,
and the barricaded hatchway glowed dull red. Another crash followed. The
edge of the hatch split open, pouring acrid Murexide fumes into the
cabin. A third explosion breached the door six inches; Greg could see
headlamps in the corridor beyond.

He fired through the crack, pressing down the stud until the stunner
scorched his hand. Then he heard boots clanging up the other corridor.
He pressed back against the wall, waited until the sounds were near,
then threw open the hatch. For an instant he made a perfect target, but
the raiders did not fire. The stunner buzzed in his hand, and once again
the footfalls retreated.

They _were_ being careful!

Silence then, and blackness. Minutes passed ... five, ten.... Greg
checked the time again. It was over twenty minutes since Tom had talked
to him. What had happened? Whatever Tom had planned must have misfired,
or something would have happened by now. For a moment he considered
leaving his post and starting down the dark corridor to search ... but
where to search? There was nothing to do but wait and hope for a
miracle.

Then suddenly the lights blazed on in the control cabin and the corridor
outside. An attention signal buzzed in Greg's earphones. "All right,
Hunter, it's all over," a voice grated. "You've got five minutes to get
down to No. 3 lock. If you make us come get you, you'll get hurt."

"I'll chance it," Greg snapped back. "Come on up."

"We're through fooling," the voice said. "You'd better get down here.
And bring your brother with you."

"Sure," Greg said. "Start holding your breath."

The contact broke for a moment, then clicked on again. This time it was
another voice. "We've got Johnny Coombs down here," it said. "You want
him to stay alive, you start moving. Without your stunner."

Greg chewed his lip. They could be bluffing ... but they might not be.
"I want to see Johnny," he said.

On the control panel a viewscreen flickered to life. "Take a look,
then," the voice said in his earphones.

They had Johnny, all right. A burly guard was holding his good arm
behind his back. Greg could see the speaker wires jerked loose from his
helmet.

"It's up to you," the voice said. "You've got three minutes. If you're
not down here by then, this helmet comes off and your friend goes out
the lock. It's quick that way, but it's not very pleasant."

Johnny was shaking his head violently; the guard wrenched at his arm,
and the miner's face twisted in pain. "Two minutes," the voice said.

"Okay," Greg said. "I'm coming down."

"Drop the stunner right there."

He dropped the weapon onto the deck. Three steps out into the corridor,
and two guards were there to meet him, stunners raised. They marched him
up the ramp to the outer level corridor and around to No. 3 lock.

They were waiting there with Johnny. A moment later the guards herded
them through the lock and into the hold of the Ranger ship, stripped off
their suits, and searched them.

A big man with a heavy face and coarse black hair came into the cabin.
He looked at Johnny and Greg and grunted. "You must be Hunter," he said
to Greg. "Where's the other one?"

"What other one?" Greg said.

"Your brother. Where is he?"

"How would I know?" Greg said.

The man's face darkened. "You'd be smart to watch your tongue," he said.
"We know there were three of you, we want the other one."

The man turned to a guard. "What about it?"

"Don't know, Doc. Nobody's reported him."

"Then take a crew and search the ship. We were due back hours ago. He's
in there somewhere."

"Sure, Doc." The guard disappeared through the lock. The man called Doc
motioned Greg and Johnny through into the main cabin.

"What are you planning to do with us?" Greg demanded.

"You'll find out soon enough." Doc's mouth twisted angrily.

A guard burst into the cabin. "Doc, there's just nobody there! We've
scoured the ship."

"You think he just floated away in his space suit?" Doc growled. "_Find
him._ Tawney only needs one of them, but we can't take a chance on the
other one getting back...." He broke off, his eyes on the viewscreen.
"Did you check those scout ships?"

"No, I thought...."

"Get down there and check them." Doc turned back to the viewscreen
impatiently.

Greg caught Johnny's eye, saw the big miner's worried frown. "Where is
he?" he whispered.

"I don't know. Thought you did...."

"All I know is that he had some kind of scheme in mind."

"Shut up," Doc said to them. "If you're smart, you'll be strapping down
before we...." He broke off in mid sentence, listening.

Quite suddenly, the Ranger ship had begun to vibrate. Somewhere, far
away, there was the muffled rumble of engines.

Doc whirled to the viewscreen. Greg and Johnny looked at the same
instant, and Johnny groaned.

Below them, the _Scavenger_'s jets were flaring. First the pale starter
flame, then a long stream of fire, growing longer as the engines
developed thrust.

Doc slammed down a switch, roared into a speaker. "That scout
ship ... stop it! He's trying to make a break!"

Two guards appeared at the lock almost instantly, but it was too late.
Already she was straining at her magnetic cable moorings; then the
exhaust flared, and the little scout ship leaped away from the
orbit-ship, moving out at a tangent to the asteroid's orbit, picking up
speed, moving faster and faster....

In toward the orbit of Mars.

The man called Doc had gone pale. Now he snapped on the speaker again.
"Frank? Stand by on missile control. He's asking for it."

"Right," the voice came back. "I'm sighting in."

The _Scavenger_ was moving fast now, dwindling in the viewscreen. One
panel of the screen went telescopic to track her. "All right," Doc said.
"Fire one and two."

From both sides of the Ranger, tiny rockets flared. Like twin bullets
the homing shells moved out, side by side, in the track of the escaping
_Scavenger_. With a strangled cry, Greg leaped forward, but Johnny
caught his arm.

"Johnny, _Tom's on ... that thing_...."

"I know. But he's got a chance."

Already the homing shells were out of sight; only the twin flares were
visible. Greg stared helplessly at the tiny light-spot of the
_Scavenger_. At first she had been moving straight, but now she was
dodging and twisting, her side-jets flaring at irregular intervals. The
twin pursuit shells mimicked each change in course, drawing closer to
her every second.

And then there was a flash, so brilliant it nearly blinded them, and the
_Scavenger_ burst apart in space. The second shell struck a fragment;
there was another flash. Then there was nothing but a nebulous powdering
of tiny metal fragments.

The last run of the _Scavenger_ had ended.

Dazed, Greg turned away from the screen, and somewhere, as if in a
dream, he heard Doc saying, "All right, boys, strap this pair down.
We've got a lot of work to do before we can get out of here."




7. Prisoners


Wherever they were planning to take them, the captors took great pains
to make sure that their two prisoners did not escape before they were
underway. Greg and Johnny were strapped down securely into accelleration
cots. Two burly guards were assigned to them, and the guards were taking
their job seriously. One of the two was watching them at all times, and
both men held their stunners on ready.

Meanwhile, under Doc's orders, the crew of the Jupiter Equilateral ship
began a systematic looting of the orbit-ship they had disabled. Earlier
