
But, then, Professor Lightning really didn't understand carny. He never
thought of the one good argument, and after a while he gave up, and went
away.

Of course, that was several days later. Professor Lightning told Charley
that he was leaving for New York, and Charley said: "What? In the middle
of the season?" Then he told Wrout, and Wrout screamed and ranted and
swore that Professor Lightning would never work in carny again. "I'll
have you blacklisted!" he roared.

And Professor Lightning shrugged and smiled and went away to pack. He
took all his notebooks, and all the cages with little animals in them,
and he didn't seem at all disturbed. "I'll find another subject," he
told Charley, when he left. "When they find out what I've got, in New
York, they'll provide me with subjects by the hundred. I did want to
help you ..."

"Thanks," Charley said honestly.

"... But that's the way things are, I suppose," Professor Lightning
said. "Maybe some day you'll realize."

Charley shook his head. "I'm afraid not, professor," he said, and
Professor Lightning shook Charley's foot, and left, and Charley went
back to work in the freak show, and for a while he didn't even think
about Professor Lightning. Then, of course, the news began to show up in
the Chicago _American_, which Charley got two or three days late because
his mother sent it to him by mail.

At first Charley didn't realize that Dr. Edmund Charles Schinsake was
Professor Lightning, but then the _American_ ran his picture; that was
the day Professor Lightning was awarded a medal by the AMA, and Charley
felt pleased and happy for the old man. It looked as it he'd got what he
wanted.

Charley, of course, didn't think much about the professor's "limb
regeneration"; he didn't need it, he thought, and he didn't want it, and
that was that.

And then, one night, he was dropped from the bally, and he asked Dave
Lungs about it, and Dave said: "Well, we want the biggest draw we can
get, out there before the show," and put Erma, the Fish Girl, out in his
place. And Charley started to wonder about that, and after a few days
had gone by he found himself talking about it, to Ed Baylis, over in the
cooktent while they were having lunch.

Baylis was a little man of sixty or so, with a wrinkled face like a
walnut and a powerful set of lungs; he was Wrout's outside talker for
the girlie show. "Because I'm old," he said, grinning. "I don't have
trouble with the girls. And if I got to take one off the bally or out of
the show there's no personal stuff that would make it tough, see what I
mean?"

"That's what I'm worried about," Charley said.

"What?" Ed asked. He speared a group of string beans with his fork and
conveyed them to his mouth. Charley, using his right foot, did the same.

"The bally," Charley said. "The way things are, Dave took me off, and
I'm worrying about it."

"Maybe some kind of a change," Ed said.

Charley shook his head. "He said ... he said he wanted the biggest draw
out there. Now, you know I'm a big draw, Ed. I always have been."

"Sure," Ed said. He chewed another mouthful and swallowed. "Still,
people want a change now and then. Doesn't have to mean anything."

"Maybe not," Charley said uncomfortably. But he wasn't convinced.

       *       *       *       *       *

The season drew to a close, and Charley went off to the Florida Keys,
where he spent a month living with some friends before holing up with
his mother and sister for the winter. He was offered a job in New York,
at a year-round flea museum in Times Square, but after some thought he
decided against it. He'd never had to work winters, and he wasn't going
to start.

After all, he was still doing well, wasn't he? He told himself
emphatically that he was. He was an Armless Wonder, a born freak, the
top of the carny ladder, with a good job wherever he cared to look for
one.

He had to tell himself that quite a few times before he began to believe
it.

Spring came, and then summer, and Charley kissed his mother and his
sister good-by and joined Wrout's Carnival Shows in Summit, Idaho, three
days before their opening. He didn't notice much change from previous
years, but it took an effort not to notice some things.

Not like the new man who'd taken Professor Lightning's place--a tall
thin youngster who had an Electric Chair act. Or like the periodic
quarrels between Ned and Ed; it seemed they'd met a girl over the winter
season, and disagreed about her. Ed thought she was perfectly wonderful;
Ned couldn't see her for beans.

No, things like that were a part of carny; you got used to them, as the
show rolled along year after year, and paid no more attention to them
than a housewife pays to rather uninteresting back-fence gossip.

It was something else that had changed, something important.

His contract, for instance. It was made out for the same pay as he'd
been getting, but the option periods were shortened up; suddenly,
Charley was living from season to season, with almost no assurance of
continuous, steady work. Old man Wrout had looked a little less than
happy when he'd given Charley the contract; he'd almost seemed ashamed,
and he hadn't really looked Charley in the eye once. But when Charley
asked what was wrong, he got no answer.

Or none that meant anything. "It's just the way things are," Wrout
muttered. "Don't make no difference, kid."

But it did make a difference. Charley wasn't out in the bally any more,
either; he was backstage among the second-rate acts, the tattooed man
and the fire-eater and the rest, while Erma and Ned and Ed and the
top-liners took their bows out before the crowd, pulling them in, and
got the gasps and the applause.

The crowds in front of his own platform, inside during the show, were
smaller, too. At first Charley thought that was due to the bally itself,
but as the season began and wore on, the crowds continued to shrink
beyond all expectation. Counting as he worked, combing his hair with one
foot, drawing little sketches for the customers ("Take one home for only
one extra dime, a treasured souvenir especially personalized for you by
Charley de Milo")--counting the house, he discovered one evening that he
was the smallest draw in the tent. The tattooed man did better than
Charley de Milo, which was enough of a disgrace; the rest were so far
ahead that Charley didn't even want to think about it.

His first idea was that somebody was out to get him. He could feel the
muscles of his shoulders and back bunching up when he tried thinking
what to do about the sabotage that had struck him; but an Armless Wonder
has one very real disadvantage. He can comb his own hair and brush his
own teeth; he can feed himself and--with proper clothing--dress himself;
he can open doors and shut windows and turn the pages of books. But he
can't engage in a free-for-all fight, not without long and careful
training in that style of battle known as _savate_, or boxing with the
feet. Charley had never learned _savate_; he had never needed it.

For the first time since he could remember, he felt helpless. He wasn't
normal; he couldn't do what any normal man could do. He wanted to find
the man who was sabotaging his show, and beat him into a confession, and
throw him off the lot--

And he couldn't.

The muscles of his back pulled and pulled at him. He clenched his jaw.
Then Dave Lungs came over to his platform and he forced himself to
relax, sweating. There were four or five people behind Dave, ordinary
marks with soft, soft faces and round eyes. While Dave talked Charley
went through his act; perhaps ten other marks were scattered in the
tent, standing at other platforms, watching other acts even without Dave
there to guide them and talk them up.

And when he was through Dave sold exactly one of the sketches Charley
had done. One. An old man bought it, a chubby little Santa Claus of a
man with eyes that twinkled and a belly that undoubtedly shook like a
jelly bowl when it was freed from its expensive orlon confines. Dave
went off to the next platform, where Erma stood, and the marks followed
him, and more drifted over. Erma had ten customers, Charley noticed, and
he grabbed a handkerchief from the platform floor and wiped his damp
face with one foot.

