equipment unreliability? Dying he could face. Goofing would be a
disgrace that he would have to meet in fact or in symbol. Hardware
crackup was a matter of the laws of probability. Not only his duty
demanded that he report, his essence cried out for a voice to _let them
know_.

Anybody.

Just the chance to tell one other human soul.

Chelan asked, "Who are you? Your name and rank?"

He said sullenly, "Go to hell."

"We have ways and means."

He said, "Use 'em."

"If we said that we mean no harm; if we asked what we could do to prove
it, what would be your reply?"

"Take me back and let me go."

"Who are you? Will you identify yourself?"

"No."

"Stubborn Terran!"

"I know my rights. We are not at war. I'll tell you nothing. Why did you
capture me?"

"We'll ask the questions, Terran."

"You'll get no answers." He sneered at them angrily. "Torture me--and
then wonder whether my screamings tell the truth. Dope me and wonder
whether what I truly believe is fact or fantasy."

"Please," said Chelan, "we only want to understand your kind. To know
what makes you tick."

"Then why didn't you ask?"

"We've tried and we get no answers. Terran, the Universe is a vastness
beyond comprehension. Co-operate and give us what we want to know and a
piece of it is yours."

"Nuts!"

"Terran, you have friends."

"Who doesn't?"

"Why can't we be your friends?"

Angrily, resentfully, "Your way isn't friendly enough to convince me."

Chelan shook his head. "Take him away," he directed in his own tongue.

"Where? And how shall we keep him?"

"To the place we've prepared. And keep him safe."

Huvane asked, "Safe? Who knows what is safe? One bribed his guards. One
seduced her guards. One dug his way out scratch by scratch. Disappeared,
died, dead, gone, mingled off with the myriad of worlds--did one get
home, perhaps, to start their legend of the gods in the sky; the legend
that never dies through the rise and fall of culture from savagery to
... to ... to Element 109?"

Chelan looked at Jerry Markham, the Terran looked back defiantly as if
he were guest instead of captive. "Co-operate," breathed Chelan.

"I'll tell you nothing. Force me. I can't stop that."

Chelan shook his head sorrowfully. "Extracting what you know would be
less than the play of a child," he said. "No, Terran. We can know what
you know in the turn of a dial. What we need is that which you do not
know. Laugh? Or is that a sneer? No matter. What you know is worthless.
Your problems and your ambitions, both racial and personal, are minor.
We know them already. The pattern is repetitive, only some of the names
are changed.

"But why? Ah, that we must know. Why are you what you are? Seven times
in History Terra has come up from the mud, seven times along the same
route. Seven times a history of ten thousand years from savage to
savant, from beast to brilliance and always with the same will to
do--to do what? To die for what? To fight for what?"

Chelan waved Huvane to take the Terran away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Huvane said, "He's locked in air-tight with guards who can be trusted.
Now what do we do with him?"

"He will co-operate."

"By force?"
