steady the wheel.

"Uncle Phil!"

"It's all right, Tim. It ... it's all right. I had a thought there that
kind of shook me." He relaxed with a shaky laugh, relief flooding his
face once more with color. "What a crazy thought! I could have sworn ...
well, never mind. But it shakes a man to learn what tricks his own mind
can play on him, all in an instant."

"What kind of tricks, Uncle Phil?"

"Oh, no you don't. If you hadn't egged me on with so many questions,
I'd have been spared a pretty nasty moment, you know that? Now let me
concentrate on driving for a change so I can get you home in time for
supper. O. K.?"

"But ... oh, O.K."

"Don't sound so disappointed, chum. It's been a pleasant drive, even if
nothing much happened."

"Yes, Uncle Phil. Even if ... nothing much happened."

       *       *       *       *       *

Spring changed to summer, and summer rolled into its final days. Phil
was in a gloomy frame of mind when Timmy's eleventh birthday came
around.

He watched Timmy draw a deep breath and--without puffing out his cheeks
as a child would do--neatly blow out the eleven candles on his cake.
It was an efficient, sprayless, perfectly-controlled operation, an
operation carried out happily and in high spirits, and it depressed
Phil. The "party" itself depressed him--a child's birthday party with
no children present, unless you counted Timmy! Phil and Doc, Helen and
Jerry, and Homer, the latter gray muzzled and stiff in the joints. That
was the roster of the guests and it could almost be called the roster
of Timmy's total acquaintances. His parents, his two friends, and a dog
that at its best had never seemed bright and now was obviously half-dead
with age. The boy was not normal, had no normal life, and gave no
indication of ever being likely to take a normal role in life. He was
a "disordered personality" if one could take comfort in a tag, but the
true nature, cause and cure of his divergence from "normal" would remain
unknown so long as his parents were afraid of tampering--

"Did you make a wish, Timmy?"

"Sure, Mom."

"Helen, honey--Tim knows that wishing when you blow out the candles is
kid stuff."

"And what is he but an eleven-year-old kid?"

[Illustration]

"He's too smart to believe in wishing, honey. Smarter than his old man,
eh, Tim?"

"I'll _never_ be as smart as you, Dad."

"That's my boy! But you don't kid me." Jerry turned to Phil and Clancey,
feigning indignation. "You know what happened the other day? I brought
home an old design that I dug out of the files and wanted to look
over--a helical gravity conveyer--and when Tim saw it spread out on the
table he said, 'That's the curve I was just reading about.' Now how did
that little so-and-so know enough to call it a curve? I figured he was
bluffing and got him to show me where he read about it, and the brat
showed me all right--in one of my old college textbooks! Of course I
only had to ask a few questions to find out that the college texts are
far beyond him, but imagine him dipping into them on his own and getting
anything out of them at all! How about that, young man? Explain
yourself."

Timmy hesitated, his eyes dark with uncertainty.

"You said I could," he blurted defensively. "Remember? Remember I asked
you one day and you said--"

"Your father isn't angry, Timmy," Helen laughed, hugging him. "Honest,
you get worried about the darnedest things! He's _proud_ of you! Don't
you know paternal boasting when you hear it?"

"Oh!" The shadow lifted and he laughed sheepishly. "I get it. It was
nuance of idiom that threw me. Calling me a brat and a so-and-so was
affectionate misdirection to conceal--" he broke off at their
expressions. Helen darted a quick look around and came to his rescue
again.

"Timmy-chile, where you git these heah high-falutin' _ex_-pressions
I'll never know. Hit shore ain't from you' low-talkin' pappy."

"Or from yo' low-comedian mammy. It's all right, son--you just sound
a bit bookish sometimes, that's all. Want some help with the dishes,
Helen?"

"You know darn well you'd divorce me if I said yes. You and Clancey take
Timmy in the front room and let him teach you something. Phil's just
crazy to help with the dishes. Aren't you, Phil?"

"The obvious answer is yes. O. K., let's go."

       *       *       *       *       *

They piled the dishes, joking and chattering until the sound of laughter
from the front of the house told them that the others were occupied,
then Helen put down the dish she was washing.

"Well, Phil?"

"Am I supposed to know what that means?"

"Phil, in plain language, is Timmy a ... a genius?"

"No, I don't think so. He's unaccountably bright in many ways and just
as unaccountably slow in others. I don't think genius comes into it at
all."

"That's what I think, too. Timmy's no genius ... yet he does things that
only a genius-type could do."

"Don't exaggerate, Helen. A sharp youngster living a secluded life and
studying more than he plays may be years ahead of other kids who go to
public schools."

"He's farther ahead than you think, Phil. I have Timmy in the house with
me all day, so maybe I know him better than Jerry does. He fooled Jerry
with that business of the college textbooks, but not me. I think that
for some reason Timmy doesn't want us to know how advanced he really is.
I think he slipped up when he commented on that helical what's-it, then
covered his slip by pretending he'd only leafed through the texts and
picked up a bit here and there. I know when that boy's fooling, and I
know he deliberately fluffed the questions Jerry put to him. Timmy's
just plain lousy when it comes to dissembling, you know, as if it was
completely foreign to him to lie. All right, all right, I know what
you're going to say--fond mama building mother's-intuition fantasy
around only child.

"Well, I kept an eye on him after that and about a week later Jerry
brought home some calculus dealing with a new design he's developing. He
ran into trouble with it and sweated and swore for an hour, while Timmy
sat and read and I kept peeking in the hall mirror that lets you see
into the front room from the kitchen. After a while Jerry left the room
to look for some tables he wanted and Timmy slipped over and looked at
his work, made a single notation, then dived back to his book as Jerry
returned. Jerry started to sweat over the thing again, then suddenly did
a double-take. He made some erasures and in five minutes had the whole
thing worked out, cursing himself for misreading a figure or something.

"Now don't tell me it was just a coincidence. Timmy hadn't seen that
problem before and it should have been miles over his head anyway, yet
he gave it a quick glance, spotted the error, changed the limits of an
integration and put Jerry on the right track. Just like that."

       *       *       *       *       *

Phil carefully massaged a dry plate even drier.

"So I stagger back and gasp, 'I can't believe it!' or something insane
but appropriate. The disturbing thing to me is that I not only _can_
believe it, I do believe it. Completely. I may as well tell you now
what I haven't yet told anyone else, that I've been methodically
tricking Timmy for some months past--in fact, ever since I began to
suspect that his knowledge of the sciences was, to say the least,
unusual for a boy his age. I probably led him into making that slip with
Jerry, identifying the curve. By giving him the impression that any boy
his age would know far more chemistry, math and physics than is actually
the case, I tripped him into revealing that he himself knows a very
great deal about them. Perhaps more than I do.

"I begin to suspect now that I didn't set my sights nearly high enough
in leading him on, but God alone knows where he could have learned. On
anything that could be related to the humanities he's very slow, but in
the physical sciences he's out of this world. His secluded life--unable
to mix with other kids, go to shows, games, or do anything that gets
him into crowds--gives him a very limited background for understanding
his environment, leaves him unboyish. He doesn't understand people. I
constantly have the impression that he is anxious to do the right thing,
but is simply baffled by problems in human relations."

"I know. He looks at me sometimes as though he's just desperate to reach
me somehow--a lonely, unhappy little soul. He gets plenty of affection
from both of us, but it isn't the answer--it just isn't the answer."

"Tell me, Helen, do you love your son?"

"Do I--! Well, now, really Phil--what kind of a question is that?"

"A simple one. Do you love Timmy?"

"Of course I do. He's very dear to me."

"_Do you love your son?_"

"Now look here--! I told you.... Phil, what are you getting at?"

"I'm wondering why you have no doubt that you love Timmy, but the
question of whether you love your son confuses you and throws you on
the defensive. You react strongly, evade answering, take refuge in
exclamations and unfinished sentences. A species of stuttering. Can it
be that you find it difficult to think of Timmy as your son? _Do you
doubt that he is your son?_ Here, sit down! I didn't think it would hit
you so hard."

"Phil, the only other moment like this in my life was when I first
admitted to myself years ago that Timmy was ... what he used to be.
An imbecile. Phil, it _can't_ be true! He _is_ my son! There's been
no substitution, no--"

"Easy, Helen, easy. I agree with you. I've checked back as fully as I
can, and I'm sure there's been no trickery of any sort. Timmy was born
to you eleven years ago, beyond a shadow of a doubt."

"But you've felt it too, haven't you? He's sweet and lovable in his
funny, confused way, talking like a comic-strip kid one minute and an
encyclopedia the next--so empty and faraway sometimes, then loving and
affectionate, as though to make up to us for being ... away. I'm sure he
loves us, Jerry and I, as much as we love him, but I feel that we've
failed him, that he wants love but it can't reach him. I'll say it,
Phil. I feel that he's not mine, that he's apart from us. Ridiculous,
isn't it? I can't feel true kinship for my own child, much as he means
to me. I feel better now that I've said it."

"I wish I could say the same, but I don't know that I feel any better
for adding one more question mark to a long, long line of them. Like
you, I sense a loneliness, a reaching out from Timmy for something I
can't give him no matter what I do, no matter how I try to understand.
I watch him, and I think of that line '... a stranger and afraid ...'
What is there that frightens him? Can it ... possibly ... be us?"




VI


Indian summer now lay softly upon the land.

On a wooded rise ten miles from the outskirts of the town, close by
a bluff overlooking the bushland, the tan walls of a small tent warmed
to the late afternoon sun. Here and there beyond the bushland the
supper-smoke of scattered farms stood columned and motionless. The only
sound on the still air was the harsh, labored breathing of the dying
Homer.

The dog lay in the open near the edge of the bluff, his eyes closed, his
companions seated nearby. Phil had brought Timmy on a week-end camping
trip that now appeared spoiled at the outset, for the short, steep climb
up the bluff had unexpectedly proven too much for old gray-muzzle. His
trembling legs had barely carried him to the top before he collapsed,
and now it was only a question of how long he must suffer before
release. Phil glanced toward a .22 rifle lying with their gear. It would
be more merciful.

"No, Uncle Phil. He'll live until sundown at least. Let him have that
much."

"I'm sorry this happened, Timmy, but now that it has I think we should
make it easier for him."

"You liked him, didn't you, Uncle Phil?"

"Yes, Tim ... I'm a bit surprised to find that I really did. I can't say
that I'm much of an animal-lover, but in his way Homer was the perfect
Old Faithful. No beauty and not very bright, you must admit, but he
never left your side. It won't seem the same."

"It won't _be_ the same, Uncle Phil." The boy raised his head to look
over the distant bushland. His face was composed.

"Timmy, I hesitate to say this, but--"

"I don't seem very upset about it?"

"Well, yes. Did you really care much for Homer? You never paid any
attention to him, never petted or played with him, just let him tag
along."

"I had no need to pet or play with him, and it was enough that he give
me all of his attention. I should have spared a thought for him, his
needs and limitations, but it's too late now." The answering voice was
subtly changed from that of a boy, and strangely gentle. "A dog's life
is so short, hardly more than today and tomorrow. A breath or two, and
it has begun and ended. When Homer dies he will be free, and I will no
longer exist."

A chill slid over the man.

What makes a voice? Air and musculature and tissue, but what more?
A brain, a mind--a life. An accumulative series of reactive patterns
