
"Stay in orbit, remember?" he told himself. He moved aside, going to
the other side of the group around the fabricator.

Now he remembered the man. Val Vernay had been working on the
fabricators when Stan had come to the shop.

Somehow, he had never run an acceptable program, but he hung around
the demonstrations, unable to comprehend the explanations--resentful
of those who showed aptitude.

He glanced aside as Stan moved, then pushed his way across until he
was again in front of the smaller man. Stan sighed resignedly.

Again, the heavy foot crashed toward the rear. This time, the
temptation was too great. Deftly, Stan swung his toe through a small
arc, sweeping Vernay's ankle aside and putting the man off balance.

He moved quickly away, further trapping the ankle and getting clear of
the flailing arms.

For a breathless instant, Vernay tried to hop on one foot, his arms
windmilling as he fought to regain his balance. Then he crashed to the
floor, his head banging violently against the stones.

Stan looked at the body in consternation. He had merely intended to
make the fellow look a little silly.

"Hope he's got a hard head," he told himself.

The workroom guard came up warily.

"What's all this?"

"I don't know, sir." Stan managed a vaguely puzzled look. "First thing
I knew, he was swinging his arms all over the place. Then he went
down. Maybe he had a fit, huh?"

"Yeah." The guard was sardonic. "Yeah, maybe he had a fit. Well, no
more trouble out of him for a while." He raised his voice.

"Hey, you over by the first-aid kit. Grab that stretcher."

Big Carl Marlo was in his bunk when Stan came into the cell. He looked
up with a grin.

"Hey, kid, you start at the top, huh?"

"What do you mean?"

"This Vernay, what else? Like I said, you start at the top. I didn't
think you got it when I told you about the muscle racket. How'd I know
you was already figuring something?" Marlo shook his head admiringly.

"Real nice job, too. You take it easy, set this chump up, and there
you are. Only you get a real big fish. Think you can handle this guy
again?"

Stan blinked. "Look," he said, "punch in some more data, will you? And
run it by real slow. I'm way off co-ordinates."

"Huh? What you--Oh, I get you." Marlo frowned.

"Now don't go telling me you don't know about this Vernay. Don't give
me you ain't figured how you can land a big job with Janzel Equipment.
You know me--Big Carl. I don't talk, remember?" He looked at the blank
expression on Stan's face.

"Besides, there ain't a guy in the walls, don't figure this deal by
now. Man, you just don't know how many guys been watching that
Vernay."

Stan walked across the cell and sat down on his bunk.

"Look," he said patiently, "let's just say I'm some stupid kid from
off planet. Maybe I don't get things so well. Now, what's this all
about?"

Marlo shrugged. "So all right, but for some guy don't know what he's
doing, you sure pick 'em pretty. Well, anyway, here's the layout.

"See, this guy, Vernay, is one of Janzel's big strong-arms. Real salt
and butter guy. Been pushing them poor apes of theirs all over the
place, see. Don't know too much about the business, but they tell him
some mug's not putting out, Vernay goes over and bends the guy around
his machine a while, he should maybe work faster. See what I mean?"

Stan frowned distastefully and Marlo held up a hand.

"Oh, that's all right," he said. "This is what they pay this guy for.
But he gets to like his work too well, know what I mean? So here a
while back, he gets on some machine tender. Leans all over this poor
guy. Well, the fab nurse ends up turning in his tickets, and this, the
joes don't go for so good." He jerked a shoulder.

"Oh, Janzel tries to kill the squawk, but it's no go. The joes push
the button and here's Vernay." He grinned.

"They manage to get it knocked to some kinda manslaughter, but
Vernay's still got time to pick up, so they pull wires and get him up
here. It ain't no rest home, but it ain't no madhouse neither, like
some of them places." His eyes clouded.

"Oogh, when I think of some of the holes--" He waved a hand.

"So anyway, like you see, Vernay's got plenty of muscle, but he's kind
of low in the brain department. Maybe they thought something might
drill through the skull up here, but that don't work either. I guess
Janzel'd about as soon get another pretty boy, but they know they'll
lose too much face, they dump him right away.

"Then you come along and just about split the chump's conk just so's
he'll stay out of your light, see?" He shook his head slowly.

"Only thing, that don't solve nothing. He comes out of the bone-house
in a couple days, and he ain't gonna like you at all. See what I
mean?"

"Yeah." Stan examined his fingernails.

"Yeah," he repeated. "You make it all nice and clear." He got up and
went to the washstand.

"Whatcha gonna do, Georgie, boy?" he chanted. "Guess I'll just have to
give him a free lesson in breakfalls. He won't like it too well, but
he could use lots of practice."

       *       *       *       *       *

It took Vernay more than a couple of days to get out of the hospital.
As time went by, Stan became more and more conscious of the
speculative looks he was getting from prisoners and guards alike.

He stood watching, as a maintenance engineer tore into the vitals of a
Lambert-Howell. Around him was space--a full meter on all sides. It
was, he realized, a distinction--symbolic accolade for anyone who had
the temerity to down a man like Vernay. It was also a gesture of
caution. No one was anxious to block the view of a man who had downed
a vicious fighter with an unobtrusive gesture. And no one was anxious
to be too close when Vernay might come by.

What sort of man was Vernay, Stan wondered. Of course, he was familiar
with the appearance of the tall, blond. He could easily visualize the
insolent, sleepy looking eyes--the careless weave of the heavy
shoulders. And he'd heard a lot about the man's actions.

But these could mean anything. Was the man actually as clumsy and
inept as he'd seemed? Was he simply a powerful oaf, who relied on pure
strength and savagery? Or was he a cunning fighter, who had made one
contemptuously careless mistake?

"Well," the maintenance man was saying, "that's the way you set those
upper coils. Remember, each one has its own field angle, and you've
got to set 'em down to within a tenth of a degree. Otherwise, you'll
never get a sharp focus and your spray'll make a real mess." He swept
his glance over the group.

"You use the manual when you set these things up," he added. "Don't go
depending on your memory. You can play some pretty dirty tricks on
yourself that way." He looked thoughtfully at the array of coils.

"And don't go using any gravito clamps around these things when the
back's off. They don't like it. It makes 'em do nasty things." He
flipped his wrist up, looking at his watch.

"All right, that's it. Let's go eat." He snapped a cover back in place
and swung down from the catwalk.

Stan turned away. No tools to put away tonight, he thought. Didn't
need 'em all afternoon. He smiled. And no column to fall into, either.
This was the weekly free night.

He walked out of the shop, following a group of prisoners through the
archway into the main yard. Another small group followed him, keeping
a decent interval behind.

Someone drew a sharp breath.

"Hey, look! Over there."

Stan followed the direction indicated by a dozen abruptly turned
heads. Vernay was lounging in the shadow of the archway. He smiled
tigerishly and sauntered toward Stan. The group of prisoners melted
away, to form a rough semicircle. From somewhere, others were
appearing.

"So all right, little rat," Vernay said softly, "you've had a lot of
fun these last few days, eh? Big man around the yard, huh? Yeah! Well,
it's going to stop." He massaged his right hand with the thumb and
fingers of his left, then stretched out his arms, flexing his fingers.

"Real smart little fella," he added. "Knows all kinds of little
tricks. Got anything to say before I open you up for inspection?"

Stan faced him, his feet a few inches apart, his knees slightly bent.
He folded his arms without interlacing them.

"Look, Vernay," he said. "I'm not looking for any fight, but if you
force one, I'll break you all to pieces. I didn't mean to bust your
head the first time, but I can do it on purpose if I have to. Why
don't we just forget it?"

Vernay looked dazed for an instant, then recovered and laughed
derisively.

"You trying to crawl out and still look good? No, no. You made your
brags. Now we'll have a little dance." He took a step forward.

"Come on, baby, just stay there. I'm going to unscrew your head."

He came closer, then reached out, his hand open.

Stan looked at the hand incredulously. No one could be that careless.
For an instant, he almost spun away from a suspected trap. Then he
decided the man was in no position for a counter. A try for a simple
hand hold couldn't do a bit of harm.

His right hand darted up, gripping the outstretched hand before him.
He jerked down, clamped the hand with his left, then pressed up and
took a quick step forward.

With a startled cry of pain, Vernay spun around and bent toward the
