All of these needed water to form, and their existence on the Moon
puzzled him for a while. Then he opened the bag that had contained the
unusual hexagonal crystals, and the puzzle resolved itself. There was
nothing in the bag but a few drops of water. What he had taken to be a
type of rock was ice, frozen in a niche that had never been warmed by
the sun.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sun rose to the meridian slowly. It was a week after sunrise. The
stars shone coldly, and wheeled in their slow course with the sun. Only
Earth remained in the same spot in the black sky. The shadow line crept
around until Earth was nearly dark, and then the rim of light appeared
on the opposite side. For a while Earth was a dark disk in a thin halo,
and then the light came to be a crescent, and the line of dawn began to
move around Earth. The continents drifted across the dark disk and into
the crescent. The people on Earth saw the full moon set about the same
time that the sun rose.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nickel Jones was the captain of a supply rocket. He made trips from and
to the Moon about once a month, carrying supplies in and metal and ores
out. At this time he was visiting with his old friend McIlroy.

"I swear, Mac," said Jones, "another season like this, and I'm going
back to mining."

"I thought you were doing pretty well," said McIlroy, as he poured two
drinks from a bottle of Scotch that Jones had brought him.

"Oh, the money I like, but I will say that I'd have more if I didn't
have to fight the union and the Lunar Trade Commission."

McIlroy had heard all of this before. "How's that?" he asked politely.

"You may think it's myself running the ship," Jones started on his
tirade, "but it's not. The union it is that says who I can hire. The
union it is that says how much I must pay, and how large a crew I need.
And then the Commission ..." The word seemed to give Jones an unpleasant
taste in his mouth, which he hurriedly rinsed with a sip of Scotch.

"The Commission," he continued, making the word sound like an obscenity,
"it is that tells me how much I can charge for freight."

McIlroy noticed that his friend's glass was empty, and he quietly filled
it again.

"And then," continued Jones, "if I buy a cargo up here, the Commission
it is that says what I'll sell it for. If I had my way, I'd charge only
fifty cents a pound for freight instead of the dollar forty that the
Commission insists on. That's from here to Earth, of course. There's no
profit I could make by cutting rates the other way."

"Why not?" asked McIlroy. He knew the answer, but he liked to listen to
the slightly Welsh voice of Jones.

"Near cost it is now at a dollar forty. But what sense is there in
charging the same rate to go either way when it takes about a seventh of
the fuel to get from here to Earth as it does to get from there to
here?"

"What good would it do to charge fifty cents a pound?" asked McIlroy.

"The nickel, man, the tons of nickel worth a dollar and a half on Earth,
and not worth mining here; the low-grade ores of uranium and vanadium,
they need these things on Earth, but they can't get them as long as it
isn't worth the carrying of them. And then, of course, there's the water
we haven't got. We could afford to bring more water for more people, and
set up more distilling plants if we had the money from the nickel.

"Even though I say it who shouldn't, two-eighty a quart is too much to
pay for water."

Both men fell silent for a while. Then Jones spoke again:

"Have you seen our friend Evans lately? The price of chromium has gone
up, and I think he could ship some of his ore from Yellow Crater at a
profit."

"He's out prospecting again. I don't expect to see him until sun-down."

"I'll likely see him then. I won't be loaded for another week and a
half. Can't you get in touch with him by radio?"

"He isn't carrying one. Most of the prospectors don't. They claim that a
radio that won't carry beyond the horizon isn't any good, and one that
will bounce messages from Earth takes up too much room."

"Well, if I don't see him, you let him know about the chromium."

"Anything to help another Welshman, is that the idea?"

"Well, protection it is that a poor Welshman needs from all the English
and Scots. Speaking of which--"

"Oh, of course," McIlroy grinned as he refilled the glasses.

"_Slainte, McIlroy, bach._" [Health, McIlroy, man.]

"_Slainte mhor, bach._" [Great Health, man.]

       *       *       *       *       *

The sun was halfway to the horizon, and Earth was a crescent in the sky
when Evans had quarried all the ice that was available in the cave. The
thought grew on him as he worked that this couldn't be the only such
cave in the area. There must be several more bubbles in the lava flow.

Part of his reasoning proved correct. That is, he found that by
chipping, he could locate small bubbles up to an inch in diameter, each
one with its droplet of water. The average was about one per cent of the
volume of each bubble filled with ice.

A quarter of a mile from the tractor, Evans found a promising looking
mound of lava. It was rounded on top, and it could easily be the dome of
a bubble. Suddenly, Evans noticed that the gauge on the oxygen tank of
his suit was reading dangerously near empty. He turned back to his
tractor, moving as slowly as he felt safe in doing. Running would use up
