guests. Queeth touched his ears together ceremoniously and then trotted
on, until he came to the back door of his group's gymnasium. He
whistled the code word and the door opened automatically.

The whole group was assembled, though it was past sleep week for most
of them. Their ears clicked together, but they waited silently as he
curled himself up in the official box. Then Krhal, the merchant
viscount, whistled questioningly. "This will have to be important,
Queeth."

The prince bobbed his ears emphatically. "It is. My father's guests
have all the news, and I learned everything. It won't be as long as we
thought." He paused, before delivering the big news. "The bipeds of
Kloomiria are going to attack Cathay. There'll be official war there
within two weeks!"

He saw them exchanging hasty signals, but again it was Krhal who voiced
their question. "And you think that is important, Queeth? What does it
offer us? Cathay is a human colony. Earth will have to declare war with
her. And with Earth's wealth, it will be over before we could arrive."

"Earth has already passed a resolution that neutrality will apply to
colonies as well as to other planets!"

This time the whistles were sharper. Krhal had difficulty believing it
at first. "So Earth really is afraid to fight? That must mean those
rumors that she has no fleet are true. Our ancestors thought so, and
even planned to attack her, before the humanoids defeated us. The
ancestor king believed that even a single ship fully armed might
conquer her."

"It could be," Queeth admitted. "But do you agree that this is the news
for which we've waited so long?"

There was a quick flutter of cars. "It's our duty," Krhal agreed. "In a
war between Cathay and Kloomiria, we can't remain neutral if we're ever
to serve our friends. Well, the ship is ready!"

That came as a surprise to Queeth. He knew the plans were well along,
but not that they were completed. As merchant viscount, and
second-degree adult, Krhal was entitled to a tenth of his father's
interests. He'd chosen the biggest freighter and the balance in fluid
assets, to the pleasure of his father--who believed he was planning an
honorable career of exploring.

"The conversion completed?" Queeth asked. "But the planet bombs--!"

"Earth supplied them on the last shipment. I explained on the order
that I was going to search uninhabited planets for minerals."

Queeth counted the group again, and was satisfied. There were enough.
With a ship of that size, fully staffed and armed, they would be a
welcome addition to any fleet. They might be enough to tip the balance
for victory, in fact. And while Cathay and Kloomiria lay a long way on
the other side of Earth's system, the drives were fast enough to cover
it in two weeks.

"Does your father know?" Krhal asked.

Queeth smirked. "Would you tell him? He still believes along with the
Earth ambassador that the warrior strain was ruined among our people
when we lost the war with the humanoids."

"Maybe it was," Krhal said doubtfully. "In four generations, it could
evolve again. And there are the books and traditions from which we
trained. If even a timid race such as those of Earth can produce
warriors like O'Neill--a mere poet--why can't the Sugfarth do better?
Particularly when Earth rebuilt factories for us to start our
shipbuilding anew."

"Then we join the war," the prince decided.

There was a series of assent signals from the group.

"Tonight," he suggested, and again there was only assent.

Krhal stood up, setting the course for the others. When the last had
risen, Queeth uncurled himself and rose from the box. "We'll have to
pass near Earth," he suggested as they filed out toward the hangars
where Krhal kept his ship. "Maybe we should show our intentions there!"

There was a sudden whistle of surprise. Then the assent was mounting
wildly. Queeth trotted ahead toward the warship, making his attack
plans over again as he realized he was a born leader who could command
such enthusiasm. He had been doubtful before, in spite of his study of
elementary statistical treatment of relationships.

The lights in the palace showed that the Earth guests were still
celebrating as the great, heavily-laden warship blasted up and headed
toward Earth.




V


Duke O'Neill found a corner of the lounge where no Earthman was near
and dropped down with the magazine and papers, trying to catch up on
the currents of the universe as they affected the six hundred connected
worlds. Most of the articles related to Earth alone, and he skipped
them. He found one on the set-up of the Outer Federation finally. The
humanoid planets there were in a pocket of alien worlds, and union had
been almost automatic. It was still loose, but it seemed to have sound
enough a basis.

If Earth had been willing to come out of its shell and risk some of its
fat trading profits, there could have been an even stronger union that
would have driven war-like thoughts out of the minds of all the aliens.

Instead, she seemed to be equally interested in building up her
potential enemies and ruining her friends. Duke had watched a showing
of new films on the work being done on Throm the night before, and he
was still sick from it. Throm had lost the war, but by a military
defeat, not by thirty-one unprotected raids on all her surface. She
still had landing fields equipped for Earth ships, and the big
freighters were dropping down regularly, spewing out foods, equipment
and even heavy machinery for her rebuilding. Throm was already on the
road back. Meloa had to wait until she could pull herself up enough to
build fields.

Duke turned his eyes to the port. The ship had stopped at Clovis on the
way back to Earth. From where he sat, he could see almost Earth-like
skyscrapers stretching up in a great city. The landing field was huge,
and there were rows on rows of factories building more of the
freighters that stubbed the field.

It seemed impossible, when he remembered that only forty years had
passed since Djamboula's suicide raid had finally defeated the fungoid
creatures of the planet and since the survivors' vows to repay all
Earthmen for their defeat. They were a prolific race, of course--but
without help from Earth, the factories would be shacks and the rockets
and high-drive ships would be only memories.

He wondered how many were cursing their ancestors for making the
mistake of attacking a neighboring humanoid planet instead of Earth,
only two days away on high drive. By now, they knew that Earth was
defenseless. And yet, they seemed content to go on with their vows
forgotten. Duke couldn't believe it. Down underground, beyond Earth
inspection, they could have vast stockpiles of weapons, ready to
install in their ships within days.

How could Earth risk it, unless she had her own stock of hidden ships
and weapons? Yet if she did, he was sure that it would have been
impossible not to use them in defense of the colony of Cathay.

He stared out, watching the crewmen mixing with the repulsive alien
natives, laughing as they worked side by side. There must be some
factor he didn't understand, but he'd never found it--nor did he know
anyone who had guessed it.

He stirred, uncomfortable with his own thoughts. But it wasn't fear for
Earth that bothered him. It was simply that sooner or later some alien
race would risk whatever unknown power the others feared. If the aliens
won, the vast potential power of Earth would then be turned against all
the humanoid races of the universe. Humanity could be driven from the
galaxy.

He turned the pages, idly glancing at the headlines. It was hard to
realize that the paper wasn't right off the presses of Earth; it must
have been brought out to Clovis on the latest ship. He checked the
date, and frowned in surprise. According to the rough calendar he'd
kept, it was the current date. Somewhere he must have lost track of two
days. How much else had he lost sight of during the long years of war?

A diagram caught his attention almost at once as he turned to another
magazine. It was of a behemoth ship, bigger than any he had ever seen,
and built like the dream of a battleship, though it was listed as a
freighter. He scanned it, mentally converting it. With a few like that,
Meloa could have won during the first year.

Then he swore as he saw it was part of an article on the progress of
some alien world known as Sugfarth--by the article, a world of former
warriors, once dedicated to the complete elimination of humanoids!

                    *      *      *      *      *

He saw Flannery coming along the deck at that moment, and he picked up
the magazine, heading for his cabin. He'd ignored previous summons on
the thin excuse of not feeling well. He had no desire to talk with
Earthmen. It was bad enough to take their charity back to Earth and to
have to stay on the planet until he could sign on with the Outer
Federation. His memories were ugly enough, without having them
refreshed.

But Flannery caught him as he was opening the door to his cabin. The
director was huge, with heavy, strong features and a body that looked
too robust for the white hair and the age that showed around his eyes.
His voice was tired, however, showing his years more plainly than his
looks.

"Captain O'Neill," he said quickly. "Stop jousting with windmills. It's
time you grew up. Besides, I've got a job for you."

"Does my charity passage demand an interview, director?" Duke asked.

The other showed no offense, unfortunately. He smiled wryly. "If I
choose, it does. I'm in command of this ship, as well as head of the
Foreign Office. May I come in?"

"I can't keep you out," Duke admitted. He dropped onto the couch,
sprawling out, while the other found the single chair.

Flannery picked up the magazine and glanced through it. "So you're
interested in the Outer Federation?" he asked. "Don't be. It doesn't
have a chance. In a week or so, you'll see it shot. And I don't mean
we'll wreck it. They've picked their own doom, against all the advice
we could give them. Care to have a drink sent down while we talk?"

Duke shook his head. "I'd rather cut it short."

"Hotheads," Flannery told the walls thoughtfully, "make the best men
obtainable, once they're tamed. Nothing beats an idealist who can face
facts. And the intelligent ones usually grow up. Captain, I've studied
your strategy against Throm on that last drive after Dayole was killed.
Brilliant! I need a good man, and I can pay for one. If you give me a
chance, I can also show you why you should take it. Know anything about
how Earth got started on its present course?"

"Dumb luck and cowardice, as far as I can see," Duke answered.

When Earth discovered the first inefficient version of the high drive,
she had found herself in a deserted section of the universe, with the
nearest inhabited star system months away. The secret of the drive
couldn't be kept, of course, but the races who used it to build war
fleets found it easier to fight with each other than with distant
Earth. Later, when faster drives were developed, Earth was protected by
the buffer worlds she had rebuilt.

Flannery grinned. "Luck--and experience. We learned something from our
early nuclear-technological wars. We learned more from the interstellar
wars of others. We decided that any planet ruined by such war wouldn't
fight again--the women and children who lived through that hell would
see to it--unless new hatreds grew up during the struggle back. So we
practically pauperized ourselves at first to see that they recovered
too quickly for hate and fear. We also began digging into the science
of how to manipulate relationships--Earth's greatest discovery--to set
up a system that would work. It paid off for us in the long run."

"So what's all that got to do with me?" Duke asked. He'd heard of the
great science of Earth and her ability to manipulate all kinds of
relationships before, spoken of in hush-hush terms when he was still in
college. But he'd quit believing in fairy tales even before then. Now
he was even sicker of Earth's self-justification.
