have to live inside your vac suit until you come to a stopping place
where you can spend an hour or so resting before you go on. It's like
driving cross-continent in an automobile, except that the signposts
and landmarks are constantly shifting position. An inexperienced man
can get lost easily in the Belt.

I was happy to find that Jack Ravenhurst knew how to handle a
flitterboat and could sight navigate by the stars. That meant that I
could sleep while she piloted and vice-versa. The trip back was a lot
easier and faster than the trip out had been.

I was glad, in a way, that Ceres was within flitterboat range of
Raven's Rest. I don't like the time wasted in waiting for a regular
spaceship, which you have to do when your target is a quarter of the
way around the Belt from you. The cross-system jumps don't take long,
but getting to a ship takes time.

The Ravenhurst girl wasn't much of a talker while we were en route. A
little general chitchat once in a while, then she'd clam up to do a
little mental orbit figuring. I didn't mind. I was in no mood to pump
her just yet, and I was usually figuring orbits myself. You get in the
habit after a while.

When the Ceres beacon came into view, I was snoozing. Jack reached
forward and shook my shoulder. "Decelerating toward Ceres," she said.
"Want to take over from here on?" Her voice sounded tinny and tired in
the earphones of my fishbowl.

"O.K.; I'll take her in. Have you called Ceres Field yet?"

"Not yet. I figured that you'd better do that, since it's your
flitterboat."

I said O.K. and called Ceres. They gave me a traffic orbit, and I
followed it in to Ceres Field.

It was a lot bigger than the postage-stamp field on Raven's Rest, and
more brightly lit, and a lot busier, but it was basically the same
idea--a broad, wide, smooth area that had been carved out of the
surface of the nickel-iron with a focused sun beam. One end of it was
reserved for flitterboats; three big spaceships sat on the other end,
looking very _noblesse oblige_ at the little flitterboats.

I clamped down, gave the key to one of the men behind the desk after
we had gone below, and turned to Jack. "I suggest we go to the hotel
first and get a shower and a little rest. We can go out to Viking
tomorrow."

She glanced at her watch. Like every other watch and clock in the
Belt, it was set for Greenwich Standard Time. What's the point in
having time zones in space?

"I'm not tired," she said brightly. "I got plenty of sleep while we
were on the way. Why don't we go out tonight? They've got a
bounce-dance place called _Bali_'s that--"

I held up a hand. "No. You may not be tired, but I am. Remember, I
went all the way out there by myself, and then came right back.

"I need at least six hours sleep in a nice, comfortable bed before
I'll be able to move again."

The look she gave me made me feel every one of my thirty-five years,
but I didn't intend to let her go roaming around at this stage of the
game.

Instead, I put her aboard one of the little rail cars, and we headed
for the Viking Arms, generally considered the best hotel on Ceres.

Ceres has a pretty respectable gee pull for a planetoid: Three per
cent of Standard. I weigh a good, hefty five pounds on the surface.
That makes it a lot easier to walk around on Ceres than on, say,
Raven's Rest. Even so, you always get the impression that one of the
little rail cars that scoots along the corridors is climbing uphill
all the way, because the acceleration is greater than any measly
thirty centimeters per second squared.

Jack didn't say another word until we reached the Viking, where
Ravenhurst had thoughtfully made reservations for adjoining rooms.
Then, after we'd registered, she said: "We could at least get
something to eat."

"That's not a bad idea. We can get something to line our stomachs,
anyway. Steak?"

She beamed up at me. "Steak. Sounds wonderful after all those mushy
concentrates. Let's go."

       *       *       *       *       *

The restaurant off the lobby was just like the lobby and the corridors
outside--a big room hollowed out of the metal of the asteroid. The
walls had been painted to prevent rusting, but they still bore the
roughness left by the sun beam that had burnt them out.

We sat down at a table, and a waiter brought over a menu. The place
wouldn't be classed higher than a third-rate cafe on Earth, but on
Ceres it's considered one of the better places. The prices certainly
compare well with those of the best New York or Moscow restaurants,
and the price of meat, which has to be shipped from Earth, is--you
should pardon the gag--astronomical.

That didn't bother me. Steaks for two would go right on the expense
account. I mentally thanked Mr. Ravenhurst for the fine slab of beef
when the waiter finally brought it.

While we were waiting, though, I lit a cigarette and said: "You're
awfully quiet, Jack."

"Am I? Men are funny."

"Is that meant as a conversational gambit, or an honest observation?"

"Observation. I mean, men are always complaining that girls talk too
much, but if a girl keeps her mouth shut, they think there's something
wrong with her."

"Uh-huh. And you think that's a paradox or something?"

She looked puzzled. "Isn't it?"

"Not at all. The noise a jackhammer makes isn't pleasant at all, but
if it doesn't make that noise, you figure it isn't functioning
properly. So you wonder why."

Out of the corner of my eye, I had noticed a man wearing the
black-and-gold union suit of Ravenhurst's Security Guard coming toward
us from the door, using the gliding shuffle that works best under low
gee. I ignored him to listen to Jack Ravenhurst.

"That has all the earmarks of a dirty crack," she said. The tone of
her voice indicated that she wasn't sure whether to be angry or to
laugh.

"Hello, Miss Ravenhurst; Hi, Oak." Colonel Brock had reached the
table. He stood there, smiling his rather flat smile, while his eyes
looked us both over carefully.

[Illustration]

He was five feet ten, an inch shorter than I am, and lean almost to
the point of emaciation. His scarred, hard-bitten face looked as
though it had gotten that way when he tried to kiss a crocodile.

"Hello, Brock," I said. "What's new?"

Jack gave him a meaningless smile and said: "Hello, colonel." She was
obviously not very impressed with either of us.

"Mind if I sit?" Brock asked.

We didn't, so he sat.

"I'm sorry I missed you at the spaceport," Brock said seriously, "but
I had several of my boys there with their eyes open." He was quite
obviously addressing Jack, not me.

"It's all right," Jack said. "I'm not going anywhere this time." She
looked at me and gave me an odd grin. "I'm going to stay home and be a
good girl this time around."

Colonel Brock's good-natured chuckle sounded about as genuine as the
ring of a lead nickel. "Oh, you're no trouble, Miss Ravenhurst."

"Thank you, kind sir; you're a poor liar." She stood up and smiled
sweetly. "Will you gentlemen excuse me a moment?"

We would and did. Colonel Brock and I watched her cross the room and
disappear through a door. Then he turned to look at me, giving me a
wry grin and shaking his head a little sadly. "So you got saddled with
Jack the Ripper, eh, Oak?"

"Is she that bad?"

His chuckle was harsher this time, and had the ring of truth. "You'll
find out. Oh, I don't mean she's got the morals of a cat or anything
like that. So far as I know, she's still waiting for Mister Right to
come along."

"Drugs?" I asked. "Liquor?"

"A few drinks now and then--nothing else," Brock said. "No, it's none
of the usual things. It isn't what _she_ does that counts; it's what
she talks other people into doing. She's a convincer."

"That sounds impressive," I said. "What does it mean?"

His hard face looked wolfish, "I ought to let you find out for
yourself. But, no; that wouldn't be professional courtesy, and it
wouldn't be ethical."

"Brock," I said tiredly, "I have been given more runarounds in the
past week than Mercury has had in the past millennium. I expect
clients to be cagey, to hold back information, and to lie. But I
didn't expect it of you. Give."

He nodded brusquely. "As I said, she's a convincer. A talker. She can
talk people into doing almost anything she wants them to."

"For instance?"

"Like, for instance, getting all the patrons at the _Bali_ to do a
snake dance around the corridors in the altogether. The Ceres police
broke it up, but she was nowhere to be found."

He said it so innocently that I knew he'd been the one to get her out
of the mess.

"And the time," he continued, "that she almost succeeded in getting a
welder named Plotkin elected Hereditary Czar of Ceres. She'd have
succeeded, too, if she hadn't made the mistake of getting Plotkin
himself up to speak in front of his loyal supporters. After that,
everybody felt so silly that the movement fell apart."

He went on, reciting half a dozen more instances of the girl's ability
to influence people without winning friends. None of them were new to
me; they were all on file in the Political Survey Division of the
United Nations Government on Earth, plus several more which Colonel
Brock either neglected to tell me or wasn't aware of himself.

But I listened with interest; after all, I wasn't supposed to know any
of these things. I am just a plain, ordinary, "confidential
expediter". That's what it says on the door of my office in New York,
and that's what it says on my license. All very legal and very
dishonest.

The Political Survey Division is very legal and very dishonest, too.
Theoretically, it is supposed to be nothing but a branch of the System
Census Bureau; it is supposed to do nothing but observe and tabulate
political trends. The actual fact that it is the Secret Service branch
of the United Nations Government is known only to relatively few
people.

I know it because I work for the Political Survey Division.

The PSD already had men investigating both Ravenhurst and Thurston,
but when they found out that Ravenhurst was looking for a confidential
expediter, for a special job, they'd shoved me in fast.

It isn't easy to fool sharp operators like Colonel Brock, but, so far, I'd
been lucky enough to get away with it by playing ignorant-but-not-stupid.

The steaks were brought, and I mentally saluted Ravenhurst, as I had
promised myself I would. Then I rather belatedly asked the colonel if
he'd eat with us.

"No," he said, with a shake of his head. "No, thanks. I've got to get
things ready for her visit to the Viking plant tomorrow."

"Oh? Hiding something?" I asked blandly.

