
"The coffee, the bacon--_come here a minute_."

She reeked--of bacon, of coffee, of burned toast, but mostly of perfume.
"Did you put on any fresh perfume this morning?"

"Before breakfast? Dod't be ridiculous."

"Not even a drop?" Phillip was turning very white.

"Dot a drop."

He shook his head. "Now, wait a minute. This must be all in my mind.
I'm--just imagining things, that's all. Working too hard, hysterical
reaction. In a minute it'll all go away." He poured a cup of coffee,
added cream and sugar.

But he couldn't get it close enough to taste it. It smelled as if it had
been boiling three weeks in a rancid pot. It was the smell of coffee,
all right, but a smell that was fiendishly distorted, overpoweringly,
nauseatingly magnified. It pervaded the room and burned his throat and
brought tears gushing to his eyes.

Slowly, realization began to dawn. He spilled the coffee as he set the
cup down. The perfume. The coffee. The cigarette....

"My hat," he choked. "Get me my hat. I've got to get to the laboratory."

       *       *       *       *       *

It got worse all the way downtown. He fought down waves of nausea as the
smell of damp, rotting earth rose from his front yard in a gray cloud.
The neighbor's dog dashed out to greet him, exuding the
great-grandfather of all doggy odors. As Phillip waited for the bus,
every passing car fouled the air with noxious fumes, gagging him,
doubling him up with coughing as he dabbed at his streaming eyes.

Nobody else seemed to notice anything wrong at all.

The bus ride was a nightmare. It was a damp, rainy day; the inside of
the bus smelled like the men's locker room after a big game. A
bleary-eyed man with three-days' stubble on his chin flopped down in the
seat next to him, and Phillip reeled back with a jolt to the job he had
held in his student days, cleaning vats in the brewery.

"It'sh a great morning," Bleary-eyes breathed at him, "huh, Doc?"
Phillip blanched. To top it, the man had had a breakfast of salami. In
the seat ahead, a fat man held a dead cigar clamped in his mouth like a
rank growth. Phillip's stomach began rolling; he sank his face into his
hand, trying unobtrusively to clamp his nostrils. With a groan of
deliverance he lurched off the bus at the laboratory gate.

He met Jake Miles coming up the steps. Jake looked pale, too pale.

"Morning," Phillip said weakly. "Nice day. Looks like the sun might come
through."

"Yeah," said Jake. "Nice day. You--uh--feel all right this morning?"

"Fine, fine." Phillip tossed his hat in the closet, opened the incubator
on his culture tubes, trying to look busy. He slammed the door after one
whiff and gripped the edge of the work table with whitening knuckles.
"Why?"

"Oh, nothing. Thought you looked a little peaked, was all."

They stared at each other in silence. Then, as though by signal, their
eyes turned to the office at the end of the lab.

"Coffin come in yet?"

Jake nodded. "He's in there. He's got the door locked."

"I think he's going to have to open it," said Phillip.

A gray-faced Dr. Coffin unlocked the door, backed quickly toward the
wall. The room reeked of kitchen deodorant. "Stay right where you are,"
Coffin squeaked. "Don't come a step closer. I can't see you now.
I'm--I'm busy, I've got work that has to be done--"

"You're telling _me_," growled Phillip. He motioned Jake into the office
and locked the door carefully. Then he turned to Coffin. "When did it
start for you?"

Coffin was trembling. "Right after supper last night. I thought I was
going to suffocate. Got up and walked the streets all night. My God,
what a stench!"

"Jake?"

Dr. Miles shook his head. "Sometime this morning, I don't know when. I
woke up with it."

"That's when it hit me," said Phillip.

"But I don't understand," Coffin howled. "Nobody else seems to notice
anything--"

"Yet," said Phillip, "we were the first three to take the Coffin Cure,
remember? You, and me and Jake. Two months ago."

Coffin's forehead was beaded with sweat. He stared at the two men in
growing horror. "_But what about the others?_" he whispered.

"I think," said Phillip, "that we'd better find something spectacular to
do in a mighty big hurry. That's what I think."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jake Miles said, "The most important thing right now is secrecy. We
mustn't let a word get out, not until we're absolutely certain."

