other car waved back.

"Shall I duck under the trees?" the driver asked.

"Not yet. Not until we have to."

Read fingered the machine gun he had picked up when he got in the
car. He had never been shot at. Twice he had faced an unarmed
mob, but a few shots had sent them running.

Birds flew screaming from their nests. Monkeys screeched and
threw things at the noisy, speeding cars. A little cloud of birds
surrounded each vehicle.

The escort car made a sharp turn and charged their pursuers. The
big rifle fired twice. Read saw the Belderkan cars scatter.
Suddenly machine-gun bullets cracked and whined beside him.

"Evade," Rashid said. "Don't go down."

Without losing any forward speed, the driver took them straight
up. Read's stomach bounced.

A shell exploded above them. The car rocked. He raised his eyes
and saw a long crack in the roof.

"Hit the floor," Rashid said.

They knelt on the cramped floor. Rashid put on his gas mask and
Read copied him. Umluana breathed like a furnace, still
unconscious from the injection Rashid had given him.

_I can't do anything_, Read thought. _They're too far away to
shoot back. All we can do is run._

The sky was clear and blue. The jungle was a noisy bazaar of
color. In the distance guns crashed. He listened to shells
whistle by and the whipcrack of machine-gun bullets. The car
roller-coastered up and down. Every time a shell passed, he
crawled in waves down his own back.

Another explosion, this time very loud.

Rashid raised his eyes above the seat and looked out the rear
window. "Two left. Keep down, Read."

"Can't we go down?" Read said.

"They'll get to Miaka before us."

He shut his eyes when he heard another loud explosion.

Sergeant Rashid looked out the window again. He swore bitterly in
English and Egyptian. Read raised his head. The two cars behind
them weren't fighting each other. A long way back the tree-tops
burned.

"How much farther?" Rashid said. The masks muffled their voices.

"There it is now. Shall I take us right in?"

"I think you'd better."

       *       *       *       *       *

The station was a glass diamond in a small clearing. The driver
slowed down, then crashed through the glass walls and hovered by
the transmitter booth.

Rashid opened the door and threw out two grenades. Read jumped
out and the two of them struggled toward the booth with Umluana.
The driver, pistol in hand, ran for the control panel.

There were three technicians in the station and no passengers.
All three panicked when the psycho gas enveloped them. They ran
howling for the jungle.

Through the window of his mask, Read saw their pursuers land in
the clearing. Machine-gun bullets raked the building. They got
Umluana in the booth and hit the floor. Read took aim and opened
fire on the largest car.

"Now, I can shoot back," he said. "Now we'll see what they do."

"Are you ready, Rashid?" yelled the driver.

"Man, get us out of here!"

The booth door shut. When it opened, they were at the Game
Preserve.

The station jutted from the side of a hill. A glass-walled
waiting room surrounded the bank of transmitter booths. Read
looked out the door and saw his first battlefield.

Directly in front of him, his head shattered by a bullet, a dead
inspector lay behind an overturned couch.

Read had seen dozens of training films taken during actual
battles or after atomic attacks. He had laughed when other
recruits complained. "That's the way this world is. You people
with the weak stomachs better get used to it."

Now he slid against the rear wall of the transmitter booth.

A wounded inspector crawled across the floor to the booth. Read
couldn't see his wound, only the pain scratched on his face and
the blood he deposited on the floor.

"Did you get Umluana?" he asked Sergeant Rashid.

"He's in the booth. What's going on?" Rashid's Middle East Oxford
seemed more clipped than ever.
