consequently it does less than its due share of the total quantity of
spin, and an increased quantity of spin must therefore be accomplished
by the moon; but this can only be done by an enlargement of its orbit.
Thus there are two great consequences of the tides in the earth-moon
system--the days are getting longer, the moon is receding further.

These points are so important that I shall try and illustrate them in
another way, which will show, at all events, that one and both of
these tidal phenomena commend themselves to our common sense. Have we
not shown how the tides in their ebb and flow are incessantly
producing friction, and have we not also likened the earth to a great
wheel? When the driver wants to stop a railway train the brakes are
put on, and the brake is merely a contrivance for applying friction to
the circumference of a wheel for the purpose of checking its motion.
Or when a great weight is being lowered by a crane, the motion is
checked by a band which applies friction on the circumference of a
wheel, arranged for the special purpose. Need we then be surprised
that the friction of the tides acts like a brake on the earth, and
gradually tends to check its mighty rotation? The progress of
lengthening the day by the tides is thus readily intelligible. It is
not quite so easy to see why the ebbing and the flowing of the tide on
the earth should actually have the effect of making the moon to
retreat; this phenomenon is in deference to a profound law of nature,
which tells us that action and reaction are equal and opposite to each
other. If I might venture on a very homely illustration, I may say
that the moon, like a troublesome fellow, is constantly annoying the
earth by dragging its waters backward and forward by means of tides;
and the earth, to free itself from this irritating interference, tries
to push off the aggressor and to make him move further away.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Another way in which we can illustrate the retreat of the moon as the
inevitable consequence of tidal friction is shown in the adjoining
figure, in which the large body E represents the earth, and the small
body M the moon. We may for simplicity regard the moon as a point, and
as this attracts each particle of the earth, the total effect of the
moon on the earth may be represented by a single force. By the law of
equality of action and reaction, the force of the earth on the moon is
to be represented by an equal and opposite force. If there were no
tides then the moon's force would of course pass through the earth's
centre; but as the effect of the moon is to slacken the earth's
rotation, it follows that the total force does not exactly pass
through the line of the earth's centre, but a little to one side, in
order to pull the opposite way to that in which the earth is turning,
and thus bring down its speed. We may therefore decompose the earth's
total force on the moon into two parts, one of which tends directly
towards the earth's centre, while the other acts tangentially to the
moon's orbit. The central force is of course the main guiding power
which keeps the moon in its path; but the incessant tangential force
constantly tends to send the moon out further and further, and thus
the growth of its orbit can be accounted for.

We therefore conclude finally, that the tides are making the day
longer and sending the moon away further. It is the development of the
consequences of these laws that specially demands our attention in
these lectures. We must have the courage to look at the facts
unflinchingly, and deduce from them all the wondrous consequences they
involve. Their potency arises from a characteristic feature--they are
unintermitting. Most of the great astronomical changes with which we
are ordinarily familiar are really periodic: they gradually increase
in one direction for years, for centuries, or for untold ages; but
then a change comes, and the increase is changed into a decrease, so
that after the lapse of becoming periods the original state of things
is restored. Such periodic phenomena abound in astronomy. There is the
annual fluctuation of the seasons; there is the eighteen or nineteen
year period of the moon; there is the great period of the precession
of the equinoxes, amounting to twenty-six thousand years; and then
there is the stupendous Annus Magnus of hundreds of thousands of
years, during which the earth's orbit itself breathes in and out in
response to the attraction of the planets. But these periodic
phenomena, however important they may be to us mere creatures of a
day, are insignificant in their effects on the grand evolution through
which the celestial bodies are passing. The really potent agents in
fashioning the universe are those which, however slow or feeble they
may seem to be, are still incessant in their action. The effect which
a cause shall be competent to produce depends not alone upon the
intensity of that cause, but also upon the time during which it has
been in operation. From the phenomena of geology, as well as from
those of astronomy, we know that this earth and the system to which it
belongs has endured for ages, not to be counted by scores of thousands
of years, or, as Prof. Tyndall has so well remarked, "Not for six
thousand years, nor for sixty thousand years, nor six hundred thousand
years, but for aeons of untold millions." Those slender agents which
have devoted themselves unceasingly to the accomplishment of a single
task may in this long lapse of time have accomplished results of
stupendous magnitude. In famed stalactite caverns we are shown a
colossal figure of crystal extending from floor to roof, and the
formation of that column is accounted for when we see a tiny drop
falling from the roof above to the floor beneath. A lifetime may not
suffice for that falling drop to add an appreciable increase to the
stalactite down which it trickles, or to the growing stalagmite on
which it falls; but when the operation has been in progress for
immense ages, it is capable of the formation of the stately column.
Here we have an illustration of an influence which, though apparently
trivial, acquires colossal significance when adequate time is
afforded. It is phenomena of this kind which the student of nature
should most narrowly watch, for they are the real architects of the
universe.

The tidal consequences which we have already demonstrated are
emphatically of this non-periodic class--the day is always
lengthening, the moon is always retreating. To-day is longer than
yesterday; to-morrow will be longer than to-day. It cannot be said
that the change is a great one; it is indeed too small to be
appreciable even by our most delicate observations. In one thousand
years the alteration in the length of a day is only a small fraction
of a second; but what may be a very small matter in one thousand years
can become a very large one in many millions of years. Thus it is that
when we stretch our view through immense vistas of time past, or when
we look forward through immeasurable ages of time to come, the
alteration in the length of the day will assume the most startling
proportions, and involve the most momentous consequences.

Let us first look back. There was a time when the day, instead of
being the twenty-four hours we now have, must have been only
twenty-three hours, How many millions of years ago that was I do not
pretend to say, nor is the point material for our argument; suffice it
to say, that assuming, as geology assures us we may assume, the
existence of these aeons of millions of years, there was once a time
when the day was not only one hour shorter, but was even several hours
less than it is at present. Nor need we stop our retrospect at a day
of even twenty, or fifteen, or ten hours long; we shall at once
project our glance back to an immeasurably remote epoch, at which the
earth was spinning round in a time only one sixth or even less of the
length of the present day. There is here a reason for our retrospect
to halt, for at some eventful period, when the day was about three or
four hours long, the earth must have been in a condition of a very
critical kind.

It is well known that fearful accidents occasionally happen where
large grindstones are being driven at a high speed. The velocity of
rotation becomes too great for the tenacity of the stone to withstand
the stress; a rupture takes place, the stone flies in pieces, and huge
fragments are hurled around. For each particular grindstone there is
a certain special velocity depending upon its actual materials and
character, at which it would inevitably fly in pieces. I have once
before likened our earth to a wheel; now let me liken it to a
grindstone. There is therefore a certain critical velocity of rotation
for the earth at which it would be on the brink of rupture. We cannot
exactly say, in our ignorance of the internal constitution of the
earth, what length of day would be the shortest possible for our earth
to have consistently with the preservation of its integrity; we may,
however, assume that it will be about three or four hours, or perhaps
a little less than three. The exact amount, however, is not really
very material to us; it would be sufficient for our argument to assert
that there is a certain minimum length of day for which the earth can
hold together. In our retrospect, therefore, through the abyss of time
past our view must be bounded by that state of the earth when it is
revolving in this critical period. With what happened before that we
shall not at present concern ourselves. Thus we look back to a time at
the beginning of the present order of things, when the day was only
some three or four hours long.

Let us now look at the moon, and examine where it must have been
during these past ages. As the moon is gradually getting further and
further from us at present, so, looking back into past time, we find
that the moon was nearer and nearer to the earth the further back our
view extends; in fact, concentrating our attention solely on essential
features, we may say that the path of the moon is a sort of spiral
which winds round and round the earth, gradually getting larger,
though with extreme slowness. Looking back we see this spiral
gradually coiling in and in, until in a retrospect of millions of
years, instead of its distance from the earth being 240,000 miles, it
must have been much less. There was a time when the moon was only
200,000 miles away; there was a time many millions of years ago, when
the moon was only 100,000 miles away. Nor can we here stop our
retrospect; we must look further and further back, and follow the
moon's spiral path as it creeps in and in towards the earth, until at
last it appears actually in contact with that great globe of ours,
from which it is now separated by a quarter of a million of miles.

Surely the tides have thus led us to the knowledge of an astounding
epoch in our earth's past history, when the earth is spinning round in
a few hours, and when the moon is, practically speaking, in contact
with it. Perhaps I should rather say, that the materials of our
present moon were in this situation, for we would hardly be entitled
to assume that the moon then possessed the same globular form in which
we see it now. To form a just apprehension of the true nature of both
bodies at this critical epoch, we must study their concurrent history
as it is disclosed to us by a totally different line of reasoning.

Drop, then, for a moment all thought of tides, and let us bring to our
aid the laws of heat, which will disclose certain facts in the ancient
history of the earth-moon system perhaps as astounding as those to
which the tides have conducted us. In one respect we may compare these
laws of heat with the laws of the tides; they are both alike
non-periodic, their effects are cumulative from age to age, and
imagination can hardly even impose a limit to the magnificence of the
works they can accomplish. Our argument from heat is founded on a
very simple matter. It is quite obvious that a heated body tends to
grow cold. I am not now speaking of fires or of actual combustion
whereby heat is produced; I am speaking merely of such heat as would
be possessed by a red-hot poker after being taken from the fire, or by
an iron casting after the metal has been run into the mould. In such
cases as this the general law holds good, that the heated body tends
to grow cold. The cooling may be retarded no doubt if the passage of
heat from the body is impeded. We can, for instance, retard the
cooling of a teapot by the well-known practice of putting a cosy upon
it; but the law remains that, slowly or quickly, the heated body will
tend to grow colder. It seems almost puerile to insist with any
emphasis on a point so obvious as this, but yet I frequently find that
people do not readily apprehend all the gigantic consequences that can
flow from a principle so simple. It is true that a poker cools when
taken from the fire; we also find that a gigantic casting weighing
many tons will grow gradually cold, though it may require days to do
so. The same principle will extend to any object, no matter how vast
it may happen to be. Were that great casting 2000 miles in diameter,
or were it 8000 miles in diameter, it will still steadily part with
its heat, though no doubt the process of cooling becomes greatly
prolonged with an increase in the dimensions of the heated body. The
earth and the moon cannot escape from the application of these simple
principles.

Let us first speak of the earth. There are multitudes of volcanoes in
action at the present moment in various countries upon this earth. Now
whatever explanation may be given of the approximate cause of the
volcanic phenomena, there can be no doubt that they indicate the
existence of heat in the interior of the earth. It may possibly be, as
some have urged, that the volcanoes are merely vents for comparatively
small masses of subterranean molten matter; it may be, as others more
reasonably, in my opinion, believe, that the whole interior of the
earth is at the temperature of incandescence, and that the eruptions
of volcanoes and the shocks of earthquakes are merely consequences of
the gradual shrinkage of the external crust, as it continually strives
to accommodate itself to the lessening bulk of the fluid interior.
But whichever view we may adopt, it is at least obvious that the earth
is in part, at all events, a heated body, and that the heat is not in
the nature of a combustion, generated and sustained by the progress of
chemical action. No doubt there may be local phenomena of this
description, but by far the larger proportion of the earth's internal
heat seems merely the fervour of incandescence. It is to be likened to
the heat of the molten iron which has been run into the sand, rather
than to the glowing coals in the furnace in which that iron has been
smelted.

There is one volcanic outbreak of such exceptional interest in these
modern times that I cannot refrain from alluding to it. Doubtless
every one has heard of that marvellous eruption of Krakatoa, which
occurred on August 26th and 27th, 1883, and gives a unique chapter in
the history of volcanic phenomena. Not alone was the eruption of
Krakatoa alarming in its more ordinary manifestations, but it was
unparalleled both in the vehemence of the shock and in the distance to
which the effects of the great eruption were propagated. I speak not
now of the great waves of ocean that inundated the coasts of Sumatra
and Java, and swept away thirty-six thousand people, nor do I allude
to the intense darkness which spread for one hundred and eighty miles
or more all round. I shall just mention the three most important
phenomena, which demonstrate the energy which still resides in the
interior of our earth. Place a terrestrial globe before you, and fix
your attention on the Straits of Sunda; think also of the great
atmospheric ocean some two or three hundred miles deep which envelopes
our earth. When a pebble is tossed into a pond a beautiful series of
concentric ripples diverge from it; so when Krakatoa burst up in that
mighty catastrophe, a series of gigantic waves were propagated through
the air; they embraced the whole globe, converged to the antipodes of
Krakatoa, thence again diverged, and returned to the seat of the
volcano; a second time the mighty series of atmospheric ripples spread
to the antipodes, and a second time returned. Seven times did that
series of waves course over our globe, and leave their traces on every
self-recording barometer that our earth possesses. Thirty-six hours
were occupied in the journey of the great undulation from Krakatoa to
its antipodes. Perhaps even more striking was the extent of our
earth's surface over which the noise of the great explosion spread. At
Batavia, ninety-four miles away, the concussions were simply
deafening; at Macassar, in Celebes, two steamers were sent out to
investigate the explosions which were heard, little thinking that they
came from Krakatoa, nine hundred and sixty-nine miles away. Alarming
sounds were heard over the island of Timor, one thousand three hundred
and fifty-one miles away from Krakatoa. Diego Garcia in the Chogos
islands is two thousand two hundred and sixty-seven miles from
Krakatoa, but the thunders traversed even this distance, and were
attributed to some ship in distress, for which a search was made. Most
astounding of all, there is undoubted evidence that the sound of the
mighty explosion was propagated across nearly the entire Indian ocean,
and was heard in the island of Rodriguez, almost three thousand miles
away. The immense distance over which this sound journeyed will be
appreciated by the fact, that the noise did not reach Rodriguez until
four hours after it had left Krakatoa. In fact, it would seem that if
Vesuvius were to explode with the same vehemence as Krakatoa did, the
thunders of the explosion might penetrate so far as to be heard in
London.

There is another and more beautiful manifestation of the world-wide
significance of the Krakatoa outbreak. The vast column of smoke and
ashes ascended twenty miles high in the air, and commenced a series of
voyages around the equatorial regions of the earth. In three days it
crossed the Indian ocean, and was traversing equatorial Africa; then
came an Atlantic voyage; and then it coursed over central America,
before a Pacific voyage brought it back to its point of departure
after thirteen days; then the dust started again, and was traced
around another similar circuit, while it was even tracked for a
considerable time in placing the third girdle round the earth. Strange
blue suns and green moons and other mysterious phenomena marked the
progress of this vast volcanic cloud. At last the cloud began to lose
its density, the dust spread more widely over the tropics, became
diffused through the temperate regions, and then the whole earth was
able to participate in the glories of Krakatoa. The marvellous sunsets
in the autumn of 1883 are attributable to this cause; and thus once
again was brought before us the fact that the earth still contains
large stores of thermal energy.

Attempts are sometimes made to explain volcanic phenomena on the
supposition that they are entirely of a local character, and that we
are not entitled to infer the incandescent nature of the earth's
interior from the fact that volcanic outbreaks occasionally happen.
For our present purpose this point is immaterial, though I must say it
appears to me unreasonable to deny that the interior of the earth is
in a most highly heated state. Every test we can apply shows us the
existence of internal heat. Setting aside the more colossal phenomena
of volcanic eruptions, we have innumerable minor manifestations of its
presence. Are there not geysers and hot springs in many parts of the
earth? and have we not all over our globe invariable testimony
confirming the statement, that the deeper we go down beneath its
surface the hotter does the temperature become? Every miner is
familiar with these facts; he knows that the deeper are his shafts the
warmer it is down below, and the greater the necessity for providing
increased ventilation to keep the temperature within a limit that
shall be suitable for the workmen. All these varied classes of
phenomena admit solely of one explanation, and that is, that the
interior of the earth contains vast stores of incandescent heat.

We now apply to our earth the same reasoning which we should employ on
a poker taken from the fire, or on a casting drawn from the foundry.
Such bodies will lose their heat by radiation and conduction. The
earth is therefore losing its heat. No doubt the process is an
extremely slow one. The mighty reservoirs of internal heat are covered
by vast layers of rock, which are such excellent non-conductors that
they offer every possible impediment to the leakage of heat from the
interior to the surface. We coat our steam-pipes over with
non-conducting material, and this can now be done so successfully,
that it is beginning to be found economical to transmit steam for a
very long distance through properly protected pipes. But no
non-conducting material that we can manufacture can be half so
effective as the shell of rock twenty miles or more in thickness,
which secures the heated interior of the earth from rapid loss by
radiation into space. Even were the earth's surface solid copper or
solid silver, both most admirable conductors of heat, the cooling down
of this vast globe would be an extremely tardy process; how much more
tardy must it therefore be when such exceedingly bad conductors as
rocks form the envelope? How imperfectly material of this kind will
transmit heat is strikingly illustrated by the great blast iron
furnaces which are so vitally important in one of England's greatest
manufacturing industries. A glowing mass of coal and iron ore and
limestone is here urged to vivid incandescence by a blast of air
itself heated to an intense temperature. The mighty heat thus
generated--sufficient as it is to detach the iron from its close
alliance with the earthy materials and to render the metal out as a
pure stream rushing white-hot from the vent--is sufficiently confined
by a few feet of brick-work, one side of which is therefore at the
temperature of molten iron, while the other is at a temperature not
much exceeding that of the air. We may liken the brick-work of a blast
furnace to the rocky covering of the earth; in each case an
exceedingly high temperature on one side is compatible with a very
moderate temperature on the other.

Although the drainage of heat away from the earth's interior to its
surface, and its loss there by radiation into space, is an extremely
tardy process, yet it is incessantly going on. We have here again to
note the ability for gigantic effect which a small but continually
operating cause may have, provided it always tends in the same
direction. The earth is incessantly losing heat; and though in a day,
a week, or a year the loss may not be very significant, yet when we
come to deal with periods of time that have to be reckoned by millions
of years, it may well be that the effect of a small loss of heat per
annum can, in the course of these ages, reach unimagined dimensions.
Suppose, for instance, that the earth experienced a fall of
temperature in its interior which amounted to only one-thousandth of a
degree in a year. So minute a quantity as this is imperceptible. Even
in a century, the loss of heat at this rate would be only the tenth of
a degree. There would be no possible way of detecting it; the most
careful thermometer could not be relied on to tell us for a certainty
that the temperature of the hot waters of Bath had declined the tenth
of a degree; and I need hardly say, that the fall of a tenth of a
degree would signify nothing in the lavas of Vesuvius, nor influence
the thunders of Krakatoa by one appreciable note. So far as a human
life or the life of the human race is concerned, the decline of a
tenth of a degree per century in the earth's internal heat is
absolutely void of significance. I cannot, however, impress upon you
too strongly, that the mere few thousands of years with which human
history is cognizant are an inappreciable moment in comparison with
those unmeasured millions of years which geology opens out to us, or
with those far more majestic periods which the astronomer demands for
the events he has to describe.

An annual loss of even one-thousandth of a degree will be capable of
stupendous achievements when supposed to operate during epochs of
geological magnitude. In fact, its effects would be so vast, that it
seems hardly credible that the present loss of heat from the earth
should be so great as to amount to an abatement of one-thousandth of a
degree per annum, for that would mean, that in a thousand years the
earth's temperature would decline by one degree, and in a million
years the decline would amount to a thousand degrees. At all events,
the illustration may suffice to show, that the fact that we are not
able to prove by our instruments that the earth is cooling is no
argument whatever against the inevitable law, that the earth, like
every other heated body, must be tending towards a lower temperature.

Without pretending to any numerical accuracy, we can at all events
give a qualitative if not a quantitative analysis of the past history of
our earth, in so far as its changes of temperature are concerned. A
million years ago our earth doubtless contained appreciably more heat
than it does at present. I speak not now, of course, of mere solar
heat--of the heat which gives us the vicissitudes of seasons; I am
only referring to the original hoard of internal heat which is
gradually waning. As therefore our retrospect extends through
