to think with.

The noise wasn't deafening, but it was certainly all-pervasive.

Bart Stanton had reholstered his own weapon and half opened his lips to
speak when he heard another sound behind him.

Again he whirled, his guns in his hands--both of them this time--and his
forefingers only fractions of a millimeter from the point that would
fire the hair triggers.

But he did not fire.

The second man had merely shifted the weapons in his holsters and then
dropped his hands away.

The noise, which had been flooding the room over the speaker system,
died instantly.

Stanton shoved his guns back into place and rose from his crouch. "Real
cute," he said, grinning. "I wasn't expecting that one."

The man he was facing smiled back. "Well, Bart, perhaps we have proved
our point. What do you think, Colonel?" The last was addressed to the
third man, who was still standing quietly, looking worried and surprised
about the three spots on his jacket that had come from the special
harmless projectiles in Stanton's gun.

Colonel Mannheim was four inches shorter than Stanton's five-ten, and
was fifteen years older. But in spite of the differences, he would have
laughed if anyone had told him five minutes before that he couldn't
outdraw a man who was standing with his back turned.

His bright blue eyes, set deep beneath craggy brows in a tanned face,
looked speculatively at the younger man.

"Incredible," he said gently. "Absolutely incredible." Then he looked at
the other man, a lean civilian with mild blue eyes a shade lighter than
his own. "All right, Farnsworth; I'm convinced. You and your staff have
quite literally created a superman. Anyone who can stand in a
noise-filled room and hear a man draw a gun twenty feet behind him is
incredible enough. The fact that he could and did outdraw and outshoot
me after I had started--well, that's almost beyond comprehension."

He looked back at Bart Stanton. "What's your opinion? Do you think you
can handle the Nipe, Stanton?"

Stanton paused imperceptibly before answering, while his ultrafast mind
considered the problem before arriving at a decision. Just how much
confidence should he show the colonel? Mannheim was a man with
tremendous confidence in his own abilities, but who was nevertheless
capable of recognizing that there were men who were his superiors in one
field or another.

"If I can't dispose of the Nipe," Stanton said, "no one can."

Colonel Mannheim nodded slowly. "I believe you're right," he said at
last. His voice was firm with inner conviction. He shot a glance at
Farnsworth. "How about the second man?"

Farnsworth shook his head. "He'll never make it. In another two years we
can put him into reasonable shape again, but his nervous system just
couldn't stand the gaff."

"Can we get another man ready in time?"

"Hardly. We can't just pick a man up off the street and turn him into a
superman. Even if we could find another subject with Bart's genetic
possibilities, it would take more time than we have to spare."

"No way at all of cutting the time down?"

"This isn't magic, Colonel," Farnsworth said. "You don't change a nobody
into a physical and mental giant by saying _abracadabra_ or by teaching
him how to pronounce _shazam_ properly."

"I'm aware of that," said the colonel without rancor. "It's just that I
keep feeling that five years of work on Mr. Stanton should have taught
you enough to be able to repeat the process in less time."

Farnsworth repeated the head-shaking. "Human beings aren't machines,
Colonel. They require time to heal, time to learn, time to integrate
themselves. Remember that, in spite of our increased knowledge of
anesthesia, antibiotics, viricides, and obstetrics, it still takes nine
months to produce a baby. We're in the same position, if not more so.
After all, we can't even allow for a premature delivery."

"I know," said Mannheim.

"Besides," Dr. Farnsworth continued, "Stanton's body and nervous system
are now close to the theoretical limit for human tissue. I'm afraid you
don't realize what kind of mental stability and organization are
required to handle the equipment he has now."

"I'm sure I don't," Colonel Mannheim agreed. "I doubt if anyone besides
Stanton himself _really_ knows." He looked at Bart Stanton. "That's it
then, son. You're it. You're the only answer we've found so far. And the
only answer visible in the foreseeable future to the problem posed by
the Nipe."

The colonel's face seemed to darken. "Ten years," he said in a low
voice. "Ten years that inhuman monster has been loose on Earth. He's
become a legend. He's replaced Satan, the Bogeyman, Frankenstein's
monster, and Mumbo Jumbo, Lord of the Congo, in the public mind. Read
the newsfacs, watch the newscasts. Take a look at popular fiction. He's
everywhere at once. He can do anything. He's taken on the attributes of
the djinn, the vampire, the ghoul, the werewolf, and every other horror
and hobgoblin that the mind of man has conjured up in the past half
million years."

"That's hardly surprising, Colonel," Bart Stanton said with a wry smile.
"If a human being had gone on a ten-year rampage of robbery and murder,
showing himself as callously indifferent to human life and property as
you and I would be to the life and property of a cockroach, and if, in
addition, he proved impossible to catch, such a person would be looked
upon as a demon too. And if you add to that the fact that the Nipe is
_not_ human, that he is as frightening in appearance as he is in
actions, what can you expect?"

"I agree," said Dr. Farnsworth. "Look at Jack the Ripper and consider
how he terrorized London a couple of centuries ago."

"I know," said Colonel Mannheim. "There have been human criminals whose
actions could be described as 'inhuman', but the Nipe has some touches
that few human criminals have thought of and almost none would have the
capacity to execute. If he has time to spare, his victims become an
annoying problem in identification when they're found. He leaves nothing
but well-gnawed bones. And by 'time to spare', I mean twenty or thirty
minutes. The damned monster has a very efficient digestive tract, if
nothing else. He eats like a shrew."

"And if he doesn't have time, he beats them to death," Bart Stanton said
thoughtfully.

Colonel Mannheim frowned. "Not exactly. According to the evidence--"

Dr. Farnsworth interrupted him. "Colonel, let's go into the lounge,
shall we? Aside from the fact that standing around in an empty chamber
like this isn't the most comfortable way to discuss the fate of mankind,
this room is scheduled for other work."

Colonel Mannheim grinned, caught up by the touch of lightness that the
biophysicist had injected into the conversation. "Very well. I could do
with some coffee, if you have some."

"All you want," said Dr. Farnsworth, leading the way toward the door of
the chamber and opening it. "Or, if you'd prefer something with a little
more power to it...."

"Thanks, no," said Mannheim. "Coffee will do fine. How about you,
Stanton?"

Bart Stanton shook his head. "I'd love to have some coffee, but I'll
leave the alcohol alone. I'd just have the luck to be finishing a drink
when our friend, the Nipe, popped in on us. And when I do meet him, I'm
going to need every microsecond of reflex speed I can scrape up."

They walked down a soft-floored, warmly lit corridor to an elevator
which whisked them up to the main level of the Neurophysical Institute
Building.

Another corridor led them to a room that might have been the common room
of one of the more exclusive men's clubs. There were soft chairs and
shelves of books and reading tables and smoking stands, all quietly
luxurious. There was no one in the room when the three men entered.

"We can have some privacy here," Dr. Farnsworth said. "None of the rest
of the staff will come in until we're through."

He walked over to a table, where an urn of coffee radiated soft warmth.
"Cream and sugar over there on the tray," he said as he began to fill
cups.

The cups were filled and the three men sat down in a triangle of chairs
before any of them spoke again. Then Bart Stanton said:

"I made the remark that if the Nipe doesn't have time to eat his victims
he just beats them to death, and you started to say something, Colonel."

Colonel Mannheim took a sip from his cup before he spoke. "Yes. I was
going to say that, according to the evidence we have, he _always_ beats
his victims to death, whether he manages to eat them or not."

"Oh?" Stanton looked thoughtful.

"Oh, he's not cruel about it," the colonel said. "He kills quickly and
neatly. The thing is that he never, under any circumstances, uses any
weapons except the weapons that nature gave him--hands or feet or claws
or teeth. He never uses a gun or a knife or even a club. Dr. Yoritomo
has some theories about that which I won't go into now. He'll tell you
about them pretty soon."

Stanton thought about the Japanese scientist and smiled. "I know. Dr.
Yoritomo has threatened to tell me all kinds of theories."

"And believe me he will," said Mannheim with a soft chuckle. He took
another sip of his coffee and then looked up at Stanton. "You've been
through five years of hell, Mr. Stanton. In addition, you've been pretty
much isolated here. Dr. Farnsworth, here, has tried to keep you
informed, but, as I understand it, it has only been during the last few
months that you've actually been able to absorb and retain information
reliably. At least, that's the report I get. How do you feel about it?"

Bart Stanton thought for a moment. It was true that he'd been out of
touch with what had been going on outside the walls of the Neurophysical
Institute for the past five years. In spite of the reading he'd done and
the newscasts he'd watched and the TV tapes he'd seen, he still had no
real feeling for the situation.

There had been long hazy periods during that five years. He had
undergone extensive glandular and neural operations of great delicacy,
many of which had resulted in what could have been agonizing pain
without the use of suppressors. As a result of those operations, he
possessed a biological engine that, for sheer driving power and nicety
of control, surpassed any other known to exist or to have ever existed
on Earth--with the possible exception of the Nipe. But those five years
of rebuilding and retraining had left a gap in his life.

Several of the steps required to make the conversion from man to
superman had resulted in temporary insanity; the wild, swinging
imbalances of glandular secretions seeking a new balance, the erratic
misfirings of neurons as they attempted to adjust to higher
nerve-impulse velocities, and the sheer fatigue engendered by cells that
were acting too rapidly for a lagging excretory system, all had
contributed to periods of greater or lesser abnormality.

That he was sane now, there was no question. But there were holes in his
memory that still had to be filled.

He admitted as much to Colonel Mannheim.

"I see." The colonel rubbed one hand along the angle of his jaw,
considering his next words. "Can you give me, in your own words, a
general summary of the type of thing the Nipe has been doing?"

"I think so," Stanton said.

His verbal summary was succinct and accurate. The loot that the Nipe had
been stealing had, at first, seemed to be a hodgepodge of everything. It
was unpredictable. Money, as such, he apparently had no use for. He had
taken gold, silver, and platinum, but one raid for each of these
elements had evidently been enough, with the exception of silver, which
had required three raids over a period of four years. Since then, he
hadn't touched silver again.

He hadn't yet tried for any of the radioactives except radium. He'd
taken a full ounce of that in five raids, but hadn't attempted to get
his hands on uranium, thorium, plutonium, or any of the other elements
normally associated with atomic energy. Nor had he tried to steal any of
the fusion materials--the heavy isotopes of hydrogen or any of the
lithium isotopes. Beryllium had been taken, but whether there was any
significance in the thefts or not, no one knew.

There was a pattern in the thefts and robberies, nonetheless. They had
begun small and had increased. Scientific and technical
instruments--oscilloscopes, X-ray generators, radar equipment, maser
sets, dynostatic crystals, thermolight resonators, and so on--were
stolen complete or gutted for various parts. After a while, he had gone
on to bigger things--whole aircraft, with their crews, had vanished.

That he had not committed anywhere near all the crimes that had been
attributed to him was certain; that he _had_ committed a great many of
them was equally certain.

There was no doubt at all that his loot was being used to make
instruments and devices of unknown kinds. He had used several of them on
his raids. The one that could apparently phase out any electromagnetic
frequency up to about a hundred thousand megacycles--including
sixty-cycle power frequencies--was considered a particularly cute item.
So was the gadget that reduced the tensile strength of concrete to about
that of a good grade of marshmallow.

After he had been operating for a few years, there was no installation
on Earth that could be considered Nipe-proof for more than a few
minutes. He struck when and where he wanted and took whatever he needed.

It was manifestly impossible to guard against the Nipe, since no one
knew what sort of loot might strike his fancy next, and there was
therefore no way of knowing where or how he would hit next.

Nor could he ever be found after one of his raids. They were plotted and
followed through with diabolical accuracy and thoroughness. He struck,
looted, and vanished. And he wasn't seen again until his next strike.

Colonel Mannheim, who had carefully puffed a cigar alight and smoked it
thoughtfully during Stanton's recitation, dropped the remains of the
cigar into an ash receptacle. "Accurate but incomplete," he said
quietly. "You must have made some guesses. I'd like to hear them."

Stanton finished the last of his coffee and glanced at Dr. Farnsworth.
The biophysicist was thoughtfully looking down at his own cup, his
expression unreadable.

_All right_, Stanton thought, _he's looking for something. I'll let him
have both barrels and see if I hit the target_.

"I've thought about it," he admitted. He got up, went over to the coffee
urn, and refilled his cup. "I've got a pet theory of my own. It's just a
notion, really. I wouldn't dare reduce it to syllogistic form, because
it might not hold much water, logically speaking. But the evidence seems
conclusive enough to me."

He walked back to his seat. Colonel Mannheim was watching him, a look of
interest on his face, but he said nothing.

"To me," Stanton said, "it seems incredible that the combined
intelligence and organizational ability of the UN Government is
incapable of finding anything out about one single alien, no matter how
competent he may be. Somehow, somewhere, someone must have gotten a line
on the Nipe. He must have a base for his operations, and someone should
have found it by this time.

"I may be faster and stronger and more sensitive than any other living
human being, but that doesn't mean I have superhuman powers, or that I'm
a magician. And I'm quite certain that you, Colonel, don't credit me
with such abilities. You don't believe that I can do in a short time
what the combined forces of the Government couldn't do in ten. Certainly
you wouldn't rely too heavily on it.

"And yet, apparently, you are.

"To me, that can only mean that you have another ace up your sleeve. You
_know_ we're going to get the Nipe fairly quickly. You either have a
sure way of tracing him, or you already know where he is.

"Which is it?"

Colonel Mannheim sighed. "We know where he is," he said. "We have known
for six years."




_[6]_


The Nipe prowled around the huge underground room, carefully checking
his alarms. If anyone entered the network of tunnels at any point, the
instruments would register that fact. They had to be adjusted, of
course, for the presence of the small, omnivorous quadrupeds that ran
through the tunnels in such numbers, but anything larger than they would
be noted immediately.

He did not like to leave this place. Here, over a period of ten
revolutions of this planet about its primary, he had built himself a
nest that was almost comfortable. Here, too, were his workshops and his
storehouses. He had reason to believe that he was safe here, screened
and protected as he was, but each time he left or entered he ran the
chance of being observed.

Still, there was no help for it. Thus far, he had been hampered by
