Thus the Terran Empire had come into being with only a fraction of the
internal disruption which normally follows empire-building.

But Man can flee as well as fight. Every invading army is preceded by
hordes of refugees. Ships left every planet threatened by the Empire,
seeking new, uncharted planets to settle--planets that would be safe
from the Imperial Fleet because they were hidden among a thousand
thousand stars. Mankind spread through the galaxy faster than the Empire
could. Not even Jerris the First could completely consolidate the vast
reaches of the galaxy into a single unit; one lifetime is simply not
enough.

Nor are a dozen.

Slowly, the Empire had changed. Over the next several generations, the
Emperors had yielded more and more of the absolute power that had been
left to them by Jerris. While history never exactly repeats itself, a
parallel could be drawn between the history of the Empire and the
history of England between, say, 1550 and 1950. But, while England's
empire had begun to recede with the coming of democratic government, the
Terran Empire continued to spread--more slowly than at first, but
steadily.

Until, that is, the Empire had touched the edges of the Gehan
Federation.

For the hordes that had fled from the Empire had not forgotten her; they
knew that one day the Empire would find them, that one day they would
have to fight for their independence. So they formed the Federation,
with its capital on the third planet of Gehan's Sun.

It was a federation in name only. Even after several generations, the
refugees had not been able to build up enough population to fight the
Empire. There was only one other way out, as they saw it. They formed a
military dictatorship.

In the Twentieth Century, the German Third Reich, although outnumbered
by its neighbors and enemies, populationwise, had concentrated all its
efforts on building an unbeatable war machine. Japan, also outnumbered,
had done likewise. Between them, they thought they could beat the rest
of Earth. And they came dangerously close to succeeding.

The Gehan Federation had done the same thing, building up fleets and
armies and material stockpiles as though she were already at war.

And, in doing so, her citizens had voluntarily forfeited the very thing
they thought they were fighting for--their freedom.

But they posed a greater threat to the Terran Empire than that Empire
had ever faced before. Any nation so totally prepared for defensive war
may, at any moment, decide that the best defense is a good offense. Any
nation which subjects its people to semislavery for the sake of war must
eventually fight that war or suffer collapse.

The Empire had to change tactics. Instead of steady expansion, she was
forced into a deadly game of interstellar chess, making her plays
carefully, so as not to touch off the explosive temper of her opponent.

It was not a situation to be handled by clumsy fools.

And Lord Senesin, the Prime Portfolio of the Imperial File, the elected
leader of the Empire, the constitutional head of the Imperial
Government, was accused, not only of being a clumsy fool, but of being a
dangerous madman. The planet Bairnvell was an independent, autonomic
ally of the Gehan Federation, and, although not actually a member of the
Federation, was presumably under her protection. For the Imperial Fleet
to go to the aid of rebels trying to overthrow Bairnvell's lawful
government seemed to be the act of an insane mind. The people of the
Empire wouldn't stand for it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Colonel Lord Barrick Sorban was well aware of the temper of the people
and of the situation that prevailed politically in the Empire--more so,
in fact, than most men. He was also well aware that internal strife of a
very serious nature could so dangerously weaken the Empire that the
Gehan Federation would be able to attack and win.

His job was to cut off that sort of thing before it could gain momentum.
His job was to maintain the Empire; his only superior was the Emperor
himself; his subordinates hand-picked, well-trained, and, like himself,
unobtrusive to the public eye. And not one of those subordinates knew
who the colonel's superior was.

The colonel strolled along the streets of Honolulu with all the
courteous aplomb of a man who was both an officer and a gentleman of
leisure. He dropped in at various respectable clubs and did various
respectable things. He went into other places and did other things not
so respectable. He gave certain orders to certain people and made
certain odd arrangements. When everything had been set up to his
satisfaction, he ate a leisurely dinner, topped it off with two glasses
of Velaskan wine, read the tenth edition of the _Globe_, and strolled
out to the street again, looking every inch the impeccable gentleman.

At ten minutes of eleven, he took a skycab to the fashionable apartment
house where the Honorable Jon Senesin, son of the Prime Portfolio, made
his home. The skycab deposited him on the roof at two minutes of eleven.
The android doorman opened the entrance for him, and he took the drop
chute down to the fifteenth floor. At precisely eleven o'clock, he was
facing the announcer plate on Jon Senesin's door.

[Illustration]

Senesin opened the door. There was a queer look--half jubilant, half
worried--on his face as he said: "Come in, my lord, come in. Care for a
drink?"

"Don't mind if I do, Jon. Brandy, if you have it."

Young Senesin poured the brandy, speaking rapidly as he did. "I've made
an appointment to get those tapes, my lord. I want you to go with me. If
we can get them, we can break this whole fraud wide open. Wide open." He
handed the colonel a crystal goblet half filled with the clear,
red-brown liquid. "Sorry I left so hurriedly this morning, but if that
Heywood character had said another word I'd have broken his nose for
him."

The colonel took the goblet and looked into its depths. "Jon, what do
you expect these tapes to prove?"

The young man's face darkened. He walked across the spacious room,
brandy goblet in hand, and sat down on the wall couch before he spoke.

"Just what I told you, my lord. I expect to prove that my father's mind
has been tampered with--that he is not responsible for the decisions
that have been made in his name--that he is going to lose his position
and his reputation and his career for something that he would never have
done in his right mind--that he has been the duped pawn of someone
else."

The colonel walked over toward the couch and stood over the young man.
"Someone? You keep referring to 'someone.' Ever since you asked me to
help you, you've been mysterious about this someone. Whom do you
suspect?"

Senesin looked up at the colonel for a long moment before he answered.
Then: "I suspect the Emperor himself," he said, half defiantly.

The colonel raised his finely-drawn brows just a fraction of an inch, as
though he hadn't known what the answer would be. "The Emperor? Hannikar
IV? Isn't that a little far-fetched?"
