
At this hour the office was deserted except for a wispy-haired little
man who sat at a desk fussing with some papers. He looked up
questioningly as Tee came in.

"Is my ship re-charged and provisioned?" asked Tee.

"Uh, what's the name please?"

"Tee Ormond. I own the _Starduster_."

The clerk pulled a card from a file on the desk and studied it. "Ah,
yes, the _Starduster_."

"I'd like to pay my bill and clear the _Starduster_ for immediate
departure."

"Uh, very good, Mr. Ormond." He consulted the card again. "That'll be
fourteen hundred and eleven credits." He beamed. "We included a case of
Ruykeser's Concentrate, compliments of the management." He handed a
circular to Tee. "This is a list of our ports and facilities on other
planets. Our accommodations are the finest, and we carry a complete line
of parts." He smiled professionally.

"What about my key?" asked Tee, pulling out his wallet.

"Uh, let's see, number thirty-seven." The clerk started for a numbered
board hanging on the wall. He never got there.

Tee whipped a stun-gun from inside his jacket and waved it at the
clerk's back. It caught him in mid-stride, and unbalanced, he crashed
heavily to the floor. Tee glanced briefly down as he stepped over the
paralyzed form, avoiding the accusing eyes, and snatched the magnetic
key off the hook. He forced himself to walk calmly across the field
toward the hangar that housed the _Starduster_.

A uniformed guard stopped him at the hangar door. "May I see your
clearance, sir?" he asked, politely.

Tee hesitated for a moment. "Oh, I'm just going to get something out of
my ship," he said, smoothly. "The clerk said it was roj."

"The clerk said? But he can't--" The guard tensed. "Mind if I check,
sir? Orders, you know." He bent his head slightly as he pressed a knob
on his wrist radio. As his eyes turned downward, Tee swung the stun-gun
in an arc that ended on the back of the guard's head. As he leaped into
the _Starduster_ he was sorry for a moment that he hadn't had time to
recharge the gun, and hoped he hadn't struck too hard.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

OCTOBER 11, 433rd Year GALACTIC ERA

Tee stepped out of the hangar and surveyed the twin suns. The pale
binaries sat stolidly on the horizon, forty degrees apart. Their mingled
light washed down dimly on the single continent of the planet, Aurora.

He started, as a man walked around the corner of the hangar. The man
looked at Tee searchingly for a moment, then asked, "Anything troubling
you, Tee?"

"Why ... why, no, Mr. Jenner. You just startled me, that's all."

"Well, how's everything coming?"

"Right on schedule. We'll be ready for the final test by the end of the
week."

"By the way," asked Jenner, speculatively, "how come you ordered the
ship stocked and provisioned, for the test?"

"Why ... why I think she should be tested under exactly the same
conditions as she'll encounter in actual use."

"We could have done it a lot cheaper by just using ballast," said
Jenner. "After this, I want to personally see any voucher for over a
hundred credits before it's cleared."

"Yes, sir, but I just didn't want to bother you with details."

"An expenditure of over two thousand credits isn't just detail; but let
it pass. It's already done. Anyway, on the drawing board she's the
fastest thing in the galaxy." He smiled. "If she lives up to
expectations, she'll make your ship look like an old freighter. We've
got four million sunk in her so far, so she'd better check out roj."

He put his hand on Tee's shoulder. "You're not worried about testing
her, are you? You've been jumpy lately."

"Oh, no, nothing like that, Mr. Jenner. I'm just ... well, I've been up
all night watching them install the gyroscopes. Think I'll get some
sleep." He yawned.

Jenner cupped his chin in his palm and stood staring after the
retreating figure. As Tee turned and looked back nervously, Jenner
entered the hangar office. He spoke softly into the visiphone and in a
moment the screen lit up.

"Is this the prison administrator?" asked Jenner.

"What can I do for you?"

"My name is Jenner; Consolidated Spacecraft."

"Yes?"

"Suppose an escaped prisoner from Hades landed on Aurora?"

"_No one_ escapes from Hades Prison."

"Well, just suppose one did?"

"I never receive information about escapees."

"But you're the administrator here."

"My job, as the title implies, is purely administrative. I merely
arrange transportation for our annual shipment of prisoners to Hades,
and see that the records are kept straight."

"But whom _would_ they contact in the event of an escape?"

The administrator pursed his lips in impatience. "Hades has six billion
prisoners at any given time. If one did manage to escape, they couldn't
very well alert a million planets."

"You mean you wouldn't do anything?"

