adverse criticism with the same charming urbanity.

Ambition of the most intense earnestness was a natural characteristic,
but was guided by a stern and inflexible justice. Envy and malice were
unknown to them. It was, doubtless, owing to their elevated moral
character that courts and legal proceedings had become unnecessary. If a
discussion arose between parties involving a question of law, they
repaired to the Public Library, where the statute books were kept, and
looked up the matter themselves, and settled it as the law directed.
Should they fail to interpret the law alike, a third party was selected
as referee, but accepted no pay.

Indolence was as much a disgrace to them as is the lack of virtue to the
women of my country, hence every citizen, no matter how wealthy, had
some regular trade, business or profession. I found those occupations we
are accustomed to see accepted by the people of inferior birth and
breeding, were there filled by women of the highest social rank, refined
in manner and frequently of notable intellectual acquirements. It grew,
or was the result of the custom of selecting whatever vocation they felt
themselves competent to most worthily fill, and as no social favor or
ignominy rested on any kind of labor, the whole community of Mizora was
one immense family of sisters who knew no distinction of birth or
position among themselves.

There were no paupers and no charities, either public or private, to be
found in the country. The absence of poverty such as I knew existed in
all civilized nations upon the face of the earth, was largely owing to
the cheapness of food. But there was one other consideration that bore
vitally upon it. The dignity and necessity of labor was early and
diligently impressed upon the mind. The Preceptress said to me:

"Mizora is a land of industry. Nature has taught us the duty of work.
Had some of us been born with minds fully matured, or did knowledge come
to some as old age comes to all, we might think that a portion was
intended to live without effort. But we are all born equal, and labor is
assigned to all; and the one who seeks labor is wiser than the one who
lets labor seek her."

Citizens, I learned, were not restrained from accumulating vast wealth
had they the desire and ability to do so, but custom imposed upon them
the most honorable processes. If a citizen should be found guilty of
questionable business transactions, she suffered banishment to a lonely
island and the confiscation of her entire estate, both hereditary and
acquired. The property confiscated went to the public schools in the
town or city where she resided; but never was permitted to augment
salaries. I discovered this in the statute books, but not in the memory
of any one living had it been found necessary to inflict such a
punishment.

"Our laws," said Wauna, "are simply established legal advice. No law can
be so constructed as to fit every case so exactly that a criminal mind
could not warp it into a dishonest use. But in a country like ours,
where civilization has reached that state of enlightenment that needs no
laws, we are simply guided by custom."

The love of splendor and ornament was a pronounced characteristic of
these strange people. But where gorgeous colors were used, they were
always of rich quality. The humblest homes were exquisitely ornamented,
and often displayed a luxury that, with us, would have been considered
an evidence of wealth.

They took the greatest delight in their beauty, and were exceedingly
careful of it. A lovely face and delicate complexion, they averred,
added to one's refinement. The art of applying an artificial bloom and
fairness to the skin, which I had often seen practiced in my own
country, appeared to be unknown to them. But everything savoring of
deception was universally condemned. They made no concealment of the
practice they resorted to for preserving their complexions, and so
universal and effectual were they, that women who, I was informed, had
passed the age allotted to the grandmothers in my country, had the
smooth brow and pink bloom of cheek that belongs to a more youthful
period of life. There was, however, a distinction between youth and old
age. The hair was permitted to whiten, but the delicate complexion of
old age, with its exquisite coloring, excited in my mind as much
admiration as astonishment.

I cannot explain why I hesitated to press my first inquiry as to where
the men were. I had put the question to Wauna one day, but she professed
never to have heard of such beings. It silenced me--for a time.

"Perhaps it is some extinct animal," she added, naively. "We have so
many new things to study and investigate, that we pay but little
attention to ancient history."

I bided my time and put the query in another form.

"Where is your other parent?"

She regarded me with innocent surprise. "You talk strangely. I have but
one parent. How could I have any more?"

"You ought to have two."

She laughed merrily. "You have a queer way of jesting. I have but one
mother, one adorable mother. How could I have two?" and she laughed
again.

I saw that there was some mystery I could not unravel at present, and
fearing to involve myself in some trouble, refrained from further
questioning on the subject. I nevertheless kept a close observance of
all that passed, and seized every opportunity to investigate a mystery
that began to harass me with its strangeness.

Soon after my conversation with Wauna, I attended an entertainment at
which a great number of guests were present. It was a literary festival
and, after the intellectual delicacies were disposed of, a banquet
followed of more than royal munificence. Toasts were drank, succeeded by
music and dancing and all the gayeties of a festive occasion, yet none
but the fairest of fair women graced the scene. Is it strange,
therefore, that I should have regarded with increasing astonishment and
uneasiness a country in all respects alluring to the desires of man--yet
found him not there in lordly possession?

Beauty and intellect, wealth and industry, splendor and careful economy,
natures lofty and generous, gentle and loving--why has not Man claimed
this for himself?




CHAPTER V.


The Preceptress of the National College appointed her daughter Wanna as
a guide and instructor to me. I formed a deep and strong attachment for
her, which, it pains me to remember, was the cause of her unhappy fate.
In stature she was above the medium height, with a form of the fairest
earthly loveliness and exquisite grace. Her eyes were so deep a blue,
that at first I mistook them for brown. Her hair was the color of a ripe
chestnut frosted with gold, and in length and abundance would cover her
like a garment. She was vivacious and fond of athletic sports. Her
strength amazed me. Those beautiful hands, with their tapering fingers,
had a grip like a vise. They had discovered, in this wonderful land,
that a body possessing perfectly developed muscles must, by the laws of
nature, be symmetrical and graceful. They rode a great deal on small,
two-wheeled vehicles, which they propelled themselves. They gave me one
on which I accompanied Wauna to all of the places of interest in the
Capital city and vicinity.

I must mention that Wauna's voice was exceedingly musical, even in that
land of sweet voices, but she did not excel as a singer.

The infant schools interested me more than all the magnificence and
grandeur of the college buildings. The quaint courtesy, gentle manners
and affectionate demeanor of the little ones toward one another, was a
surprise to me. I had visited infant schools of my own and other
countries, where I had witnessed the display of human nature,
unrestrained by mature discretion and policy. Fights, quarrels, kicks,
screams, the unlawful seizure of toys and trinkets, and other
misdemeanors, were generally the principal exhibits. But here it was all
different. I thought, as I looked at them, that should a philanthropist
from the outside world have chanced unknowingly upon the playground of a
Mizora infant school, he would have believed himself in a company of
little angels.

At first, a kindness so universal impressed me as studied; a species of
refined courtesy in which the children were drilled. But time and
observation proved to me that it was the natural impulse of the heart,
an inherited trait of moral culture. In _my_ world, kindness and
affection were family possessions, extended occasionally to
acquaintances. Beyond this was courtesy only for the great busy bustling
mass of humanity called--"the world."

It must not be understood that there was no variety of character in
Mizora. Just as marked a difference was to be found there as elsewhere;
but it was elevated and ennobled. Its evil tendencies had been
eliminated. There were many causes that had made this possible. The
first, and probably the most influential, was the extreme cheapness of
living. Food and fuel were items of so small consequence, that poverty
had become unknown. Added to this, and to me by far the most vital
reason, was their system of free education. In contemplating the state
of enlightenment to which Mizora had attained, I became an enthusiast
upon the subject of education, and resolved, should I ever again reach
the upper world, to devote all my energies and ability to convincing the
governments of its importance. I believe it is the duty of every
government to make its schools and colleges, and everything appertaining
to education--FREE. To be always starved for knowledge is a more pitiful
craving than to hunger for bread. One dwarfs the body; the other the
mind.

The utmost care was bestowed upon the training and education of the
children. There was nothing that I met with in that beautiful and happy
country I longed more to bring with me to the inhabitants of my world,
than their manner of rearing children. The most scrupulous attention was
paid to their diet and exercise, both mental and physical. The result
was plump limbs, healthy, happy faces and joyous spirits. In all the
fifteen years that I spent in Mizora, I never saw a tear of sorrow fall
from children's eyes. Admirable sanitary regulations exist in all the
cities and villages of the land, which insures them pure air. I may
state here that every private-house looks as carefully to the condition
of its atmosphere, as we do to the material neatness of ours.

The only intense feeling that I could discover among these people was
the love between parent and child. I visited the theater where the
tragedy of the play was the destruction of a daughter by shipwreck in
view of the distracted mother. The scenery was managed with wonderful
realism. The thunder of the surf as it beat upon the shore, the
frightful carnival of wind and waves that no human power could still,
and the agony of the mother watching the vessel break to pieces upon the
rock and her child sink into the boiling water to rise no more, was
thrilling beyond my power to describe. I lost control of my feelings.
The audience wept and applauded; and when the curtain fell, I could
scarcely believe it had only been a play. The love of Mizora women for
their children is strong and deep. They consider the care of them a
sacred duty, fraught with the noblest results of life. A daughter of
scholarly attainments and noble character is a credit to her mother.
That selfish mother who looks upon her children as so many afflictions
is unknown to Mizora. If a mother should ever feel her children as
burdens upon her, she would never give it expression, as any dereliction
of duty would be severely rebuked by the whole community, if not
punished by banishment. Corporal punishment was unknown.

I received an invitation from a lady prominent in literature and science
to make her a visit. I accepted with gratification, as it would afford
me the opportunity I coveted to become acquainted with the domestic life
of Mizora, and perhaps penetrate its greatest mystery, for I must
confess that the singular dearth of anything and everything resembling
Man, never ceased to prey upon my curiosity.

The lady was the editor and proprietor of the largest and most widely
known scientific and literary magazine in the country. She was the
mother of eight children, and possessed one of the largest fortunes and
most magnificent residences in the country.

The house stood on an elevation, and was a magnificent structure of grey
granite, with polished cornices. The porch floors were of clouded
marble. The pillars supporting its roof were round shafts of the same
material, with vines of ivy, grape and rose winding about them, carved
and colored into perfect representations of the natural shrubs.

The drawing-room, which was vast and imposing in size and appearance,
had a floor of pure white marble. The mantels and window-sills were of
white onyx, with delicate vinings of pink and green. The floor was
strewn with richly colored mats and rugs. Luxurious sofas and chairs
comprised the only furniture. Each corner contained a piece of fine
statuary. From the centre of the ceiling depended a large gold basin of
beautiful design and workmanship, in which played a miniature fountain
of perfumed water that filled the air with a delicate fragrance. The
walls were divided into panels of polished and unpolished granite. On
the unpolished panels hung paintings of scenery. The dull, gray color of
the walls brought out in sharp and tasteful relief the few costly and
elegant adornments of the room: a placid landscape with mountains dimly
outlining the distance. A water scene with a boat idly drifting,
occupied by a solitary figure watching the play of variegated lights
upon the tranquil waters. Then came a wild and rugged mountain scene
with precipices and a foaming torrent. Then a concert of birds amusingly
treated.

The onyx marble mantel-piece contained but a single ornament--an
orchestra. A coral vase contained a large and perfect tiger lily, made
of gold. Each stamen supported a tiny figure carved out of ivory,
holding a musical instrument. When they played, each figure appeared
instinct with life, like the mythical fairies of my childhood; and the
music was so sweet, yet faint, that I readily imagined the charmed ring
and tiny dancers keeping time to its rhythm.

The drawing-room presented a vista of arches draped in curtains of a
rare texture, though I afterward learned they were spun glass. The one
that draped the entrance to the conservatory looked like sea foam with
the faint blush of day shining through it. The conservatory was in the
shape of a half sphere, and entirely of glass. From its dome, more than
a hundred feet above our heads, hung a globe of white fire that gave
forth a soft clear light. Terminating, as it did, the long vista of
arches with their transparent hangings of cobweb texture, it presented a
picture of magnificence and beauty indescribably.

The other apartments displayed the same taste and luxury. The
sitting-room contained an instrument resembling a grand piano.

The grounds surrounding this elegant home were adorned with natural and
artificial beauties, Grottoes, fountains, lakes, cascades, terraces of
flowers, statuary, arbors and foliage in endless variety, that rendered
it a miniature paradise. In these grounds, darting in and out among the
avenues, playing hide-and-seek behind the statuary, or otherwise amusing
themselves, I met eight lovely children, ranging from infancy to young
maidenhood. The glowing cheeks and eyes, and supple limbs spoke of
perfect health and happiness. When they saw their mother coming, they
ran to meet her, the oldest carrying the two-year old baby. The stately
woman greeted each with a loving kiss. She showed in loving glance and
action how dear they all were to her. For the time being she unbent,
and became a child herself in the interest she took in their prattle and
mirth. A true mother and happy children.

I discovered that each department of this handsome home was under the
care of a professional artist. I remarked to my hostess that I had
supposed her home was the expression of her own taste.

"So it is," she replied; "but it requires an equally well educated taste
to carry out my designs. The arrangement and ornamentation of my grounds
were suggested by me, and planned and executed by my landscape artist."

After supper we repaired to the general sitting-room. The eldest
daughter had been deeply absorbed in a book before we came in. She
closed and left it upon a table. I watched for an opportunity to
carelessly pick it up and examine it. It was a novel I felt sure, for
she appeared to resign it reluctantly out of courtesy to her guest. I
might, from it, gather some clue to the mystery of the male sex. I took
up the book and opened it. It was The Conservation of Force and The
Phenomena of Nature. I laid it down with a sigh of discomfiture.

The next evening, my hostess gave a small entertainment, and what was my
amazement, not to say offense, to perceive the cook, the chamber-maid,
and in fact all the servants in the establishment, enter and join in the
conversation and amusement. The cook was asked to sing, for, with the
exception of myself--and I tried to conceal it--no one appeared to take
umbrage at her presence. She sat down to the piano and sang a pretty
ballad in a charming manner. Her voice was cultivated and musical, as
are all the voices in Mizora, but it was lacking in the qualities that
make a great singer, yet it had a plaintive sweetness that was very
