
"My usual room, Malcom?"

"Yeah. Sure, Sam; sure." As Skinner walked off toward one of the other
buildings, Porter said: "Quite a load of baggage you have there, Mr.
Elshawe. Recording equipment?"

"Most of it," the reporter admitted. "Recording TV cameras, 16mm movie
cameras, tape recorders, 35mm still cameras--the works. I wanted to get
good coverage, and if you've got any men that you won't be using during
the take-off, I'd like to borrow them to help me operate this stuff."

"Certainly; certainly. Come on, Bill, let's get this stuff over to Mr.
Elshawe's suite."

       *       *       *       *       *

The suite consisted of three rooms, all very nicely appointed for a
place as far out in the wilderness as this. When Elshawe got his
equipment stowed away, Porter invited him to come out and take a look at
his pride and joy.

"The first real spaceship, Elshawe," he said energetically. "The first
real spaceship. The rocket is no more a spaceship than a rowboat is an
ocean-going vessel." He gestured toward the sleek, shining, metal ship.
"Of course, it's only a pilot model, you might say. I don't have
hundreds of millions of dollars to spend; I had to make do with what I
could afford. That's an old Grumman _Supernova_ stratojet. I got it
fairly cheap because I told 'em I didn't want the engines or the wings
or the tail assembly.

"But she'll do the job, all right. Isn't she a beauty?"

Elshawe had his small pocket recorder going; he might as well get all
this down. "Mr. Porter," he asked carefully, "just how does this vessel
propel itself? I understand that, at the trial, it was said that you
claimed it was an antigravity device, but that you denied it."

"Those idiots!" Porter exploded angrily. "Nobody understood what I was
talking about because they wouldn't listen! Antigravity! _Pfui!_ When
they learned how to harness electricity, did they call it
anti-electricity? When they built the first atomic reactor, did they
call it anti-atomic energy? A rocket works against gravity, but they
don't call _that_ antigravity, do they? My device works _with_ gravity,
not against it."

"What sort of device is it?" Elshawe asked.

"I call it the Gravito-Inertial Differential Polarizer," Porter said
importantly.

Elshawe was trying to frame his next question when Porter said: "I know
the name doesn't tell you much, but then, names never do, do they? You
know what a transformer does, but what does the name by itself convey?
Nothing, unless you know what it does in the first place. A cyclotron
cycles something, but what? A broadcaster casts something abroad--what?
And how?"

"I see. And the 'how' and 'what' is your secret, eh?"

"Partly. I can give you a little information, though. Suppose there were
only one planet in all space, and you were standing on its surface.
Could you tell if the planet were spinning or not? And, if so, how fast?
Sure you could; you could measure the so-called centrifugal force. The
same thing goes for a proton or electron or neutron or even a neutrino.
But, if it _is_ spinning, what is the spin relative to? To the particle
itself? That's obvious nonsense. Therefore, what is commonly called
'inertia' is as much a property of so-called 'empty space' as it is a
property of matter. My device simply utilizes spatial inertia by
polarizing it against the matter inertia of the ship, that's all."

"Hm-m-m," said Elshawe. As far as his own knowledge of science went,
that statement made no sense whatever. But the man's manner was
persuasive. Talking to him, Elshawe began to have the feeling that
Porter not only knew what he was talking about, but could actually do
what he said he was going to do.

"What's that?" Porter asked sharply, looking up into the sky.

Elshawe followed his gaze. "That" was a Cadillac aircar coming over a
ridge in the distance, its fans making an ever-louder throaty hum as it
approached. It settled down to an altitude of three feet as it neared,
and floated toward them on its cushion of air. On its side, Elshawe
could see the words, UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT, and beneath that, in
smaller letters, _Civil Aeronautics Authority_.

"Now what?" Porter muttered softly. "I haven't notified anyone of my
intentions yet--not officially."

"Sometimes those boys don't wait for official notification," Elshawe
said.

Porter glanced at him, his eyes narrowed. "You didn't say anything, did
you?"

"Look, Mr. Porter, I don't play that way," Elshawe said tightly. "As far
as I'm concerned, this is your show; I'm just here to get the story. You
did us a favor by giving us advance notice; why should we louse up your
show for you?"

"Sorry," Porter said brusquely. "Well, let's make a good show of it."

The CAA aircar slowed to a halt, its fans died, and it settled to its
wheels.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two neatly dressed, middle-aged men climbed out. Both were carrying
briefcases. Porter walked briskly toward them, a warm smile on his face;
Elshawe tagged along behind. The CAA men returned Porter's smile with
smiles that could only be called polite and businesslike.

Porter performed the introductions, and the two men identified
themselves as Mr. Granby and Mr. Feldstein, of the Civil Aeronautics
Authority.

"Can I help you, gentlemen?" Porter asked.

Granby, who was somewhat shorter, fatter, and balder than his partner,
opened his briefcase. "We're just here on a routine check, Mr. Porter.
If you can give us a little information...?" He let the half-question
hang in the air as he took a sheaf of papers from his briefcase.

"Anything I can do to help," Porter said.

Granby, looking at the papers, said: "In 1979, I believe you purchased a
Grumman _Supernova_ jet powered aircraft from Trans-American Airlines?
Is that correct?"

"That is correct," Porter agreed.

Granby handed one of the papers to Porter. "That is a copy of the
registration certificate. Is the registration number the same as it is
on your copy?"

[Illustration]

"I believe so," Porter said, looking at the number. "Yes, I'm sure it
is."

Granby nodded briskly. "According to our records, the machine was sold
as scrap. That is to say, it was not in an airworthy condition. It was,
in fact, sold without the engines. Is that correct?"

"Correct."

"May I ask if you still own the machine in question?"

Porter gave the man a look that accused Granby of being stupid or blind
or both. He pointed to the hulking fuselage of the giant aircraft.
"There it is."

Granby and Feldstein both turned to look at it as though they had never
noticed it before. "Ah, yes," Granby said, turning back. "Well, that's
about all there is to it." He looked at his partner. "It's obvious that
there's no violation here, eh, Feldstein?"

"Quite," said Feldstein in a staccato voice.

"Violation?" Porter asked. "What violation?"

"Well, nothing, really," Granby said, deprecatingly. "Just routine, as I
said. People have been known to buy aircraft as scrap and then repair
them and re-outfit them."

"Is that illegal?" Porter asked.

"No, no," said Granby hastily. "Of course not. But any ship so
re-outfitted and repaired must pass CAA inspection before it can leave
the ground, you understand. So we keep an eye on such transactions to
make sure that the law isn't violated."

"After three years?" Porter asked blandly.

"Well ... ah ... well ... you know how it is," Granby said nervously.
"These things take time. Sometimes ... due to ... clerical error, we
overlook a case now and then." He glanced at his partner, then quickly
looked back at Porter.

"As a matter of fact, Mr. Porter," Feldstein said in a flat, cold voice,
"in view of your record, we felt that the investigation at this time was
advisable. You bought a scrap missile and used it illegally. You can
hardly blame us for looking into this matter."

"No," said Porter. He had transferred his level gaze to the taller of
the two men, since it had suddenly become evident that Feldstein, not
Granby, was the stronger of the two.

"However," Feldstein went on, "I'm glad to see that we have no cause for
alarm. You're obviously not fitting that up as an aircraft. By the
way--just out of curiosity--what _are_ you doing with it?" He turned
around to look at the big fuselage again.

Porter sighed. "I had intended to hold off on this for a few days, but I
might as well let the cat out now. I intend to take off in that ship
this week end."

       *       *       *       *       *

Granby's eyes opened wide, and Feldstein spun around as though someone
had jabbed him with a needle. "_What?_"

Porter simply repeated what he had said. "I had intended to make
application to the Space Force for permission to test it," he added.

Feldstein looked at him blankly for a moment.

Then: "The _Space_ Force? Mr. Porter, civilian aircraft come under the
jurisdiction of the CAA."

"How's he going to fly it?" Granby asked. "No engines, no wings, no
control surfaces. It's silly."

"Rocket motors in the rear, of course," said Feldstein. "He's converted
the thing into a rocket."

