"You have our permission to try your scheme," he decided. "We will
invest you with the barony of Menstal."

       *       *       *       *       *

Konar paused at the castle gate. It had been pure chance, he knew, that
they had noticed this bit of equipment. The east coast earldom was
known, of course, but somehow, searchers had failed to discover that the
Earl held any equipment. Konar shrugged. He probably hadn't inherited
it, but had gotten it by chance, and his possession of the mentacom and
shield weren't commonly known.

"Well," he told himself, "we know about it now. I'll make a routine
pickup, and he won't have it any more."

A pair of weary sentries stood just inside the heavy doors. One shifted
his weight, to lean partially on his pike, partially against the
stonework. Idly, he looked out at the road which led through the
village, staring directly through the place where Konar stood.

Konar smiled to himself. "Good thing I've got my body shield modulated
for full refraction," he told himself. "He'd be a little startled if he
should see me."

The sentry yawned and relaxed still more, sliding down a little, till he
sat on a slightly protruding stone. His companion looked over at him.

"Old Marnio sees you like that," he muttered warningly, "makes lashes."

The other yawned again. "No matter. He'll be drowsing inside, where it's
warm. Be a long time before he comes out to relieve."

Konar nodded amusedly. The castle guard, he gathered, was a little less
than perfectly alert. This would be simple. He touched the controls of
his body shield to raise himself a few inches above the cobblestones,
and floated between the two sentries, going slowly to avoid making a
breeze.

Once inside, he decided to waste no more time. Of course, he would have
to wait inside the Earl's sleeping room till the man slept, but there
was no point in waiting out here. He passed rapidly through the outer
ward, ignoring the serfs and retainers who walked between the dwellings
nestled against the wall.

The inner gate had been closed for the night, so he lifted and went over
the wall.

He looked around, deciding that the Earl's living quarters would be in
the wooden building at the head of the inner courtyard. As he
approached, he frowned. The windows were tightly closed against the
night air. He would have to enter through the doors, and a young squire
blocked that way. The lad was talking to a girl.

There was nothing to do but wait, so Konar poised himself a few feet
from them. They'd go inside eventually, and he would float in after
them. Then, he could wait until the Earl was asleep.

After that, it would be a simple, practiced routine. The small hand
weapon he carried would render the obsolete body shield ineffective, if
necessary, and a light charge would assure that the man wouldn't awaken.
It would be the work of a few minutes to remove the equipment the man
had, to substitute the purely ornamental insignia, and to sweep out of
the room, closing the window after him. Konar hoped it would stay
closed. The Earl might be annoyed if it flew open, to expose him to the
dreaded night air.

In the morning, the Earl would waken, innocent of any knowledge of his
visitor. He would assume his talismans had simply lost their powers due
to some occult reason, as many others had during recent times.

Idly, Konar listened to the conversation of the two before him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The squire was telling the girl of his prowess in the hunt. Tomorrow, he
announced, he would accompany the Earl's honored guest from the eastern
land.

"And I'm the one that can show him the best coverts," he boasted. "His
Grace did well to assign me to the Duke."

The girl lifted her chin disdainfully. "Since you're such a great
hunter," she told him, "perchance you could find my brooch, which I lost
in yonder garden." She turned to point at the flower-bordered patch of
berry bushes at the other end of the court. In so doing, she faced
directly toward Konar.

She was a pretty girl, he thought. His respect for the young squire's
judgment grew. Any man would admire the slender, well featured face
which was framed within a soft cloud of dark, well combed hair. She
looked quite different from the usual girls one saw in this country.
Possibly, she was of eastern descent, Konar thought.

The girl's eyes widened and her mouth flew open, making her face
grotesquely gaunt. Abruptly, she was most unpretty. For a few
heartbeats, she stood rigidly, staring at Konar. Then she put her hands
to her face, her fingers making a rumpled mess of her hair. Her eyes,
fixed and with staring pupils, peered between her fingers. And she
screamed.

Konar felt suddenly faint, as though the girl's horror was somehow
communicated to him. The scream reverberated through his brain, rising
in an intolerable crescendo, blotting out other sensory perception. He
fought to regain control of his fading senses, but the castle court
blurred and he felt himself slipping into unconsciousness. He started
sliding down an endless, dark chute, ending in impenetrable blackness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly, the black dissolved into a flash of unbearably brilliant
light, and Konar's eyes closed tightly.

He was alertly conscious again, but his head ached, and he felt
reluctant, even unable, to open his eyes. Even closed, they ached from
the brilliant spots which snapped into being before them. He shuddered,
bringing his head down to his breast, gripping it with shaking hands,
and breathing with uneven effort.

This was like nothing he had ever met before. He would have to get back
to the others--find out what had happened to him--get help.

He concentrated on his eyelids, forcing them open. A crowd was
gathering, to look accusingly at the squire, who supported the fainting
girl in his arms. Her eyes fluttered weakly, and she struggled to regain
her feet.

"That awful thing! It's right over there!" She pointed at Konar.

Again, the unbearable ululation swept through his mind. Convulsively, he
swept his hand to his shield controls, fighting to remain conscious just
long enough to set his course up and away.

Before he was able to move and think with anything approaching
normality, he was far above the earth. He looked at the tiny castle far
below, noticing that from his altitude, it looked like some child's toy,
set on a sand hill, with bits of moss strewed about to make a realistic
picture. He shivered. His head still ached dully, and he could still
hear echoes of the horrified screaming.

"I don't know what it was," he told himself, "but I hope I never run
into anything like that again."

He located the hill which concealed the flier, and dropped rapidly
toward it.

As he entered, the pilot noticed him.

"Well, that was a quick mission," he commented. "How'd you----" He
looked at Konar's pain-lined face. "Hey, what's the matter, youngster?
You look like the last end of a bad week."

Konar tried to smile, but it didn't work very well.

"I ran into something, Barskor," he said. "Didn't complete my mission. I
don't know what happened, but I hope it never happens again."

Barskor looked at him curiously, then turned. "Chief," he called,
"something's gone wrong. Konar's been hurt."

       *       *       *       *       *

Meinora listened to Konar's story, then shook his head unhappily.

"You ran into a transvisor, I'm afraid. We didn't think there were any
on this planet." He paused. "There were definitely none discovered to
the west, and we looked for them. But now, we're close to the east
coast, and you said that girl looked eastern. The eastern continent may
be loaded with 'em."

Konar looked curious. "A transvisor? I never heard of them."

"They're rather rare. You only find them under special conditions, and
those conditions, we thought, are absent here. But when you find one,
you can be sure there are more. It runs in families. You see, they're
beings with a completely wild talent. They can be any age, any species,
or of any intelligence, but they're nearly always female. Visibility
refraction just doesn't work right for their senses, and they can cause
trouble." He looked closely at Konar.

"You were lucky to get away. A really terrified transvisor could kill
you, just as surely as a heavy caliber blaster."

Konar shivered. "I believe it. But why are they called 'transvisors'?"

"The name's somewhat descriptive, even if it is incomplete. As I said,
visibility refraction doesn't work right in their case. Somehow, they
pick up visual sensation right through a screen, regardless of its
adjustment. But things seen through a screen are distorted, and look
abnormal to them. Unless they're used to it, they get frightened when
they see a person with a refracted body shield. That's when the trouble
starts."

Konar nodded in understanding. "You mean, they transmit their fear?"

"They do. And they'll shock excite a mentacom, completely distorting its
wave pattern. If they remain conscious and scared, their fear is deadly
to its object." Meinora drew a deep breath.

"As I said, you were lucky. The girl fainted and let you get away." He
shrugged and turned to Barskor.

"We'll have to change our mode of operation," he added. "We'll pick up
the Earl's mentacom and belt at the hunt tomorrow. Find him alone,
knock him out with a paralyzer, and give him parahypnosis afterward.
It's not so good, but it's effective. But be sure you are alone, and
don't try to use visual refraction under any circumstance. Be better to
be seen, if it comes to that. There might be another transvisor around."
He kicked gently at the seat beside him.

"This was just a secondary job, done in passing," he said, "but it's a
good thing we found this out when we did. It'll change our whole primary
plan. Now, we'll have to slog it out the hard way. On no account can
anyone refract. It might be suicide. We'll have to talk to travelers. We
want to know what abnormal or unusual developments have taken place in
what country in the last twenty years. Then, we'll have to check them
out. We've got a lot of work to do." He looked around. "Ciernar."

"Yes, sir?" The communications operator looked up.

"Send in a report on this to Group. Make it 'operational.'"

[Illustration]

Konar tilted his head a little. "Say, chief, you said the transvisor's
fear was amplified by my mentacom. What if I wasn't wearing one?"

"You wouldn't feel a thing," Meinora smiled. "But don't get any ideas.
Without amplification, you couldn't control your shield properly. You'd
have protection, but your refraction control's entirely mental, and
levitation direction depends on mental, not physical control, remember?"

"But how about you? You don't use amplification. Neither do several of
the other team chiefs."

Meinora shrugged. "No," he admitted, "we don't need it, except in
abnormal circumstances. But we don't go around scaring transvisors. They
can't kill us, but they can make us pretty sick. You see we're a little
sensitive in some ways." He shook his head. "No, the only advantage I've
got is that I can spot a transvisor by her mental pattern--if I get
close enough. There's a little side radiation that can be detected,
though it won't pass an amplifier. When you've felt it once, you'll
never forget it. Makes you uncomfortable." He smiled wryly.

"And you can believe me," he added, "when I do get close to a
transvisor, I'm very, very careful not to frighten her."

       *       *       *       *       *

Winter passed, and spring, and summer came. Nal Gerda, Officer of the
Guard, stood on the small wharf below the old watchtower. He looked
across the narrows, examined the cliff opposite him, then looked upward
at the luminous sky. There were a few small clouds, whose fleecy
whiteness accentuated the clear blue about them. Brilliant sunshine
bathed the wharf and tower, driving away the night mists.

It would not be long before the new guard came down the cliff. Gerda
stretched and drew a deep breath, savoring the summer morning air. Now,
it was pleasant, a happy contrast to the sullen skies and biting winter
winds he had faced a few short months ago.

For a time, he looked at the green atop the cliffs, then he transferred
his attention upriver, toward the bend where the Nalen came out of the
pass to blow between the iron cliffs of Menstal. The water flowed
swiftly in the narrows, throwing off white glints as its ripples caught
the sunlight, then deepening to a dark blue where it came into the
shadow of the cliffs.

A sudden call sounded from the lookout far above, and the officer
wheeled about, looking to the great chain which stretched from tower to
cliff, to block river traffic. It was in proper position, and Gerda
looked back at the bend.

As he watched, a long, low barge drifted into sight, picking up speed as
it came into the rapid current. Polemen balanced themselves alertly in
the bow, their long sticks poised to deflect their course from any
threatening rocks.

Gerda threw off the almost poetical admiration of beauty that had
possessed him a moment before and faced the guard house, from whence
came a scuffle of feet and the clank of arms, to tell of the guard's
readiness.
