the year 2100 when the Ringwave propulsion-communication principle was
discovered. That principle has served men since."

Farrell stared in blank disbelief at the anomalous craft on the screen.
Primitive, as Stryker had said, was not the word for it: clumsily ovoid,
studded with torpedo domes and turrets and bristling at either end with
propulsion tubes, it lay at the center of its square like a rusted relic
of a past largely destroyed and all but forgotten. What a magnificent
disregard its builders must have had, he thought, for their lives and
the genetic purity of their posterity! The sullen atomic fires banked in
that oxidizing hulk--

Stryker said plaintively, "If you're right, Gib, then we're more in the
dark than ever. How could a Terran-built ship eleven hundred years old
get _here_?"

Gibson, absorbed in his chess-player's contemplation of alternatives,
seemed hardly to hear him.

"Logic or not-logic," Gibson said. "If it's a Terran artifact, we can
discover the reason for its presence. If not--"

"_Any problem posed by one group of human beings_," Stryker quoted his
Handbook, "_can be resolved by any other group, regardless of ideology
or conditioning, because the basic perceptive abilities of both must be
the same through identical heredity_."

"If it's an imitation, and this is another Hymenop experiment in
condition ecology, then we're stumped to begin with," Gibson finished.
"Because we're not equipped to evaluate the psychology of alien
motivation. We've got to determine first which case applies here."

       *       *       *       *       *

He waited for Farrell's expected irony, and when the navigator
forestalled him by remaining grimly quiet, continued.

"The obvious premise is that a Terran ship must have been built by
Terrans. Question: Was it flown here, or built here?"

"It couldn't have been built here," Stryker said. "Alphard Six was
surveyed just before the Bees took over in 3025, and there was nothing
of the sort here then. It couldn't have been built during the two and a
quarter centuries since; it's obviously much older than that. It was
flown here."

"We progress," Farrell said dryly. "Now if you'll tell us _how_, we're
ready to move."

"I think the ship was built on Terra during the Twenty-second Century,"
Gibson said calmly. "The atomic wars during that period destroyed
practically all historical records along with the technology of the
time, but I've read well-authenticated reports of atomic-driven ships
leaving Terra before then for the nearer stars. The human race climbed
out of its pit again during the Twenty-third Century and developed the
technology that gave us the Ringwave. Certainly no atomic-powered ships
were built after the wars--our records are complete from that time."

Farrell shook his head at the inference. "I've read any number of
fanciful romances on the theme, Gib, but it won't stand up in practice.
No shipboard society could last through a thousand-year space voyage.
It's a physical and psychological impossibility. There's got to be some
other explanation."

       *       *       *       *       *

Gibson shrugged. "We can only eliminate the least likely alternatives
and accept the simplest one remaining."

"Then we can eliminate this one now," Farrell said flatly. "It entails a
thousand-year voyage, which is an impossibility for any gross reaction
drive; the application of suspended animation or longevity or a
successive-generation program, and a final penetration of
Hymenop-occupied space to set up a colony under the very antennae of the
Bees. Longevity wasn't developed until around the year 3000--Lee here
was one of the first to profit by it, if you remember--and suspended
animation is still to come. So there's one theory you can forget."

"Arthur's right," Stryker said reluctantly. "An atomic-powered ship
_couldn't_ have made such a trip, Gib. And such a lineal-descendant
project couldn't have lasted through forty generations, speculative
fiction to the contrary--the later generations would have been too far
removed in ideology and intent from their ancestors. They'd have adapted
to shipboard life as the norm. They'd have atrophied physically, perhaps
even have mutated--"

"And they'd never have fought past the Bees during the Hymenop invasion
and occupation," Farrell finished triumphantly. "The Bees had better
detection equipment than we had. They'd have picked this ship up long
before it reached Alphard Six."

"But the ship wasn't here in 3000," Gibson said, "and it is now.
Therefore it must have arrived at some time during the two hundred
years of Hymenop occupation and evacuation."

Farrell, tangled in contradictions, swore bitterly. "But why should the
Bees let them through? The three domes on Five are over two hundred
years old, which means that the Bees were here before the ship came. Why
didn't they blast it or enslave its crew?"

"We haven't touched on all the possibilities," Gibson reminded him. "We
haven't even established yet that these people were never under Hymenop
control. Precedent won't hold always, and there's no predicting nor
evaluating the motives of an alien race. We never understood the
