and--above all--avoid blowing your top? Boy--if you queer this...!"

Tiflin's mouth was open. "You kidding?"

"No!"

Tiflin gulped, and actually looked subdued. "Okay, Frank. Be cavalier.
Hell, I'd croak before I'd mess this up...!"

By evening, everybody had visited J. John Reynolds, including Charlie
Reynolds and Jig Hollins. Nelsen got the backslapping treatment.

Charlie sighed, rubbed his head, then grinned with immense relief.
"That's a load off," he said. "Glad to have somebody else fix it.
Congrats, Frank. I wonder if Otto has got any champagne to go with the
hotdogs...?"

Otto had a bottle--enough for a taste, all around. Eileen kissed Frank
impulsively. "You ought to get _real_ smart," she said.

"Uh-huh," he answered. "Now let's get some beer--more our speed."

But none of them overdid the beer either...

Just after New Year's they had eight bubbs completed, tested, folded
carefully according to government manuals, and stowed in an attic they
had rented over Otto's place. They had seven ionics finished and stored.
More parts and materials were arriving. The air-restorers were going to
be the toughest and most expensive to make. They were the really vital
things to a spaceman. Every detail had to be carefully fitted and
assembled. The chlorophane contained costly catalytic agents.

A winter of hard work was ahead, but they figured on a stretch of clear
sailing, now. They didn't expect anyone to shake their morale, least of
all a nice, soft-spoken guy in U.S.S.F. greys. Harv Diamond was the one
man from Jarviston who had gotten into the Space Force. He used to hang
around Hendricks'.

He dropped in on a Sunday evening, when the whole Bunch was in the shop.
They were around him at once, like around a hero, shouting and
questioning. There were mottled patches on his hands, and he wore dark
glasses, but he seemed at ease and happy.

"There have been some changes in the old joint, huh, Paul?" he said. "So
you guys are one of the outfits building its own gear... Looks pretty
good... Of course you can get some bulky supplies cheaper on the Moon,
because everything from Earth has to be boosted into space against a
gravity six times as great as the lunar, which raises the price like
hell. Water and oxygen, for instance. Peculiar, on the dry, almost
airless Moon. But roasting water out of lunar gypsum rock is an easy
trick. And oxygen can be derived from water by simple electrolysis."

"Hell, we know all that, Harv," Ramos laughed.

So Harv Diamond gave them the lowdown on the shortage of girls--yet--in
Serenitatis Base, on the Moon. Just the same, it was growing like corn
in July, and was already a pretty good leave-spot, if you liked to look
around. Big vegetable gardens under sealed, stellene domes. Metal
refineries, solar power plants, plastic factories and so forth, already
in operation... But there was nothing like Pallastown, on little Pallas,
out in the Asteroid Belt... Mars? That was the heebie-jeebie planet.

Gimp asked Harv how much leave he had on Earth.

"Not long, I guess," Harv laughed. "I've got to check back at the Force
Hospital in Minneapolis tomorrow..."

But right away it was evident that his thoughts had been put on the
wrong track. His easy smile faded. He gasped and looked kind of
surprised. He hung onto Paul's old swivel chair, in which he was
sitting, as if he was suddenly terribly afraid of falling. His eyes
closed tight, and there was a funny gurgle in his throat.

The Bunch surrounded him, wanting to help, but he half recovered.

"Even a good Space Force bubb, manufactured under rigid government
specifications, can tear," he said in a thick tone. "If some jerk,
horsing around with another craft, bumps you even lightly.
Compartmentation helps, but you can still be unlucky. I was
fortunate--almost buttoned into my Archer Six, already. _But did you
ever see a person slowly swell up and turn purple, with frothy bubbles
forming under the skin, while his blood boils in the Big Vacuum?_ That
was my buddy, Ed Kraft..."

Lieutenant Harvey Diamond gasped. Huge, strangling hiccups came out of
his throat. His eyes went wild. The Kuzaks had to hold him, while Mitch
Storey ran to phone Doc Miller. A shot quieted Diamond somewhat, and an
ambulance took him away.

That incident shook up the Bunch a little. A worse one came on a Tuesday
evening, when not everybody was at the shop.

The TV was on, showing the interior of the _Far Side_, one of those big,
comparatively luxurious tour bubbs that take rubbernecks that can afford
it on a swing around the Moon. The _Far Side_ was just coming into
orbit, where tending skip gliders would take off the passengers for
grounding at the New Mexico spaceport. Aboard the big bubb you could see
people moving about, or sitting with drinks on curved benches. A girl
was playing soft music on a tiny, lightweight piano.

There wasn't any sign of trouble except that the TV channel went dead
for a second, until a stand by commercial with singing cartoon figures
cut in.

But Frank Nelsen somehow put his hands to his head, as if to protect it.

Mitch Storey, with a big piece of stellene in his brown mitts, stood up
very straight.

Gimp, at a bench, handed a tiny capacitor to Eileen, and started
counting, slow and even. "One--two--three--four--five--"

"What's with you slobs?" Jig Hollins wanted to know.

"Dunno--we're nuts, maybe," Gimp answered. "Ten--eleven--twelve--"

Charlie Reynolds and Paul Hendricks were alert, too.

Then a big, white light trembled on the thin snow beyond the windows,
turning the whole night landscape into weird day. The tearing, crackling
roar was delayed. By the time the sound arrived, all of the stellene in
the _Far Side_ must have been consumed. It had no resistance to
atmospheric friction at five miles per second, or faster. There were
just the heavier metallic details left to fall and burn. Far off, there
was a thumping crash that seemed to make the ground sag and recover.

"Here we go!" Charlie Reynolds yelled.

In his and Hollins' cars, they got to the scene of the fragment's fall,
two miles out of town, by following a faint, fading glow. They were
almost the first to reach the spot. Tiflin and Ramos, who had been
working on their jobs, came with their boss, along with a trailing horde
of cars from town.

Flashlights probed into the hot impact pit in the open field, where the
frozen soil had seemed to splash like a liquid. Crumpled in the hole was
a lump of half-fused sheet steel, wadded up like paper. It was probably
part of the _Far Side_'s central hub. Magnesium and aluminum, of which
the major portions had certainly been made, were gone; they could never
have endured the rush through the atmosphere.

Ramos got down into the pit. After a minute, he gave a queer cry, and
climbed out again. His mitten smoked as he opened it, to show something.

"It must have been behind a heavy object," he said very seriously, not
like his usual self at all. "That broke the molecular impact with the
air--like a ceramic nose cone. Kept it from burning up completely."

The thing was a lady's silver compact, from which a large piece had been
fused away. A bobbypin had gotten welded to it.

Old Paul Hendricks cursed. Poor Two-and-Two moved off sickly, with a
palm clamped over his mouth.

Eileen Sands gasped, and seemed about to yell. But she got back most of
her poise. Women have nursed the messily ill and dying, and have tended
ghastly wounds during ages of time. So they know the messier side of
biology as well as men.

Ramos gave the pathetic relic to a cop who was trying to take charge.

"Somebody must have goofed bad on the _Far Side_, for it to miss orbit
like that," Ramos grated. "Or was something wrong, beforehand? Their TV
transmitter went out--we were watching, too, at the garage... You can
see the aurora--the Northern Lights... Those damn solar storms might
have loused up instruments...! But who'll ever know, now...?"

The Kuzaks, who had been to an Athletic Association meeting at Tech, had
grabbed a ride out with the stream of cars from town. Both looked grim.
"No use hanging around here, Charlie," Art urged. "Let's get back to the
shop."

Before he drove off, Jig Hollins tried to chuckle mockingly at
everybody, especially Charlie Reynolds. "Time to think about keeping a
nice safe job in the Jarviston powerhouse--eh, Reynolds? And staying
near granddad?"

"We're supposed not to be children, Hollins," Charlie shot back at him
from his car window. "We're supposed to have known long ago that these
things happen, and to have adjusted ourselves to our chances."

"Ninnies that get scared first thing, when the facts begin to show!"
Tiflin snarled. "Cripes--let's don't be like soft bugs under boards!"

"You're right, Tif," Frank Nelsen agreed, feeling that for once the
ne'er-do-well--the nuisance--might be doing them all some good. Frank
could feel how Tiflin shamed some of the quiver out of his own insides,
and helped bring back pride and strength.

The _Far Side_ disaster had been pretty disturbing, however. And next
day, Thursday, the blue envelopes came to the members of the Bunch. A
printed card with a typed-in date, was inside each: "Report for
space-fitness tests at Space-Medicine Center, February 15th..."

"Just a couple of weeks!" Two-and-Two was moaning that night. "How'll I
get through, with my courses only half-finished. You've gotta help me
some more, people! With that stinking math...!"

So equipment building was almost suspended, while the Bunch crammed and
sweated and griped and cursed. But maybe now some of them wouldn't care
so very much if they flunked.

Two loaded automobiles took off for Minneapolis on the night before the
ordeal. The Bunch put up at motels to be fresh the next morning. Maybe
some of them even slept.

At the Center, there were more forms to fill out. Then complete
physicals started the process. Next came the written part. Right off,
Frank Nelsen knew that this was going a familiar way, which had
happened quite often at Tech: Struggle through a tough course, hear dire
promises of head-cracking questions and math problems in the final quiz.
Then the switch--the easy letdown.

The remainder of the tests proceeded like assembly-line operations, each
person taking each alone, in the order of his casual position in the
waiting line.

First there was the dizzying, mind-blackening centrifuge test, to see if
you could take enough Gs of acceleration, and still be alert enough to
fit a simple block puzzle together.

Then came the free fall test, from the top of a thousand foot tower. A
parachute-arrangement broke your speed at the bottom of the track. As in
the centrifuge, instruments incorporated into the fabric of a coverall
suit with a hood, were recording your emotional and bodily reactions.
The medics wanted to be sure that your panic level was high and cool.
Nelsen didn't find free fall very hard to take, either.

Right after that came the scramble to see how fast you could get into an
Archer, unfold and inflate a bubb and rig its gear.

"That's all, Mister," the observer with the camera told Nelsen in a
bored tone.

"Results will be mailed to your home within twelve hours--Mr. Nelsen," a
girl informed him as she read his name from a printed card.

So the Bunch returned tensely to Jarviston, with more time to sweat out.
Everybody looked at Gimp Hines--and then looked away. Even Jig Hollins
didn't make any comments. Gimp, himself, seemed pretty subdued.

The small, green space-fitness cards were arriving at Jarviston
addresses in the morning.

Near the end of the noon hour, Two-and-Two Baines was waving his around
the Tech campus, having gone home to look, as of course everybody else
who could, had also done. "Cripes!--Hi-di-ho--here it is!" he was
yelling at the frosty sky, when Frank came with his own ticket.

The Kuzaks had theirs, and were calm about it. Eileen Sands' card was
tucked neatly into her sweater pocket, as she joined those who were
waiting for the others on the front steps of Tech's Carver Hall.

Ramos had to make a noise. "See what Santa brought the lady! But he
didn't forget your Uncle Miguel, either--see! We're in, kid--be happy.
Yippee!"

He tried to whirl her in some crazy dance, but Gimp was swinging along
the slushy walk on his crutches. His grin was a mile wide. Mitch Storey
was with him, looking almost as pleased.

"Guess legs don't count, Out There," Gimp was saying. "Or patched
tickers, either, as long as they work good! I kind of figured on it...
Hey--I don't want to ride anybody's shoulders, Ramos--cut it out...! We
won't know about Charlie and Jig till tonight, when they come to Paul's
from their jobs. But I don't think that there's any sweat for them,
either... Only--where's Tif? He should be back by now from where he
lives with his father..."

Tiflin didn't show up at Hendricks' at all that evening, or at his
garage job either. Ramos phoned from the garage to confirm that.

"And he's not at home," Ramos added. "The boss sent me to check. His Old
Man says he doesn't know where Tif is and cares less."

"Just leave Tif be," Mitch Storey said softly.

"Maybe that's best, at that," old Paul growled. "Only I hope the darned
idiot doesn't cook himself up another jam..."

They all knew then, for sure, what had happened. Right now, Glen Tiflin
was wandering alone, somewhere, cursing and suffering. As likely as not,
he'd start hitchhiking across the country, to try to get away from
himself... Somewhere the test instruments--which had seemed so
lenient--had tripped him up, spotting the weakness that he had tried to
fight. Temper, nerves--emotional instability. So there was no green card
for Tif, to whom space was a kind of Nirvana...

The Bunch worked on with their preparations. Things got done all right,
but the fine edge of enthusiasm had dulled. Jig Hollins flung his usual
remarks, with their derisive undertone, around for a couple of weeks.
Then he came into the shop with a girl who had a pretty, rather blank
face, and a mouth that could twist with stubborn anger.

"Meet Minnie," Jig said loudly. "She is one reason why I have decided
that I've had enough of this kid stuff. I gave it a whirl--for kicks.
But who, with any sense, wants to go batting off to Mars or the
Asteroids? That's for the birds, the crackpots. Wife, house, kids--right
in your own home town--that's the only sense there is. Minnie showed me
that, and we're gonna get married!"

The Bunch looked at Jig Hollins. He was swaggering. He was making sour
fun of them, but in his eyes there were other signs, too. A pleading:
Agree with me--back me up--quit! Don't see through me--it's not so,
anyhow! Don't say I'm hiding behind a skirt... Above all, don't call me
yellow! I'm _not_ yellow, I tell you! I'm tough Jig Hollins! You're the
dopes!...

Frank Nelsen spoke for the others. "We understand, Jig. We'll be getting
you a little wedding present. Later on, maybe we'll be able to send you
something really good. Best of luck..."

They let Jig Hollins and his Minnie go. They felt their contempt and
pity, and their lifting, wild pride. Maybe Jig Hollins, wise guy and big
mouth, boosted their own selves quite a bit, by contrast.

"Poor sap," Joe Kuzak breathed. "Who's he kidding--us or himself, or
neither...?"

Soon Eileen began to show symptoms: Sighs. A restlessness. Sudden angry
pouts that would change as quickly to the secret smiles of reverie,
while she hummed a soft tune to herself, and rose on her toes, dancing a
few steps. Speculative looks at Nelsen, or the other guys around her.
Maybe she envied men. Her eyes would narrow thoughtfully for a second.
Then she might look scared and very young, as if her thoughts frightened
her. But the expression of determined planning would return.

After about ten days of this, Gimp asked, "What's with you, Eileen? You
don't usually say much, but now there must be something else."

She tossed down a fistful of waste with which she had been wiping her
hands--she had been cementing segments of the last of the ten bubbs they
would make--more than they needed, now, but spares might be useful.

"Okay, all," she said briskly. "You should hear this, without any
further delay. I'm clearing out, too. Reasons? Well--at least since Tif
flunked his emotional I've been getting the idea that possibly I've been
playing on a third-rate team. No offense, please--I don't really believe
it's so, and if it isn't so you're tough enough not to be hurt. Far
worse--I'm a girl. So why am I trying to do things in a man's way, when
there are means that are made for me? I'm all of twenty-two. I've got
nobody except an aunt in Illinois. Meanwhile, out in New Mexico, there's
a big spaceport, and a lot of the right people who can help me. I'll bet
I can get where you want to go, before you do. Tell Mr. J. John Reynolds
that he can have my equipment--most of which he paid for. But perhaps
I'll still be able to give him his ten percent."

"Eileen! Cripes, what are you talking about?" This was Ramos yelping, as
if the clown could be hurt, after all.

"I don't mean anything so bad, Fun Boy," she said more gently. "Lots of
men are remarkably chivalrous. But no arguments. Now that I have
declared my intentions, I'll pick up and pull out of here this
minute--taking some pleasant memories with me, as well as a
space-fitness card. You're all good, plodding joes--honest. But there'll
be a plane west from Minneapolis tomorrow."

She was getting into her blazer. Even Ramos saw that arguments would be
futile. Frank Nelsen's throat ached suddenly, as if at sins of omission.
But that was wrong. Eileen Sands was too old for him, anyhow.

"So long, you characters," she said. "Good luck. Don't follow me
outside. Maybe I'll see you, someplace."

"Right, Eileen--we'll miss yuh," Storey said. "And we better sure enough
see you that someplace!"

There were ragged shouts. "Good luck, kid. So long, Eileen..."

She was gone--a small, scared, determined figure, dressed like a boy. On
her wrist was a watch that might get pawned for a plane ticket.

Ramos was unbelievably glum for days. But he worked harder building
air-restorers than most of the Bunch had ever worked before. "We're
hardcore, now--we'll last," he would growl. "Final, long lap--March,
April and May--with no more interruptions. In June, when our courses at
Tech are finished, we'll be ready to roll..."

That was about how it turned out. Near the end of May, the Bunch lined
up in the shop, the ten blastoff drums they had made, including two
spares. The drums were just large tubes of sheet magnesium, in which
about everything that each man would need was compactly stowed: Archer
Five, bubb, sun-powered ionic drive motor, air-restorer,
moisture-reclaimer, flasks of oxygen and water, instruments, dehydrated
foods, medicines, a rifle, instruction manuals, a few clothes, and
various small, useful items. Everything was cut to minimum, to keep the
weight down. The lined up drums made a utilitarian display that looked
rather grim.

The gear was set out like this, for the safety inspectors to look at
during the next few days, and provide their stamp of approval.

The blastoff tickets had also been purchased--for June tenth.

"Well, how do you think the Bunch should travel to New Mexico, Paul?"
Frank Nelsen joshed.

"Like other Bunches, I guess," Paul Hendricks laughed. "A couple of
moving vans should do the trick..."




III


On June first, ten days before blastoff, David Lester came back to the
shop, sheepishness, pleasure and worry showing in his face.

"I cleared up matters at home, guys," he said. "And I went to
Minneapolis and obtained one of these." He held up the same kind of
space-fitness card that the others had.

"The tests are mostly passive," he explained further. "Anybody can be
whirled in a centrifuge, or take a fall. That is somewhat simpler, in
