Then his face took on an expression of contrition. "I hope, venerable
one, that you will not think this miserable creature too bold if he asks
for your papers?"

"Not at all," said Candron, taking a billfold from his inside coat
pocket. "Such is the law, and the law of the People of China is to be
always respected."

He opened the billfold and spread the papers for the clerk's inspection.
They were all there--identification, travel papers, everything. The
clerk looked them over and jotted down the numbers in the register book
on the desk, then turned the book around. "Your chop, venerable one."

The "chop" was a small stamp bearing the ideograph which indicated the
name Candron was using. Illiteracy still ran high in China because of
the difficulty in memorizing the tens of thousands of ideographs which
made up the written language, so each man carried a chop to imprint his
name. Officially, China used the alphabet, spelling out the Chinese
words phonetically--and, significantly, they had chosen the Latin
alphabet of the Western nations rather than the Cyrillic of the Soviets.
But old usages die hard.

Candron imprinted the ideograph on the page, then, beside it, he wrote
"Ying Lee" in Latin characters.

The clerk's respect for this old man went up a degree. He had expected
to have to put down the Latin characters himself. "Our humble
establishment is honored by your esteemed presence, Mr. Ying," he said.
"For how long will it be your pleasure to bestow this honor upon us?"

"My poor business, unimportant though it is, will require it least one
week; at the most, ten days." Candron said, knowing full well that
twenty-four hours would be his maximum, if everything went well.

"It pains me to ask for money in advance from so honorable a gentleman
as yourself," said the clerk, "but such are the rules. It will be seven
and a half yuan per day, or fifty yuan per week."

Candron put five ten-yuan notes on the counter. Since the readjustment
of the Chinese monetary system, the yuan had regained a great deal of
its value.

       *       *       *       *       *

A young man who doubled as bellhop and elevator operator took Candron up
to the third floor. Candron tipped him generously, but not
extravagantly, and then proceeded to unpack his suitcase. He hung the
suits in the closet and put the shirts in the clothes chest. By the time
he was through, it looked as though Ying Lee was prepared to stay for a
considerable length of time.

Then he checked his escape routes, and found two that were satisfactory.
Neither led downward to the ground floor, but upward, to the roof. The
hotel was eight stories high, higher than any of the nearby buildings.
No one would expect him to go up.

Then he gave his attention to the room itself. He went over it
carefully, running his fingers gently over the walls and the furniture,
noticing every detail with his eyes. He examined the chairs, the low
bed, the floor--everything.

He was not searching for spy devices. He didn't care whether there were
any there or not. He wanted to know that room. To know it, become
familiar with it, make it a part of him.

Had there been any spy devices, they would have noticed nothing unusual.
There was only an old man there, walking slowly around the room,
muttering to himself as though he were thinking over something important
or, perhaps, merely reminiscing on the past, mentally chewing over his
memories.

He did not peer, or poke, or prod. He did not appear to be looking for
anything. He picked up a small, cheap vase and looked at it as though it
were an old friend; he rubbed his hand over the small writing desk, as
though he had written many things in that familiar place; he sat down in
a chair and leaned back in it and caressed the armrests with his palms
as though it were an honored seat in his own home. And, finally, he
undressed, put on his nightclothes, and lay down on the bed, staring at
the ceiling with a soft smile on his face. After ten minutes or so, his
eyes closed and remained that way for three-quarters of an hour.

Unusual? No. An old man must have his rest. There is nothing unusual
about an old man taking a short nap.

When he got up again, Spencer Candron was thoroughly familiar with the
room. It was home, and he loved it.

Nightfall found the honorable Mr. Ying a long way from his hotel. He
had, as his papers had said, gone to do business with a certain Mr. Yee,
had haggled over the price of certain goods, and had been unsuccessful
in establishing a mutual price. Mr. Yee was later to be able to prove
to the People's Police that he had done no business whatever with Mr.
Ying, and had had no notion whatever that Mr. Ying's business
connections in Nanking were totally nonexistent.

But, on that afternoon, Mr. Ying had left Mr. Yee with the impression
that he would return the next day with, perhaps, a more amenable
attitude toward Mr. Yee's prices. Then Mr. Ying Lee had gone to a
restaurant for his evening meal.

He had eaten quietly by himself, reading the evening edition of the
Peiping _Truth_ as he ate his leisurely meal. Although many of the
younger people had taken up the use of the knife and fork, the venerable
Mr. Ying clung to the chopsticks of an earlier day, plied expertly
between the thumb and forefinger of his right hand. He was not the only
elderly man in the place who did so.

Having finished his meal and his newspaper in peace, Mr. Ying Lee
strolled out into the gathering dusk. By the time utter darkness had
come, and the widely-spaced street lamps of the city had come alive, the
elderly Mr. Ying Lee was within half a mile of the most important group
of buildings in China.

The Peiping Explosion, back in the sixties, had almost started World War
Three. An atomic blast had leveled a hundred square miles of the city
and started fires that had taken weeks to extinguish. Soviet Russia had
roared in its great bear voice that the Western Powers had attacked, and
was apparently on the verge of coming to the defense of its Asian
comrade when the Chinese government had said irritatedly that there had
been no attack, that traitorous and counterrevolutionary Chinese agents
of Formosa had sabotaged an atomic plant, nothing more, and that the
honorable comrades of Russia would be wise not to set off anything that
would destroy civilization. The Russian Bear grumbled and sheathed its
claws.

The vast intelligence system of the United States had reported that (A)
the explosion had been caused by carelessness, not sabotage, but the
Chinese had had to save face, and (B) the Soviet Union had no intention
of actually starting an atomic war at that time. If she had, she would
have shot first and made excuses afterwards. But she _had_ hoped to make
good propaganda usage of the blast.

The Peiping Explosion had caused widespread death and destruction, yes;
but it had also ended up being the fastest slum-clearance project on
record. The rebuilding had taken somewhat more time than the clearing
had taken, but the results had been a new Peiping--a modern city in
every respect. And nowhere else on Earth was there one hundred square
miles of _completely_ modern city. Alteration takes longer than starting
from scratch if the techniques are available; there isn't so much dead
wood to clear away.

In the middle of the city, the Chinese government had built its
equivalent of the Kremlin--nearly a third of a square mile of
ultra-modern buildings designed to house every function of the Communist
Government of China. It had taken slave labor to do the job, but the job
had been done.

A little more than half a mile on a side, the area was surrounded by a
wall that had been designed after the Great Wall of China. It stood
twenty-five feet high and looked very quaint and picturesque.

And somewhere inside it James Ch'ien, American-born physicist, was being
held prisoner. Spencer Candron, alias Mr. Ying Lee, had to get him out.

Dr. Ch'ien was important. The government of the United States knew he
was important, but they did not yet know _how_ important he was.

       *       *       *       *       *

Man had already reached the Moon and returned. The Martian expedition
had landed safely, but had not yet returned. No one had heard from the
Venusian expedition, and it was presumed lost. But the Moon was being
