
          4. What is often done with ripe grapes?

          5. What happens after the grape-juice has stood a
          short time?

          6. Why would the changed grape-juice not be good
          to use in making jelly?

          7. Into what is the sugar in the juice changed?

          8. What becomes of the gas?

          9. What becomes of the alcohol?

          10. What is gone and what left?

          11. What is alcohol?

          12. What does alcohol do to those who drink it?

          13. When are grapes good food?

          14. When is grape-juice not a safe drink?

          15. Why?

          16. What is this changed grape-juice called?

          17. What is wine?

          18. From what is wine made?

          19. What do people sometimes think of home-made
          wines?

          20. How can alcohol be there when none has been
          put into it?

          21. What does alcohol make the person who takes it
          want?

          22. What is such a one called?

          23. What has wine done to many persons?

          24. What does alcohol hurt?

          25. How does it change a person?

          26. Are you sure you will not become a drunkard if
          you drink wine?

          27. Why should you not drink it?

          28. What is cider made from?

          29. What soon happens to apple-juice?

          30. How may vinegar be made?

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote A: This gas is called car bon'ic acid gas.]




CHAPTER V.

BEER.


[Illustration: A]LCOHOL is often made from grains as well as from fruit.
The grain has starch instead of sugar.

If the starch in your mother's starch-box at home should be changed into
sugar, you would think it a very strange thing.

Every year, in the spring-time, many thousand pounds of starch are
changed into sugar in a hidden, quiet way, so that most of us think
nothing about it.


STARCH AND SUGAR.

All kinds of grain are full of starch.

If you plant them in the ground, where they are kept moist and warm,
they begin to sprout and grow, to send little roots down into the earth,
and little stems up into the sunshine.

These little roots and stems must be fed with sugar; thus, in a wise
way, which is too wonderful for you to understand, as soon as the seed
begins to sprout, its starch begins to turn into sugar.

[Illustration]

If you should chew two grains of wheat, one before sprouting and one
after, you could tell by the taste that this is true.

Barley is a kind of grain from which the brewer makes beer.

He must first turn its starch into sugar, so he begins by sprouting his
grain.

Of course he does not plant it in the ground, because it would need to
be quickly dug up again.

He keeps it warm and moist in a place where he can watch it, and stop
the sprouting just in time to save the sugar, before it is used to feed
the root and stem. This sprouted grain is called malt.

The brewer soaks it in plenty of water, because the grain has not water
in itself, as the grape has.

He puts in some yeast to help start the work of changing the sugar into
gas[B] and alcohol.

Sometimes hops are also put in, to give it a bitter taste.

The brewer watches to see the bubbles of gas that tell, as plainly as
words could, that sugar is going and alcohol is coming.

When the work is finished, the barley has been made into beer.

It might have been ground and made into barley-cakes, or into pearl
barley to thicken our soups, and then it would have been good food. Now,
it is a drink containing alcohol, and alcohol is a poison.

You should not drink beer, because there is alcohol in it.

Two boys of the same age begin school together. One of them drinks
wine, cider, and beer. The other never allows these drinks to pass his
lips. These boys soon become very different from each other, because one
is poisoning his body and mind with alcohol, and the other is not.

A man wants a good, steady boy to work for him. Which of these two do
you think he will select? A few years later, a young man is wanted who
can be trusted with the care of an engine or a bank. It is a good
chance. Which of these young men will be more likely to get it?


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. Is there sugar in grain?

          2. What is in the grain that can be turned into
          sugar?

          3. What can you do to a seed that will make its
          starch turn into sugar?

          4. What does the brewer do to the barley to make
          its starch turn into sugar?

          5. What is malt?

          6. What does the brewer put into the malt to start
          the working?

          7. What gives the bitter taste to beer?

          8. How does the brewer know when sugar begins to
          go and alcohol to come?

          9. Why does he want the starch turned to sugar?

          10. Is barley good for food?

          11. Why is beer not good for food?

          12. Why should you not drink it?

          13. Why did the two boys of the same age, at the
          same school, become so unlike?

          14. Which will have the best chance in life?

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote B: Car bon'ic acid gas.]




CHAPTER VI.

DISTILLING.


[Illustration: D]ISTILLING (d[)i]s t[)i]l[\l]'ing) may be a new word to
you, but you can easily learn its meaning.

You have all seen distilling going on in the kitchen at home, many a
time. When the water in the tea-kettle is boiling, what comes out at the
nose? Steam.

What is steam?

You can find out what it is by catching some of it on a cold plate, or
tin cover. As soon as it touches any thing cold, it turns into drops of
water.

When we boil water and turn it into steam, and then turn the steam back
into water, we have distilled the water. We say vapor instead of steam,
when we talk about the boiling of alcohol.

It takes less heat to turn alcohol to vapor than to turn water to
steam; so, if we put over the fire some liquid that contains alcohol,
and begin to collect the vapor as it rises, we shall get alcohol first,
and then water.

But the alcohol will not be pure alcohol; it will be part water, because
it is so ready to mix with water that it has to be distilled many times
to be pure.

But each time it is distilled, it will become stronger, because there is
a little more alcohol and a little less water.

In this way, brandy, rum, whiskey, and gin are distilled, from wine,
cider, and the liquors which have been made from corn, rye, or barley.

The cider, wine, and beer had but little alcohol in them. The brandy,
rum, whiskey, and gin are nearly one-half alcohol.

A glass of strong liquor which has been made by distilling, will injure
any one more, and quicker, than a glass of cider, rum, or beer.

But a cider, wine, or beer-drinker often drinks so much more of the
weaker liquor, that he gets a great deal of alcohol. People are often
made drunkards by drinking cider or beer. The more poison, the more
danger.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. Where have you ever seen distilling going on?

          2. How can you distill water?

          3. How can men separate alcohol from wine or from
          any other liquor that contains it?

          4. Why will not this be pure alcohol?

          5. How is a liquor made stronger?

          6. Name some of the distilled liquors.

          7. How are they made?

          8. How much of them is alcohol?

          9. Which is the most harmful--the distilled
          liquor, or beer, wine, or cider?

          10. Why does the wine, cider, or beer-drinker
          often get as much alcohol?




CHAPTER VII.

ALCOHOL.


[Illustration: A]LCOHOL looks like water, but it is not at all like
water.

Alcohol will take fire, and burn if a lighted match is held near it; but
you know that water will not burn.

When alcohol burns, the color of the flame is blue. It does not give
much light: it makes no smoke or soot; but it does give a great deal of
heat.

A little dead tree-toad was once put into a bottle of alcohol. It was
years ago, but the tree-toad is there still, looking just as it did the
first day it was put in. What has kept it so?

It is the alcohol. The tree-toad would have soon decayed if it had been
put into water. So you see that alcohol keeps dead bodies from
decaying.

Pure alcohol is not often used as a drink. People who take beer, wine,
and cider get a little alcohol with each drink. Those who drink brandy,
rum, whiskey, or gin, get more alcohol, because those liquors are nearly
one half alcohol.

You may wonder that people wish to use such poisonous drinks at all. But
alcohol is a deceiver. It often cheats the man who takes a little, into
thinking it will be good for him to take more.

Sometimes the appetite which begs so hard for the poison, is formed in
childhood. If you eat wine-jelly, or wine-sauce, you may learn to like
the taste of alcohol and thus easily begin to drink some weak liquor.

The more the drinker takes, the more he often wants, and thus he goes on
from drinking cider, wine, or beer, to drinking whiskey, brandy, or rum.
Thus drunkards are made.

People who are in the habit of taking drinks which contain alcohol,
often care more for them than for any thing else, even when they know
they are being ruined by them.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. How does alcohol look?

          2. How does alcohol burn?

          3. What will alcohol do to a dead body?

          4. What drinks contain a little alcohol?

          5. What drinks are about one half alcohol?

          6. How does alcohol cheat people?

          7. When is the appetite sometimes formed?

          8. Why should you not eat wine-sauce or
          wine-jelly?

          9. How are drunkards made?




CHAPTER VIII.

TOBACCO.


[Illustration: A] FARMER who had been in the habit of planting his
fields with corn, wheat, and potatoes, once made up his mind to plant
tobacco instead.

Let us see whether he did any good to the world by the change.

The tobacco plants grew up as tall as a little boy or girl, and spread
out broad, green leaves.
