nice deep spot like the Mariannas Trench." He shrugged. "Of course, we
won't have that sort of luck, so we'll have to make the best of it."

"It just goes to show that you can't trust Americans," Eklund said. "I've
always thought we should keep our awards on this side of the Atlantic where
people are sane and civilized. Making a personality out of a computer--ugh!
I suppose it's their idea of a joke."

"I doubt it," Christianson said. "They just like to name things--preferably
with female names. It's a form of insecurity, the mother fixation. But
that's not important. I'm afraid, gentlemen, that we shall have to make
the award as we have planned. I can see no way out. After all, there's no
reason why the machine cannot receive the prize. The conditions merely
state that it is to be presented to the one, regardless of nationality,
who makes the greatest contribution to medicine or physiology."

"I wonder how His Majesty will take it," Carlstrom said.

"The king! I'd forgotten that!" Eklund gasped.

"I expect he'll have to take it," Christianson said. "He might even
appreciate the humor in the situation."

"Gustaf Adolf is a good king, but there are limits," Eklund observed.

"There are other considerations," Christianson replied. "After all, Edie is
the reason the Crown Prince is still alive, and Gustaf is fond of his son."

"After all these years?"

Christianson smiled. Swedish royalty _was_ long-lived. It was something
of a standing joke that King Gustaf would probably outlast the pyramids,
providing the pyramids lived in Sweden. "I'm sure His Majesty will
cooperate. He has a strong sense of duty and since the real problem is
his, not ours, I doubt if he will shirk it."

"How do you figure that?" Eklund asked.

"We merely select the candidates according to the rules, and according
to the nature of their contribution. Edie is obviously the outstanding
candidate in medicine for this year. It deserves the prize. We would
be compromising with principle if we did not award it fairly."

"I suppose you're right," Eklund said gloomily. "I can't think of any
reasonable excuse to deny the award."

"Nor I," Carlstrom said. "But what did you mean by that remark about
this being the king's problem?"

"You forget," Christianson said mildly. "Of all of us, the king has the
most difficult part. As you know, the Nobel Prize is formally presented
at a State banquet."

"Well?"

"His Majesty is the host," Christianson said. "And just how does one eat
dinner with an electronic computer?"


THE END



