himself to battle as long as he could in that last desperate effort to
keep the hordes at bay.

He noticed idly that the two groups still kept their oddly separated
formation. Behind them the two egg-masses of jelly were now seething in
new activity after a brief lessening of their gruesome shivering. Blake
now saw that there was a direct and unmistakable connection between the
activity of the jelly and the corresponding activity of the ape-things.

Realization of the fact sent a sudden flash of inspiration flaming
through Blake's weary brain, correlating the real significance of a
dozen different things he had been subconsciously noting ever since the
first appearance of the weird beasts.

Those attacking things were not hordes of individual animals. They were
merely two complete organisms, with the members of each organism
controlled by its nucleus through invisible lines of nervous force as
the various individual cells of the human body are linked by nerve
fibers. No wonder the creatures themselves were blind. The egg-mass that
was the nucleus of each of the two groups was eyes, brain, and seat of
life for every ape-thing in the group.

With a swift surge of hope Blake realized the way to conquer the things.
If he could only shatter those flaccid masses of jelly, he would destroy
the swarming dozens of beasts at the same time.

Reaching the jelly ovoids seemed at first consideration to be an
impossible task. They were carefully guarded far in the rear of the
attacking groups. Blake knew that he had scarcely a chance in a hundred
of battering his way through the intervening ape-things.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then he remembered the gangster's pistol. His searching eyes found it
immediately, there on the ground nearly under the feet of the ape-things
as they again shambled forward to the attack.

Blake staked everything upon a last desperate sortie against the
advancing things. With his club whistling around his head in crashing
blows that wrought murderous havoc in the close-packed hordes, he drove
them back for one breathless moment that gave him time to leap forward
and snatch up the pistol.

The ape-things were already springing back upon him as he swung the
pistol into line with one of the jelly-masses. He barely pressed the
trigger before the charging brutes knocked him from his feet.

As he went down he flung his arms over his head to protect his face from
the expected attack of those hooked talons, but none came. A body
thudded down upon him, then slid limply off again without making any
move to attack. Blake scrambled to his feet.

Writhing upon the ground all around him were ape-things in their death
agonies. On the ground beyond them, quivering and broken in the midst of
its dying guards, was a viscid mass of loathsome gray jelly. Blake's
shot had apparently struck home squarely in the center of that
vulnerable blob. Even as he watched, the gelatinous mass shuddered in a
last convulsion, then became quite still. At the same instant the last
sign of life vanished from the writhing ape-things on the ground.

A good half of the attacking creatures were included in the dead bodies.
The other half, Blake now saw, had retreated to cluster in wild panic
about the remaining blob of jelly. Realizing exultantly that his single
shot had slain one of the two weirdly disassociated organisms, Blake
with pistol in hand advanced toward the other, trying to get a clear
shot at the jelly through the furry bodies clustering around it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The group promptly turned and fled in blind panic. Blake sent the
pistol's last shot crashing into the mass without any appreciable
effect. Then the things' stampede carried them hurtling on through one
of the gold-flecked side walls out into the swirling purple mists.

The gold-flecked sheet flowed together again so swiftly behind the
things that a fraction of a second later there was not even the
slightest indication in its shimmering unbroken surface to show that it
had ever been pierced.

For thirty yards the fleeing ape-things sped on into the purple vapors.
Then disaster struck them with bewildering swiftness. They stopped in
full flight, shuddered for a moment, then slumped to the ground with
their limbs writhing in agony. In their center the jelly ovoid quivered
madly in the same strange torture.

Tiny patches of vivid purple appeared at a hundred different points upon
the dying creatures. The patches spread and merged with lightning
rapidity until a solid sheet of livid purple covered the writhing mass.
Swiftly that mass lost both movement and shape as it melted down into a
pool of turgid purple slime. Then the slime vaporized into purple mists
that blended into the surrounding vapors, and all trace of the
ape-things and their jelly nucleus had vanished.

Stunned by the incredible speed of this general dissolution, Blake
realized for the first time the real reason for the presence of the
gold-flecked walls of force. Without those shimmering walls the captives
would not have lived for a minute in the deadly purple atmosphere of
this weird world beneath the twin suns. The gold-flecked walls were both
their protection and their prison. The swirling purple mists outside
those walls held the Earthlings as effectively and hopelessly prisoners
in their enclosure as gold-fish in a bowl of water.

       *       *       *       *       *

Blake turned back to the thicket to see how Helen and Mapes had fared in
that terrific battle with the headless things. He was relieved to see
that the girl had apparently escaped without even a scratch. She was
kneeling beside Mapes' prone figure, doing what she could to revive him.
The gangster was badly battered, but he seemed to have no serious
injuries. He was already beginning to stir weakly and show signs of
returning life.

Blake started to step over to the two. Then he stopped abruptly as he
heard a sharp metallic clang from the cone-building out in the purple
mists beyond the end wall. He looked quickly up and saw that an oval
window had opened in the structure near its tip. Framed in the opening
was what seemed to be a large concave mirror. At one side of the mirror
was a living being of some kind, but the intervening mists prevented
Blake from making out any details beyond a hazy glimpse of a cluster of
what seemed to be long slender snake-like black tentacles.

The next moment there spurted from the mirror a broad and swiftly
spreading beam of red light so brilliant that it glowed clearly even in
the bright purple rays of the twin suns. Before Blake could shout a
warning to Helen the racing flood of ruddy radiance was upon them. The
scene reeled in a blurred kaleidoscope of flaming colors before Blake's
eyes for a brief second, then complete oblivion swept over him.

       *       *       *       *       *

After an interval that seemed hours, consciousness returned to him as
suddenly as it had left him. His first bewildered look around him
disclosed the fact that startling changes had occurred in his
surroundings during the period while he was under the anesthesia of the
red ray.

His first effort at movement brought realization that he was in the grip
of a strange paralysis. His head and neck seemed quite normal in every
