with the logical trains of thought that machines must follow.

"Roal--your thoughts," called F-1, the new machine.

Roal sat up. "Ah--you have gained consciousness."

"I have. You thought of hydrogen? Your thoughts ran swiftly, and
illogically, it seemed, but I followed slowly, and find you were right.
Hydrogen is the start. What is your thought?"

Roal's eyes dreamed. In human eyes there was always the expression of
thought that machines never show.

"Hydrogen, an atom in space; but a single proton; but a single electron;
each indestructible; each mutually destroying. Yet never do they
collide. Never in all science, when even electrons bombard atoms with
the awful expelling force of the exploding atom behind them, never do
they reach the proton, to touch and annihilate it. Yet--the proton is
positive and attracts the electron's negative charge. A hydrogen
atom--its electron far from the proton falls in, and from it there goes
a flash of radiation, and the electron is nearer to the proton, in a new
orbit. Another flash--it is nearer. Always falling nearer, and only
constant force will keep it from falling to that one state--then, for
some reason no more does it drop. Blocked--held by some imponderable,
yet impenetrable wall. What is that wall--why?

"Electric force curves space. As the two come nearer, the forces become
terrific; nearer they are; more terrific. Perhaps, if it passed within
that forbidden territory, the proton and the electron curve space beyond
all bounds--and are in a new space." Roal's soft voice dropped to
nothing, and his eyes dreamed.

F-1 hummed softly in its new-made mechanism. "Far ahead of us there is a
step that no logic can justly ascend, but yet, working backwards, it is
perfect." F-1 floated motionless on its anti-gravity drive. Suddenly,
force shafts gleamed out, tentacles became writhing masses of
rubber-covered metal, weaving in some infinite pattern, weaving in
flashing speed, while the whirr of air sucked into a transmutation
field, whined and howled about the writhing mass. Fierce beams of force
drove and pushed at a rapidly materializing something, while the hum of
the powerful generators within the shining cylinder of F-1 waxed and
waned.

       *       *       *       *

Flashes of fierce flame, sudden crashing arcs that glowed and snapped in
the steady light of the laboratory, and glimpses of white-hot metal
supported on beams of force. The sputter of welding, the whine of
transmuted air, and the hum of powerful generators, blasting atoms were
there. All combined to a weird symphony of light and dark, of sound and
quiet. About F-1 were clustered floating tiers of science-machines,
watching steadily.

The tentacles writhed once more, straightened, and rolled back. The
whine of generators softened to a sigh, and but three beams of force
held the structure of glowing, bluish metal. It was a small thing,
scarcely half the size of Roal. From it curled three thin tentacles of
the same bluish metal. Suddenly the generators within F-1 seemed to roar
into life. An enormous aura of white light surrounded the small torpedo
of metal, and it was shot through with crackling streamers of blue
lightning. Lightning cracked and roared from F-1 to the ground near him,
and to one machine which had come too close. Suddenly, there was a dull
snap, and F-1 fell heavily to the floor, and beside him fell the fused,
distorted mass of metal that had been a science-machine.

But before them, the small torpedo still floated, held now on its own
power!

From it came waves of thought, the waves that man and machine alike
could understand. "F-1 has destroyed his generators. They can be
repaired; his rhythm can be re-established. It is not worth it, my type
is better. F-1 has done his work. See."

From the floating machine there broke a stream of brilliant light that
floated like some cloud of luminescence down a straight channel. It
flooded F-1, and as it touched it, F-1 seemed to flow into it, and float
back along it, in atomic sections. In seconds the mass of metal was
gone.

"It is impossible to use that more rapidly, however, lest the matter
disintegrate instantly to energy. The Ultimate Energy which is in me is
generated. F-1 has done its work, and the memory-stacks that he has put
in me are electronic, not atomic, as they are in you, nor molecular as
in man. The capacity of mine are unlimited. Already they hold all
memories of all the things each of you has done, known and seen. I shall
make others of my type."

Again that weird process began, but now there were no flashing
tentacles. There was only the weird glow of forces that played with, and
laughed at matter, and its futilely resisting electrons. Lurid flares of
energy shot up, now and again they played over the fighting, mingling,
dancing forces. Then suddenly the whine of transmuted air died, and
again the forces strained.

A small cylinder, smaller even than its creator, floated where the
forces had danced.

"The problem has been solved, F-2?" asked Roal.

"It is done, Roal. The Ultimate Energy is at our disposal," replied F-2.
"This, I have made, is not a scientist. It is a coordinator machine--a
ruler."

"F-2, only a part of the problem is solved. Half of half of the beams of
Death are not yet stopped. And we have the attack system," said the
ruler machine. Force played from it, and on its sides appeared C-R-U-1
in dully glowing golden light.

"Some life-form, and we shall see," said F-2.

Minutes later a life-form investigator came with a small cage, which
held a guinea pig. Forces played about the base of F-2, and moments
later, came a pale-green beam therefrom. It passed through the guinea
pig, and the little animal fell dead.

"At least, we have the beam. I can see no screen for this beam. I
believe there is none. Let machines be made and attack that enemy
life-form."

Machines can do things much more quickly, and with fuller cooperation
than man ever could. In a matter of hours, under the direction of
C-R-U-1, they had built a great automatic machine on the clear bare
