
The Cathedral of the Incarnation, at Garden City, N. Y., the memorial
of Mrs. Cornelia M. Stewart to her husband, Alexander T. Stewart, was
opened April 9, 1885, by impressive religious ceremonies. At precisely
11 o'clock the chimes in the cathedral tower rang out a clear and
resonant peal, and the people thronged into the building through its
tower and transept entrances.

The effort has been made to reproduce in the cathedral a pure type of
the Gothic architecture of the thirteenth century, without its ruder
and less refined characteristics. The strained and coarse images
designed to illustrate "the world, the flesh, and the devil,"
which seem so strange and unapt to American visitors to the
great Continental cathedrals, are almost entirely omitted in this
reproduction. The carving, too, in deference to the more sensitive
tastes and better skill of this age, is far more artistic and natural
than in the old originals. Flowers in stone are made to resemble
flowers, and heads are fashioned after a human pattern, and clusters
of figures are modeled in a congruous and modern manner. But aside
from changes of this kind, the new and magnificent edifice upon
Hempstead Plains is a perfect example of the elaborate and picturesque
Gothic structures of mediaeval days.

It is built of brown sandstone raised in colossal blocks. The spire,
floriated richly and graduated with a precise symmetry, rises to an
extreme altitude of 220 feet 6 inches. The extreme length is about 170
ft. The massive oaken front doors are carved handsomely, and contain
the arms of the Stewart family, the Clinch family (Mrs. Stewart's
maiden name), the Hilton family, and those of Bishop Littlejohn,
the Episcopal head of the Long Island Diocese. The porch or tower
entrance, which is the main entrance to the building, is paved with
white marble. In the center of the floor the Stewart arms are enameled
in brass, showing a shield with a white and blue check, supported
by the figures of a wild Briton and a lion. The crest is a pelican
feeding its young, and the motto is "_Prudentia et Constantia_."
These heraldic figures are made a special feature of the main aisle.
Directly in the center of the auditorium floor the Stewart and Clinch
arms are impaled, enameled in brass. On the floor in the choir the
Hilton arms are placed. They bear the patriotic motto "_Ubi libertas
ibi patria_," with a deer for a crest. The floor of the ante-chancel
presents the arms of the diocese. Its insular character is especially
prominent. The shield of barry wavy contains three crosslets, the
peculiar sign of the cathedral. It is supported by dolphins. The crest
is a ship, and under all is the sacred motto, "I will set his dominion
in the sea." The workmanship of all these arms is superb.

By far the most wonderful works of art in the edifice are the windows
of stained glass and the musical facilities. Every window presents a
theme suggestive of the Incarnation. The windows of the porch present
several of the Old Testament characters and events which prefigured
the birth of Christ, and over the door leading to the nave are figures
of Adam and Eve and of Abraham and Sarah. The four windows on the
south side of the nave show the Annunciation, the dream of Joseph, the
salutation of Elizabeth, and the refusal of the stable to the parents
of the infant Redeemer. In the first window of the transept is
presented the inn-keeper's refusal of refuge to Joseph and Mary. The
great window of the south transept, in all about thirty feet high, one
of the largest windows in the world, shows the family of Jesse, the
ancestor of Jesus. Jesse is resting at full length; above him is King
David, and all around are figures of his descendants leading up to the
Virgin Mary with the Holy Child in her arms. Above all, in the apex
of the windows, are the emblems used in prophecies of Christ's coming.
The third window of the south transept shows the Nativity, with the
Babe in the manger. Two windows in the choir are chosen with special
reference to the regular service of the church. The first represents
the appearance of the star in the east to the shepherds of Bethlehem,
introducing the "Gloria in Excelsis," and the second shows the
presentation of Christ in the temple, suggesting the "Nunc Dimittis,"
the "Magnificat," and the "Benedictus." Then beautiful representations
are given in the north transept windows of the Magi bringing gifts to
the infant Saviour, and the wise men before King Herod. The windows
of the nave show the flight into Egypt, the massacre of the innocents,
and the return to Nazareth.

The north window of the transept is the most magnificent of all. It
presents Christ in glory, thus suggesting the "Te Deum." Jesus sits
enthroned with the angels and archangels, prophets, apostles and
martyrs of the church in all ages bending in adoration before Him,
while the heavenly choir are waving palms and chanting music in
honor of Heaven's King. The smaller windows under the roof show the
hierarchy of heaven indicating by music and dances the joy of the
celestial world at the scenes of the Incarnation depicted below. Upon
a bright, sunny day the cathedral is made exquisitely beautiful by
the mellowed radiance of these windows. They were designed and
manufactured by Clayton & Bell, of London, and are esteemed to present
the perfection of their work. Their colors, rich and varied, blend in
perfect harmony, and the intricacy of the groupings makes each one as
interesting as an oil painting.

Six different organs have been built in different parts of the
building. The most important of these is the great organ in the
north apse. It is furnished with four keyboards and 124 stops, with
twenty-four combination stops that admit of more than a million
combinations of sound. On either side of the choir is another organ,
with a fourth of great power in the crypt, a fifth in the tower, and
an echo organ built under the vaulting of the roof. This produces a
soft and weird music. All the organs are operated from the keyboard of
the great apse organ, which also plays the chimes of thirteen bells
in the tower. The choir instruments are made to correspond by means
of iron tubes filled with wind by a bellows engine in the crypt of the
apse. A second engine in the crypt of the tower operates the bellows
that inflate the instruments in the crypt, the tower, and the
vaulting. All the organs and the chimes are connected by electric
wires, about twenty-six miles of which are employed, supplied with
electricity by a motor in the tower engine room. Sublime and grand are
the only terms which can suggest the effect of the volume of harmony
produced by these instruments in united action. They were made by
Hilborne L. Roosevelt, of this city.

The ante-chancel contains the bishop's throne, the dean's seat, and
the stalls of the clergy and canons, all of carved mahogany. A superb
work of art is the altar, in the chancel, which is separated from
the ante-chancel by a heavy bronze railing. The altar is of statuary
marble manufactured by Cox & Sons, of London. Its corner columns are
of black marble, supported by others of flecked marble, with panels
of Sienna and Griote. Between the panels are rich carvings, done
in Antwerp, representing the temptation and fall in Eden; Abraham's
offering of his son Isaac; Moses raising the brazen serpent in the
wilderness; the annunciation to the Virgin; the birth scene in the
stable; the Crucifixion and the Resurrection. The slab of the altar
is inlaid with five crosslets, representing the five wounds, and the
symbol "I. H. S."

None of the cathedral windows are richer than those which circle the
chancel. They present Christ as the Good Shepherd and the apostolic
college. An excellent piece of chiseling is done by Sibbel, the
sculptor of this city, in the panels over the credence. They are
figures of the high priest with a slain lamb, the type of the bloody
sacrifice, and Christ with sheaves of wheat and clusters of grapes,
the unbloody sacrifice. Beneath them is the text, "Thou art a prophet
forever after the order of Melchisedec." The chancel is paved with red
and yellow Sienna marble as center pieces, flanked with squares of
red Griote and white marble, the whole bordered with strips of red and
black marble. The ante-chancel is paved with blocks of red Griote and
verd antique. Two magnificent pieces of statuary stand on either side
of the transept. The first represents Religion holding a little model
of the cathedral. The other is an image of Hope. They were done by
Park, the Florentine sculptor.

In the south apse is the baptistery, built with a tower furnished with
chimes. Its supporting columns are of Languedoc marble clustered with
smaller ones of Sienna and verd antique. Six columns support the dome.
Each is of a different marble, crowned with sculptured capitals in
high relief. The windows are appropriate in theme. They represent Noah
with the ark; the building of the ark; Moses holding the tables of the
law; the passage of the Red Sea; John the Baptist; the Baptism of
the eunuch; St. Philip, the deacon; and the Baptism of Christ. In
the center of the room stands the font upon an octagonal base of two
steps. Its pedestal and bowl are traced with symbolic carvings. Over
it is a canopy of elaborately carved mahogany drawn into a spire
bearing a gold crown, studded with rubies and amethysts.

At the foot of the chancel is the pulpit, of bronze, designed by
Sibbel. Its base is surrounded by figures representing hearers of
the Word. Mr. Sibbel has incorporated an anachronism in one of these
figures that will be exceedingly interesting in coming years. It shows
the features of Henry G. Harrison, of this city, the architect of the
cathedral. The lectern stands on the other side of the ante-chancel,
representing Christ blessing little children. Superb bronze columns
with brass coronas of natural flowers support the roof of the
building. The triforium is carved in the richest style with passion
flowers, fuchsias, roses, and lilies.

In the crypt below are the robing rooms of the clergy and the choir
and the Sunday-school room. Its windows show the arms of every
American diocese. Beneath the choir is the chantry, furnished in
carved oak. Adjoining this room is the famous mausoleum erected to the
memory of Alexander T. Stewart. It is constructed of statuary marble,
and consists of fourteen bays, at the angles of which are triple
columns of the most richly colored imported marbles arched above
the elegantly carved capitals, with open tracery, through which the
headlights of the colored glass are seen. The subjects of the thirteen
windows relate to the passion, death, resurrection, and subsequent
appearances of Christ, and are executed in admirable design and color.
They were made by Heaton, Butler & Bayne, of London. Above the window
openings rises a dome-shaped ceiling, in carved marble, with a pendent
canopy in the center. The pavement, of black and white marbles,
radiates from the center of the sides of this polygonal structure, and
a large white urn, delicately draped after Sibbel's designs, stands
under the pendent canopy. It bears Mr. Stewart's name. The two
entrances to the mausoleum are guarded by open-work bronze gates of
elegant design and workmanship.--_N. Y. Tribune._

       *       *       *       *       *




MOVABLE MARKET BUILDINGS.


The furnishing of food supplies has always been a question of great
importance to cities, and there are few of the latter, great or small,
where the establishment of markets is not the order of the day.

At Paris especially, by reason of the massing of the population, which
is annually increasing, the multiplicity of the wants to be satisfied
renders the solution of this question more and more difficult. The old
markets, some of the types of which still exist in various parts of
Paris, were built of masonry and wood. They were massive structures
into which the air and light penetrated with difficulty, and which
consequently formed a dangerous focus of infection for those who
occupied them, and for the inhabitants of the neighboring houses. So
the introduction of iron into the construction of markets will bring
about a genuine revolution whose influence will soon make itself felt
in all branches of the builder's art.

The Central Markets were to have been built of masonry, and the work
had even been begun, when, under the pressure of public opinion, the
architect, Mr. Baltard, was led to use iron. Evidently, the metal that
permits of covering vast spaces with the use of distant bearing points
that present a small surface in plan, and leaves between them wide
openings that the sun and air can enter in quantity, was the only
thing that was capable of giving the solution sought. So it has
been said, and rightly, that the Central Markets are, as regards the
distribution and rational use of materials, the most beautiful of the
structures of modern Paris. This system of construction at once met
with great success, and the old markets are everywhere gradually
disappearing, in order to give place to the new style of buildings.

Notwithstanding their number, the Parisian markets long ago became
insufficient, and wants increased with such rapidity that it became
impossible to supply them. The municipal administration was therefore
obliged, especially in populous quarters, to tolerate perambulating
peddlers, who carried their wares in hand carts. This system has the
drawback that it interferes considerably with travel, and especially
in streets where the latter is most active. Moreover, the merchants
and their goods are exposed to the inclemency of the weather. In
other places, where large spaces were utilizable, such as squares and
avenues, very light structures, that could be easily put together and
taken apart, were erected, and markets were opened in these once or
twice a week. This method presents serious advantages. Iron markets,
in fact, despite the immense progress that they mark, present
disadvantages that are inherent to all stationary structures. It
is necessary to erect them in populous centers, where land is
consequently of great value; and the structure itself is costly.

The result is that the prime cost is very great, and this forces the
city to charge the merchants high rents, and the consumer has to pay
for it. With movable markets, on the contrary, the city can utilize
large areas of unproductive ground, and find new resources, although
renting the stalls at a minimum price. The expense connected with the
structure itself is very small. In fact, the distinguishing character
of such structures is their portability--so that the same shed can be
used in any number of different places.

The principal expense, then, will be for carriage; but it is easy to
see that there will always be an economy in their use. This is a fact,
moreover, that practice has verified, for it is well known that Paris
does not get her expenses back from her stationary markets, while the
movable ones yield a revenue.

On another hand, as stationary markets are costly, it results that
they cannot be multiplied as much as necessary, and so a portion of
the inhabitants are daily submitted to a loss of time in reaching the
one nearest them.

Finally, from a hygienic standpoint, movable markets present a
very great advantage over stationary ones. The latter, in fact,
notwithstanding their large open spaces, never get rid of the vitiated
air that they contain, and the bad odors that emanate from them are
also a source of annoyance and danger to the neighborhood. In movable
ones, on the contrary, when the structure is taken apart, the air,
sun, and rain disperse all bad odors, and the place is rendered
wholesome in an instant.

We have now demonstrated what great advantages the city of Paris and
her population might derive from the establishing of movable markets.

It is easy to see that well established structures of this kind would
render great services in small towns also. They might entirely
replace stationary iron markets, the high cost of which often causes
municipalities to preserve their old, inconvenient, and unhealthy
structures. As a general thing, market is held but once or twice a
week in small towns. In the interior the structure could be taken
apart, and the place rendered free.

The question, then, is to have a system of construction that shall
satisfy the different parts of the programme that we have just laid
out, that is to say, strength, lightness, rapidity of erection,
and ease of carriage. The shelters that are at present employed
for movable markets at Paris are very primitive, and are wanting in
solidity and convenience. They consist simply of wooden uprights to
which are affixed cross-pieces that support an impermeable canvas.

In order to render it possible to extend the system of movable
markets, it became necessary to first find and study the proper
material.

During the year 1883 the city of Paris resolved to make some
experiments, and the Direction of Municipal Affairs commissioned Mr.
Andre, director of the Neuilly works, to submit to him a plan for a
structure that could be easily taken apart. The plan finally proposed
seemed to meet all the requirements of the case, and a group of
ten structures was erected. The trial that was made of these proved
entirely satisfactory. The city then made concession to the Neuilly
company, for six years, of the market in Boulevard Richard-Lenoir,
of those of La Reine Park, and of the Madeleine flower markets. A six
months' trial has shown the great resistance of the materials that we
are about to describe in detail.

The structure is supported by cylindrical hollow iron uprights that
are firmly connected with the ground as follows: At the places where
they are to be fixed, small catches are inserted in the ground so that
their upper surface comes flush therewith. These catches consist of
two cast iron sides bolted together, and of a bottom and ends formed
of flat iron--the end pieces being bent so as to form cramp irons.
Each of the sides is provided internally with a projecting piece, and
an inclined plane as a wedge. In case the catch becomes filled with
dirt, it can be easily cleaned out with a scraper. The iron upright
terminates in a malleable cast iron shoe, which is screwed on to
it, and which is provided beneath with a projection in the form of
a reversed T, the upper part of the horizontal branches of which is
beveled off in a direction opposite that of the inclined planes of the
catch. This projection enters through the slit and fits into the two
wedges, and a simple blow of a hammer suffices to make the adherence
perfect.

The front and hind uprights differ only in length, and the roof
timbers are joined at their upper extremities. The figures so well
show how the parts are fitted together as to render an explanation
unnecessary.

The dimensions of these structures vary from 6.5 to 5.75 feet in
length by 6.5 in width and 6 in height. The rafters are prolonged so
as to project 4.25 feet in front, in order to form a protection for
the purchaser. This part of the rafters, as well as the longitudinals,
is supported by three curved iron braces, which are put in place as
follows: The timbers are provided with a ring fixed by a screw, and
one extremity of the brace is inserted into this, while the other is
held against the upright by a sliding iron socket. The longitudinal
timbers are supported between each two uprights by an iron rod that
rests upon a block of stone fixed in the ground.

The front ends of the rafters are connected by a longitudinal, 18 feet
in length.

The structure is covered with waterproof canvas held in place by
wooden rods, to which it is attached.

The wood employed is pitch pine.

An entire market of 300 stalls can be put up in three hours by one
workman and four assistants.--_Le Genie Civil._


[Illustration: THE MOVABLE MADELEINE FLOWER MARKET AT PARIS.]
               FIG. 1.--GENERAL VIEW OF A MOVABLE MARKET.
               FIG. 2.--SHOES.
               FIG. 3.--MODE OF JOINING THE ROOF TIMBERS.
               FIG. 4.--IRON SUPPORT.
               FIG. 5.--SECTION OF A SHOE INSERTED IN THE CATCH.
               FIG. 6.--CATCHES.
               FIG. 7.--WATERPROOF CANVAS.]

       *       *       *       *       *




DINOCRATES' PROJECT.


Vitruvius relates that the architect Dinocrates proposed to
Alexander the Great to carve Mount Athos in such a way as to give it
the shape of a man, whose one hand should support an entire city, and
whose other should carry a cup which received all the waters from the
mountain, and from which they overflowed into the sea.

Alexander, charmed with the idea, asked him if this city was to be
surrounded by land capable of supplying it with the grain necessary
for its subsistence. Having ascertained that the provisioning could
only be done by sea, Alexander said: "Dinocrates, I grant the beauty
of your project; it pleases me, but I think that any one who should
take it into his head to establish a colony in the place you propose
would run the risk of being taxed with want of foresight; for, just as
a child can neither feed nor develop without the milk of a nurse, so
a city cannot increase without fertile fields, have a large population
without plenty of food, and allow its inhabitants to subsist without
rich harvests; so, while giving the originality of your plan my
approval, I have to say to you that I disapprove of the place that you
have selected for putting it into execution. But I want you to stay
near me, because I shall have need of your services."

This gigantic project had doubtless been suggested to the Macedonian
architect by the singular forms that certain mountains affect. It is
not rare, in fact, to see human profiles delineated upon the sky,
and this phenomenon especially happens in countries where the folded
limestone strata have been broken up in such a way as to give rise to
deep valleys perpendicular to the direction of the chain. If we look
at these folds from below in an oblique direction, we shall see them
superposed upon one another in such a way as to represent figures that
recall a human profile.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. LANDSCAPE BY FATHER KIRCHER.]

In the seventeenth century, Father Kircher conceived the idea of
taking up Dinocrates' plan upon a small scale, and composed the
landscape shown in Fig. 1. The drawing remained engraved for a long
time upon a marble tablet set into the wall of Cardinal Montalte's
garden at Rome. Later on, artists improved and varied this project, as
shown in Figs. 2 and 3. By looking at these cuts from the sides of the
page, it will be seen that they form human profiles. Fig. 2 represents
an old woman, and Fig. 3 a man whose beard and hair are formed by
shrubbery.

[Illustration: FIGS. 2 AND 3.--LANDSCAPES SHOWING PROFILES OF
HUMAN FACE.]

We do not think that these conceptions have ever been realized,
although Heron in his treatise on Dioptra, and Father Scott in his
Parastatic Magic, have described instruments that permit of making the
necessary outlines to cause grounds to present a given aspect from
a given point. These instruments consist essentially of a vertical
transparent frame upon which is drawn a vertical projection of the
landscape that it is desired to obtain.

       *       *       *       *       *


In the island of Goa, near Bombay, there is a singular vegetable
called "the sorrowful tree," because it only flourishes in the night.
At sunset no flowers are to be seen, and yet after half an hour it is
full of them. They yield a sweet smell, but the sun no sooner begins
to shine upon them than some of them fall off, and others close up;
and thus it continues flowering in the night during the whole year.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CRUTO INCANDESCENT LAMP.


An electrical exhibition on a comparatively small scale was opened in
Paris, March 22, 1885, with considerable eclat, the President of
the Republic being present. Engines to the extent of 200 H.P. are
employed to work the lights. Among the exhibits is the Cruto
light. _Engineering_ says: At the first glance it presents the same
appearance as an Edison lamp, having the same form of globe, and
