resemblance to small particles of camphor floating in the
atmosphere; a sensation of pain has no similitude whatever to the
point of a sword which occasions it; nor has the sensation of
sound any resemblance to waves or tremors in the air. In our
present state of knowledge, therefore, all that we can say, is,
that nature has so formed us, that when an impression is made on
any of the organs of sense, it causes a sensation, which forces us
to believe in the existence of an external object, though we
cannot see any connexion between the sensation and the object
which produces it.

But though philosophers were certainly blameable for assuming an
unknown cause, to account for various phenomena, yet later
experiments would seem to prove that even the conjectures of
Newton were not founded on slight grounds. His idea that the
diamond was inflammable, has been confirmed by various
experiments: and that there exists in nature a subtile fluid,
capable of pervading with ease the densest bodies, the phenomena
of electricity would seem to show, and some late experiments
render it by no means improbable, that this fluid or influence,
acts a conspicuous part in the nervous system. That it exists in
great quantity in animal bodies, is evident on gently rubbing the
back of a cat in the dark; and it would seem that, in some
instances, it may be given out or secreted by the nerves. We shall
afterwards see that the seat of vision is a delicate expansion of
a large nerve which comes from the brain, and is spread out on the
bottom of the eye; and flashes of light, or a kind of sparkling,
is often seen to dart from the eyes of persons in high health, and
possessed of much nervous energy. These luminous flashes are very
apparent in the dark in some animals; such as the lion, the lynx,
and the cat; and it is difficult to account for this appearance
unless we suppose it electrical.

The experiments of Galvani and others, have however proved beyond
all doubt, that this fluid, when applied to the nerves and
muscles, is capable of exciting various sensations and motions. To
produce this fluid by the application of two metals, it is
necessary that one of them should be in such a situation, as to be
easily oxidable, while the other is prevented from oxidation. If a
piece of zinc be put into water, no change will take place; but if
a piece of silver be put along with it, the zinc will immediately
oxidate, by decomposing the water, and a current of electricity
will pass through the silver. If the upper and under surfaces of
the tongue be coated with two different metals, one of which is
easily oxidable, and these be brought into contact, a sensation is
produced resembling taste, which takes place suddenly, like a
slight electrical shock. This taste may likewise be produced by
applying one part of the metals to the tongue and the other to any
part of the body deprived of the cuticle, and bringing them in
contact.

The sensation of light may be produced in various ways; such as by
applying one metal between the gum and the upper lip, and the
other under the tongue; or by putting a silver probe up one of the
nostrils, and a piece of zinc upon the tongue; a sensation
resembling a very strong flash of light is perceived in the
corresponding eye, at the instant of contact.

But the experiments which tend most strongly to prove what I have
hinted, are made in the following manner. Lay bare a portion of a
great nerve leading to any muscle or limb of an animal, for
instance, the leg of a frog separated from the body. Touch the
bared nerve with a piece of zinc, and the muscle with a piece of
silver, and strong contractions take place the instant these
metals are brought into contact. The same effect may be produced
by placing a piece of silver on a larger piece of zinc, and
putting a worm or a leech on the silver; in moving about, the
instant it touches the zinc it is thrown into strong convulsions.

These phenomena have been clearly proved to be electrical; for by
a number of pieces of these metals, properly disposed, strong
shocks can be given, the electrometer can be affected, a Leyden
vial charged, the electric spark seen, and combustible bodies
inflamed.

Some animals likewise possess the power of accumulating this
influence in a great degree; for instanc the torpedo, and
electrical eel, which will both give strong shocks; and if the
circuit have a small interruption a spark may be seen, as was
shown by Mr. Walsh. On dissecting these fish, Mr. Hunter found an
organ very similar to the pile of Volta; it consists of numerous
membranaceous columns, filled with plates or pellicles, in the
form of thin disks, separated from each other by small intervals,
which intervals contain a fluid substance; this organ, like the
pile of Volta, is capable of giving repeated shocks, even when
surrounded by water.

It is not absolutely necessary to use two metals to produce the
galvanic phenomena; for if one side of a metal be made to oxidate,
while the other is prevented from oxidation, these appearances
will still be produced. It is not indeed necessary to use any
metal; for a piece of charcoal, oxidated in the same way, produces
galvanism; so does fresh muscular fibre, and perhaps any substance
capable of oxidation. The most striking circumstance in galvanism,
is, that it accompanies oxidation, and is perhaps never produced
without it. But oxidation is always going on in the body by means
of respiration and the circulation of the blood. We shall
afterwards find reason to believe, that the oxygen, received from
the atmosphere by the lungs, is the cause of animal heat, and
probably of animal irritability; and it is perhaps not
unreasonable to suppose, that the nervous influence or electricity
may be separated by the brain, and sent along the nerves, which
seem the most powerful conductors of it, to stimulate the muscles
to action.

What the nature of the electric fluid is, we are ignorant; some
galvanic experiments have led me to suppose that it may be
hydrogen, which when combined with caloric appears in the form of
gas, but when pure, or perhaps in a different state, may be
capable of passing through solid bodies in the form of
electricity.

Having given this short view of the human body, considered as a
machine composed of bones, muscles, and nerves, I shall proceed to
state the different subjects which I shall consider in this
course. It is extremely difficult to begin a course like this; for
we must either enter abruptly into the middle, or the outset must
be in some measure tedious and dry. I have chosen however rather
to hazard the latter appellation, with respect to this lecture,
than to enter more abruptly into the subject, in order to make it
more entertaining. As we proceed, I trust you will feel an
increasing interest in the subject; and, I think I may venture to
promise, that this will be found the least entertaining lecture in
the course. The subjects will be illustrated by experiments, in
order to render the deductions more striking.

I shall next proceed to consider the phenomena of respiration, and
animal heat; after which I shall explain the circulation of the
blood; and the phenomena of digestion and nutrition. I shall then
examine, more minutely than has been done in this lecture, the
connexion of man with the external world, which will lead to a
discussion of the different senses; vision, hearing, smelling,
tasting, and feeling.

When these subjects have been discussed as fully as our time will
allow, I shall examine, at considerable length, the manner in
which the powers that support life, which have been improperly
called by physiologists, the nonnaturals, act upon the body. This
will naturally lead to a fuller explanation of the system which I
have attempted to defend, in my lecture on health. And, after I
have fully explained the laws by which the irritable principle is
regulated, I shall proceed to show, how those variations from the
healthy state, called diseases, are produced; I shall point out
the difference that exists between the debility which is brought
on by the diminished action of the powers which support life, and
that which results from their too powerful action; I shall then
inquire into the nature of diseases of increased excitement; and
after having shown how the undue action of the powers which
support life, operates in producing disease, I shall endeavour to
lay down such rules for the preservation of health, as are the
result of reasoning on these subjects, and are also confirmed by
experience.

[1] [FIGURE] Suppose AC to be a lever, held in equilibrio by the
force B and weight W, then the whole momentum exerted at B must be
equal to that at W, but the forces will be different. For B x AC = W
x AB, and if AC = 10AB, then a force equal to ten times the weight to
be raised must be exerted by the muscle. Hence we see, that in the
actions of muscles there is a loss of power, from their insertions
being nearer the fulcrum than the weight. For example, suppose the
deltoid muscle to act and raise a weight of 55 lb.: the weight of the
arm is 5 lb., and the distance of its insertion is only 1/3 of the
arms length, hence the force exerted must be (55 + 5) x 3 = 180 lb.

[FIGURE] But by this contrivance we gain a greater extent of motion,
and also a greater velocity, and both with less contraction. Let A be
the centre of motion, or articulation; B the insertion of a muscle,
and AC the length of the lever or bone; then, by a contraction only
equal to B_b_, C is carried through C_c_, which is to B_b_ as AC to AB.
It is obvious also, that the velocity is greater, since C moves to _c_
in the same time as B to _b_.

A loss of power is likewise occasioned by the obliquity of the
muscular action, and the oblique direction of the fibres.

For, in this case, there is a compound of two forces, and a
consequent loss of power: for the forces are proportioned to the two
sides of a parallelogram, but the effects produced are proportioned
only to the diagonal.

LECTURE II.
RESPIRATION.

In the last lecture I took a short view of the human body, as a
moving machine, regulated by the will. We shall now proceed to
examine some of its functions more particularly.

I need not tell any of my audience, how necessary air is to the
living body; for every person knows that we cannot live when excluded
from this fluid; but, before we can understand the manner in which it
acts on the body, we must become acquainted with some of its
properties.

That the air is a fluid, consisting of such particles as have little
or no cohesion, and which slide easily among each other, and yield to
the slightest force, is evident from the ease with which animals
breathe it, and move through it. Indeed from its being transparent,
and therefore invisible, as well as from its extreme tenuity, and the
ease with which bodies move through it, people will scarcely believe
that they are living at the bottom of an aerial ocean, like fishes at
the bottom of the sea. We become, however, very sensible of it, when
it flows rapidly in streams or currents, so as to form what is called
a wind, which will sometimes act so violently as to tear up the
strongest trees by the roots, and blow down to the ground the best
and firmest buildings.

Some may still be inclined to ask, what is this air in which we are
said to live? We see nothing; we feel nothing; we find ourselves at
liberty to move about in any direction, without any hindrance. Whence
then comes the assertion, that we are surrounded by a fluid, called
air? When we pour water out of a vessel, it appears to be empty; for
our senses do not inform us that any thing occupies the place of the
water, for instance, when we pour water out of a vial. But this
operation is exactly similar to pouring out mercury from a vial in a
jar of water, the water gets in and supplies the place of the
mercury; so does the air which supplies the place of the water; and
this air will prevent water from rising, or filling a vessel which
contains it.

Hence we see that air possesses similar appearances of
impenetrability with other matter: for it excludes bodies from the
space which itself occupies.

Air being therefore material must have weight; and we shall
accordingly find, that a quart of it weighs about fifteen grains. But
a quart of water weighs about two pounds; this fluid therefore is
nearly a thousand times heavier than air.

But though air is so much lighter than water, yet, because it extends
to a considerable height above the surface of the earth, it is
evident, that it must press strongly on the surfaces of bodies. It is
thought to extend nearly fifty miles above the surface of the earth,
and must therefore press heavily on this surface. This may be evinced
by different experiments, performed by means of the air pump.

Another property of the air, by which it is distinguished from most
other fluids, is its elasticity. It may be compressed into a less
space than it naturally occupies, and when the compressing force is
removed, it expands to its former bulk, by its spring or elasticity.
Indeed it is always compressed into less space than it would
naturally occupy, by the weight of the superincumbent air.

The trachea, or windpipe, commences at the further end of the mouth,
between the root of the tongue, and the passage into the stomach: its
upper part is termed the larynx; it forms the projection in the fore
part of the neck, which is more prominent in the male than the
female: its opening is called the glottis, and is covered with a
small valve, or lid, called the epiglottis, which is open while we
breathe, but shuts when we swallow any thing, to prevent its getting
into the lungs: sometimes, however, particularly when we attempt to
speak at the time we swallow, a small portion of our food or drink
gets into the larynx, and excites violent coughing until it is thrown
back again.

The windpipe is composed of cartilaginous rings, covered with
membrane, which keep it open: after having run downwards for the
space of a few inches, it divides into two great branches, each of
which is subdivided into a vast number of ramifications, ultimately
terminating in little vesicles, which, when distended with air, make
up the greatest part of the bulk of the lungs.

The cavity in which the lungs are contained is called the thorax, or
chest: and is bounded by the ribs, and backbone or spine, and
separated from the abdomen by a muscular membrane, called the
diaphragm. The thorax, by the action of the diaphragm and intercostal
muscles, is alternately enlarged and diminished. Suppose then the
thorax to be in its least state; if it become larger, a vacuum will
be formed, into which the external air will descend by its weight,
filling and distending the vesicles of the lungs.

The thorax, thus dilated, is brought back to its former magnitude,
principally by the relaxation of the muscles, which distended it, and
the natural elasticity of the parts, aided by the contraction of the
abdominal muscles; the thorax being thus diminished, a quantity of
air is expelled from the lungs. The muscles which distend the thorax
beginning again to act, the air reenters; and this alternate dilatation
and contraction, is called respiration. The entrance of the air into
the lungs, is termed inspiration, and its expulsion, expiration.

To form a more accurate idea of the manner in which respiration is
performed, let us suppose this room to be filled with water. On
enlarging the thorax, in the manner before mentioned, the water by
its weight would rush in, and fill the newly formed void; and, upon
the diminution of the capacity of the thorax, a part of this water
would be expelled. Just in the same manner the air will alternately
enter and be expelled from the lungs by this alternate dilatation and
contraction of the thorax.

Respiration is a function of such consequence, that death follows if
it is suspended for a few minutes only. By means of this function the
blood is elaborated, and rendered fit to nourish the body; by means
of it the system is, most probably, supplied with irritability; by
means of it the nervous energy is, most likely, conveyed into the
body, to be expended in sensation, and muscular motion. It appears,
likewise, that in this way, animals are supplied with that heat which
preserves their temperatures nearly the same, whatever may be the
temperatures of surrounding bodies.

If any number of inanimate bodies, possessed of different degrees of
heat, be placed near each other, the heat will begin to pass from the
hotter bodies to the colder, till there be an equilibrium of
temperature. But this is by no means the case with respect to
animated matter; for whatever be the degree of heat peculiar to
individual animals, they preserve it, nearly unchanged, in every
temperature, provided the temperature be not altogether incompatible
with life or health. Thus, we find, from experiments that have been
made, that the human body is not only capable of supporting, in
certain circumstances, without any material change in its
temperature, a degree of heat considerably above that at which water
boils; but it likewise maintains its usual temperature, whilst the
surrounding medium is several degrees below frost.

It is evident, therefore, that animals neither receive their heat
from the bodies which surround them, nor suffer, from the influence
of external circumstances, any material alterations in that heat
which is peculiar to their nature. These general facts are confirmed
and elucidated by many accurate and well authenticated observations,
which show, that the degree of heat in the same genus and species of
the more perfect animals, continues uniformly the same, whether they
be surrounded by mountains of snow, in the neighbourhood of the pole,
or exposed to a vertical sun, in the sultry regions of the torrid
zone.

This stability and uniformity of animal heat, under such a disparity
of external circumstances, and so vast a latitude in the temperature
of the ambient air, prove, beyond doubt, that the living body is
furnished with a peculiar mechanism, or power of generating,
supporting, and regulating its own temperature; and that this is so
wisely adapted to the circumstances of its economy, or so dependent
upon them, that, whatever be the temperature of the atmosphere, it
will have very little influence either in diminishing or increasing
that of the animal.

In order that we may see how this effect is produced, we must examine
the chemical properties of the air. Previously to this, however, it
will be necessary to point out briefly how bodies are affected, with
respect to heat, when they change their form.

When a body passes from a state of solidity to that of fluidity, it
absorbs a quantity of heat, which becomes chemically combined with
it, and insensible to the touch or the thermometer; in the same
manner, when it passes from a fluid state to that of vapour or gas,
it combines with a still larger quantity of heat, which remains
latent in it, so long as it continues in the state of gas, but when
it returns to the liquid or solid state, it gives out the heat which
was combined with it, which, being set at liberty, flows into the
surrounding bodies, and augments their temperature.

This is evinced by the conversion of ice into water, and of water
into steam; and by the return of steam into water. It is evinced
likewise by the evaporation of ether, and by numberless other
experiments.

Modern chemistry has shown that the atmosphere is not a homogeneous
fluid, but consists of two elastic fluids, endowed with opposite and
different properties.

If a combustible body, for instance a candle, be confined in a given
quantity of atmospheric air, it will burn only for a certain time;
after it is extinguished, if another combustible body be lighted and
immersed in the same air, it will not burn, but will immediately be
extinguished.

It has been proved by chemical experiments, that in this instance,
the combustible body absorbs that portion of the air which is fitted
for combustion, but produces no change on that which is unfit: so
that, according to this, the air of the atmosphere consists of two
elastic fluids, one of which is capable of supporting combustion, and
the other not; and that they exist in the proportion of one part of
the former to three of the latter nearly.

These two parts may be separated from each other, and experiments
