again turned on their force and so had been rotated out of my own time
into theirs. They said that they had always hoped to get someone living
from a distant time in that way, since such a man would be a proof to
all the other men of knowledge of what they had been able to do.

"I could not comprehend, and they saw and told me not to fear. I was not
fearful, but excited at the things that I saw around me. I asked of
those things and Rastin and Thicourt laughed and explained some of them
to me as best they could. Much they said that I did not understand but
my eyes saw marvels in that room of which I had never dreamed.

"They showed me a thing like a small glass bottle with wires inside, and
then told me to touch a button beneath it. I did so and the bottle shone
with a brilliant light exceeding that of scores of candles. I shrank
back, but they laughed, and when Rastin touched the button again, the
light in the glass thing vanished. I saw that there were many of these
things in the ceiling.

"They showed me also a rounded black object of metal with a wheel at the
end. A belt ran around the wheel and around smaller wheels connected to
many machines. They touched a lever on this object and a sound of
humming came from it and the wheel turned very fast, turning all the
machines with the belt. It turned faster than any man could ever have
turned it, yet when they touched the lever again, its turning ceased.
They said that it was the power of the lightning in the skies that they
used to make the light and to turn that wheel!

"My brain reeled at the wonders that they showed. One took an instrument
from the table that he held to his face, saying that he would summon the
other scientists or men of knowledge to see their experiment that night.
He spoke into the instrument as though to different men, and let me hear
voices from it answering him! They said that the men who answered were
leagues separated from him!

"I could not believe--and yet somehow I did believe! I was half-dazed
with wonder and yet excited too. The white-bearded man, Rastin, saw
that, and encouraged me. Then they brought a small box with an opening
and placed a black disk on the box, and set it turning in some way. A
woman's voice came from the opening of the box, singing. I shuddered
when they told me that the woman was one who had died years before.
Could the dead speak thus?

       *       *       *       *       *

"How can I describe what I saw there? Another box or cabinet there was,
with an opening also. I thought it was like that from which I had heard
the dead woman singing, but they said it was different. They touched
buttons on it and a voice came from it speaking in a tongue I knew not.
They said that the man was speaking thousands of leagues from us, in a
strange land across the uncrossed western ocean, yet he seemed speaking
by my side!

"They saw how dazed I was by these things, and gave me wine. At that I
took heart, for wine, at least, was as it had always been.

"'You will want to see Paris--the Paris of our time, Henri?' asked
Rastin.

"'But it is different--terrible--' I said.

"'We'll take you,' Thicourt said, 'but first your clothes--'

"He got a long light coat that they had me put on, that covered my tunic
and hose, and a hat of grotesque round shape that they put on my head.
They led me then out of the building and into the street.

"I gazed astoundedly along that street. It had a raised walk at either
side, on which many hundreds of people moved to and fro, all dressed in
as strange a fashion. Many, like Rastin and Thicourt, seemed of gentle
blood, yet, in spite of this, they did not wear a sword or even a
dagger. There were no knights or squires, or priests or peasants. All
seemed dressed much the same.

"Small lads ran to and fro selling what seemed sheets of very thin white
parchment, many times folded and covered with lettering. Rastin said
that these had written in them all things that had happened through all
the world, even but hours before. I said that to write even one of these
sheets would take a clerk many days, but they said that the writing was
done in some way very quickly by machines.

"In the broad stone street between the two raised walks were rushing
back and forth the strange vehicles I had seen from the window. There
was no animal pulling or pushing any one of them, yet they never halted
their swift rush, and carried many people at unthinkable speed.
Sometimes those who walked stepped before the rushing vehicles, and then
from them came terrible warning snarls or moans that made the walkers
draw back.

"One of the vehicles stood at the walk's edge before us, and we entered
it and sat side by side on a soft leather seat. Thicourt sat behind a
wheel on a post, with levers beside him. He touched these and a humming
sound came from somewhere in the vehicle and then it too began to rush
forward. Faster and faster along the street it went, yet neither of them
seemed afraid.

"Many thousands of these vehicles were moving swiftly through the
streets about us. We passed on, between great buildings and along wider
streets, my eyes and ears numbed by what I saw about me. Then the
buildings grew smaller, after we had gone for miles through them, and
we were passing through the city's outskirts. I could not believe,
hardly, that it was Paris in which I was.
