their mutual relations, the laws governing their movements, their
distances from the earth, masses, and intrinsic lustre, had begun to be
successfully investigated. _Begun to be_; for only regarding a scarcely
perceptible minority had even approximate conclusions been arrived at.
Nevertheless the whole progress of the future lay in that beginning; it
was the thin end of the wedge of exact knowledge. The principle of
measurement had been substituted for that of probability; a basis had
been found large and strong enough to enable calculation to ascend from
it to the sidereal heavens; and refinements had been introduced,
fruitful in performance, but still more in promise. Thus, rather the
kind than the amount of information collected was significant for the
time to come--rather the methods employed than the results actually
secured rendered the first half of the nineteenth century of epochal
importance in the history of our knowledge of the stars.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 58: Bessel, _Populaere Vorlesungen_, pp. 6, 408.]

[Footnote 59: Fitted to the old transit instrument, July 11, 1772.]

[Footnote 60: _Briefwechsel mit Olbers_, p. xvi.]

[Footnote 61: R. Wolf, _Gesch. der Astron._, p. 518.]

[Footnote 62: Bessel, _Pop. Vorl._, p. 22.]

[Footnote 63: A new reduction of the observations upon which they were
founded was undertaken in 1896 by Herman S. Davis, of the U.S. Coast
Survey.]

[Footnote 64: Bessel, _Pop. Vorl._, p. 440.]

[Footnote 65: Durege, _Bessel's Leben und Wirken_, p. 28.]

[Footnote 66: _Bonner Beobachtungen_, Bd. iii.-v., 1859-62.]

[Footnote 67: Bessel, _Pop. Vorl._, p. 238.]

[Footnote 68: The heads of the screws applied to move the halves of the
object-glass in the Koenigsberg heliometer are of so considerable a size
that a thousandth part of a revolution, equivalent to 1/20 of a second
of arc, can be measured with the utmost accuracy. Main, _R. A. S. Mem._,
vol. xii., p. 53.]

[Footnote 69: _Specola Astronomica di Palermo_, lib. vi., p. 10,
_note_.]

[Footnote 70: _Monatliche Correspondenz_, vol. xxvi., p. 162.]

[Footnote 71: _Astronomische Nachrichten_, Nos. 365-366. It should be
explained that what is called the "annual parallax" of a star is only
half its apparent displacement. In other words, it is the angle
subtended at the distance of that particular star by the _radius_ of the
earth's orbit.]

[Footnote 72: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 401-402.]

[Footnote 73: Sir R. Ball's measurements at Dunsink gave to 61 Cygni a
parallax of 0.47"; Professor Pritchard obtained, by photographic
determinations, one of 0.43".]

[Footnote 74: _Additamentum in Mensuras Micrometricas_, p. 28.]

[Footnote 75: Elkin's corrected result (in 1897) for the parallax of
Vega is 0.082".]

[Footnote 76: _Mem. Roy. Astr. Soc._, vol. xi., p. 61.]

[Footnote 77: That numbered 21,185 in Lalande's _Hist. Cel._, found by
Argelander to have a proper motion of 4.734", and by Winnecke a parallax
of O.511". _Month. Not._, vol. xviii., p. 289.]

[Footnote 78: _Fund. Astr._, p. 309.]

[Footnote 79: _Mem. Pres. a l'Ac. de St. Petersb._, t. iii.]

[Footnote 80: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cxxxvii., p. 79.]

[Footnote 81: _Mem. Roy. Astr. Soc._, vols. xxviii. and xxxii.]

[Footnote 82: _Ibid._, vol. xlvii., p. 327.]

[Footnote 83: _Memoires de St. Petersbourg_, t. xxxv., No. 3, 1887;
revised in _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 3,729-30, 1901.]

[Footnote 84: _Astronomical Journal_, Nos. 213, 501.]

[Footnote 85: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 2,999, 3,000.]

[Footnote 86: _Veroeffentlichungen der Grossh. Sternwarte zu Karlsruhe_,
Bd. iv., 1892.]

[Footnote 87: _Proceedings Amsterdam Acad. of Sciences_, Jan. 27, 1900.]

[Footnote 88: _Astr. Jour._, No. 457.]

[Footnote 89: _Ibid._, Nos. 276, 497.]

[Footnote 90: _Phil. Trans._, vol. xcvi., p. 230.]

[Footnote 91: _Mem. Pres. a l'Ac. de St. Petersbourg_, t. iii., p. 603
(read Feb. 5, 1837).]

[Footnote 92: _Die Centralsonne, Astr. Nach._, Nos. 566-567, 1846.]

[Footnote 93: Sir J. Herschel, note to _Treatise on Astronomy_, and
_Phil. Trans._, vol. cxxiii., part ii., p. 502.]

[Footnote 94: The position is (as Sir J. Herschel pointed out, _Outlines
of Astronomy_, p. 631, 10th ed.) placed beyond the range of reasonable
probability by its remoteness (fully 26 deg.) from the galactic plane.]

[Footnote 95: Maedler in _Westermann's Jahrbuch_, 1867, p. 615.]

[Footnote 96: Letter from Bessel to Sir J. Herschel, _Month. Not._, vol.
vi., p. 139.]

[Footnote 97: Wolf, _Gesch. d. Astr._, p. 743, _note_.]

[Footnote 98: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 745-748.]

[Footnote 99: _Astr. Jour._, No. 440.]

[Footnote 100: Adopting Elkin's revised parallax for Procyon of 0.325".]

[Footnote 101: _Astr. Nach._, Nos. 1371-1373.]

[Footnote 102: _Ueber die Doppelsterne_, Bericht, 1827, p. 22.]

[Footnote 103: _Ueber die Doppelsterne_, Bericht, 1827, p. 25.]

[Footnote 104: _Mensurae Micr._, p. xcix.]

[Footnote 105: _Stellarum Fixarum imprimis Duplicium et Multiplicum
Positiones Mediae_, pp. cxc., cciii.]

[Footnote 106: For instance, the southern stars, 36A Ophiuchi (itself
double) and 30 Scorpii, which are 12' 10" apart. _Ibid._, p. cciii.]

[Footnote 107: _Stellarum Fixarum_, etc., p. ccliii.]

[Footnote 108: _Etudes d'Astronomie Stellaire_, 1847, p. 82.]

[Footnote 109: _Ibid._, p. 86.]

[Footnote 110: See Encke's criticism in _Astr. Nach._, No. 622.]

[Footnote 111: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cxiv., part iii., 1824.]

[Footnote 112: _Conn. d. Temps_, 1830.]

[Footnote 113: _R. A. S. Mem._, vol. v., p. 178, 1833.]

[Footnote 114: _Astr. and Astrophysics_, vol. xii., p. 581.]

[Footnote 115: _Popular Astr._, vol. i., p. 243.]

[Footnote 116: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cxxiii., and _Results_, etc.,
Introd.]

[Footnote 117: _Results of Astronomical Observations made during the
years 1834-8 at the Cape of Good Hope._]

[Footnote 118: _Results_, etc., p. 147.]

[Footnote 119: See Proctor's _Universe of Stars_, p. 92.]

[Footnote 120: _A Treatise on Astronomy_, 1833, p. 406.]

[Footnote 121: _Results_, etc., p. 139.]

[Footnote 122: _Ibid._, pp. 24, 142.]

[Footnote 123: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cxxiii., p. 503.]

[Footnote 124: _Results_, etc., p. 136.]

[Footnote 125: Loomis, _Month. Not._, vol. xxix., p. 298.]

[Footnote 126: See the Author's _System of the Stars_, pp. 116-120.]

[Footnote 127: _Outlines of Astr._, App. I.]

[Footnote 128: _Phil. Trans._, vol. cxix., p. 27.]

[Footnote 129: Dr. Dreyer's New General Catalogue, published in 1888 as
vol. xlix. of the Royal Astronomical Society's _Memoirs_, is an
enlargement of Herschel's work. It includes 7,840 entries, and was
supplemented, in 1895, by an "Index Catalogue" of 1,529 nebulae
discovered 1888 to 1894. _Mem. R. A. S._, vol. li.]

[Footnote 130: A list of 10,320 composite stars was drawn out by him in
order of right ascension, and has been published in vol. xl. of _Mem. R.
A. S._; but the data requisite for their formation into a catalogue were
not forthcoming. See Main's and Pritchard's _Preface_ to above, and
Dunkin's _Obituary Notices_, p. 73.]




                                CHAPTER III

                _PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE REGARDING THE SUN_


The discovery of sun-spots in 1610 by Fabricius and Galileo first opened
a way for inquiry into the solar constitution; but it was long before
that way was followed with system or profit. The seeming irregularity of
the phenomena discouraged continuous attention; casual observations were
made the basis of arbitrary conjectures, and real knowledge received
little or no increase. In 1620 we find Jean Tarde, Canon of Sarlat,
arguing that because the sun is "the eye of the world," and the eye of
the world _cannot suffer from ophthalmia_, therefore the appearances in
question must be due, not to actual specks or stains on the bright solar
disc, but to the transits of a number of small planets across it! To
this new group of heavenly bodies he gave the name of "Borbonia Sidera,"
and they were claimed in 1633 for the House of Hapsburg, under the title
of "Austriaca Sidera" by Father Malapertius, a Belgian Jesuit.[131] A
similar view was temporarily maintained against Galileo by the justly
celebrated Father Scheiner of Ingolstadt, and later by William
Gascoigne, the inventor of the micrometer; but most of those who were
capable of thinking at all on such subjects (and they were but few)
adhered either to the _cloud theory_ or to the _slag theory_ of
sun-spots. The first was championed by Galileo, the second by Simon
Marius, "astronomer and physician" to the brother Margraves of
Brandenburg. The latter opinion received a further notable development
from the fact that in 1618, a year remarkable for the appearance of
three bright comets, the sun was almost free from spots; whence it was
inferred that the cindery refuse from the great solar conflagration,
which usually appeared as dark blotches on its surface, was occasionally
thrown off in the form of comets, leaving the sun, like a snuffed taper,
to blaze with renewed brilliancy.[132]

In the following century, Derham gathered from observations carried on
during the years 1703-11, "That the spots on the sun are caused by the
eruption of some new volcano therein, which at first pouring out a
prodigious quantity of smoke and other opacous matter, causeth the
spots; and as that fuliginous matter decayeth and spendeth itself, and
the volcano at last becomes more torrid and flaming, so the spots decay,
and grow to umbrae, and at last to faculae."[133]

The view, confidently upheld by Lalande,[134] that spots were rocky
elevations uncovered by the casual ebbing of a luminous ocean, the
surrounding penumbrae representing shoals or sandbanks, had even less to
recommend it than Derham's volcanic theory. Both were, however,
significant of a growing tendency to bring solar phenomena within the
compass of terrestrial analogies.

For 164 years, then, after Galileo first levelled his telescope at the
setting sun, next to nothing was learned as to its nature; and the facts
immediately ascertained, of its rotation on an axis nearly erect to the
plane of the ecliptic, in a period of between twenty-five and twenty-six
days, and of the virtual limitation of the spots to a so-called "royal"
zone extending some thirty degrees north and south of the solar equator,
gained little either in precision or development from five generations
of astronomers.

But in November, 1769, a spot of extraordinary size engaged the
attention of Alexander Wilson, professor of astronomy in the University
of Glasgow. He watched it day by day, and to good purpose. As the great
globe slowly revolved, carrying the spot towards its western edge, he
was struck with the gradual contraction and final disappearance of the
penumbra _on the side next the centre of the disc_; and when on the 6th
of December the same spot re-emerged on the eastern limb, he perceived,
as he had anticipated, that the shady zone was now deficient _on the
opposite side_, and resumed its original completeness as it returned to
a central position. In other spots subsequently examined by him, similar
perspective effects were visible, and he proved in 1774,[135] by strict
geometrical reasoning, that they could only arise in vast photospheric
excavations. It was not, indeed, the first time that such a view had
been suggested. Father Scheiner's later observations plainly
foreshadowed it;[136] a conjecture to the same effect was emitted by
Leonard Rost of Nuremburg early in the eighteenth century;[137] both by
Lahire in 1703 and by J. Cassini in 1719 spots had been seen as notches
on the solar limb; while in 1770 Pastor Schuelen of Essingen, from the
careful study of phenomena similar to those noted by Wilson, concluded
their depressed nature.[138] Modern observations, nevertheless, prove
those phenomena to be by no means universally present.

Wilson's general theory of the sun was avowedly tentative. It took the
modest form of an interrogatory. "Is it not reasonable to think," he
asks, "that the great and stupendous body of the sun is made up of two
kinds of matter, very different in their qualities; that by far the
greater part is solid and dark, and that this immense and dark globe is
encompassed with a thin covering of that resplendent substance from
which the sun would seem to derive the whole of his vivifying heat and
energy?"[139] He further suggests that the excavations or spots may be
occasioned "by the working of some sort of elastic vapour which is
generated within the dark globe," and that the luminous matter, being in
some degree fluid, and being acted upon by gravity, tends to flow down
and cover the nucleus. From these hints, supplemented by his own
diligent observations and sagacious reasonings, Herschel elaborated a
scheme of solar constitution which held its ground until the physics of
the sun were revolutionised by the spectroscope.

A cool, dark, solid globe, its surface diversified with mountains and
valleys, clothed in luxuriant vegetation, and "richly stored with
inhabitants," protected by a heavy cloud-canopy from the intolerable
glare of the upper luminous region, where the dazzling coruscations of a
solar aurora some thousands of miles in depth evolved the stores of
light and heat which vivify our world--such was the central luminary
which Herschel constructed with his wonted ingenuity, and described with
his wonted eloquence.

"This way of considering the sun and its atmosphere," he says,[140]
"removes the great dissimilarity we have hitherto been used to find
between its condition and that of the rest of the great bodies of the
solar system. The sun, viewed in this light, appears to be nothing else
than a very eminent, large, and lucid planet, evidently the first, or,
in strictness of speaking, the only primary one of our system; all
others being truly secondary to it. Its similarity to the other globes
of the solar system with regard to its solidity, its atmosphere, and its
diversified surface, the rotation upon its axis, and the fall of heavy
bodies, leads us on to suppose that it is most probably also inhabited,
like the rest of the planets, by beings whose organs are adapted to the
peculiar circumstances of that vast globe."

We smile at conclusions which our present knowledge condemns as
extravagant and impossible, but such incidental flights of fancy in no
way derogate from the high value of Herschel's contributions to solar
science. The cloud-like character which he attributed to the radiant
shell of the sun (first named by Schroeter the "photosphere") is borne
out by all recent investigations; he observed its mottled or corrugated
aspect, resembling, as he described it, the roughness on the rind of an
orange; showed that "faculae" are elevations or heaped-up ridges of the
disturbed photospheric matter; and threw out the idea that spots may
ensue from an excess of the ordinary luminous emissions. A certain
"empyreal" gas was, he supposed (very much as Wilson had done),
generated in the body of the sun, and rising everywhere by reason of its
lightness, made for itself, when in moderate quantities, small openings
or "pores,"[141] abundantly visible as dark points on the solar disc.
But should an uncommon quantity be formed, "it will," he maintained,
"burst through the planetary[142] regions of clouds, and thus will
produce great openings; then, spreading itself above them, it will
occasion large shallows (penumbrae), and mixing afterwards gradually with
other superior gases, it will promote the increase, and assist in the
maintenance, of the general luminous phenomena."[143]

This partial anticipation of the modern view that the solar radiations
are maintained by some process of circulation within the solar mass, was
reached by Herschel through prolonged study of the phenomena in
question. The novel and important idea contained in it, however, it was
at that time premature to attempt to develop. But though many of the
subtler suggestions of Herschel's genius passed unnoticed by his
contemporaries, the main result of his solar researches was an
unmistakable one. It was nothing less than the definitive introduction
into astronomy of the paradoxical conception of the central fire and
hearth of our system as a cold, dark, terrestrial mass, wrapt in a
mantle of innocuous radiance--an earth, so to speak, within--a sun
without.

Let us pause for a moment to consider the value of this remarkable
innovation. It certainly was not a step in the direction of truth. On
the contrary, the crude notions of Anaxagoras and Xeno approached more
nearly to what we now know of the sun, than the complicated structure
devised for the happiness of a nobler race of beings than our own by the
benevolence of eighteenth-century astronomers. And yet it undoubtedly
constituted a very important advance in science. It was the first
earnest attempt to bring solar phenomena within the compass of a
rational system; to put together into a consistent whole the facts
ascertained; to fabricate, in short, a solar machine that would in some
fashion work. It is true that the materials were inadequate and the
design faulty. The resulting construction has not proved strong enough
to stand the wear and tear of time and discovery, but has had to be
taken to pieces and remodelled on a totally different plan. But the work
was not therefore done in vain. None of Bacon's aphorisms show a clearer
insight into the relations between the human mind and the external world
than that which declares "Truth to emerge sooner from error than from
confusion."[144] A definite theory (even if a false one) gives
holding-ground to thought. Facts acquire a meaning with reference to it.
It affords a motive for accumulating them and a means of co-ordinating
them; it provides a framework for their arrangement, and a receptacle
for their preservation, until they become too strong and numerous to be
any longer included within arbitrary limits, and shatter the vessel
originally framed to contain them.

Such was the purpose subserved by Herschel's theory of the sun. It
helped to _clarify_ ideas on the subject. The turbid sense of groping
and viewless ignorance gave place to the lucidity of a possible scheme.
The persuasion of knowledge is a keen incentive to its increase. Few men
care to investigate what they are obliged to admit themselves entirely
ignorant of; but once started on the road of knowledge, real or
supposed, they are eager to pursue it. By the promulgation of a
confident and consistent view regarding the nature of the sun,
accordingly, research was encouraged, because it was rendered hopeful,
and inquirers were shown a path leading indefinitely onwards where an
impassable thicket had before seemed to bar the way.

We have called the "terrestrial" theory of the sun's nature an
innovation, and so, as far as its general acceptance is concerned, it
may justly be termed; but, like all successful innovations, it was a
long time brewing. It is extremely curious to find that Herschel had a
predecessor in its advocacy who never looked through a telescope (nor,
indeed, imagined the possibility of such an instrument), who knew
nothing of sun-spots, was still (mistaken assertions to the contrary
notwithstanding) in the bondage of the geocentric system, and regarded
nature from the lofty standpoint of an idealist philosophy. This was the
learned and enlightened Cardinal Cusa, a fisherman's son from the banks
of the Moselle, whose distinguished career in the Church and in
literature extended over a considerable part of the fifteenth century
(1401-64). In his singular treatise _De Docta Ignorantia_, one of the
most notable literary monuments of the early Renaissance, the following
passage occurs:--"To a spectator on the surface of the sun, the
splendour which appears to us would be invisible, since it contains, as
it were, an earth for its central mass, with a circumferential envelope
of light and heat, and between the two an atmosphere of water and clouds
and translucent air." The luminary of Herschel's fancy could scarcely be
more clearly portrayed; some added words, however, betray the origin of
the Cardinal's idea. "The earth also," he says, "would appear as a
shining star to any one outside the fiery element." It was, in fact, an
extension to the sun of the ancient elemental doctrine; but an extension
remarkable at that period, as premonitory of the tendency, so powerfully
developed by subsequent discoveries, to assimilate the orbs of heaven to
the model of our insignificant planet, and to extend the brotherhood of
our system and our species to the farthest limit of the visible or
imaginable universe.

In later times we find Flamsteed communicating to Newton, March 7, 1681,
his opinion "that the substance of the sun is terrestrial matter, his
light but the liquid menstruum encompassing him."[145] Bode in 1776
arrived independently at the conclusion that "the sun is neither burning
nor glowing, but in its essence a dark planetary body, composed like our
earth of land and water, varied by mountains and valleys, and enveloped
in a vaporous atmosphere";[146] and the learned in general applauded and
acquiesced. The view, however, was in 1787 still so far from popular,
that the holding of it was alleged as a proof of insanity in Dr. Elliot
when accused of a murderous assault on Miss Boydell. His friend Dr.
Simmons stated on his behalf that he had received from him in the
preceding January a letter giving evidence of a deranged mind, wherein
he asserted "that the sun is not a body of fire, as hath been hitherto
supposed, but that its light proceeds from a dense and universal aurora,
which may afford ample light to the inhabitants of the surface beneath,
and yet be at such a distance aloft as not to annoy them. No objection,
he saith, ariseth to that great luminary's being inhabited; vegetation
may obtain there as well as with us. There may be water and dry land,
hills and dales, rain and fair weather; and as the light, so the season
must be eternal, consequently it may easily be conceived to be by far
the most blissful habitation of the whole system!" The Recorder,
nevertheless, objected that if an extravagant hypothesis were to be
adduced as proof of insanity, the same might hold good with regard to
some other speculators, and desired Dr. Simmons to tell the court what
he thought of the theories of Burnet and Buffon.[147]

Eight years later, this same "extravagant hypothesis," backed by the
powerful recommendation of Sir William Herschel, obtained admittance to
the venerable halls of science, there to abide undisturbed for nearly
seven decades. Individual objectors, it is true, made themselves heard,
but their arguments had little effect on the general body of opinion.
Ruder blows were required to shatter an hypothesis flattering to human
pride of invention in its completeness, in the plausible detail of
observations by which it seemed to be supported, and in its
condescension to the natural pleasure in discovering resemblance under
all but total dissimilarity.

Sir John Herschel included among the results of his multifarious labours
at the Cape of Good Hope a careful study of the sun-spots conspicuously
visible towards the end of the year 1836 and in the early part of 1837.
They were remarkable, he tells us, for their forms and arrangement, as
well as for their number and size; one group, measured on the 29th of
March in the latter year, covering (apart from what may be called its
outlying dependencies) the vast area of five square minutes or 3,780
million square miles.[148] We have at present to consider, however, not
so much these observations in themselves, as the chain of theoretical
suggestions by which they were connected. The distribution of spots, it
was pointed out, on two zones parallel to the equator, showed plainly
their intimate connection with the solar rotation, and indicated as
their cause fluid circulations analogous to those producing the
terrestrial trade and anti-trade winds.

"The spots, in this view of the subject," he went on to say,[149] "would
come to be assimilated to those regions on the earth's surface where,
for the moment, hurricanes and tornadoes prevail; the upper stratum
being temporarily carried downwards, displacing by its impetus the two
strata of luminous matter beneath, the upper of course to a greater
extent than the lower, and thus wholly or partially denuding the opaque
surface of the sun below. Such processes cannot be unaccompanied by
vorticose motions, which, left to themselves, die away by degrees and
dissipate, with the peculiarity that their lower portions come to rest
more speedily than their upper, by reason of the greater resistance
below, as well as the remoteness from the point of action, which lies in
a higher region, so that their centres (as seen in our waterspouts,
which are nothing but small tornadoes) appear to retreat upwards. Now
this agrees perfectly with what is observed during the obliteration of
the solar spots, which appear as if filled in by the collapse of their
sides, the penumbra closing in upon the spot and disappearing after it."

But when it comes to be asked whether a cause can be found by which a
diversity of solar temperature might be produced corresponding with that
which sets the currents of the terrestrial atmosphere in motion, we are
forced to reply that we know of no such cause. For Sir John Herschel's
hypothesis of an increased retention of heat at the sun's equator, due
to the slightly spheroidal or bulging form of its outer atmospheric
envelope, assuredly gives no sufficient account of such circulatory
movements as he supposed to exist. Nevertheless, the view that the sun's
rotation is intimately connected with the formation of spots is so
obviously correct, that we can only wonder it was not thought of sooner,
while we are even now unable to explain with any certainty _how_ it is
so connected.

Mere scrutiny of the solar surface, however, is not the only means of
solar observation. We have a satellite, and that satellite from time to
time acts most opportunely as a screen, cutting off a part or the whole
of those dazzling rays in which the master-orb of our system veils
himself from over-curious regards. The importance of eclipses to the
study of the solar surroundings is of comparatively recent recognition;
nevertheless, much of what we know concerning them has been snatched, as
it were, by surprise under favour of the moon. In former times, the sole
astronomical use of such incidents was the correction of the received
theories of the solar and lunar movements; the precise time of their
occurrence was the main fact to be noted, and subsidiary phenomena
received but casual attention. Now, their significance as a geometrical
test of tabular accuracy is altogether overshadowed by the interest
attaching to the physical observations for which they afford propitious
occasions. This change may be said to date, in its pronounced form, from
the great eclipse of 1842. Although a necessary consequence of the
general direction taken by scientific progress, it remains associated in
a special manner with the name of Francis Baily.

The "philosopher of Newbury" was by profession a London stockbroker, and
a highly successful one. Nevertheless, his services to science were
numerous and invaluable, though not of the brilliant kind which attract
popular notice. Born at Newbury in Berkshire, April 28, 1774, and placed
in the City at the age of fourteen, he derived from the acquaintance of
Dr. Priestley a love of science which never afterwards left him. It was,
however, no passion such as flames up in the brain of the destined
discoverer, but a regulated inclination, kept well within the bounds of
an actively pursued commercial career. After travelling for a year or
two in what were then the wilds of North America, he went on the Stock
Exchange in 1799, and earned during twenty-four years of assiduous
application to affairs a high reputation for integrity and ability, to
which corresponded an ample fortune. In the meantime the Astronomical
Society (largely through his co-operation) had been founded; he had for
three years acted as its secretary, and he now felt entitled to devote
himself exclusively to a subject which had long occupied his leisure
hours. He accordingly in 1825 retired from business, purchased a house
in Tavistock Place, and fitted up there a small observatory. He was,
however, by preference a computator rather than an observer. What Sir
John Herschel calls the "archaeology of practical astronomy" found in him
an especially zealous student. He re-edited the star-catalogues of
Ptolemy, Ulugh Beigh, Tycho Brahe, Hevelius, Halley, Flamsteed,
Lacaille, and Mayer; calculated the eclipse of Thales and the eclipse of
Agathocles, and vindicated the memory of the first Astronomer Royal. But
he was no less active in meeting present needs than in revising past
performances. The subject of the reduction of observations, then, as we
have already explained,[150] in a state of deplorable confusion,
attracted his most earnest attention, and he was close on the track of
Bessel when made acquainted with the method of simplification devised at
Koenigsberg. Anticipated as an inventor, he could still be of eminent use
as a promoter of these valuable improvements; and, carrying them out on
a large scale in the star-catalogue of the Astronomical Society
(published in 1827), "he put" (in the words of Herschel) "the
astronomical world in possession of a power which may be said, without
exaggeration, to have changed the face of sidereal astronomy."[151]

His reputation was still further enhanced by his renewal, with vastly
improved apparatus, of the method, first used by Henry Cavendish in
1797-98, for determining the density of the earth. From a series of no
less than 2,153 delicate and difficult experiments, conducted at
Tavistock Place during the years 1838-42, he concluded our planet to
weigh 5.66 as much as a globe of water of the same bulk; and this result
slightly corrected is still accepted as a very close approximation of
the truth.

What we have thus glanced at is but a fragment of the truly surprising
mass of work accomplished by Baily in the course of a variously occupied
life. A rare combination of qualities fitted him for his task. Unvarying
health, undisturbed equanimity, methodical habits, the power of directed
and sustained thought, combined to form in him an intellectual toiler of
the surest, though not perhaps of the highest quality. He was in harness
almost to the end. He was destined scarcely to know the miseries of
enforced idleness or of consciously failing powers. In 1842 he completed
the laborious reduction of Lalande's great catalogue, undertaken at the
request of the British Association, and was still engaged in seeing it
through the press when he was attacked with what proved his last, as it
was probably his first serious illness. He, however, recovered
sufficiently to attend the Oxford Commemoration of July 2, 1844, where
an honorary degree of D.C.L. was conferred upon him in company with Airy
and Struve; but sank rapidly after the effort, and died on the 30th of
August following, at the age of seventy, lamented and esteemed by all
who knew him.

It is now time to consider his share in the promotion of solar research.
Eclipses of the sun, both ancient and modern, were a speciality with
him, and he was fortunate in those which came under his observation.
Such phenomena are of three kinds--partial, annular, and total. In a
partial eclipse, the moon, instead of passing directly between us and
the sun, slips by, as it were, a little on one side, thus cutting off
from our sight only a portion of his surface. An annular eclipse, on the
other hand, takes place when the moon is indeed centrally interposed,
but falls short of the apparent size required for the entire concealment
of the solar disc, which consequently remains visible as a bright ring
or annulus, even when the obscuration is at its height. In a total
eclipse, on the contrary, the sun completely disappears behind the dark
body of the moon. The difference of the two latter varieties is due to
the fact that the apparent diameter of the sun and moon are so nearly
equal as to gain alternate preponderance one over the other through the
slight periodical changes in their respective distances from the earth.

Now, on the 15th of May, 1836, an annular eclipse was visible in the
northern parts of Great Britain, and was observed by Baily at Inch
Bonney, near Jedburgh. It was here that he saw the phenomenon which
obtained the name of "Baily's Beads," from the notoriety conferred upon
it by his vivid description.

"When the cusps of the sun," he writes, "were about 40 deg. asunder, a
row of lucid points, like a string of bright beads, irregular in size
and distance from each other, _suddenly_ formed round that part of the
circumference of the moon that was about to enter on the sun's disc. Its
formation, indeed, was so rapid that it presented the appearance of
having been caused by the ignition of a fine train of gunpowder.
Finally, as the moon pursued her course, the dark intervening spaces
(which, at their origin, had the appearance of lunar mountains in high
relief, and which still continued attached to the sun's border) were
stretched out into long, black, thick, parallel lines, joining the limbs
of the sun and moon; when all at once they _suddenly_ gave way, and left
the circumference of the sun and moon in those points, as in the rest,
comparatively smooth and circular, and the moon perceptibly advanced on
the face of the sun."[152]

These curious appearances were not an absolute novelty. Weber in 1791,
and Von Zach in 1820, had seen the "beads"; Van Swinden had described
the "belts" or "threads."[153] These last were, moreover (as Baily
clearly perceived), completely analogous to the "black ligament" which
formed so troublesome a feature in the transits of Venus in 1764 and
1769, and which, to the regret and confusion, though no longer to the
surprise of observers, was renewed in that of 1874. The phenomenon is
largely an effect of what is called _irradiation_, by which a bright
object seems to encroach upon a dark one; but under good atmospheric and
instrumental conditions it becomes inconspicuous. The "Beads" must
always appear when the projected lunar edge is serrated with mountains.
In Baily's observation, they were exaggerated and distorted by an
irradiative _clinging together_ of the limbs of sun and moon.

The immediate result, however, was powerfully to stimulate attention to
solar eclipses in their _physical_ aspect. Never before had an
occurrence of the kind been expected so eagerly or prepared for so
actively as that which was total over Central and Southern Europe on the
8th of July, 1842. Astronomers hastened from all quarters to the
favoured region. The Astronomer Royal (Airy) repaired to Turin; Baily to
Pavia; Otto Struve threw aside his work amidst the stars at Pulkowa, and
went south as far as Lipeszk; Schumacher travelled from Altona to
Vienna; Arago from Paris to Perpignan. Nor did their trouble go
unrewarded. The expectations of the most sanguine were outdone by the
wonders disclosed.

Baily (to whose narrative we again have recourse) had set up his
Dollond's achromatic in an upper room of the University of Pavia, and
was eagerly engaged in noting a partial repetition of the singular
appearances seen by him in 1836, when he was "astounded by a tremendous
burst of applause from the streets below, and at the same moment was
electrified at the sight of one of the most brilliant and splendid
phenomena that can well be imagined. For at that instant the dark body
of the moon was suddenly surrounded with a corona, or kind of bright
glory similar in shape and relative magnitude to that which painters
draw round the heads of saints, and which by the French is designated an
_aureole_. Pavia contains many thousand inhabitants, the major part of
whom were, at this early hour, walking about the streets and squares or
looking out of windows, in order to witness this long-talked-of
phenomenon; and when the total obscuration took place, which was
_instantaneous_, there was a universal shout from every observer, which
'made the welkin ring,' and, for the moment, withdrew my attention from
the object with which I was immediately occupied. I had indeed
anticipated the appearance of a luminous circle round the moon during
the time of total obscurity; but I did not expect, from any of the
accounts of preceding eclipses that I had read, to witness so
magnificent an exhibition as that which took place.... The breadth of
the corona, measured from the circumference of the moon, appeared to me
to be nearly equal to half the moon's diameter. It had the appearance of
brilliant rays. The light was most dense close to the border of the
moon, and became gradually and uniformly more attenuate as its distance
therefrom increased, assuming the form of diverging rays in a
rectilinear line, which at the extremity were more divided, and of an
unequal length; so that in no part of the corona could I discover the
regular and well-defined shape of a ring at its _outer_ margin. It
appeared to me to have the sun for its centre, but I had no means of
taking any accurate measures for determining this point. Its colour was
quite white, not pearl-colour, nor yellow, nor red, and the rays had a
vivid and flickering appearance, somewhat like that which a gaslight
illumination might be supposed to assume if formed into a similar
shape.... Splendid and astonishing, however, as this remarkable
phenomenon really was, and although it could not fail to call forth the
admiration and applause of every beholder, yet I must confess that there
was at the same time something in its singular and wonderful appearance
that was appalling; and I can readily imagine that uncivilised nations
may occasionally have become alarmed and terrified at such an object,
more especially at times when the true cause of the occurrence may have
been but faintly understood, and the phenomenon itself wholly
unexpected.

"But the most remarkable circumstance attending the phenomenon was the
appearance of _three large protuberances_ apparently emanating from the
circumference of the moon, but evidently forming a portion of the
corona. They had the appearance of mountains of a prodigious elevation;
their colour was red, tinged with lilac or purple; perhaps the colour of
the peach-blossom would more nearly represent it. They somewhat
resembled the snowy tops of the Alpine mountains when coloured by the
rising or setting sun. They resembled the Alpine mountains also in
another respect, inasmuch as their light was perfectly steady, and had
none of that flickering or sparkling motion so visible in other parts of
the corona. All the three projections were of the same roseate cast of
colour, and very different from the brilliant vivid white light that
formed the corona; but they differed from each other in magnitude....
The whole of these three protuberances were visible even to the last
moment of total obscuration; at least, I never lost sight of them when
looking in that direction; and when the first ray of light was admitted
from the sun, they vanished, with the corona, altogether, and daylight
was instantaneously restored."[154]

Notwithstanding unfavourable weather, the "red flames" were perceived
with little less clearness and no less amazement from the Superga than
at Pavia, and were even discerned by Mr. Airy with the naked eye. "Their
form" (the Astronomer Royal wrote) "was nearly that of saw-teeth in the
position proper for a circular saw turned round in the same direction in
which the hands of a watch turn.... Their colour was a full lake-red,
and their brilliancy greater than that of any other part of the
ring."[155]

The height of these extraordinary objects was estimated by Arago at two
minutes of arc, representing, at the sun's distance, an actual elevation
of 54,000 miles. When carefully watched, the rose-flush of their
illumination was perceived to fade through violet to white as the light
returned, the same changes in a reversed order having accompanied their
first appearance. Their forms, however, during about three minutes of
visibility, showed no change, although of so apparently unstable a
character as to suggest to Arago "mountains on the point of crumbling
into ruins" through topheaviness.[156]

The corona, both as to figure and extent, presented very different
appearances at different stations. This was no doubt due to varieties in
atmospheric conditions. At the Superga, for instance, all details of
structure seem to have been effaced by the murky air, only a
comparatively feeble ring of light being seen to encircle the moon.
Elsewhere, a brilliant radiated formation was conspicuous, spreading at
four opposite points into four vast luminous expansions, compared to
feather-plumes or _aigrettes_.[157] Arago at Perpignan noticed
considerable irregularities in the divergent rays. Some appeared curved
and twisted, a few lay _across_ the others, in a direction almost
tangential to the moon's limb, the general effect being described as
that of a "hank of thread in disorder."[158] At Lipeszk, where the sun
stood much higher above the horizon than in Italy or France, the corona
showed with surprising splendour. Its apparent extent was judged by
Struve to be no less than twenty-five minutes (more than six times
Airy's estimate), while the great plumes spread their radiance to three
or four degrees from the dark lunar edge. So dazzling was the light that
many well-instructed persons denied the totality of the eclipse. Nor was
the error without precedent, although the appearances attending
respectively a total and an annular eclipse are in reality wholly
dissimilar. In the latter case, the surviving ring of sunlight becomes
so much enlarged by irradiation, that the interposed dark lunar body is
reduced to comparative insignificance, or even invisibility. Maclaurin
tells us[159] that during an eclipse of this character which he observed
at Edinburgh in 1737, "gentlemen by no means shortsighted declared
themselves unable to discern the moon upon the sun without the aid of a
smoked glass;" and Baily (who, however, _was_ shortsighted) could
distinguish, in 1836, with the naked eye, no trace of "the globe of
purple velvet" which the telescope revealed as projected upon the face
of the sun.[160] Moreover, the diminution of light is described by him
as "little more than might be caused by a temporary cloud passing over
the sun"; the birds continued in full song, and "one cock in particular
was crowing with all his might while the annulus was forming."

Very different were the effects of the eclipse of 1842, as to which some
interesting particulars were collected by Arago.[161] Beasts of burthen,
he tells us, paused in their labour, and could by no amount of
punishment be induced to move until the sun reappeared. Birds and beasts
abandoned their food; linnets were found dead in their cages; even ants
suspended their toil. Diligence-horses, on the other hand, seemed as
insensible to the phenomenon as locomotives. The convolvulus and some
other plants closed their leaves, but those of the mimosa remained open.
The little light that remained was of a livid hue. One observer
described the general coloration as resembling the lees of wine, but
human faces showed pale olive or greenish. We may, then, rest assured
that none of the remarkable obscurations recorded in history were due to
eclipses of the annular kind.

The existence of the corona is no modern discovery. Indeed, it is too
conspicuous an apparition to escape notice from the least attentive or
least practised observer of a total eclipse. Nevertheless, explicit
references to it are rare in early times. Plutarch, however, speaks of a
"certain splendour" compassing round the hidden edge of the sun, as a
regular feature of total eclipses;[162] and the corona is expressly
mentioned in a description of an eclipse visible at Corfu in 968
A.D.[163] The first to take the phenomenon into scientific consideration
was Kepler. He showed, from the orbital positions at the time of the sun
and moon, that an eclipse observed by Clavius at Rome in 1567 could not
have been annular,[164] as the dazzling coronal radiance visible during
the obscuration had caused it to be believed. Although he himself never
witnessed a total eclipse of the sun, he carefully collected and
compared the remarks of those more fortunate, and concluded that the
ring of "flame-like splendour" seen on such occasions was caused by the
reflection of the solar rays from matter condensed in the neighbourhood
either of the sun or moon.[165] To the solar explanation he gave his own
decided preference; but, with one of those curious flashes of
half-prophetic insight characteristic of his genius, declared that "it
should be laid by ready for use, not brought into immediate
requisition."[166] So literally was his advice acted upon, that the
theory, which we now know to be (broadly speaking) the correct one, only
emerged from the repository of anticipated truths after 236 years of
almost complete retirement, and even then timorously and with
hesitation.

The first eclipse of which the attendant phenomena were observed with
tolerable exactness was that which was central in the South of France,
May 12, 1706. Cassini then put forward the view that the "crown of pale
light" seen round the lunar disc was caused by the illumination of the
zodiacal light;[167] but it failed to receive the attention which, as a
step in the right direction, it undoubtedly merited. Nine years later we
meet with Halley's comments on a similar event, the first which had
occurred in London since March 20, 1140. By nine in the morning of May
3, 1715, the obscuration, he tells us, "was about ten digits,[168] when
the face and colour of the sky began to change from perfect serene azure
blue to a more dusky livid colour, having an eye of purple intermixt....
A few seconds before the sun was all hid, there discovered itself round
the moon a luminous ring, about a digit or perhaps a tenth part of the
moon's diameter in breadth. It was of a pale whiteness, or rather pearl
colour, seeming to be a little tinged with the colours of the iris, and
to be concentric with the moon, whence I concluded it the moon's
atmosphere. But the great height thereof, far exceeding our earth's
atmosphere, and the observation of some, who found the breadth of the
ring to increase on the west side of the moon as emersion approached,
together with the contrary sentiments of those whose judgment I shall
always revere" (Newton is most probably referred to), "makes me less
confident, especially in a matter whereto I confess I gave not all the
attention requisite." He concludes by declining to decide whether the
"enlightened atmosphere," which the appearance "in all respects
resembled," "belonged to sun or moon."[169]

A French Academician, who happened to be in London at the time, was less
guarded in expressing an opinion. The Chevalier de Louville declared
emphatically for the lunar atmospheric theory of the corona,[170] and
his authority carried great weight. It was, however, much discredited by
an observation made by Maraldi in 1724, to the effect that the luminous
ring, instead of travelling _with_ the moon, was traversed _by_ it.[171]
This was in reality decisive, though, as usual, belief lagged far behind
demonstration. In 1715 a novel explanation had been offered by Delisle
and Lahire,[172] supported by experiments regarded at the time as
perfectly satisfactory. The aureola round the eclipsed sun, they argued,
is simply a result of the _diffraction_, or apparent bending of the
sunbeams that graze the surface of the lunar globe--an effect of the
same kind as the coloured fringes of shadows. And this view prevailed
amongst men of science until (and even after) Brewster showed, with
clear and simple decisiveness, that such an effect could by no
possibility be appreciable at our distance from the moon.[173] Don Jose
Joaquim de Ferrer, however, who observed a total eclipse of the sun at
Kinderhook, in the State of New York, on June 16, 1806, ignoring this
refined optical _rationale_, considered two alternative explanations of
the phenomenon as alone possible. The bright ring round the moon must be
due to the illumination either of a lunar or of a solar atmosphere. If
the former, he calculated that it should have a height fifty times that
of the earth's gaseous envelope. "Such an atmosphere," he rightly
concluded, "cannot belong to the moon, but must without any doubt belong
to the sun."[174] But he stood alone in this unhesitating assertion.

The importance of the problem was first brought fully home to
astronomers by the eclipse of 1842. The brilliant and complex appearance
which on that occasion challenged the attention of so many observers,
demanded and received, no longer the casual attention hitherto bestowed
upon it, but the most earnest study of those interested in the progress
of science. Nevertheless, it was only by degrees, and through a process
of "exclusions" (to use a Baconian phrase) that the corona was put in
its right place as a solar appendage. As every other available
explanation proved inadmissible and dropped out of sight, the broad
presentation of fact remained, which, though of sufficiently obvious
interpretation, was long and persistently misconstrued. Nor was it until
1869 that absolutely decisive evidence on the subject was forthcoming,
as we shall see further on.

Sir John Herschel, writing to his venerable aunt, relates that when the
brilliant red flames burst into view behind the dark moon on the morning
of the 8th of July, 1842, the populace of Milan, with the usual
inconsequence of a crowd, raised the shout, "_Es leben die
Astronomen!_"[175] In reality, none were less prepared for their
apparition than the class to whom the applause due to the magnificent
spectacle was thus adjudged. And in some measure through their own
fault, for many partial hints and some distinct statements from earlier
observers had given unheeded notice that some such phenomenon might be
expected to attend a solar eclipse.

What we now call the "chromosphere" is an envelope of glowing gases, by
which the sun is completely covered, and from which the "prominences"
are emanations, eruptive or flame-like. Now, continual indications of
the presence of this fire-ocean had been detected during eclipses in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Captain Stannyan, describing in a
letter to Flamsteed an occurrence of the kind witnessed by him at Berne
on May 1 (o.s.), 1706, says that the sun's "getting out of the eclipse
was preceded by a blood-red streak of light from its left limb."[176] A
precisely similar appearance was noted by both Halley and De Louville in
1715; during annular eclipses by Lord Aberdour in 1737,[177] and by
Short in 1748,[178] the tint of the ruby border being, however, subdued
to "brown" or "dusky red" by the surviving sunlight; while observations
identical in character were made at Amsterdam in 1820,[179] at Edinburgh
by Henderson in 1836, and at New York in 1838.[180]
