"Evidently they wear grey suits of some kind, probably for protection."

"They took them off anyway," Channeljumper said, eager to impart his
knowledge, "and they were sort of pink-orange underneath. There are only
two of them, and one has long hair."

"Strange," Longtree mused, thinking of their own hairless bodies.
"Wonder what they want."

Channeljumper shrugged to indicate he didn't know. "The short-haired one
followed me," he said.

Longtree felt the chill blue of fear creep along his spine, but
immediate anger at himself changed it conveniently to purple, and he was
certain Channeljumper hadn't noticed. When he had controlled himself, he
said, "Well, it doesn't matter. I've got to get on with my symphony.
That last note--"

"He's here," Channeljumper announced.

"What?"

Channeljumper pointed eagerly, and Longtree's eyes followed the
direction to where the alien stood at the top of a nearby dune staring
at them. Longtree could feel his skin automatically turning red with
caution, blending with the sand while the ever-trusting Channeljumper
remained bright orange.

"Good gosh," the alien exclaimed. "Not only do they look like modified
grasshoppers, they change color too!"

"What'd he say?" Longtree demanded.

"How should I know?" Channeljumper said. "It's in another language."

"And its voice," Longtree exclaimed, almost disbelieving it. "Low. Lower
than even our drums' rumble."

"And they talk in squeaks yet!" the alien told himself aloud.

Longtree regarded the alien carefully. As Channeljumper had said, the
creature was short and had close-cropped hair on its head. The legs were
brief and pudgy, and Longtree felt a shade of pity for the creature who
could obviously not get around as well as they. It was undoubtedly
intelligent--the space rocket testified to that--and the fact that the
creature's skin color stayed a peaceful pink-orange helped assure
Longtree the alien's mission was friendly.

The alien raised a short arm and stepped slowly forward. "I come in
peace," he said in the language they could not understand. "My wife and
I are probably the only humans left alive. When we left Earth, most of
the population had been wiped out by atomics. I think we were the only
ones to get away."

Longtree felt his redness subside to orange, as he wondered idly what
the alien had said. Except for a natural curiosity, he didn't really
care, for he remembered suddenly the symphony he had to finish by
tomorrow if he were to marry Redsand. But there was the element of
politeness to consider, so he nudged Channeljumper.

"Don't just stand there, say something!"

Channeljumper flustered and turned several colors in rapid succession.
He stammered, "Er--ah--welcome to our planet, O visitor from space," and
motioned the alien to sit down.

"That's not very creative," Longtree accused.

"What's the difference," Channeljumper pointed out, "when he doesn't
understand us anyway."

"You guys don't really look like grasshoppers," the man from Earth
apologized, coming forward; "it's just the long legs that fooled me from
up there. Boy, am I glad to find somebody intelligent on Mars; from the
air we couldn't see any cities or anything, and we were afraid the
