Barra scowled furiously.

"You incapable imbecile! You dare to call your master a liar?"

He swung about, his furious gaze scanning the village. The pile of
stones he had noticed before caught his attention. He focused on it.

A few stones rose into the air and flew toward the headman.

The old man faced about, his eyes widening in sudden fear. He dodged one
of the flying stones, then turned to flee.

Barra flicked a second control on him briefly and the flight was halted.

More stones flew, making thudding sounds as they struck, then sailing
away, to gain velocity before they curved back, to strike again.

At last, Barra turned from the litter of rock about the formless mass on
the ground. He stared around the village, the fury slowly ebbing within
him.

A few faces could be seen, peeping from windows and from between trees.
He motioned.

"All villagers," he ordered. "Here before me. Now!" He waited
impatiently as people reluctantly came from their huts and out of the
trees, to approach the clearing.

At last, the villagers were assembled. Barra looked them over,
identifying each as he looked at him. Apart from the others, one of the
younger herd guards stood close to his woman. Barra looked at him
thoughtfully.

This man, he had noted, was obeyed by both herds and herdsmen. He had
seen him at work, as he had seen all the villagers, and obviously, the
man was capable of quick decisions--as quick, that was, as any pseudoman
could be. He pointed.

"This village needs a new headman," he thought peremptorily. "You will
take charge of it."

The man looked toward the huddled mass in the center of the litter of
rocks, then looked back at his woman. A faint wave of reluctance came to
Barra, who stared sternly.

"I said you are the new headman," he thought imperiously. "Take charge."
He waved a hand.

"And get this mess cleaned up. I want a neat village from now on."

As the man lowered his head submissively, Barra turned away, rose from
the ground, and drifted majestically toward the lake shore. He could
check on the progress of the village from his view crystal back at the
Residence.

The situation had been taken care of and there was no point in remaining
in the depressing atmosphere of the village for too long.

Besides, there was that adventure projection he hadn't finished.
Perhaps it would be of interest now.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the projection faded, Barra looked around the study, then got out of
his chair and picked the crystal from its pedestal. He stood, looking at
it approvingly for a few seconds, then went over to the cabinet and set
it back in its case. For a time, he looked at the rest of the
assortment.

Finally, he shook his head. Some of them, he would sell unscanned. The
others--well, they could wait.

Yes, he thought, the record crystals had better be left alone for a
while. He hadn't finished his inspection of the Estates and the
situation at Tibara might not be an isolated case. It would be well to
make a really searching inspection. He sighed.

In fact, it might be well to make frequent searching inspections.

Shortly after his accession to the Estates, he had seen to the defense
of Kira Barra. He smiled wryly as he thought of the expense he had
incurred in securing all those power and control crystals to make up his
surrogate installations. But they had been well worth it.

He had been most thorough then, but that had been some time ago. His
last full inspection had been almost a year ago. Lately he had been
satisfying himself with spot inspections, not really going over the
Estates from border to border.

Of course, the spot inspections had been calculated to touch the
potential trouble spots and they had been productive of results, but
there might still be hidden things he should know about. This would
have to be looked into.

He turned and went back to his chair, causing it to swivel around and
face the view crystal.

There was that matter of Tibara, as far as that went. Possibly it would
be well to count that herd and identify the animals positively.

Maybe the pasturage was getting poor and he would have to instruct the
new headman to move to better lands. Those strays had looked rather
thin, now that he thought of it.

Maybe some of the other long-necks had strayed from the main herd and he
would have to have the headman send out guards to pick them up and bring
them in.

He concentrated on the viewer, swinging its scan over to the swamp where
he had driven that small herd.

They were still there, wallowing in the shallow water and grazing on the
lush vegetation. He smiled. It would be several days before their feeble
minds threw off the impression he had forced on them that this was their
proper feeding place.

Idly, he examined the beasts, then he leaned forward, studying them more
critically. They weren't the heavy, fat producers of meat normal to the
Tibara herd. Something was wrong.

These were the same general breed as the Tibara long-necks, to be sure,
but either their pasturage had been unbelievably bad or they had been
recently run--long and hard. They looked almost like draft beasts.

He frowned. If these were from the Tibara herd, he'd been missing
something for quite a while.

Thoughtfully, he caused the scan to shift. As he followed a small river,
he noted groups of the huge, greenish gray beasts as they grazed on the
tender rock ferns. Here and there, he noted herdsmen and chore boys
either watching or urging the great brutes about with their noisemakers,
keeping the herd together. He examined the scene critically, counting
and evaluating. Finally, he settled back in his chair.

The herd was all here--even to the chicks. And they were in good shape.
He smiled wryly.

Those brutes over in the swamp really didn't belong here, then. They
must have drifted into the Estates from the null, and been on their way
back. The headman-- He shrugged.

"Oh, well," he told himself, "it was time I got a new headman for
Tibara, anyway. And the discipline there will be tighter from now on."

       *       *       *       *       *

He started to shift scan again, then sat up. The view was pulsing.

As he watched, the scan shifted automatically, to pick up the eastern
border of the Estates. Stretching across the landscape was a thin line
of draft saurians, each with its driver straddling its neck. The train
had halted and a heavily armored riding lizard advanced toward the
surrogate. Its rider was facing the hidden crystals.

As Barra focused on him, the man nodded.

"Master Protector?"

"That is correct." Barra activated his communicators. "I am Kio Barra,
Master of the Estates Kira Barra."

The other smiled. "I am Dar Makun, independent caravan master," he
announced. "The null turbulence forced me off route. Lost a few carriers
and several days of time. I'd like to request permission to pass over
your land. And perhaps you could favor me by selling some long-necks to
fill my train again. The brutes I've got left are a little overloaded."

Barra considered. It was not an unusual request, of course. Certain
caravans habitually came through, to do business with the Estates.
Others were often detoured by the northern null and forced to come
through Kira Barra.

Of course, the masters of the caravans were lacklanders, but they had
given little trouble in the past. And this one seemed to be a little
above the average if anything. In his own way, he was a man of
substance, for an owner master was quite different from someone who
merely guided another's train for hire.

The northern null was a menace, Barra thought, but it did have this one
advantage. The regular caravans, of course, passed with the courtesy of
the Estates, doing business on their way. But these others paid and
their pasturage and passage fees added to the income of the Estates.

In this case, the sale of a few draft saurians could be quite
profitable. He shifted the view crystals to allow two-way vision.

"To be sure." He waved a hand. "Direct your train due west to the second
river. Cross that, then follow it southward. I will meet you at the
first village you come to and we can kennel your slaves there and put
your beasts to pasture under my herdsmen. From there, it is a short
distance to the Residence."

"Thank you." Dar Makun nodded again, then turned and waved an arm.
Faintly, Barra caught the command to proceed.

He watched for a few minutes and examined the long train as it moved
over the rolling land and lumbered into a forest. Then he shifted his
scan to continue his inspection of the rest of the lands. It would be
several hours before that caravan could reach Tibara and he could scan
back and note its progress as he wished.

He relaxed in his chair, watching the panorama as the Estates unrolled
before him. Now and then, he halted the steady motion of the scanner, to
examine village or herd closely. Then he nodded in satisfaction and
continued his inspection.

The Estates, he decided, were in overall good condition. Of course,
there were a few corrections he would have to have made in the days to
come, but these could be taken care of after the departure of the
caravan.

There was that grain field over in the Zadabar section, for example.
That headman would have to be straightened out. He smiled grimly. Maybe
it would be well to create a vacancy in that village. But that could
wait for a few days.

He directed the scan back to the eastern section, tracing the route he
had given the caravan master. At last, the long line of saurians came
into view and he watched their deceptively awkward gait as the alien
crawled through a forest and came out into deep grass.

They were making far better progress than he had thought they would and
he would have to get ready if he planned to be in Tibara when they
arrived.

He was more careful of his dress than usual. This time, he decided, he'd
want quite a few protective devices. One could never be quite sure of
these caravan masters.

Of course, so long as they could plainly see the futility of any
treacherous move, they were good company and easy people to deal with,
but it would be most unwise to give one of them any opening. It just
might be he would be the one who was tired of wandering.

He waited patiently as his slave attached his shield brooches and placed
his control cap on his head, then he reached into the casket the man
held for him and took out a pair of paralysis rings, slipping one on
each of his middle fingers. At last, he dismissed the man.

He floated out of the building and let himself down on the cushions in
the rear of his speedboat. Critically, he examined the condition of the
craft. His yardboys had cleaned everything up, he noted. The canopy was
down, leaving the lines of the boat clean and sharp.

He turned his attention to the power crystal and the boat drew out of
its shelter, gained speed, and cut through the water to the distant
shoreline.

With only part of his mind concentrated on controlling the boat, Barra
looked across the lake. It was broad in expanse, dotted with islands,
and rich in marine life.

Perhaps he might persuade this Dar Makun to pick up a few loads of dried
lake fish, both for his own rations and for sale along the way to his
destination. Some of the warehouses, he had noted, were well stocked and
he'd have to arrange for some shipments soon.

       *       *       *       *       *

The boat was nearing Tibara pier. He concentrated on setting it in close
