
As he had hoped, the sound of his command carried to Doge Zeno, whose
face, wrinkled as a yellow raisin, turned in Simon's direction.

"Serenity!" Simon called, using the customary form of address for the
doge. "It is my duty to guard these ambassadors."

Sordello, at Simon's elbow, said in a low voice, "You are a great lord
in your own land, Your Signory, but it would be best if you did not
arouse the wrath of the doge of Venice."

"Be still," Simon snapped.

Helmeted archers moved in on Simon from all sides, but Simon saw the
doge give an abrupt hand signal to their capitano. At a shouted order
from the capitano, the men-at-arms fell back, letting Simon through.

"Why do you disturb our ceremonies, young count?" The doge's voice was a
hoarse whisper. He smiled faintly, but his eyes were cold as winter.
Simon felt painfully embarrassed. The ruler of the mightiest city on the
Middle Sea was, after all, as puissant as any king on earth.

Simon fell to one knee before the doge. "Forgive me, Serenity. I only
wish to aid you in protecting the emissaries from Tartary, as my king
has commanded me." His knees trembled, and he felt as if his heart were
hammering hard enough to break his ribs.

The smile faded and the aged eyes grew icier. "Does the Frankish count
think Venice too feeble to protect her distinguished visitors?"

"Not at all, Serenity," said Simon hastily. "Only let me add my strength
to yours."

"Say no more," said the doge in a voice as sharp as a dagger.

By now the two Tartars had descended the ramp and were standing before
the doge. For a moment Simon's eyes met those of the white-bearded
Tartar, and he felt a new, inexplicable, and powerful fear. He took a
step backward, almost as if he had been struck a physical blow, and he
gripped his sword hilt for reassurance.

The Tartar turned his gaze to the doge, and Simon's fear faded, leaving
him to wonder what there was in this little brown-skinned man to inspire
it. What he had seen in those eyes? A hardness, a gaze as empty of
concern for Simon de Gobignon as the cloudless blue sky overhead.

The friar said, "Serenity, this is John Chagan Noyon," indicating the
older Tartar. "A noyon among the Tartars is equal in rank to a prince in
our lands. The Khan Hulagu sends you a prince to show how earnestly he
wishes to ally himself with Christendom to destroy our mutual enemies,
the Muslims. This other gentleman is Philip Uzbek Baghadur. 'Baghadur'
means valiant, and he is a tuman-bashi, a commander of ten thousand. He
holds high place in the councils of Hulagu Khan." Each Tartar clasped
his hands before him and bowed low to the doge as his name was spoken.

"How is it that they have Christian names?" asked the doge.

The Franciscan friar smiled. "John Chagan comes of an old Christian
family, formerly subject to the great Christian King of Asia, Prester
John. And Philip Uzbek was baptized in his youth by the Bishop of
Karakorum."

The doge waved his bony hands, making his heavy garments rustle.
"Christian Tartars! Prester John! The Bishop of _Karakorum_? This is too
much for an old man to grasp all at once. But surely I can learn much
from you and these noble gentlemen that will be good for Venice. Tell
them that I invite them to bear me company to my palace, where we will
dine together tonight and I will learn more of the marvels of the empire
of Tartary."

Simon knew that the doge's palace was more than half a mile down the
avenue along this bank of the Grand Canal, and the prospect of the
ambassadors parading that distance alarmed him again. His fear of
disaster came back full force, driving him once again, against all
courtesy, to speak out.

"Serenity! I beg the privilege of joining forces with you to escort the
ambassadors to your palace."

Anger blazed in the gaze the doge turned upon him this time. "Young man,
if you speak out of turn once more, I will have you thrown into the
canal."

Simon had no doubt that the doge would enjoy making good on his threat.
But would the ruler of Venice allow an undignified scuffle on the
waterfront in the presence of two ambassadors? Simon doubted it, and
decided to stand his ground.

"Forgive me, Serenity," he said, inclining his head. "It is my concern
for these precious lives that urges me to speak out."

The doge took a deep breath. Then his small mouth twitched in a smile.

"Very well, Count. You may follow after us."

While the doge presented the assembled Venetian dignitaries to the
Tartars, Simon ordered Henri de Puys and Alain de Pirenne to draw up the
knights and Sordello to form up the archers and be ready to follow the
ambassadors' train.

Bearers brought a sedan chair for the Tartars, who climbed into it with
bows and smiles. To Simon's distress, the conveyance was open, naturally
enough, since the Tartars would want to see Venice and the Venetians
would want to see them. But it meant still more danger.

The Franciscan friar came over and put his hand on Simon's arm. "You are
very brave, young man, to speak up to the ruler of Venice as you did.
And who might you be?"

Simon introduced himself, and the friar bowed and addressed him in
French. "How good to speak the language of my homeland again. I am
Mathieu d'Alcon of the Little Brothers of San Francesco, and I was born
near Limoges, which is not far from your estate, Count. Of course, no
place in France is far from Gobignon lands." His broad smile told Simon
the remark was meant in friendly jest. "It was our good King Louis who
sent me to the Tartars years ago. I am glad we will be in French hands
after we leave Venice." He gave Simon's arm a squeeze and returned to
the doge's procession.

Simon had begun to think the whole world had turned against him, and
Friar Mathieu's friendly words cheered him immensely. He watched the
white-bearded friar with a warm feeling as he shook his head at the
attendants who held a sedan chair for him. As befitted a good
Franciscan, sworn to poverty and dedicated to simplicity, the friar
would allow no one to carry him but insisted on walking on his own
sandaled feet behind the Tartars' chair.

Simon and his men followed the last contingent of the doge's foot
soldiers along the waterfront. Ahead, a stone bridge arched over one of
the many Venetian canals.

The procession was moving slowly now. After crossing the bridge, Simon
saw the ambassadors' sedan chair swing around a corner, and his pulse
quickened because those he was to protect were out of his sight.

He wanted to hurry to the corner, but the street narrowed here, with the
windowless white ground floor of a palazzo on one side and an iron
railing on the other. There was no room to bypass those ahead. Simon
hurried his pace until he was all but treading on the leather-shod heels
of the spearman in front of him.

He turned the corner into the small square in front of the doge's
palace. He saw the doge's sedan chair and that of the Tartars pass
through the gateway between the palace and the great basilica of San
Marco.

Then he stopped short, feeling as if he had crashed headfirst into a
wall. The tall gates leading into the palace swung shut, and facing him
was a triple line of men-at-arms of the Most Serene Republic, in green
and gold tunics and armed with long spears.

"Mere de Dieu!" he whispered.

He could not force his way into the palace. If he even tried, he would
only look ridiculous. Indeed, he doubted that his men would fight. The
ill-disciplined mercenaries were Venetians, too, and why would they obey
the command of a French seigneur, who had hired them only yesterday, to
fight their own countrymen?

"It appears we are not welcome at the palace, Your Signory," said a
voice at his side. Simon turned and glared at Sordello, whose
weather-beaten face seemed to mask amusement.

Simon tried to think of a way to rescue his dignity. "Find the leader of
the palace guards and tell him I want to speak to him."

Sordello shrugged. "As you wish, Your Signory."

Alain de Pirenne, his gauntleted fist clenched on the hilt of his sword,
blustered out, "Damned Italian discourtesy! It would serve them right if
somebody did slip a dagger into those Tartars while we stand out here."

_God forbid!_ thought Simon.

Sordello came back with a Venetian man-at-arms, who touched the brim of
his polished kettle-helmet respectfully.

"This sergente has a message for you from His Serenity, the doge, Your
Signory."

"Let him tell it."

Simon's command of the Venetian dialect was not good enough to follow
what the man in the kettle-helmet said, and to make it harder, he spoke
in what appeared to be an embarrassed mumble.

"What did he say, Sordello?"

"Forgive me, Your Signory," said Sordello. "The message may offend you.
I will repeat it only if you wish it."

"What did he say?" said Simon again in a tight voice.

"The doge says you are to wait in quarters of your own choosing until
the ambassadors from Tartary are ready to travel. At that time he will
place them in your keeping. Until then you are to trouble him no more,
unless you are a very good swimmer."

Simon felt rage boil up within him. He clenched his fists and fought it
down.

"Tell him I thank His Serenity for his courtesy and will forever honor
him for it."

Sordello nodded, and there was a look of respect in his craggy face.

As Sordello repeated Simon's words to the sergente of the doge's guards,
Simon wheeled and strode back the way he had come, to stare out to sea.
Tears of frustrated fury burned his eyes. He could feel hot blood
beating in his temples. The doge had treated him like a small boy. That
old gargoyle had insulted him, had insulted the house of Gobignon, had
insulted King Louis.

And there was nothing Simon could do about it. He felt furious and
miserable. A failure, at the very start of his task.




VI


Crushed, Simon decided that at least he would quarter his French knights
and the Venetian archers as near to the doge's palace as possible. The
doge alone would be protecting the Tartars for the time being, and Simon
had no choice about it.

With Sordello's help he found lodgings for his men at the outrageous
price of two deniers a night per man--not all the thieves were on the
highways--at the nearest inn to the Piazza San Marco, just a short
distance down a side street. How much of what he paid the innkeeper, he
wondered, would end up in Sordello's purse?

Then, accompanied by Alain de Pirenne, he walked back to the entrance
gate to the doge's palace, a long three-story building that stretched
from the waterfront to the basilica. He sent a message in by way of a
guard, asking Friar Mathieu to meet him in the piazza. The kindly
Franciscan was, he suspected, the most important person in the Tartars'
entourage.

Simon and Alain had taken off their mail and were more comfortably
dressed in silk tunics, short capes, and velvet caps. Each still wore
his weapons belt, with longsword hung on the left and dagger on the
right. The leather heels of their point-toed boots rang on the stones of
the piazza as they paced, waiting to see if Friar Mathieu would come
out.

Alain was still indignant.

"They have no idea who you are, Simon. Why, you could take this whole
city and set it in one corner of the Gobignon domain and it would never
be noticed." Normally ruddy, Alain was even redder with anger. His blond
mustache bristled.

_As much as Paris goes unnoticed in the midst of the Ile de France_,
Simon thought with a smile.

Now that his armor was off and an hour or more had passed, Simon felt
more at ease and was inclined to accept the situation. After all, if he
could not get into the doge's palace, he might reasonably hope that
neither could anyone who would want to harm the Tartars.

"It is wealth and ships that make this city great, Alain, not its size."

"That is all these Venetians care about--money." Like any proper knight,
Alain despised money and those who loved it. In the course of learning
to manage his estate, Simon had acquired more respect for money.

"Even Paris has no beauty to rival this," said Simon, feeling a shade
disloyal even as he said so. "Look at those horses." He pointed to the
facade above the central doorway of the cathedral of San Marco, where
four gilded bronze horses pranced, so proud and energetic as to seem
almost in motion.

Alain whistled in appreciation. "What wizard wrought them, I wonder."

Simon, who had been asking questions in the week they had been there,
said, "They come from Constantinople. About sixty years ago the
Venetians paid an army of French crusaders--our forefathers--to turn
aside from the Holy Land and conquer Constantinople instead. The
Venetians took those horses and set them here to proclaim their
triumph."

"Diverting a crusade is surely a great sin," said Alain. "And theft is
theft. But none of my forefathers had anything to do with the foul deed
you tell of."

"No, nor mine," said Simon. "The French knights who conquered
Constantinople were our forefathers only in a manner of speaking."

_But my predecessor, Count Amalric de Gobignon, did fouler things by
far. As Alain well knows, though he is too good a friend to mention
it._

"Still, the good taste of the Venetians is admirable," Simon said aloud,
still gazing at the horses.

"For all I know, this could be the richest city in the world," said
Alain, missing the point. "But what matter, Simon, if its riches are
stolen goods?"

"Venice is by no means the richest city in the world, Messire," someone
beside them said.

Startled, Simon turned to see Friar Mathieu, who had fallen into step
with them, his eyes warm and friendly. Simon wanted to throw his arms
around the old man and hug him.

"There are cities in the Far East so big and so rich they make Venice
look like a fishing village," Friar Mathieu went on, his long white
beard blowing gently in the breeze from the waterfront.

"People love to tell wild stories about the East," said Alain
skeptically. "I've heard of cities of solid gold, birds as big as an
elephant, and so on and on."

_But this man has been there!_ Simon wanted to shout. Much though he
liked Alain, Simon was discovering in his friend a narrowness that made
him a frustrating traveling companion. With Alain here, the conversation
with Friar Mathieu would plod, and Simon wanted it to gallop.

"Sire Alain," he said, "I fear our hired men-at-arms may get into
trouble drinking, fighting, and wenching unless someone keeps a sharp
eye on them. Will you see to them, please?"

De Pirenne held up a broad hand. "I will slap them down for you, if need
be, Monseigneur." Now that a third party was present, he addressed Simon
formally.

"Travel is said to open a man's mind," said Friar Mathieu when de
Pirenne was gone. "But some minds are like country chateaus. Let
anything strange approach, and the doors and windows slam shut."

He took Simon's arm and steered him over the flagstones of the piazza
toward the cathedral. The many-columned facade of pink, white, and green
marble, sculptures, and mosaics filling the spaces between them took
Simon's breath away. There was an opulence to the five great domes that
seemed to Simon to speak of the storied wealth of the East. They were so
different from the pointed spires of the cathedrals newly built in
France.

"I am very grateful to you, Simon, for trying so hard to protect us
today," Friar Mathieu said. "The doge's discourtesy to you was the
worst kind of rudeness, the rudeness of one who thinks himself more
refined than all others."

Simon felt better, but he wondered if the friar was speaking so only out
of kindness to him.

"It is good of you to reassure me," he said, "but the doge seems to be
guarding the ambassadors well enough."

"All show," said Friar Mathieu. "The Venetians are not alert enough. The
doge has no idea that we are in any danger. Nor does he seem to care. I
believe he has not decided whether he has anything to gain from an
alliance between Christians and Tartars. After all, the Venetians trade
quite happily with the Muslims these days."

Simon was shocked. "Is that not a sin?"

"Against God, perhaps, but not against profit. And the common heading on
your Venetian merchant's account book is 'For God and Profit.' Young
Seigneur de Gobignon, you do not know how happy I am to talk to a
Frenchman again after so many years."

"How long have you been among the Tartars, Friar Mathieu?"

The old Franciscan sighed. "Long enough to learn the Eastern peoples'
way of counting the years in twelve-year cycles. They give each year the
name of a certain animal."

"A strange system."

"A sensible system. It is easier to remember beasts than numbers. Let me
see, this year, Anno Domini 1263, they call the Year of the Sheep, and
when I first entered the camp of Hulagu Khan the Tartars told me it was
the Year of the Dragon. From Dragon to Sheep there are"--he counted on
his fingers while muttering the names of beasts under his breath--"seven
animals. So, seven years since our good King Louis sent me to bear his
messages to the Tartars."

"Then you went in 1256?"

"Anno Domini 1256. That is right."

Simon wanted very much to know more about life among the Tartars. But he
and the old friar could have long talks on the road to Orvieto. For now
there were more pressing questions.

Just as he was about to speak, the friar pointed to the gateway between
the basilica and the doge's palace. "There go the Armenians."

Simon saw six of the swarthy men crossing the piazza in a line.
Short-statured though they were, there was a swagger in the way they
walked. They had doffed their leather armor and wore tunics of white
silk with billowing red trousers over short black boots. Their tunics
were cinched at the waist with black leather belts, and in each belt was
thrust a curving saber in a jeweled scabbard. Their bows were slung
across their backs, along with black leather quivers.

"Four of them stayed behind to guard the Tartars," Friar Mathieu said.

Simon had been wondering just how his knights and archers would share
with the Armenian guards the responsibility of protecting the Tartars.

"Why did the ambassadors bring Armenians, and not their own Tartar
warriors?" he asked Friar Mathieu.

"Because the Armenians are Christians and are more like Europeans than
themselves. The Armenians are allies, not subjects of the Tartars. These
ten who travel with us are great men among the Armenian people. One of
them, Hethum, is in line to be King of Armenia some day. One feels
safer, traveling with such men."

Simon watched the half-dozen Armenians disappear down a narrow side
street leading off the piazza. He felt a twinge of worry, seeing that
they were heading toward the street in which his own men were quartered.
He wanted to follow after the men from the East, but he did not want to
interrupt his conversation with Friar Mathieu. Feeling pulled in two
directions, he held himself to the friar's slow, thoughtful pace as they
approached the cathedral.

"Even some Tartars are Christians, I have heard," Simon said.

"There are many religions among the Tartars." They had reached the front
of San Marco, and Friar Mathieu, still holding Simon's arm, wheeled them
around and started them walking back toward the doge's palace. "Hulagu
Khan's wife, the Khatun, is a Christian, although he is a pagan. But
what all Tartars really worship is strength. In their own language they
call themselves 'Mongols,' which means strong." Simon looked at the
friar and saw a faraway, awe-struck look in those old eyes. "One wonders
why God created them. To punish us for our sins? Or to rule the world
and to bring order to all mankind?"

"Rule the world?" said Simon. He thought about the two slit-eyed men in
silk robes he had seen disembarking from the galley a few hours before.
He remembered the look the older Tartar had given him, so unfeeling, as
if looking down upon him from a vast distance.

"They think it is their destiny to rule the world," said Friar Mathieu.
"And it is not a foolish dream. They have already conquered much of it.
You might sneer at me as your skeptical knight did, Monseigneur, if I
told you how vast the Tartar empire is. Take France, England, and the
Holy Roman Empire together, and they would be swallowed up in the lands
ruled by the Tartars."

"Please call me Simon, Father, if you will. It embarrasses me to be
addressed as monseigneur by one such as you."

Friar Mathieu patted Simon's hand. "Very well, Simon. That is kindly
spoken. It will be good for us to be friends, because we have a very
difficult and doubtful mission."

"Why doubtful?"

"We cannot be sure we are doing the right thing. These two men, John and
Philip, command great armies in the Tartar empire. Watch them, Simon.
Notice how they observe fortifications and weapons. The same monks who
made Christians of them also taught them how to write. Many times at
day's end in Syria and on Cyprus I have seen them talking together,
making notes, drawing maps. Whether they form this alliance or not, they
will have much useful knowledge to bring back to their khan."

_Then might it not be better for all of us if I fail to protect the
Tartars, and some enemy of Christendom succeeds in killing them?_

Simon felt an aching tightness in his forehead. He desperately wanted
the alliance to succeed, and thereby show the nobility of France that
neither he nor his family any longer deserved their scorn. If the
alliance failed, he failed, and the house of Gobignon would sink deeper
into dishonor.

Let others worry, he decided, about whether it was right or wrong to
protect the Tartars.

"Monseigneur!"

There was urgency in the voice that hailed Simon from across the square,
and a feeling of dread came over him. He turned to see his equerry,
Thierry d'Hauteville, his wavy black hair uncovered, running across the
piazza.

"They are fighting, Monseigneur!" Thierry panted. "Our Venetian archers
and those men from Tartary. You'd best come at once."

"Jesus, save us!" Simon heard Friar Mathieu whisper beside him.

Staring into Thierry's anxious eyes, Simon felt himself getting angry.
Six knights he had brought with him. Any knight worthy of his spurs
should be able to stop any pack of commoners from fighting. And if they
could not, he thought with a sudden shift from anger to anxiety, what
more could he do?

There was no time to think. "Father, will you come, please?" he said to
Mathieu, and without waiting for a reply struck Thierry on the shoulder
and began to run with him.

"I follow, as quickly as I can, my son," he heard from behind him.

"Could you not stop them?" he demanded of Thierry as they headed down a
narrow cobblestoned street at a dead run.

Dread made his legs heavy. De Puys, a veteran of the last crusade, de
Pirenne, a strong and well-trained knight--_they_ had sent for _him_.
For Simon de Gobignon, twenty years of age, who had never in his life
been in a battle.

Breath of God, what did they expect of him?

"There was nothing we could do without killing the Tartars' bodyguard,"
said Thierry. "You will see how it is when you get there."

The inn was a stone building with houses on either side. The lower half
of the divided door was shut, but the upper half was open, and Simon
heard shouts from within. Thierry, ahead of him, yanked the door open
for him.

It took his eyes a moment to adjust to the darkness of the large room.
Shadowy figures jostled him as he pushed his way through. A little light
came from the grilled windows and from a single huge yellow candle
burning in a candlestick on a table. The room reeked of sweaty bodies
and old wine.

"Make way for Monseigneur le Comte!" Thierry called uselessly as the
Venetian mercenaries jabbered angrily in Italian.

Simon pushed his way into the corner of the room lit by the candle and
found himself facing a scowling, dark-skinned man pointing a gleaming
sword at him. Five of the Armenians, sabers out, had formed a protective
ring.

Within the ring, the sixth Armenian had a man bent forward over a table.
The man's arms flailed feebly and his eyes bulged. Even in the poor
light Simon could see that his face, turned on its side toward him, was
purple. The Armenian was holding his bow behind the man's neck and was
turning it slowly. Now Simon saw the string cutting into the neck.

It hurt Simon to look at what was happening. He felt his own breath cut
off, his heart pounding as if he were laboring for air. He wanted to
turn away and knew he could not. He must somehow stop this before that
Venetian died.

"Blood of God!" he whispered. He recognized the darkened, distorted
face.

Sordello.

All around Simon the Venetians were edging closer to the Armenians,
their daggers gleaming in the candlelight. But none of the foot soldiers
wanted to be the first to brave those sabers.

That meant, Simon thought, heart pounding, that he would have to face
them.

_Where the devil are my knights?_

Looking to the right and left Simon saw Alain, Henri de Puys, and the
four others, swords out but--like himself--unarmored, standing
irresolutely between the Venetians and the Armenians. Against one wall
he saw a huddle of women, their bare bosoms gleaming in the dim light.
Standing protectively in front of the women was a man Simon recognized
as the innkeeper. For the price Simon was paying, why could not this man
keep order in his own house?

"Aha, now we have the stinking figlii di cagne!" a man behind Simon
cried. Simon turned and saw a crossbow leveled at shoulder height. He
had ordered that the Venetians' weapons be kept under lock and key.
Evidently someone had broken them out. Once the rest of the Venetians
armed themselves with their bows, the Armenians would be slaughtered.

Simon's body grew hot with anger. He would like to kill the fool who
helped the Venetians to their arms.

But the Armenians had their bows, too, and one by one they started to
unsling them. Simon heard the ominous squeaking as the Venetians wound
back their crossbow strings. The Armenians would never be able to get
their arrows nocked and their bows drawn before the crossbow bolts began
to fly.

Simon's actions followed instantly on his thoughts. "Cessi!" he shouted,
hoping the Venetians would understand him.

Now all eyes were turned toward him. The muscles of his belly tightened
as he cast about in his mind for the right thing to do.

The hands of the Venetians hesitated on their crossbows as they
recognized their master.

"De Pirenne, de Puys, the rest of you. Make our men put down their
crossbows."

But just as Simon spoke, the Armenian strangling Sordello gave another
turn to his bow, and the old bravo gagged and gasped.

Simon realized that if he drew his scimitar, the room would be a charnel
house in moments. He approached the Armenian nearest him, spreading his
hands to show their emptiness. He prayed that the man, whose bow and
arrow was aimed at his chest, would not see how those outstretched hands
were trembling.

In his strongest voice he said, "Hold your arrow!" hoping the man would
understand his tone. As he spoke, he firmly grasped the arrow near its
head and pushed it aside. His heart thudded, and he could almost feel
that steel tip stabbing into his chest. And how bare was his back to the
crossbow quarrels!

The Armenian took a step to the side and let Simon pass. Simon let out a
deep breath of relief. As he stepped forward, the soles of his boots
slid a little. The floor, he realized, must be slippery with spilled
wine.

Now he was facing the man who was murdering Sordello. A vagrant thought
struck Simon: _I do not like Sordello. I would not mind if the Armenian
killed him. Why risk my life for him?_

_Because a good seigneur is loyal to his men_, the answer came at once.

He spoke commandingly but softly. "Stop. This is my man and you must not
kill him. Let him go." He put his hand firmly on the forearm of the
Armenian, who was a good deal shorter than he was. The man's dark brows
drew together in a puzzled frown. He was studying Simon's face. Simon
could feel a faint tremor in the muscles under his hand.

Any man would be frightened at a moment like this, no matter how brave,
how hardened, Simon thought. But he saw that the Armenian's face was
unlined, his eyes clear. His black mustache was small and fine.

_He must be about my age. Maybe even younger._

Simon felt a warmth toward the young Armenian, and hoped he could win
him over. But how could such a pleasant-looking fellow bring himself to
strangle a man with a bowstring? Perhaps Sordello had done something
truly evil.

"Come now," Simon said, giving the young man's arm a gentle shake. "Do
let him go." He essayed a smile, hoping it would look friendly.

The Armenian let out a deep sigh and closed his eyes. Then he released
his grip on the bow. He slapped it with one hand to make it twirl. Simon
heard a faint choking sound from Sordello, and then the Italian slid to
the stone floor.

A woman, her henna-dyed hair gleaming red-gold in the candlelight,
rushed to the young Armenian and held his arm, talking soothingly in
Italian. He stiffened at first, then smiled at her.

"Thank you," said Simon to the Armenian, shaky with relief.

He smiled and patted the dark man's free arm, feeling foolish about his
simple words of gratitude. If only Friar Mathieu would get here so that
he could talk to these men from the East.

A cool feeling of relief bathed Simon. So far all had gone amazingly
well. But, he reminded himself, this was not over yet. He must continue
to think quickly.

"De Puys, clear the Venetians out of here. Assemble them outside. Then
march them away from this street altogether. And collect their crossbows
and get them locked up again. You should never have let them get at
those weapons. De Pirenne, you stay here and tell me what happened."

"Well, this is how it was, Monseigneur," said Alain, looking abashed.
"Our men were drinking quietly, and this redheaded woman was sitting
with Sordello. Then these men from Tartary came in. They made no
trouble, just sat down in their own corner. But the woman, she took a
fancy to that man you saw trying to kill Sordello. She served him wine
and sat down with him. Sordello went over and tried to get her back.
There were words. They didn't understand each other, but the meaning was
clear. Sordello went for the other with a knife. And then the other man
_kicked_ it out of his hand--rather a surprise, that was--to Sordello,
too, I think. And the next thing I know he was strangling Sordello and
his companions would not let anyone stop it. Sordello had the key to the
storeroom where the crossbows were kept. After the Armenian seized him,
he threw it to one of the Venetians."

A typical muddle, Simon thought, like most of the cases brought to him
for justice since he had become Seigneur of Gobignon. He felt disgusted
with all these fools. No saying who was at fault. Most likely the damned
woman. Thank the Virgin he did not have to fix blame, just put a stop to
the fighting.

Sordello, who had been lying curled up on the floor, suddenly lashed out
with a booted foot.

The woman screamed. As Simon stared, the young Armenian fell heavily to
the wine-wet floor. Sordello sprang upon him, and a dagger flashed. He
was striking at the Armenian's chest.

Simon had no time to feel the panic that flooded through him. He grabbed
for Sordello's arm, too late to stop the dagger but pulling it back so
that it drove upward through the muscles of the chest instead of
plunging deep. The Armenian bellowed in pain. With all his strength,
Simon yanked Sordello off the Armenian and threw him backward. De
Pirenne caught him and held him.

Shouting in their own language and brandishing their swords, the other
Armenians rushed at Sordello.

A familiar voice cried out a sentence in a strange tongue. Friar Mathieu
rushed into the circle of candlelight, his white beard flying, his arms
upraised. At his sudden appearance the Armenians, who were ready to make
mincemeat of Sordello--and perhaps de Pirenne with him--hesitated.

_Oh, thank God!_ The weight of struggling to control this dreadful
situation was no longer Simon's alone to bear.

Friar Mathieu spoke several sentences to the Armenians. Simon could not
tell from his tone whether he was scolding them or trying to placate
them. There were in the room five angry men who looked to be formidable
fighters, armed with swords and bows and arrows. And, Simon realized, he
had just sent away all but one of his knights and all of his
crossbowmen.

Simon cursed himself for letting Sordello wound the young man.

_Alain said Sordello dropped a dagger. Why did I not think to look for
it?_

He felt himself growing hot and cold as he realized this incident might
wreck everything--for Christendom, for Louis, and for the honor of the
House of Gobignon.

Now Friar Mathieu fell to his knees beside the young Armenian, whose
white tunic was splashed deep scarlet with blood. He spoke comforting
words to him and then turned an agonized face to Simon.

"This is Prince Hethum," said the friar. "The Tartars will be furious
when they learn what has happened. This may destroy any chance of an
alliance. At the very least, they will demand satisfaction."

_I am to protect these emissaries, and one of my own men has stabbed a
prince of Armenia._

Despair was an ache in Simon's chest.

"What sort of satisfaction?"

"I fear they will require that man's life," said Friar Mathieu sadly.

"By God's beard, I have done no wrong!" Sordello rasped. His voice was a
croak.

"Be silent!" Simon snapped, his rage against himself turning to fury at
Sordello. "You are a fool, but being a fool will not save you."

"Your Signory!" Sordello cried. "How could I let him take the woman from
me? My honor--"

"_Your_ honor!" Simon raged. "What is your wandering blackguard's honor
compared to the honor of France? The woman chose him over you. Look at
her."

Sordello glared at Simon, but was silent. The red-haired woman crouched
over the fallen Prince Hethum, crooning softly in Italian.

_And yet, Uncle Charles would not want me to sacrifice Sordello. And the
Armenian did try to kill him. My knights and men-at-arms will lose all
respect for me if I let the Tartars have their way with Sordello._

_But if he goes unpunished, if the Armenian prince goes unrevenged,
there will be no alliance at all._

And it would be his fault. The little honor that was left to the House
of Gobignon would be lost.

A wave of anger at himself swept over him. Had he dedicated himself to
the alliance only so that he might free himself from the agony of his
guilty secret and his house from dishonor? He thought of King Louis and
how pure was his desire to win back for Christendom the places where
Christ had lived. How impure were Simon's own motives!

As long as he put his own needs first, he would continue to deserve the
burdens of guilt and shame.




VII


    In the Name of God, the Beneficent, the Merciful.
    All praise be to God, Lord of the Worlds.
    Master of the Day of Judgment.

