was still pinioned to his body by one of the constricting tentacles,
but his right hand, with the automatic in it, was free.

He swung the weapon's muzzle into line with the hideous face above
him, then sent a stream of lead crashing upward into the creature's
head. The bullet struck squarely home. The tentacles tightened
convulsively with a force that almost cracked Powell's ribs. Then in
another paroxysm of agony the tentacles flung him free.

The impetus of his fall sent him rolling for a dozen feet. Unhurt,
save for minor scratches and bruises, he scrambled to his feet just
in time to see the mortally wounded octopus-bat come crashing down
in the red vegetation some thirty yards away. For a few minutes
there was audible a convulsive threshing; and then there was
silence.

Powell refilled the automatic's clip, then looked about, trying to
regain his bearings. He wanted to return to the thicket of the
Tinkling Death, but the octopus-bat had carried him hundreds of
yards from there and he was now uncertain even of the direction in
which the thicket was.

As he paused in indecision, there came to Powell's ears a new sound
that promptly drove all thought of the Tinkling Death from his mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sound of his gun against the octopus-bat had apparently
attracted new and unseen assailants--and their number was legion.
Swiftly closing in upon him from every side there came the rustle
and whisper of countless thousands of unseen foes advancing through
the dense red thickets.

Completely hemmed in as he was, flight was out of the question. He
sought the center of a small clearing, some ten feet in diameter, in
order to gain at least a moment's sight of his adversaries before
they swarmed in upon him. With an automatic in each hand, he waited
tense and ready.

The encircling rush came swiftly nearer, until Powell was suddenly
aware that the unseen horde had arrived. The thicket bordering his
tiny clearing was literally alive with yard-high furry bodies of
creatures that dodged about too swiftly in the cover of the red
bushes for him to get a clear view of any of them. There was a
constant babel of snarling, chattering sound as the things called
back and forth to each other.

Then the chattering stopped abruptly, as though at the command of
some unseen leader. The next moment one of the creatures stepped
boldly out into full view in the clearing. Powell's scalp crinkled
in disgust as he realized the nature of the thing confronting him.

It was literally a rat-man. Its upright posture upon two powerful,
bowed hind legs was that of a man, but its human-like points were
overshadowed by a dozen indelible marks of the beast. A coat of
short, dirty gray fur covered the creature from head to foot. Its
hands and feet were claw-like travesties of human members. Its
pointed, chinless face with its projecting teeth and glittering
little beady eyes was that of a giant rodent.

The beast in the clearing was apparently a leader of some sort, for
around his throat was a wide collar of gray metal, with its flat
surface marked in rudely scratched hieroglyphics. Powell's heart
leaped as he noted the collar. In this creature before him he had
his second clue to the whereabouts of Joan Marlowe.

Not only was the collar practically identical to the one worn by the
skeleton that had been materialized in the egg back in the
laboratory, but the skeleton itself was obviously that of one of the
rat-men. Could it be this grotesque horde of human-like rodents that
was holding Joan captive in the Cave of Blue Flames?

       *       *       *       *       *

Powell tried desperately to think of some way of communicating with
the gray-collared leader. Then the beast shrilled a command that
brought hundreds of the beasts swarming into the clearing from every
side, and in the face of the menace of their countless glittering
eyes and bared fangs Powell abandoned all thought of attempting to
parley with the beasts.

There was another shrill command from the leader, and the horde
closed in. Both of Powell's guns flamed in a crashing leaden hail
that swept the close-packed ranks of furry bodies with murderous
effect. But he was doomed by sheer weight of numbers.

The rat-men directly in front of the blazing pistols wavered
momentarily, but the press of the hundreds behind them swept them
inexorably forward. Powell emptied both guns in a last vain effort.
Then he was swept from his feet, and the horde surged over him.

Blinded and smothered by the dozens of furry bodies that swarmed
over him, he had hardly a chance to even try to fight back. His
cartridge-belt and guns, his Silver Belts and his wrist-watch were
stripped from him by the dozens of claw-like hands that searched his
body. Other claw-hands jerked his arms behind his back and lashed
them firmly together with rope.

A blanketing sheet of some heavy fabric was crammed over his head
and tied in place so tightly that he was completely blindfolded and
half-suffocated. A noose was knotted around his neck. A suggestive
jerk of this noose brought Powell lurching to his feet; there was
another commanding jerk, and he obediently started walking.

       *       *       *       *       *

The march that followed soon became torture for the captive.
Blindfolded as he was, and having only the occasional jerks of rope
to guide his footsteps, he stumbled and fell repeatedly, until his
aching body seemed one solid mass of bruises.

As nearly as he could judge, the horde had conducted him nearly two
miles when the path abruptly sloped downward. A moment later the
sudden coolness of the air and the echoes about him told him that
they had entered an underground passage of some kind. After
traversing this passage for several yards they emerged into what was
apparently a large open area, for he could hear the excited
chattering and squealing of countless thousands of rat-men on every
side of him.

He was dragged forward a dozen steps more, then brought to a halt.
The blindfolding fabric was roughly stripped from his head. For a
moment he blinked dazedly, half-blinded by a glare of blue light
that flooded the place.

He was standing in a vast cavern. From dozens of fissures high in
the rock walls streamed flickering sheets of blue flame which both
warmed and lighted the place. There was a weird tingling glow in the
air that suggested that the strange blue fires might be electrical
in their origin.

Powell looked eagerly around for Joan, but he could see no trace of
her. The only other living beings in the big cavern were the
swarming thousands of the rat-people. The brutes were apparently too
low in the evolutionary scale to have any but the most primitive
form of tribal organization.

Sitting on a rude rock throne just in front of Powell was a
grotesquely fat, mangy-furred old rat-man who was obviously the king
of the horde. Some thirty or forty rat-men, larger and stronger than
their fellows, wore the gray-metal collars that apparently marked
them as minor leaders.

       *       *       *       *       *

The great bulk of the horde, numbering far into the thousands,
swarmed in the cavern in one vast animal pack, sleeping, feeding,
snarling, fighting. As Powell was halted before the king's throne,
most of them abandoned their other pursuits to come surging around
the captive in a jostling, curious mob.

