girl with pale face and steady, dark eyes. "I'm the passenger," she told
him. "My name's Marta Mallen."

Kent and Liggett stared, astounded. "Good Lord!" Kent exclaimed. "A girl
like you on this ship!"

"Miss Mallen happened to be on the upper-deck at the time of the
explosion and, so, escaped when the other passengers were killed," Krell
explained smoothly. "Isn't that so, Miss Mallen?"

The girl's eyes had not left Kent's, but at Krell's words she nodded.
"Yes, that is so," she said mechanically.

Kent collected his whirling thoughts. "But wouldn't you rather go back
to the _Pallas_ with us?" he asked. "I'm sure you'd be more comfortable
there."

"She doesn't go," grunted Jandron. Kent turned in quick wrath toward
him, but Krell intervened.

"Jandron only means that Miss Mallen is much more comfortable on this
passenger-ship than she'd be in your freighter." He shot a glance at the
girl as he spoke, and Kent saw her wince.

"I'm afraid that's so," she said; "but I thank you for the offer, Mr.
Kent."

Kent could have sworn that there was an appeal in her eyes, and he stood
for a moment, indecisive, Jandron's stare upon him. After a moment's
thought he turned to Krell.

"You were going to show me the damage the exploding tubes did," he said,
and Krell nodded quickly.

"Of course; you can see from the head of the stair back in the
after-deck."

He led the way along a corridor, Jandron and the girl and two of the
men coming with them. Kent's thoughts were still chaotic as he walked
between Krell and Liggett. What was this girl doing amid the men of the
_Martian Queen_? What had her eyes tried to tell him?

Liggett nudged his side in the dim corridor, and Kent, looking down, saw
dark splotches on its metal floor. Blood-stains! His suspicions
strengthened. They might be from the bleeding of those wounded in the
tube-explosions. But were they?

      *      *      *      *      *

They reached the after-deck whose stair's head gave a view of the
wrecked tube-rooms beneath. The lower decks had been smashed by terrific
forces. Kent's practiced eyes ran rapidly over the shattered
rocket-tubes.

"They've back-blasted from being fired too fast," he said. "Who was
controlling the ship when this happened?"

"Galling, our second-officer," answered Krell. "He had found us routed
too close to the dead-area's edge and was trying to get away from it in
a hurry, when he used the tubes too fast, and half of them
back-blasted."

"If Galling was at the controls in the pilot-house, how did the
explosion kill him?" asked Liggett skeptically. Krell turned quickly.

"The shock threw him against the pilot-house wall and fractured his
skull--he died in an hour," he said. Liggett was silent.

"Well, this ship will never move again," Kent said. "It's too bad that
the explosion blew out your tanks, but we ought to find fuel somewhere
in the wreck-pack for the _Pallas_. And now we'd best get back."

As they returned up the dim corridor Kent managed to walk beside Marta
Mallen, and, without being seen, he contrived to detach his
suit-phone--the compact little radiophone case inside his space-suit's
neck--and slip it into the girl's grasp. He dared utter no word of
explanation, but apparently she understood, for she had concealed the
suit-phone by the time they reached the upper-deck.

Kent and Liggett prepared to don their space-helmets, and before
entering the airlock, Kent turned to Krell.

"We'll expect you at the _Pallas_ first hour to-morrow, and we'll start
searching the wreck-pack with a dozen of our men," he said.

He then extended his hand to the girl. "Good-by, Miss Mallen. I hope we
can have a talk soon."

He had said the words with double meaning, and saw understanding in her
eyes. "I hope we can, too," she said.

Kent's nod to Jandron went unanswered, and he and Liggett adjusted their
helmets and entered the airlock.

Once out of it, they kicked rapidly away from the _Martian Queen_,
floating along with the wreck-pack's huge mass to their right, and only
the star-flecked emptiness of infinity to their left. In a few minutes
they reached the airlock of the _Pallas_.

      *      *      *      *      *

They found Captain Crain awaiting them anxiously. Briefly Kent reported
everything.

"I'm certain there has been foul play aboard the _Martian Queen_," he
said. "Krell you saw for yourself, Jandron is pure brute, and their men
seem capable of anything.

"I gave the suit-phone to the girl, however, and if she can call us with
it, we can get the truth from her. She dared not tell me anything there
in the presence of Krell and Jandron."

Crain nodded, his face grave. "We'll see whether or not she calls," he
said.

Kent took a suit-phone from one of their space-suits and rapidly, tuned
it to match the one he had left with Marta Mallen. Almost at once they
heard her voice from it, and Kent answered rapidly.

"I'm so glad I got you!" she exclaimed. "Mr. Kent, I dared not tell you
the truth about this ship when you were here, or Krell and the rest
would have killed you at once."

"I thought that was it, and that's why I left the suit-phone for you,"
Kent said. "Just what is the truth?"

"Krell and Jandron and these men of theirs are the ones who killed the
officers and passengers of the _Martian Queen_! What they told you about
the explosion was true enough, for the explosion did happen that way,
and because of it, the ship drifted into the dead-area. But the only
ones killed by it were some of the tube-men and three passengers.

"Then, while the ship was drifting into the dead-area, Krell told the
men that the fewer aboard, the longer they could live on the ship's food
and air. Krell and Jandron led the men in a surprise attack and killed
all the officers and passengers, and threw their bodies out into space.
I was the only passenger they spared, because both Krell and
Jandron--want me!"

      *      *      *      *      *

There was a silence, and Kent felt a red anger rising in him. "Have they
dared harm you?" he asked after a moment.

"No, for Krell and Jandron are too jealous of each other to permit the
other to touch me. But it's been terrible living with them in this awful
place."

"Ask her if she knows what their plans are in regard to us," Crain told
Kent.

Marta had apparently overheard the question. "I don't know that, for
they shut me in my cabin as soon as you left," she said. "I've heard
them talking and arguing excitedly, though. I know that if you do find
fuel, they'll try to kill you all and escape from here in your ship."

"Pleasant prospect," Kent commented. "Do you think they plan an attack
on us now?"

