crossing behind a beaver pelt.

Dominating the buildings inside the palisade was a blockhouse, limestone
at ground level, with an overhanging second story of logs and rifle
slits all around. Raoul had built it to fortify the trading post against
his memories of Checagou. Pierre and Papa might have thought it foolish
expense and effort, but where had they been when he needed them?

Near the east side of the blockhouse was the inn they'd just left, a log
house, food and drink on the ground floor and lodgings above. On the
west side, the fur store. Over in the northwest corner was the magazine,
a windowless cube of limestone blocks, surrounded by its own little
palisade the height of a man. Here were stored the bags and barrels of
gunpowder that passed through the trading post.

They rode out through the gateway, arched over by the name DE MARION,
formed out of small bits of log by Raoul's brother-in-law, Frank
Hopkins, carpenter and printer. Raoul glanced down at the town of
Victor, built on the steep slope below the trading post. From here he
could see mostly half-log roofs and clay-lined log chimneys following
the road that zigzagged across the face of the bluff. The houses all
faced west, with their backs to the limestone slope. North and south
from the base of the bluff stretched miles of bottomland along the
Mississippi River. The spring floods that left the bottom some of the
richest farmland in the world also made it necessary to build almost
everything on the bluff above the high-water line.

Raoul pulled Banner's head around and led his little troop at a trot
along the ridge that ran east. Now Victoire came into view, the chateau
his father and brother had built on the edge of the prairie, its first
floor, like that of the blockhouse, of stone, its upper two stories of
square-hewn timber. Some day, he thought, as he rode past the hill
crowned by the great house, he would enter Victoire as master.

They rode on, passing big log barns and animal sheds Raoul had helped
build. They followed a narrow trail through fields planted in corn and
wheat, through orchards, the trees as yet only a little higher than a
man but already yielding apples and peaches. Farther out still, cattle
and horses grazed on grassland that rolled eastward like the waves of
the ocean.

Five miles from the Mississippi they came to the boundary stone with an
M carved on it that marked Victoire's easternmost extent. From there
Raoul could see, a good ten miles or more away, the sign of the Indians,
a long finger of gray smoke leaning northeastward among the fluffy white
clouds. The mine entrance was at the bottom of a ravine carved in the
prairie by the Peach River, and the smoke doubtless meant the Indians
were smelting lead.

After a long ride they reached the little river. The five men reined up
and tethered their horses downwind from the smoke; an Indian, it was
said, had a sense of smell as keen as a dog's. Raoul led his men to the
edge of the ravine.

They walked quietly along the ravine until they sighted Indians down at
the bottom. Sauk or Fox, Raoul saw, recognizing their shaven heads with
tufts of hair in the center. One of the bucks was standing at the mine
entrance holding a skin sack that appeared to be full of chunks of
galena, lead ore. The other two were adding logs to the smelter's fire.
Their six horses--three for riding and three for carrying lead--were
standing at the edge of the river about ten feet from the smelter.

The Indians' smelter was simply a square pit dug in the hillside, lined
with rocks at the bottom and filled with logs and brushwood. They were
melting down the galena, letting it flow through the rocks into a
slanting trench that led to a square mold dug in the earth. Raoul
counted five pigs of lead already formed, cooled and stacked beside the
mold. They'd probably been at this ever since the end of winter,
thinking the mine was so far from town that no white man would notice.

Lead was selling at seventeen dollars per thousand pounds at the pit
head up north in Galena, the new boom town named for the ore, and if
these Indians had been working since the snow melted, they might have
robbed Raoul of as much as two hundred dollars.

Raoul thought he recognized the two bucks at the smelter. Last fall they
had come to him as he was bossing the crew he'd put to work expanding
the mine before he shut it down for the winter. The Indians had claimed
it was their mine. He had told them to be off, and when they hadn't
moved quickly enough, he and his men had cocked their flintlocks. Should
have killed them then.

Raoul gripped the gilded butt of the cap-and-ball pistol that hung at
his waist and slid it out of its holster.

"Get them!" he called, standing up suddenly. He stretched out his arm,
sighted along the barrel of his pistol and fired at the nearer Indian
standing by the smelter.

Four rifles went off at once. Raoul was enveloped in the bitter smell of
gunpowder and a cloud of smoke. The Indian Raoul had aimed at jerked,
fell to his knees, then collapsed face forward beside the smelter. The
other one at the smelter ran for his horse and leaped on its back. They
must have all aimed at the same one, Raoul thought, cursing himself for
not thinking of pointing out targets for each man.

The third Indian had disappeared. The skin sack of galena lay beside the
mine entrance.

"Dammit," said Raoul. "If that redskin on the horse gets away there'll
be raiding parties coming here. Whoever digs here'll have to have eyes
in the back of his head."

"I'll put an eye in the back of _his_ head," said Eli as he poured
powder from his measure down the muzzle of his rifle. He grinned at
Raoul--two upper front teeth missing and one lower. Did he know about
Clarissa? Raoul still couldn't tell.

The other men were also reloading. Raoul pushed powder and shot down the
muzzle of his pistol, then took a percussion cap out of a pouch at his
belt and pressed it onto the nipple in the breach. By the time he was
ready to fire, the Indian was galloping down the riverbed and had
disappeared around a bend.

Hodge Hode, Levi Pope and Otto Wegner ran for their horses. Eli stayed
where he was, smiling down at the rifle in his hands as if he were
holding a baby.

"If we all chase after the one on horseback," Eli said, "the one that's
hiding will run off in the other direction."

"True enough," said Raoul. By this time Hodge, Levi and Otto had ridden
off.

"Another thing," Eli said. "Our boys is on the wrong side of the ravine.
When the Injun comes out, he'll come out on the south side. By the time
they ride down and in, and up and out again, he'll be a mile away."

"So what do we do?" asked Raoul.

"It's all flat land hereabouts."

Before Raoul could demand an explanation of that, he saw the fleeing
Indian on his mount scramble out of the ravine and ride southward, just
as Eli had predicted. Raoul glanced at his men as they came to a halt,
puzzlement showing in their gestures. Hodge fired at the Indian, who
rode on unharmed. Though Raoul would not have known what else to do, he
despised his two men for their uselessness.

Soon the Indian, riding hell-bent south, was a tiny dark silhouette
against the yellow prairie. Eli raised the barrel of his Kentucky long
rifle. It was an impossible shot, Raoul thought, but he said nothing.
Eli seemed to be aiming slightly high, not straight at the redskin.
Raoul heard the Puke suck in a deep breath through his missing front
teeth.

The rifle boomed. The muzzle flash made Raoul blink, and a cloud of
blue-white smoke drifted across the canyon.

A long time seemed to pass with nothing happening. But maybe it was only
a heartbeat or two. Then the dark, distant figure threw up his arms and
toppled sideways from his horse. The horse kept running and was gone
over the horizon a moment later.

"Right through his noodle," Eli said. "I couldn't of made that shot if
he hadn't been riding due south. Too hard to get a lead on him _and_
arch the bullet just right."

Eli made it seem just a simple matter of skill, but Raoul felt as if he
had just seen a miracle.

The faces of the other men, as they climbed down from their horses,
showed as much awe as Raoul felt.

"Pretty good shooting, for a Puke," said Levi Pope.

"Better'n any Sucker could do," Eli returned genially.

Raoul said, "Otto, go get that Indian's body and bring it back here."

Otto Wegner turned at once to remount his horse. Raoul liked the way the
Prussian obeyed every order instantly.

But Hodge Hode glowered at Raoul. "Waste of time. Coyotes and buzzards
have a taste for Injun meat."

Annoyed at being questioned, Raoul said, "I don't want anybody to know
what happened to these redskins."

As Otto rode off, Eli, pointing to the mine entrance, said, "We got one
still alive. At least one."

"I'll take care of him," said Raoul.

Eli, Hodge and Levi looked at him, surprised.

Eli's fine shot had not only awed him; he felt it, uneasily, as a
challenge. The law was absent in Smith County, which was the way Raoul
liked it. Gave an edge to a man who could handle a rifle as well as Eli.
But now, to make sure his own word remained the closest thing to law in
these parts, Raoul felt he had to equal Eli's accomplishment.

He checked the load in his pistol. He gripped the hilt of the
thirteen-inch knife at his belt and loosened it in its sheath. A
blacksmith in St. Louis had made it for him, assuring him it was an
exact replica of the knife designed a couple of years ago by the famed
Arkansas frontiersman Jim Bowie.

Raoul's mouth was dry. His heart was beating so hard he thought his men
must be able to see his woollen coat quivering. His hands were cold and
sweaty.

"Ain't but one way out of that mine, is there?" said Eli. "If we go in
four abreast he can't get past us, and it's a hell of a sight safer."

"I'll take care of him," Raoul repeated. Every word Eli said against his
going into the mine alone made him even more determined to do it. He
needed to keep Eli in line, especially if it should turn out that Eli
knew about him and Clarissa.

"He might have a rifle," said Eli. "Might shoot you when you walk in
there."

"If we all go in, one of you might get shot," said Raoul. "This is my
property."

_And fighting for it will make it more truly my property than any
government grant could._

But that Indian in there--what was he armed with? Rifle, knife, bow,
tomahawk? How strong was he, how fast, how skilled in fighting hand to
hand?

_I'm a fool to put myself through this._

"Could be more'n one in there," said Eli.

Raoul felt the blood run hot through his veins as he thought of Pierre's
bastard son, of Black Salmon, of the Potawatomi who raped and murdered
Helene. His men had killed two Indians today, but there was a third
waiting in that mine, and Raoul de Marion meant to be the death of him.

Ignoring Eli's warnings, he moved toward the black square of the mine
entrance.

He walked slowly, pistol at waist level. He needed his knife out, too,
he decided. Even though he was right-handed, it would be better to have
a second weapon ready than have his left hand empty. He drew his knife,
taking heart from its well-balanced feel.

He stepped under the logs he'd set last fall to brace the entrance.
Should he light a candle? No, that would make him an even better target.
He tried to pierce the blackness with his eyes; it was thick as a wool
curtain.

This was foolish, he thought. If they all went in together, the way Eli
said, a couple of men could carry candles, and they could flush out the
Indian in no time. This way, he was going to get himself killed. If the
Indian had a rifle, Raoul was dead for sure. He felt an urge to back out
and call the others to help him. He stood there a moment, legs
trembling.

No. He had to kill his Indian by himself. He had to show Eli and the
rest.

He forced his feet to slide forward as silently as he could manage. His
hesitation had given his eyes a chance to get used to the dark. He tried
to remember the layout of the mine. In the dim light from the entrance
he made out the downward slope of the long tunnel. About twenty feet in,
another tunnel branched off to his left. His eyes ached as they tried to
find the enemy hiding somewhere ahead of him.

He could see nothing but black walls lined with logs to brace the
ceiling, a floor littered with chunks of rock. As he moved forward, the
tunnel got narrower, the ceiling lower. He could almost feel the weight
of the rock and earth above him; these logs could suddenly give way and
the prairie come down on him like a boot on a bug. He began to be more
afraid of the mine than he was of the hidden Indian.

He came to the branch tunnel and peered into it.

With a high-pitched shriek the Indian sprang at him.

Raoul glimpsed a steel tomahawk edge coming at his head. He jerked the
pistol's trigger and jabbed with the knife in his left hand to parry the
axe blade.

The blast of the pistol deafened Raoul, and in the momentary blaze of
light he saw the face of a young Indian, distorted with anger and fear.

It was a face he hated on sight--dark skin, narrow black eyes, flat but
for a beak of a nose, shaven skull. A face like those in his nightmares.
It stayed vivid in his mind's eye when the flash of light was gone.

The Indian's war whoop ended in a cry of pain.

_Got the sonofabitch!_ Raoul exulted. He'd been holding his pistol low,
must have hit the Indian in the gut.

The flash had temporarily blinded him, but reflexes honed in dozens of
riverfront brawls took over. He jammed his pistol into its holster and
switched the knife to his right hand. Every fiber of him hungered to
kill. He lunged forward, knife straight out in front of him. He could
feel his lips stretching in a grin.

The knife hit something solid, yet yielding. With a yell of triumph he
drove the point in, was rewarded with a scream of agony. He was
beginning to see again. The shadow facing him lifted the tomahawk. Raoul
jerked the knife free and swung; it chunked into the Indian's arm like a
meat cleaver. He heard the tomahawk clang on the rock floor.

Raoul threw himself on the Indian, stabbing, stabbing. His enemy's body,
smaller and lighter than his, crumpled under his weight. The fingers of
his left hand dug into smooth skin and hard muscle. He felt hands
pushing against him, but their efforts were weak, the struggles of a
dying creature. The cries and groans of pain made him eager to hurt the
Indian more. It was too dark to see where his knife was going in, but he
brought it down again and again. His hands felt wet. Some of his thrusts
sank deep, others were stopped by bone.

A pulse pounded in his brain. It did not matter that he was fighting in
the dark; fury blinded him anyway. He forgot everything but the knife in
his hand and the soft, bloody body under him. He screamed with rage and
triumph, drowning out the agonized shrieks of his enemy.

After a while, no more cries. The body under him did not move. Raoul lay
on top of the Indian, panting.

He began to think again. Carefully he slid his hand over the Indian's
chest, the buckskin shirt slippery with warm blood. No heartbeat, no
lifting of lungs.

_By God, I did it, I killed him!_ He felt as if rockets were going off
in his head, and he laughed aloud. He'd fought for his mine and spilled
his enemy's blood to make it his own.

_No goddamned Indian is ever going to steal what belongs to me._

He climbed to his feet. His knees were shaking violently under him.

His head ached so badly he felt as if his eyes were being pushed out of
his skull. He realized that in the fight he'd completely lost control of
himself. He'd become a wild thing, a creature without a mind. It had
happened to him several times before, in fights that had ended with his
killing a man.

Thoughts of triumph that he had killed his enemy, of terror at the
realization that this fight could have gone the other way, chased each
other around in his brain, but he felt even more alive and happier than
he had last night with Clarissa.

Sudden light dazzled him. An arrow of fear shot through him. More
Indians?

"Raoul!" It was Eli Greenglove's voice.

His eyes adjusted, and he could see Eli, Hodge Hode and Levi Pope
standing at the entrance to the side tunnel. They looked at the body at
his feet and the bloody knife in his hand, and then up at him and their
eyes were wide and their lips parted.

_Those looks are worth as much to me as this whole mine._

"You really chopped him into mincemeat," Eli said. "I'll have to get me
one of them Arkansas toothpicks."

"Get the other two bodies in here," Raoul said, making an effort to keep
his voice steady. "We'll find some place to bury them."

"Better search the whole mine, make sure there's no more redskins," said
Eli.

Raoul agreed, but he felt certain this one he'd killed was the only one
in the mine. He looked down at the dead face. The Indian wasn't much
more than fifteen or sixteen years old. Good, he thought. Hadn't had
long enough to do much harm.

But why, Raoul wondered, had this young buck thrown his life away
attacking him near the entrance to the mine? He'd have had more of a
chance of escaping if he'd hidden deeper.

Maybe he'd figured there was at least a little light to see and fight by
near the entrance. If he'd gotten Raoul, then somehow managed to get
away, he'd probably have claimed the right to wear a brave's feather.

The thought of himself lying dead in the dark and his scalp hanging on a
pole in front of a lodge down at Saukenuk made Raoul shudder.

But it was Raoul who'd won his feather. No Indian would ever kill Raoul
de Marion.

And any redskin sluts, and any mongrel bastards, that showed their face
around Victoire would have to deal with a man who killed Indians as
easily as he killed any other sort of vermin.

Time to have it out with Pierre.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pierre wanted to weep as he saw what was about to happen. He rushed
forward and thrust out his hand to stop Raoul.

"Not the vase!" he cried. Maman had loved it so.

Raoul was too close to the mantel for Pierre to reach him in time. He
got to it in two strides and, just as Pierre had expected, seized the
vase that had been in the family for four generations, had stood on the
mantel ever since they built this chateau.

"Raoul!" Papa cried. "Think what you are doing!"

Raoul turned, holding the vase high over his head. He fixed Pierre with
the wide-eyed stare of a madman. His teeth flashed under his black
mustache in a grimace of fury.

He dashed the vase to the flagstone floor. The white egg shape vanished
with a hollow crack, and shards scattered, some hitting Raoul's boots,
others flying into the huge stone hearth.

A sudden silence filled the great hall of Victoire. Pierre felt as if
his heart had broken with the vase.

_You killed Maman_, he wanted to cry out, _now you would kill the memory
of her_.

But he held his tongue and hated himself for even thinking what he had
almost said. What an evil thought! How could he blame Raoul because
Maman died giving birth to him?

_Think what you are doing!_ Papa had cried. That was precisely what
Raoul never did. Thought was for afterward, for escaping the
consequences of his actions. Now he had worked himself into a rage, lost
all governing of himself, because, somehow, he had heard about Sun Woman
and Gray Cloud.

Pierre had to try to win Raoul over, to find a way to break through the
anger that divided him from his younger brother. Raoul had to be
persuaded that it was only right that Sun Woman and the boy be brought
here to Victoire. If Raoul did not accept that, his rage would tear
their family apart.

But how, in one afternoon, batter down a wall that had been building
over the past dozen years?

Pierre realized that he was still standing with his hand held out to
Raoul. He lowered it slowly, feeling his shoulders slump at the same
time. He had been reading with Papa when Raoul came in. Now he took off
his spectacles, put them in the silver case that hung from his neck by a
velvet cord and dropped the case in his vest pocket.

Elysee de Marion clutched the arms of his leather wing chair with
clawlike hands, half rising from it. Raoul stood staring at the two of
them, panting and trembling.

Elysee said quietly, "Why did you do that, Raoul?"

"To make you listen." Raoul's voice was deep and strong, and it
resounded powerfully against the beamed ceiling and stone walls of the
great hall. But in its tones Pierre heard the screams of that hysterical
boy whose tantrums and nightmares, after they'd finally succeeded in
ransoming him from the Potawatomi, had wrenched the hearts of the whole
household and renewed their grief over the loss of Helene.

But now that painfully thin, frightened child was a broad-shouldered man
over six feet tall with a knife as big as a broadsword and a pistol
strapped to his waist. A very dangerous man. A man who, they said, had
killed half a dozen or more opponents in fights up and down the
Mississippi.

"We have been listening," Elysee said.

"Pierre hasn't," Raoul said resentfully. "_You_ tell him, Papa. Tell
him he'd better leave his damned squaw in the woods where she belongs."

_Damned squaw._ The words pierced Pierre's chest like arrows.

Elysee sat back down in his wing chair and stroked his jaw. He looked
like an old turkey cock, with fierce eyes, a hooked nose and a long,
wrinkled neck. The leather-bound copy of Montaigne's essays that had
been lying in his lap had slipped to the floor to join newspapers piled
around his feet like autumn leaves, a mixture of local papers like Frank
Hopkins's _Victor Visitor_, and the Galena _Miners Journal_, months-old
papers from the East--the _New York Evening Post_, the _Boston Evening
Transcript_, the _National Intelligencer_ from Washington City, the even
older copies of _Mercure de France_ from Paris.

"Come here, both of you," Elysee sighed.

Hoping his father could reconcile them where he had failed so dismally,
Pierre went to stand before Elysee's chair. After a moment's hesitation
Raoul approached too. But Pierre saw that he was pointedly keeping more
than an arm's-length distance between the two of them.

Elysee said, "That's better. I can't see you when you stand far from me.
These eyes are good for very little but reading, and when I can no
longer read, I will shoot myself. And if I cannot see well enough to
load the pistol, one of you must do it for me."

As he often did, Elysee was attempting to use humor to put out the fire.
Pierre glanced at Raoul to see if their father had drawn a smile from
him. But Raoul stood with arms folded across his chest, his mouth hidden
under his black mustache, his eyes narrowed. Except when he smiled--and
today he was far from any smiling--the mustache made him look
perpetually angry.

"Raoul," Elysee said. "Be assured that we are listening to you. Tell us
what has driven you to destroy one of our family treasures."

"Just because Pierre soiled himself with a squaw," Raoul demanded, "do
we have to live with what came of it?"

Pierre felt his face burn. He wanted to slap Raoul.

_My life with Sun Woman was as honorable as my life with Marie-Blanche._

He forced himself to control his temper. If he became as angry as Raoul
was, this day would surely be the ruin of the house of de Marion.

Pierre felt a sudden twinge of pain in his belly. He fought down an urge
to rub himself there. He wanted no one to know about his illness. Worse
than the pain was the fear it brought on, the chilling suspicion that he
was a dying man.

Fearfully he wondered what death would be like. Though Pere Isaac said
such notions were foolish, he could not help seeing God the Father as an
enormous white-bearded judge, seated among the clouds. And what would
the Father's sentence be if Pierre de Marion turned his back on a wife
and a son?

He wished he could tell Raoul that he thought he was dying. Then perhaps
his brother would understand why he had to do his duty to Sun Woman and
the boy. But he feared that if Raoul was aware of his weakness, he would
try to take over the whole estate at once.

Praying that his brother would understand, he said, "Ever since
Marie-Blanche died, I have been thinking of Sun Woman. After five years
of life together, I left her and our little son. Lately I have been
seeing her and my son, Gray Cloud, in dreams. I know God wants me to
make amends to them."

Pierre felt sweat break out on his forehead and upper lip. Why must
Raoul stir up such turmoil with his hatred? Couldn't Raoul understand
that not all red people were like the ones he had encountered? Pierre
saw Sun Woman in his mind, so strong and wise, holding the hand of their
grave, brown-eyed boy. How beautiful they were.

Elysee said, "I do not believe that Le Bon Dieu announces his intentions
in dreams, Pierre."

Always the cynic. Papa had read too much Voltaire.

Elysee turned to Raoul. "But, Raoul, it does seem simple justice, what
Pierre wants to do."

"What about justice for me?" Raoul came back. "Isn't this my home as
much as Pierre's?"

Stung by Raoul's bluster, Pierre said, "Raoul, you live more at your
trading post than you do in this home."

To Pierre's surprise, Raoul's face reddened, making Pierre wonder what,
exactly, Raoul was doing at the trading post. It had seemed natural that
he would spend most of his time there, since Papa had given him the
Illinois Fur Company when he divided his property between the two of
them. But perhaps it was not only work that kept Raoul at the trading
post night after night. A woman? Pierre found himself hoping it might
be. A woman could be good for Raoul, civilize him a bit.

He had slept there last night. How, then, could he have learned about
Pierre's plans for Sun Woman and Gray Cloud?

_Is someone in our household spying on me?_

Pierre turned to Raoul. "How did you learn about this? I was going to
tell you, but you found out before I could."

Pierre took some small satisfaction in seeing Raoul's cheeks flush a
deeper red, in seeing his hesitation. He had come storming in here
unprepared to explain just how he knew about Pierre's plans.

Raoul said, "I overheard you and Papa talking about it."

"Absurd! We did not speak of this till this morning. You were not here."

Could Armand have heard, and told Raoul?

Armand must certainly know about Marchette, Pierre thought. But he knew
Armand would never directly attack him. Armand's ancestors had come to
America when this part of the country was still New France, and such
people retained a feudal outlook. The poor fellow doubtless considered
him far superior in birth and breeding. But he was capable of seeking
some kind of revenge, such as turning Raoul against him.

Pierre opened his mouth to chide Raoul for setting one of the servants
to spy on him, but he closed it again when he saw the look of
self-righteous reproach in Raoul's face.

His brother felt betrayed too. He had never stopped feeling betrayed
since the massacre at Checagou. Then how could Pierre expect him to be
reconciled to what must be done now?

Perhaps it would be best to leave Sun Woman and Gray Cloud where they
were. He could just send them gifts. Doubtless they were content. His
own years with the Sauk and Fox had shown him what a good life they had,
so simple, so closely attuned to Nature, so constantly aware of the
things of the spirit. Those years had been the happiest of his life.

No, sending gifts from afar would not be enough. It would be as if he
was hiding his Indian wife and son away, concealing his sin in the
wilderness. As he had been doing all these years, to his shame. The boy,
Gray Cloud, was flesh of his flesh, the only child he had in the world.
He was a de Marion as much as he was a Sauk Indian. He had a right to
come here and to know what his heritage was. He had a right to know his
father, in the time his father had left to him.

_I cannot face God and tell Him I turned my back on my son._

And that beautiful Sauk way of life, what a fragile thing it was! Powers
were massing, Pierre knew, to drive them from their homeland, to force
them to choose--exile in the Great American Desert, or annihilation.
Knowledge might help Gray Cloud meet that threat.

From the depths of his chair Elysee said, "Pierre, it is quite obvious
what is at the bottom of this. It is distasteful to speak of wills and
inheritances, but it is best to be candid. Raoul is afraid that you will
marry this Indian woman and make her son your heir in place of him. Can
you set his mind at rest?"

Pierre stared at Raoul. Ten years ago, on the day of Pierre's wedding to
Marie-Blanche Gagner, Papa announced that he was getting on in years and
was transferring ownership of the de Marion estate to Pierre, the older
of his sons. This January, consumption had taken poor, frail
Marie-Blanche, still childless. The place of Raoul, fourteen years
younger than Pierre, in the line of inheritance was now a certainty.

Surely Raoul could not be afraid that Pierre would take a Sauk Indian
boy who knew no other life but woodland and make him heir to the de
Marion fortune. The notion was so bizarre that it had never even crossed
Pierre's mind. Papa, sitting in his chair by the fire day after day,
reading, reading, would sometimes entertain the most ridiculous
fantasies.

Pierre observed that Raoul looked equally startled.

Then Pierre saw Raoul's expression change from surprise to dawning
anger. Papa had inadvertently given Raoul a new reason to be angry.

Hoping to pluck out the suspicion before it took root, Pierre quickly
said, "My God, Raoul, I have no intention of changing my will. The boy,
who is called Gray Cloud, is my natural son, that is all. Since I have
no legitimate children, you are my heir. Surely you see that."

Raoul's black mustache drew back from his teeth. "What I don't see,
brother of mine, is why in hell you couldn't get a proper son in almost
ten years of marriage with Marie-Blanche. That squaw use you up?"

Again Pierre felt like striking Raoul. His face grew hot.

Elysee asked, "How old would this--Gray Cloud--be?"

Pierre frowned, subtracting dates. "He was born in 1810. So he would
have just turned fifteen." He turned again to Raoul. Perhaps knowing
what he really did have in mind for Gray Cloud would calm his brother
somewhat.

He said, "Pere Isaac, the Jesuit, visits the British Band regularly. I
make offerings to the Jesuit mission in Kaskaskia, and I've asked him to
teach the boy a little English, some elementary letters and ciphering.
Now I want to see Gray Cloud for myself. See what sort of person he has
become. And I want him to know me. And, if I thought he could benefit
from it, I might help him to be educated. I might send him to that
secondary school in New York where our cousin Emilie's husband is
headmaster."

"Educate him so he can take over here?" Raoul demanded, and Pierre's
heart sank. Perhaps he should not have said anything about educating the
boy. He had momentarily forgotten what a disaster Raoul's year in New
York had been, what with whores, drink, money thrown away at cards,
brawls with street toughs and the police. The effort to educate Raoul
had ended when he beat his Latin teacher so badly the man was in New
York Hospital for a month. It had cost Papa a fortune to persuade the
teacher not to press charges. Of course Raoul would be insulted at the
suggestions that a savage Indian boy might succeed where he had
disgraced himself.

"No, Raoul." Pierre shook his head vigorously. "At the most, I might
want his mother and him to have a small bequest. Not even as much as
will go to Nicole. So little you would never miss it. Surely you would
not let greed for wealth and property come between us."

"I came here today to protect our family honor, and you call me greedy!"
Raoul's broad chest heaved.

"What I propose _is_ honorable!"

"How could you consider it honorable to make Indians part of our family
after what they did to us?"

It hurt Pierre to call those awful memories to mind. Yes, perhaps if he
had been there and suffered as Raoul had, and had seen Helene raped and
murdered, he might hate Indians as his brother did.

Pierre said, "Raoul, when I was with Sun Woman I knew nothing of what
happened to Helene and you. Once the war broke out in 1812 I was in
effect a prisoner and had no word from the white world. The Sauk held
me for three years from the start of the war. And then, when I found
out--why do you think I left Sun Woman and Gray Cloud? And never
returned, only sent messages through the priest, never tried to see
them? It was because after I learned about Helene--about what they did
to you--I, even _I_, Raoul, could not be with Indians anymore. It has
taken all these years before I could face them again."

Elysee said with a frown, "Raoul, you keep mentioning that this woman
and her child whom your brother wishes to help are Indians, as if that
in itself made them intolerable. Now, I could quite agree, if they were
Englishmen--"

Raoul spoke in a low, steady growl. "Being Indians does make them
intolerable. They're animals."

Pierre felt anger growing inside him. He was trying to understand Raoul,
but Raoul's insults were becoming more provocation than he could endure.

"Animals?" said Elysee incredulously. "Come now, Raoul. Surely you do
not believe that. The red people are as human as we are."

Raoul laughed bitterly. "Sure, you'd have to say they're human.
Otherwise Pierre's mating with one of them would be like a half-witted
farmer mounting one of his sheep."

Something exploded in Pierre's brain and he heard his own cry of anguish
as if from a long way off. He felt tears running from eyes blinded with
fury.

And when his eyes cleared, all he could see was Raoul's sneer. He burned
to smash his fist into those so-white teeth under that black mustache,
silence that filthy tongue. He lunged forward, fist drawn back.

Raoul caught his arm in an iron grip, but the force of Pierre's rush
threw his brother back against the great chimney. Pierre reached to grab
Raoul's neck and slam his head against the stone.

"Stop!" Elysee cried.

The old man stood up more quickly than Pierre had seen him do in years
and pushed himself between them.

Suddenly afraid that his father might be hurt, Pierre forced himself to
let go of Raoul. Every muscle in his body went rigid, and he trembled
from head to foot.

"You must control yourselves," Elysee said. "Pierre, you raised your
hand against your brother."

Pierre took a step backward, still shaking. How could this father
reproach _him_, after what Raoul had just said?

_The voice of Reason_, Pierre thought bitterly. _He does not know there
are some feelings that cannot be reasoned with._

Pierre realized that he was still crying. Raoul, having let go of his
arm, was looking at him with disgust.

"I loved Sun Woman," Pierre stammered. "For him to speak of her so--to
speak so of our love--"

"Surely," Elysee said, "Raoul spoke in the heat of anger."

"I don't take back a word," Raoul said in a hard, flat voice.

But, though it was hard to read the features behind that fierce black
mustache, Pierre thought he saw uncertainty in Raoul's face. As if Raoul
finally understood that he had gone too far.

_He drove me to try to hit him. He's never pushed me that far before._

Perhaps, Pierre thought, Raoul would now apologize. Appalled at his own
words, he might seek to be reconciled.

_I will make no more overtures. He meets every attempt with insults._

Pierre waited. He could see Raoul struggling within himself. Perhaps
Papa's suggestion that he might lose his inheritance had made him
realize what consequences a rift between them could have.

_Of course, I would never disinherit Raoul. There's no one else who
could manage the estate after I die. And I may be gone sooner than
anyone expects._

Pierre saw Raoul's broad chest swell as he took a deep breath. Now,
thought Pierre, surely Raoul was going to apologize and ask forgiveness,
and they would work out some way that Sun Woman and Gray Cloud could be
brought here without stirring up old hatreds.

Raoul said, "Don't bring Indians into this house, Pierre, I warn you. If
any Indian tries to claim he's a member of my family, I'll make him wish
he had never been born at all."

The pain that might one day kill him sank its teeth deep into his guts.
Raoul's words seared him like a branding iron. He felt his shoulders
sag.

Raoul turned his back on his brother and his father, and the clump of
his hard leather boot heels echoed through the great hall.

"Raoul!" Elysee cried. He held his hand outstretched, as Pierre had when
Raoul was about to smash the Limoges vase.

Looking down at those glistening white shards scattered over the
flagstones, Pierre wondered what would happen when Raoul inherited the
de Marion fortune. Would he destroy it in one of his rages as he had
this beautiful object that had been part of the family treasure? Or
would he use its power as he used his fists and pistol and knife, to
destroy others?

The de Marion fortune.... Once it had been a huge tract of land in
northeastern France dominated by the chateau of the Counts de Marion,
held by them so long that no one knew when or how they first obtained
it. Just as the origin of the de Marions themselves was something of a
mystery.

Converted into gold, the de Marion fortune had sailed, with Elysee, the
last Count de Marion, his countess and his children, across the
Atlantic. Elysee, in the early 1780s, had foreseen the bloody upheaval
that would sweep away the king and the nobility of France. He had made a
friend of the American ambassador to France, Thomas Jefferson, and had
thought much about Jefferson's new nation. Their revolution was over and
done with. The de Marion fortune might thrive in those United States.

And on the American prairie the de Marion fortune had purchased a vast
new estate and built a new chateau.

Elysee sighed and took a step toward his chair. Pierre turned the chair
toward the fire so that its wings would gather in the warmth of the
small fire and hold it around his father's body.

"Would you consider not bringing this woman and this boy here?" Elysee
said as he sat down. "To keep the peace in our family?"

Pierre hesitated. For ten years Sun Woman and Gray Cloud had lived in
their world, and he in his. Why provoke so much strife now by trying to
change that?

But Gray Cloud was the only son he would ever have, and if he left
things as they were, he would die without knowing him.

"She is my woman--in truth, my wife--and the boy is my child," Pierre
said. "Raoul has much. They have little. Raoul is wrong to cling to this
hatred. To give in to him would mean abandoning these two people to whom
I owe so much. As soon as the weather is a little warmer, Papa, I mean
