"Right after one of these things pops is the time to take a peek at
Tony," he said to himself, and immediately he was on the way.

       *       *       *       *       *

But how to get his peep was not so easy a problem. When he alighted
from his cab a block away from Tony's building, he was hesitant about
approaching it. Tony knew him, and might see him first. Phil circled
the brick building, keeping under cover or far enough away; all around
it was a belt of thirty feet of lawn between the building and the
sidewalk. Ought he have called the police and given them his idea? Or
should he wait till darkness and see what he could do alone?

Then suddenly he saw her. Across the street, standing in the shelter
of a delivery truck in front of an apartment, she was observing Tony's
building intently. The aristocratic chin, the brightness of the eyes,
the waves of her hair, and the general sunny expression! It could not
be anyone else. Post haste he ran across the street.

"Pardon me!" he cried excitedly, lifting his hat and then digging
hastily into his inner pocket. "I'm sure you must be the--"

"Well, the nerve!" the young woman said icily, and pointing her chin
at the opposite horizon she walked haughtily away.

By that time Phil had dug out his picture and was running after her.

"Please," he said, "just a moment!" And he held the picture out in
front of her face.

"Now, where in the world--?" She looked at him in puzzled and
indignant inquiry, and then burst out laughing.

"It _is_ you, isn't it?" Phil asked. "What are you laughing at?"

"Oh, you looked so abject. I'm sure your intentions must be good. Now
tell me where you got my picture."

"Let us walk this way," suggested Phil, leading away from Tony's
building.

       *       *       *       *       *

And, as they walked, he told her the story. When he got through she
stood and looked at him a long time in silence.

"You look square to me," she said. "You're working on my side already.
Will you help me."

"I'll do anything--anything--" Phil said, and couldn't think of any
other way of expressing his willingness, for the wonderful eyes bore
radiantly upon him.

"First I must tell you my story," she began. "But before I can do so,
you must promise me that it is to remain an absolute secret. You're a
newspaper man--"

Phil gave his promise readily.

"My father is Professor Bloomsbury at the University of Chicago. He
has been experimenting in mathematical physics, and I have been
assisting him. He has succeeded in proving experimentally the concept
of tensors. A tensor is a mathematical expression for the fact that
space is smooth and flat, in three dimensions, only at an infinite
distance from matter; in the neighborhood of a particle of matter,
there is a pucker or a wrinkle in space. My father has found that by
suddenly removing a portion of matter from out of space, the pucker
flattens out. If the matter is heavy enough and its removal sudden
enough, there is a violent disturbance of space. By planning all the
steps carefully my father has succeeded in swinging a section of
space on a pivot through an angle of 180 degrees, and causing two
portions of space to change places through hyperspace, or as you might
express it popularly, through the fourth dimension."

       *       *       *       *       *

Phil held his hands to his head.

"It is not difficult," she went on smiling. "Loan me your pocket knife
and a piece of paper from your notebook. If I cut out a rectangular
piece of paper from this sheet and mount it on a pivot or shaft at A
B, I can rotate it through 180 degrees, just like a child's
teeter-totter, so that X will be where Y originally was. That is in
two dimensions. Now, simply add one dimension all the way round and
you will have what daddy is doing with space. He does it by shoving
fifty or a hundred pounds of lead right out of space; the sudden
flattening out of the tensors causes a section of space to flop
around, and two portions of space change places. The first time he
tried it, his desk disappeared, and we've never seen it again. We've
thought it was somewhere out in hyperspace; but this terrible story of
yours about disappearing safes, and the fact that you have this
picture, means that someone has got the desk."

"Surely you must have suspected that long ago, when the disappearances
first began?" Phil suggested.

"I've just returned from Europe," said Miss Bloomsbury. "I was
tremendously puzzled when I got my first newspapers in New York and
read about the safes. Gradually I gathered all the news on the
subject, and it seemed most reasonable to suspect this gangster
engineer."

"Great minds and same channels," Phil smiled. "But your father. Why
didn't he speak up when the safes began to pop?"

"Ha! ha!" she laughed a tinkly little laugh. "My father doesn't know
what safes are for, nor who is President, nor that there has been a
war. Mother and I take care of him, and he works on tensors. He has
probably never heard about the safes."

       *       *       *       *       *

"What were you going to do around here?" Phil asked, marveling at the
courage of the girl who had come to look the situation over
personally.

"I hadn't formed any definite plans. I just wanted to look about
first."

"Well," said Phil, "as you will soon see by the papers, another safe
has puffed out. It occurred to me that we might find out something by
spying about here immediately after one of the disappearances. That's
why I'm here. If you'll tell me where you live, or wait for me at some
safe place, I'll come and report to you as soon as I find out
anything."

"Oho! So that's the kind of a girl you think I am!" She laughed
sunnily again. "No, Mr. Reporter. Either we reconnoiter together, or
each on our own."

"Oh, together, by all means," said Phil so earnestly that she laughed
again. "And since we'd better wait for darkness, let's have something
to eat somewhere. I didn't finish my dinner."

Phil found Ione Bloomsbury in person to be even more wonderful than
her photograph suggested. Obviously she had brains; it was apparent,
too that she had breeding. Her cheerful view of the world was like a
tonic for tired nerves; and withal, she had a gentle sort of courtesy
in her manner that may have been old-fashioned, but it was almost too
much for Phil. Before the dinner was over, he would have laid his
heart at her feet. It gave him a thrill that went to his head, to have
her by his side, slipping along through the darkness toward Tony's
building.

This building was a one-story brick affair with a vast amount of
window space. From the sidewalk they could see faint lights glowing
within, but could make out no further details. They therefore selected
the darkest side of the building, and made their way hurriedly across
the lawn. Here, they found, they could see the crowding apparatus
within the one long room fairly well. They looked into one window
after another, making a circuit around the building, until Phil
