through the violet liquid from its base toward the three rings or
bands of green metal that encircled the cylinder.

In an instant, Larry realized that the gray mass was a human brain.
The larger, upper part the cerebrum, the smaller mass at the back the
cerebellum. And the white filaments were nerves, by means of which
this brain controlled its astounding, mechanical body!

A brain in a machine!

The violet liquid, it came to Larry in his trance of wonder, must take
the place of blood, feeding the brain-cells, absorbing waste.

An eternal mind, within a machine! Free from the ills and weaknesses
of the body. And devoid, too, of any pity, of any tender feelings. A
cold and selfish mind, without emotion--unless it might worship itself
or its mechanical body.

It was this monster that had spilt the pool of blood drying on the
floor, near the door. And it was these glistening, green, snake-like
tentacles that had crumpled the revolver into a broken mass of steel!

Abruptly the machine-monster darted forward, running swiftly upon its
four legs of green metal. Slender tentacles reached out toward the
shuddering girl at Larry's shoulder.

"Run!" Agnes gasped to him, quickly. "It will kill you!"

The girl tried to push him back.

As she touched him, Larry recovered from his daze of wondering fear.
Agnes was in frightful danger, and facing it with quiet courage. He
must find a weapon!

       *       *       *       *       *

Wildly, he looked about him. His eyes fell upon the tall, heavy wooden
stool, upon which Agnes had been sitting.

"Get back!" he shouted to her.

He snatched up the stool, and, swinging it over his head, sprang
toward the machine of violet-filled crystal and glittering green
metal.

"Stop!" Agnes screamed, in a terrified voice. "You can't--"

She had run before him. He seized her arm and swung her back behind
him. Then he advanced warily toward the machine-monster, which had
paused and seemed to be regarding him with sinister intentness,
through its glistening crystal eye-lenses.

With all his strength, Larry struck at the crystal cylinder, swinging
the stool like an ax. A slender, metallic green tentacle whipped out,
tore the stool from his hands, and sent it crashing across the room,
to splinter into fragments on the opposite wall.

Larry, sent off his balance, staggered toward the glittering machine.
As he stumbled against the transparent tube that contained the brain,
he clenched his fist to strike futilely at it.

A snake-like metal tentacle wrapped itself about him; he was hurled to
the floor, to sprawl grotesquely among broken apparatus.

His head came against the leg of a bench. For a few moments he was
dazed. But it seemed only a few seconds to him before he had staggered
to his feet, rubbing his bruised head. Anxiously, he peered about the
room.

The machine-monster and Agnes were gone!

He stumbled back to the mass of apparatus in the center of the huge
laboratory. Intently, he gazed into the upright pillar of crimson
flame. Nothing was visible there.

"No, the other!" he gasped. "The violet is the way they went."

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned to the companion ray of violet radiance that beat straight
down on the opposite side of the tiny, whirling planet. And in that
motionless torrent of chill violet flame he saw them.

Tiny, already, and swiftly dwindling!

With green wings outspread, the machine-monster was beating swiftly
upward through the pillar of purple-blue flame. And close against the
crystal tube that contained its brain, was Agnes, held fast by the
whip-like tentacles of glistening green metal.

Larry moved to spring after them, into the torrent of violet light.
But sudden caution restrained him.

"I'd shrink, too!" he muttered. "And then where would I be? I'd be
standing on the glass platform, I guess. And the thing flying off over
my head!"

He gazed at the rapidly dwindling forms of Agnes Sterling and her
amazing abductor. As it grew smaller, the machine-monster flew higher
in the violet beam, until it was opposite the tiny, spinning planet.

The distance between the red and the violet rays was just slightly
more than the diameter of the pygmy world. The sphere hung between
them, one side of it a fraction of an inch from the red, the other as
near the violet.

Opposite the elfin planet, the monster ceased to climb. It hung there
in the violet ray, an inch from the surface of the little world.

And still it swiftly dwindled. It was no larger than a fly, and Larry
could barely distinguish the form of the girl, helpless in the green
tentacles.

Soon she and the monster became a mere greenish speck.... Suddenly
they were gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a little time he stood watching the point where they had vanished,
watching the red and the violet rays that poured straight down upon
the crystal disks, watching the tiny, green-blue planet spinning so
steadily between the bright rays.

Abruptly, he recovered from his fascination of wonder.

"What did she say?" he muttered. "Something about the monsters
carrying off people to sacrifice to a rusty machine that they worship
as a god! It took her--for that!"

He clenched his fists; his lips became a straight line of
determination.

"Then I guess we try a voyage in the little plane. A slim chance,
maybe. But decidedly better than none!"

He returned to the table, dropped on his knees, inspected the tiny
airplane. A perfect miniature, delicately beautiful; its slim, small
wings were bright as silver foil. Carefully, he opened the door and
peered into the diminutive cabin. Two minute rifles, several
Lilliputian pistols, and boxes of ammunition to match, lay on the rear
seat of the plane.

"So we are prepared for war," he remarked, grinning in satisfaction.
"And the next trick, I suppose, is to get shrunk to fit the plane.
About three inches, she said. Lord, it's a queer thing to think
about!"

He got to his feet, walked back to the machine in the center of the
room, with its twin pillars of red and violet flame, and the tiny
world floating between them. He started to step into the violet ray,
then hesitated, shivering involuntarily, like a swimmer about to dive
into icy cold water.

Turning back to one of the benches, he picked up a wooden funnel-rack,
and tossed it to the crystal disk beneath the violet ray. Slowly it
decreased in size, until it had vanished from sight.

"Safe, I suppose," he muttered. "But how do I know when I'm small
enough?"

       *       *       *       *       *

After a moment he picked up a glass bottle which measured about three
inches in height, set it on the floor, beside the crystal disk.

