see if you find anything of interest. My eyes may be playing me tricks."

I glanced curiously at Correy, and then bent my attention on the image
in the disk.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was impossible to make out any details of the background, save that
the country round seemed to be fairly level, with great pools of gray
water standing here and there, and a litter, as of gigantic, wilted
vegetation, spread over everything.

And then, as I looked, it seemed to me that the _Kabit_ shifted position
slightly. At the same time, the spiral bands seemed to move, and upon
the ground around the ship, there was movement also.

I looked up from the disk, feeling Correy's eyes upon me. We stared at
each other, neither wishing to speak--hardly daring to speak. There are
some things too monstrous to put into words.

"You--you saw it, sir?" asked Correy at last, his voice scarcely more
than a whisper.

"I don't know. I think I saw something like a--a snake. Is that what you
mean?"

"Yes. Something like a snake. A snake that has wrapped itself around the
_Kabit_, holding it helpless ... a serpent...." He gestured helplessly,
a sort of horror in his eyes. I think he had convinced himself he had
only imagined the serpent, until I had seen the same thing.

"Have you stopped to think, Mr. Correy," I asked slowly, "how long the
creature would have to be to wrap itself like that around a liner the
size of the _Kabit_? It--it can't be!"

"I know it, sir," nodded Correy. "I know it. And still, I saw it, and
you saw it."

"Yes," I muttered. "I saw it. I--I saw it _move_!"

       *       *       *       *       *

We maintained a speed that kept the surface-temperature gauge
dangerously close to maximum permissible reading, and despite the forced
ventilation of the ship, we were dripping with perspiration.

Atmospheric speeds are maddeningly low after the reckless, hurtling
speed of space travel, but our vaunted scientists haven't yet found a
way of eliminating friction, and we had to make the best of it.

With maddening slowness the image in the television disk grew larger and
clearer, relentlessly confirming our original conclusion.

The _Kabit_ was wrapped in the coils of a mighty serpent; a monster that
must have been the height of a man in diameter, and whose length I could
not even guess.

Four coils were looped tightly about the _Kabit_, and we could now see
the terrible tail of the thing, and its head.

I have always been glad that the details of that ghastly head became
visible gradually: viewed suddenly, in full relief, it was a sight that
might well have threatened the reason of any man.

The serpent's mouth was lined with a triple row of long, fang-like
teeth, tilted gullet-ward at a sharp angle, and the breathing holes were
elevated to form warty excrudescences near the end of the snoutish upper
jaw. Long colorless tentacles fringed the horrible mouth: barbels that
writhed incessantly, as though they sought food for the rapacious jaws
they guarded. From a point slightly above and to the rear of the tiny,
ruby eyes, two slim and graceful antennae, iridescent and incongruously
beautiful, rose twice the height of a man. Like the antennae of a
butterfly, they were surmounted by tiny knobs, and were in constant
motion.

The whole head was armored with great plates or scales, dark green in
color; and apparently of tremendous thickness. A short distance behind
the head were two tremendous reddish-brown fins, with strong supporting
spines that seemed to terminate in retractile claws. In the water, these
fins would undoubtedly be of tremendous value in swimming and in
fighting, but on land they seemed rather useless. Aside from a
rudimentary dorsal fin, a series of black, stubby spines, connected by a
barely visible webbing, the thing had no other external evidences of its
marine origin.

"You've been restless for action, Mr. Correy," I commented grimly. "I
believe this chap will give us all you could desire."

Correy, still staring down into the disk, fascinated by the terrible
details there, shook his head.

"It shouldn't be such a stiff battle, sir," he said. "The ray will make
quick work of him once we're within distance."

"Yes--and of the _Kabit_ and all on board," I reminded him. "If he has
the strength his size would indicate, he would crush the liner in his
death agonies, or, failing that, would heave it about so violently that
those within would be maimed or killed outright. This is a case for
cunning, and not might."

"I think, sir, both cunning and might will be needed," said Correy
soberly, looking up from the disk. "Cunning alone will not dispose of
that lad. Have you any plans?"

"Rough plans only; we'll have to develop them as we go along. We don't
know what we'll be up against. We'll land a safe distance away, and a
small expeditionary force will attack as it sees fit; probably, dividing
itself into two or three units. The _Ertak_ will be manned by a skeleton
crew and ready to take any necessary action to protect itself or, if
possible, to aid any of the expeditionary parties."

"What weapons, sir?" asked Correy, his eyes gleaming. "I'll give the
orders now!"

"It's too soon for that; it'll be an hour at least before we land. But I
believe every man, including officers, should be armed with pistols, at
least six atomic bombs, and there should be a field disintegrator-ray
unit for each party. And each member must be equipped with a menore;
communication will be by menore only. You might call Mr. Kincaide and
Mr. Hendricks, and we'll hold a little council of war."

"Right, sir!" said Correy, and picked up the microphone. Kincaide and
Hendricks were in the room almost within the minute.

We laid our plans as best we could, but they weren't very definite. Only
a few things were certain.

Somehow, we must induce the monster to release his grasp on the _Kabit_.
We could take no action against the serpent until the big liner and her
passengers were safe. It was a desperate mission; an enterprise not of
the _Ertak_, but of individuals.

"One thing is certain, sir," commented Correy, taking over by visual
navigation, and reducing speed still more, "you must remain in charge of
the ship. You will be needed--"
