discovery from behind.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jupiter lowered its murky disk as the miles streamed past, breeding a
legion of shadows welcome to the fabric-clad monster skimming through
them and to the creatures who blinked and stirred as night approached.
The stream broadened into shallow pockets; patches of swamp appeared
and absorbed the stream; and Carse knew he was close to his
destination.

He cut his speed and glanced around. Ahead, the dark spire of a giant
sakari tree climbed into the gloom. It would be a good place. The man
rose slowly; like a wraith on the wind he lifted into its top-most
branches; and there, in the broad, cuplike leaves, he warily ensconced
himself. For man-sounds came into his opened helmet, and through a
fringe of leaves, across a mile of tumbled swamp and marsh, he could
see the guarding fences of the cosmetropolis of Porno.

A last slice of blotched, flaming red, the rim of setting Jupiter,
still silhouetted Porno, sprawled inside its high, electric-wired
fences, and the flood of fading light brushed the town with beauty.
The rows of tin shacks which housed its dives, the clustered,
nondescript hovels, the merchants' grim strongholds of steel--all
merged into a glowing mirage, a scene far alien to the brooding swamp
and savage jungle in whose breast it lay. Here and there several
space-ships reared their sunset-gilded flanks, glittering high-lights
in the final glorious burst of Jupiter-light....

The planet's rim vanished abruptly, and Porno returned to true
character.

For a moment it appeared what it was: a blotched, disordered huddle,
ugly, raw, fit companion of the swamp and jungle. Then beads of light
appeared, some still, some winking, one crooked line of flaring
illumination marking the Street of the Sailors, along which the
notorious kantrans flourished, now ready for their nightly brood of
men who sought forgetfulness in revelry. Soon, Carse knew, the faint
man-noises he heard would grow into a broad fabric of sound, stitched
across by shrieks and roars as the isuan and alkite flowed free. And
all around the lone watcher in the sakari tree the night-monsters were
crawling out in jungle and swamp on the dark routine of their lives
as, in the town, two-legged creatures even lower in their degradation
went abroad after the dope and liquor which gave them their vicious
recreation.

The night flowed thicker around him.

       *       *       *       *       *

From somewhere behind, the Hawk heard a suck of half-fluid mud as a
giant body stretched in its sleeping place. A tree close to his
suddenly fluttered with the unseen life it harbored. A hungry gantor
raised its long deep bellow to the night, and another answered, and
another.

It grew pitch black. Only a sprinkling of pin-points of light marked
Porno to the eye. The sky beyond the town matched the sky to the rear.
Jupiter's light now had fled the higher air levels. The time had come.

Cautiously Carse brushed the branches aside, rose upright and pressed
the mitten switch over to repulsion. In instant response his giant's
bulk lifted lightly. He sped upward, straight and fast; and at two
thousand feet, still untouched by the sinking planet's rays, he
brought himself to an approximate halt and peered below.

Port o' Porno lay spread out beneath, one thin line of light-pricks
off which angled fainter lines, extending only a short distance and
then dying widely off. There were perhaps two thousand men in the
town--men from all the countries of the three planets inhabited by
creatures that could be called human--and of these at least three
quarters knew Hawk Carse as an enemy, because of his intolerance for
their dope-trade. His approach to the house Number 574 had to be
swift, direct, unseen, unheard.

He was able to make it so. Pointing the direction rod, he winged
forward until directly above an estimated spot, then dropped a
thousand feet. A pause while he searched; another drop. He knew
Kurgo's house well, but the scene was confusing from above, and the
street the house was on was always dark at night.

He made it out at last. The squat two-storied structure, similar to
other merchants' strongholds, seemed unlit and unwatched. Carse swung
back the hinged mittens of the suit and slid his hands out ready for
action. In his left he took his ray-gun; then, pressing the
mitten-switch, he dropped straight, silent, swift, like the Hawk he
now truly was.

       *       *       *       *       *

A single window-port, high up, broke the smooth rear of Kurgo's house.
It faced a silent alleyway. The steel shutters were closed, but a pull
swung them noiselessly outward. For a brief moment Carse's bulging
giant's figure of metal and fabric hung black against the shadowed
window-port. The room he peered into was solid black. He heard no
sound. Clumsily he thrust out and stepped in.

Silence. Inky nothingness--but the air was weighted with many things,
and among them one which brought the short hairs on the Hawk's neck
prickling erect. A smell! It was not to be mistaken--a faint, but rank
and fetid and altogether identifying smell--the body-smell of a
Venusian!

For a moment Hawk Carse's breathing stopped. Metal clanked on metal
for an instant as he moved from the window-port and became one with
the darkness inside; then silence again, as his eyes trained into the
vault and his hand held ready on the ray-gun. He waited.

Was it a trap? He had seen no guards watching the house; had sensed it
deserted. But the steep shutters, unlocked, readily permitting
entrance--and the smell! Even if not still there, a Venusian had been
in the room, and a Venusian of Port o' Porno was an enemy. A
Venusian.... There were only some sixty on the whole satellite, and,
of these, fifty were the men of Lar Tantril. Lar Tantril, powerful
henchman of Dr. Ku Sui, director of the Eurasian's drug trade on
Satellite III. But that line of thought had to wait.

"I see you!" he whispered suddenly and sharply. "My gun's on you. Come
forward!"

       *       *       *       *       *

No answer; not the slightest sign or stir in the darkness. He breathed
again.

Carse knew the arrangement of Kurgo's house. He was in his
second-story sleeping-room. There was a door in the wall ahead,
leading into the room Leithgow was accustomed to use on his visits,
and there the papers should be. But first he would have to have light.

His ears pitched for any betraying sound, Carse moved heavily to his
left until a wall arrested him. He felt along it, located the desk he
sought for and scoured through it. His fingers found the flash he knew
was there.

The darkness then was slit by a hard straight line of white. It shot
over the room picking out overturned chairs, a bowl that had toppled
to the floor, scattering its contents of ripe akalot fruit, a sleeping
couch, its sheets and pillows awry, and--something human.

A half-clothed body lay sprawled beside the couch, its hands thrust
clutching forward and its unseeing eyes still staring at the door
whence had come the shots that had burnt out the left side of its
chest. Dead. Three days dead. The murdered master of the house, Kurgo,
lying where Ku Sui's robot-coolies had shot him down.

The Venusian-smell swept more strongly into his nostrils as the
adventurer opened the door into Leithgow's room. No Venusian had ever
been in those rooms _before_ the abduction.

Carse's light danced over the room's confusion: a laboratory table
overturned; apparatus spilled; several chains flung around, one
splintered: mute signs of the struggle Eliot Leithgow had offered his
kidnappers.

In a corner stood a metal chest. In the bottom drawer was the
all-significant answer. Hawk Carse crossed the room and slid it open.

The papers were gone!

       *       *       *       *       *

Methodically Carse hunted through every drawer and corner of the room,
but he found no trace of them. Every article that would be of value to
an ordinary thief was left; the one thing important to Dr. Ku Sui, the
sheaf of papers, was missing.

The presence of the Venusian body-smell started an important train of
thought in the Hawk's mind. It signified that the papers had been
taken by henchmen of Ku Sui, which in turn signified that Ku Sui had
survived the crashing of the dome and was alive and again aggressively
dangerous. But was the Eurasian already on Satellite III? Was he
already in personal possession of the papers?--perhaps conducting a
search for Leithgow's laboratory?

Or did it mean that Dr. Ku had merely radioed instructions for his
Venusian henchmen to ransack the house, take whatever pertained to
Leithgow, and wait for him?

Venusians.... There was only one logical man; and as Hawk Carse
thought of him in that dark and silent house of tragedy, his right
hand slowly rose to the bangs of hair over his forehead and began to
stroke them....

His bangs were an unusual style for the period; they stamped him and
attracted unwanted attention; but he would wear his hair in that
fashion until he went down in death. For he had once been
trapped--trapped neatly by five men, and maltreated: one, Judd the
Kite, whose life had paid already for his part in the ugly business;
two others whom he was not now concerned with; the fourth, Dr. Ku Sui;
and the fifth--a Venusian....

That fifth, the Venusian, was Lar Tantril, now one of Ku Sal's most
powerful henchmen, and director of his interplanetary drug
traffic--Lar Tantril, who possessed an impregnable isuan ranch only
twenty-five miles from Port o' Porno--_Lar Tantril, who probably had
directed the stealing of the papers from this room_! _The papers, if
not already in Ku Sui's hands_, _should be at Tantril's ranch_.
