oxygen-rejuvenating machinery. He listened intently and the _swish_ grew
in volume until it became a roar in his ears--a sound more thunderous
than that of a thousand trucks.

"There is a place where we'd be completely safe," Gloria exclaimed, her
voice suddenly loud in his ears. "I don't know how we could get there.
But if a way could be found--"

"Venus?" George inquired. "The colony your father started?"

"Yes. There are only a few colonists there--not more than twenty-five.
The war with the Agronians started just after the settlement was
established and the government never had a chance to send out more
colonists. Father showed me the approximate location--"

"The Agronians have probably destroyed the base by now," Emmett said.
But his senses were tingling with new hope.

Gloria shook her head. "I don't think so. The enemy has studied the
remains of our warships but there's a good chance that the information
never fell into their hands."

"How do we get there? We haven't got a ship, and _we can't walk_!"

"We haven't got a ship," George agreed. "But we can try to get one."

Emmett felt suddenly cold when he realized what the pilot had in mind.
"The enemy ship?" he asked.

George nodded. "During the skirmish at Arcturus, we managed to capture
one of their ships and I was a member of a group that studied it. I'm
sure I can fly one of their vessels, for the controls are far simpler
than ours. Most of the Agronians have left their ship to study ours, and
that leaves only a skeleton crew on board. We can use our spacesuit jets
to cross the distance. As you can see, it isn't too far."

"And precisely what happens when we reach their ship?"

"Who knows? Maybe we'll get killed. But getting killed in a struggle for
survival is better than just waiting to die."

Gloria shuddered. "It looks so cold out there. We'll get
separated--hopelessly lost. I don't even know how to operate the
spacesuit's rockets!"

"I don't either," Emmett admitted.

"It's simple." George carefully explained the operation of the rockets
in detail and ended by instructing them, "We'll get separated on the
way. But when we reach the ship, we'll try to meet at the air lock. It
resembles the air lock of an Earth ship."

       *       *       *       *       *

Floating through space toward the enemy ship, Emmett felt overcome with
an absurd sensation of freedom. Completely surrounded by billions of
motionless, pin-point stars and securely hidden by the vast blackness of
space, the aliens and the problem of survival seemed dream-like and
unreal.

A sharp pain stabbed at his left arm and he heard a brief hissing sound.
Oxygen was escaping from his spacesuit. The sound abruptly stopped when
the suit automatically sealed the puncture. And yet the throbbing pain
remained and he felt the wetness of blood against his flesh, seeping
slowly down his leg.

_A meteor!_ People usually visualized meteors as tons of metal hurtling
through space. But there were small ones as well, and perhaps this one
had been no larger than a grain of sand. He dismissed it from his mind,
and after what seemed an eternity, his feet touched the hull of the
enemy ship. Quickly he activated the magnetic boots.

A distant figure gestured as George's voice came loudly over the
intercom system, "This way. Here's the air lock!"

_You should whisper_, he thought. _It would be more fitting._

He shuffled in the indicated direction. His legs were rubbery beneath
him and there was a growing tingling sensation in his left arm. It was
just barely possible that he was bleeding to death. And encased as he
was in the spacesuit, it would be impossible for him to treat the wound.

_If_ they reached the colony on Venus he would receive medical
attention, of course. But they must first overpower the ship's crew, and
