
"A world inside of a world you said once, Spink. Ha--"

"Is that impossible? You have seen those ancient sailing ships built
inside of a bottle, Mr. Zmorro," I says.

He paws at his dome and takes a hyperbenzadrine tablet. "Well, thank
you, Septimus Spink. And have a good trip."

It is Friday. We climb up the ladder and into the Magnificent Mole.
"Check everything," I says to Wurpz. "You are the sub-strata
astrogator."

"Rogeria. I hope this worm can turn," Wurpz says.

       *       *       *       *       *

Zahooli checks the instruments. We don't put on space suits, but have a
pressure chamber built in to insure against the bends. I wave good-bye
to the citizens outside and close the door.

"I have got to git out," D'Ambrosia Zahooli says and heads for the door.
"I forgot somethin'."

"Huh?"

"I forgot to resign," he says, and I pull a disintegrator Betsy on him
and tell him to hop back to the controls.

"Awright, we have computed the masses of fuel we need. Stand by for the
takeoff--er, takedown. Eight seconds. Seven--Six--Five--Four--"

"I know now my mother raised one idiot," Zahooli says.

"Three seconds--two seconds--one second!" I go on. "Awright, unload the
pile in one and three tubes! Then when we have gone about five hundred
miles, give us the radium push."

Whir-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-o-o-om! The Mole shudders like a citizen looking
at his income tax bite and then starts boring. There is a big bright
light all around us, changing color every second, then there is a sound
like all the pneumatomic drills in all the universe is biting through a
thousand four-inch layers of titanium plate. And with it is a rumble of
thunder from all the electric storms since the snake bit Cleopatra. In
less than five seconds we turn on the oxygen just in case, and I jump to
the instrument panel and look at the arrow on a dial.

"Hey," I yell, "we are makin' a thousand miles per hour through the
ground!"

"Don't look through the ports," Wurpz says. "In passin' I saw an
angleworm three times the size of a firehose, and a beetle big enough to
saddle."

"Git into the compression chamber quick," I says to him. "You are
gettin' hallucinations."

I turn on the air conditioning as it gets as humid in the Mole as in the
Amazon jungle during the dog days. The boring inner spaceship starts
screeching like a banshee.

I look at the instrument panel again and see we are close to being seven
thousand miles down, and all at once the gauges show we are out of
energy. I look out the port and see a fish staring in at me, and a crab
with eyes like two poached eggs swimming in ketchup.

Then we are going through dirt again and all of a sudden we come out of
it and I see a city below us all lit up and the buildings are made of
stuff that looks like jade run through with streaks of black.

The Mole drops down about a thousand more feet and then hits the floor
of the subterranean city and we land like a fountain pen with its point
slammed into the top of a lump of clay. Bo-o-o-o-i-ing! We twang like a
plucked harp string for nearly five minutes and I hit my noggin against
the pilot's seat.

When I pick up my marbles I look around for either an Elysium field or a
slag heap but instead a creep is staring down at me. He looks part human
and part beetle and has a face the color of the meat of an avocado. His
head is shaped like a pear standing on its stem and has two eyes spaced
about six inches apart and they are as friendly as those of a spitting
cobra irked by hives. He is about four feet tall and has two pairs of
arms. I guess I am still a little delirious or I would not have told
the thing he would make a swell paper hanger.

The subterranean creep throws a fit and belts me with four fists.
"Dummkopf!" it says, and then I really get scared as he has got a lop of
hair falling down over one eye and has a black mustache the size of a
Venutian four centra stamp over his mouth which is like that of a
pouting goldfish.

I get to my feet and grab for a railing, and I see Wurpz and Zahooli
held by two other monsters that look more like beetles than the one
standing beside me.

"Zo!" the creep with the mustache says. "It is a surprise I talk
Universa? We have radar and telepathometers that give us everything that
is said in the upper world."

I think back and try not to. In the hermetically sealed cylinder back
upstairs among my Americana Spink I have some photographs, Circa 1945.
One is of a citizen of old Nazi Germany who was supposed to have
cremated himself in a bunker. Papers there record that my forebear,
Cyril Spink, had his doubts at the time.

"I am the Neofeuhrer, Earthman," this creep says. "I will conquer the
