
There is something in the human mind which recoils from too outrageous a
deception. How wonderful it would have been to say, "Larsen was here
again last night. He found a little guy who had never harmed anyone
standing by a well in the moonlight. Just for sheer delight he decided
to kill the little guy right then and there." Just to add luster to the
legend, just to send a thrill of excitement about the camp.

No, that would have been the lie colossal which no sane man could have
quite believed.

Something happened then to further unnerve us.

The most disturbing sound you can hear on Mars is the whispering.
Usually it begins as a barely audible murmur and swells in volume with
every shift of the wind. But now it started off high pitched and
insistent and did not stop.

It was the whispering of a dying race. The Martians are as elusive as
elves and all the pitiless logic of science had failed to draw them
forth into the sunlight to stand before men in uncompromising arrogance
as peers of the human race.

That failure was a tragedy in itself. If man's supremacy is to be
challenged at all let it be by a creature of flesh-and-blood, a
big-brained biped who must kill to live. Better that by far than a
ghostly flickering in the deepening dusk, a whispering and a flapping
and a long-drawn sighing prophesying death.

Oh, the Martians were real enough. A flitting vampire bat is real, or a
stinging ray in the depths of a blue lagoon. But who could point to a
Martian and say, "I have seen you plain, in broad daylight. I have
looked into your owlish eyes and watched you go flitting over the sand
on your thin, stalklike legs? I know there is nothing mysterious about
you. You are like a water insect skimming the surface of a pond in a
familiar meadow on Earth. You are quick and alert, but no match for a
man. You are no more than an interesting insect."

Who could say that, when there were ruins buried deep beneath the sand
to give the lie to any such idea. First the ruins, and then the Martians
themselves, always elusive, gnomelike, goblinlike, flitting away into
the dissolving dusk.

You're a comparative archaeologist and you're on Mars with the first
batch of rugged youngsters to come tumbling out of a spaceship with
stardust in their eyes. You see those youngsters digging wells and
sweating in the desert. You see the prefabricated housing units go up,
the tangle of machinery, the camp sites growing lusty with midnight
brawls and skull-cracking escapades. You see the towns in the desert,
the law-enforcement committees, the camp followers, the reform fanatics.

You're a sober-minded scholar, so you start digging in the ruins. You
bring up odd-looking cylinders, rolls of threaded film, instruments of
science so complex they make you giddy.

You wonder about the Martians--what they were like when they were a
young and proud race. If you're an archaeologist you wonder. But Bill
and I--we were youngsters still. Oh, sure, we were in our thirties, but
who would have suspected that? Bill looked twenty-seven and I hadn't a
gray hair in my head.


III

Bill nodded at Harry. "You'd better stay here. Tom and I will be asking
some pointed questions, and our first move will depend on the answers we
get. Don't let anyone come snooping around this shack. If anyone sticks
his head in and starts to turn ugly, warn him just once--then shoot to
kill." He handed Harry a gun.

Harry nodded grimly and settled himself on the floor close to Ned. For
the first time since I'd known him, Harry looked completely sure of
himself.

As we emerged from the shack the whispering was so loud the entire camp
had been placed on the alert. There would be no need for us to go into
shack after shack, watching surprise and shock come into their eyes.

A dozen or more men were between Bill's shack and the well. They were
staring grimly at the dawn, as if they could already see blood on the
sky, spilling over on the sand and spreading out in a sinister pool at
their feet. A mirage-like pool mirroring their own hidden forebodings,
mirroring a knotted rope and the straining shoulders of men too vengeful
to know the meaning of restraint.

Jim Kenny stood apart and alone, about forty feet from the well, staring
straight at us. His shirt was open at the throat, exposing a patch of
hairy chest, and his big hands were wedged deeply into his belt. He
stood about six feet three, very powerful, and with large feet.

I nudged Bill's arm. "What do you think?" I asked.

Kenny did seem a likely suspect. Molly had caught his eye right from the
start, and he had lost no time in pursuing her. A guy like Kenny would
have felt that losing out to a man of his own breed would have been a
terrible blow to his pride. But just imagine Kenny losing out to a
little guy like Ned. It would have infuriated him and glazed his eyes
with a red film of hate.

Bill answered my question slowly, his eyes on Kenny's cropped head. "I
think we'd better take a look at his shoes," he said.

We edged up slowly, taking care not to disturb the others, pretending we
were sauntering toward the well on a before-breakfast stroll.

It was then that Molly came out of her shack. She stood blinking for an
instant in the dawn glare, her unbound hair falling in a tumbled dark
mass to her shoulders, her eyes still drowsy with sleep. She wore
rust-colored slippers and a form-fitted yellow robe, belted in at the
waist.

Molly wasn't beautiful exactly. But there was something pulse-stirring
about her and it was easy to understand how a man like Kenny might find
her difficult to resist.

Bill slanted a glance at Kenny, then shrugged and looked straight at
Molly. He turned to me, his voice almost a whisper, "She's got to be
told, Tom. You do it. She likes you a lot."

I'd been wondering about that myself--just how much she liked me. It was
hard to be sure.

Bill saw my hesitation, and frowned. "You can tell if she's covering up.
Her reaction may give us a lead."

Molly looked startled when she saw me approaching without the mask I
usually wore when I waltzed her around and grinned and ruffled her hair
and told her that she was the cutest kid imaginable and would make some
man--not me--a fine wife.

That made telling her all the harder. The hardest part was at the
end--when she stared at me dry-eyed and threw her arms around me as if I
