

=CUTLERY.=

The display of American Cutlery is rich, affording a most gratifying
evidence of the progress of the useful arts among us. Our neighbors,
J. C. Nixon & Sons, in the Sun Buildings, feel quite confident that
they will, as usual, carry off the premiums, particularly for their
much celebrated tailor's shears. In the manufacture of engravers'
tools; they challenge not only all America, but the world
itself.--They manufacture for customers, from whom their articles have
derived their just and solid reputation.

(_To be Continued._)


=Improved Steam Printing Press.=

We have recently seen a model of a new Steam Printing Press, the
invention of Mr. Wm. W. Marston, a young and ingenious mechanic of
this city. A mass of other matters prevents our giving a description
at present; we shall probably procure an engraving, however, and
publish a full description in a few days.


=Information to persons having business to transact at the Patent
Office.=

OF MODELS.

(_Continued from No. 2._)


SEC. 26. The law requires that the inventor shall deliver a model of
his invention or improvement when the same admits of a model. The
model should he neatly made, and as small as a distinct representation
of the machine or improvement, and its characteristic properties, will
admit; the name of the inventor should be printed or engraved upon, or
fixed to it, in a durable manner. Models forwarded without a name,
cannot be entered on record, and therefore liable to be lost or
mislaid.

SEC. 27. When the invention is of 'a composition of matter,' the law
requires that the application be accompanied with specimens of
ingredients, and of the composition of matter, sufficient in quantity
for the purpose of experiment.


ON GRANTING ANEW LOST PATENTS.

SEC. 28. The third sec. of the act of March 3, 1837, provides:

'SEC. 3. And be it further enacted, That whenever it shall appear to
the Commissioner that any patent was destroyed by the burning of the
Patent Office building on the aforesaid fifteenth day of December, or
was otherwise lost prior thereto, it shall be his duty, on application
therefor by the patentee, or other persons interested therein, to
issue a new patent for the same invention or discovery, bearing the
date of the original patent, with his certificate thereon, that it was
made and issued pursuant to the provisions of the third section of
this act; and shall enter the same of record; Provided, however, That
before such patent shall be issued, the applicant therefor shall
deposit in the Patent Office a duplicate, as near as may be, of the
original model, drawings, and description, with specification of the
invention or discovery, verified by oath, as it shall be required by
the Commissioner; and such patent and copies of such drawings and
descriptions, duly certified, shall be admissible as evidence in any
judicial court of the United States, and shall protect the rights of
the patentee, his administrators, heirs, and assigns, to the extent
only in which they would have been protected by the original patent
and specification.'


PROCEEDINGS ON APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS, AND ON APPEALS FROM DECISIONS
OF THE COMMISSIONER.

(Act of 1836, Section, 7.)

SEC. 29. 'That on the filing of any such application (consisting of
petition, specification, model, and drawings, or specimens,) and the
payment of the duty hereinafter provided, the Commissioner shall make,
or cause to be made, an examination, of the alleged new invention or
discovery; and if, on any such examination, it shall not appear to the
Commissioner that the same had been invented or discovered by any
other person in this country prior to the alleged invention or
discovery thereof by the applicant, or that it had been patented or
described in any printed publication in this or any foreign country,
or had been in public use or on sale, with the applicant's consent or
allowance, prior to the application, if the Commissioner shall deem it
to be sufficiently useful and important, it shall be his duty to
issue a patent therefor. But whenever on such examination it shall
appear to the Commissioner that the applicant was not the original and
first inventor or discoverer thereof, or that any part of that which
is claimed as new had before been invented or discovered or patented,
or described in any printed publication in this or any foreign country
as aforesaid, or that the description is defective and insufficient,
he shall notify the applicant thereof, giving him briefly such
information and references as may be useful in judging of the
propriety of renewing his application, or of altering his
specification to embrace only that part of the invention or discovery
which is new. In every such case, if the applicant shall elect to
withdraw his application, relinquishing his claim to the model, he
shall be entitled to receive back twenty dollars, part of the duty
required by this act, on filing a notice in writing of such election
in the Patent Office; a copy of which, certified by the Commissioner,
shall be a sufficient warrant to the Treasurer for paying back to the
said applicant the said sum of twenty dollars. But if the applicant,
in such case, shall persist in his claim for a patent, with or without
any alteration his specification, he shall be required to make oath or
affirmation anew, in manner as aforesaid; and if specification and
claim shall not have been so modified as, in the opinion of the
Commissioner, shall entitle the applicant to a patent, he may appeal
to the Chief Justice of the United States Court for the District of
Columbia, who may affirm or reverse the decision of the Commissioner
of Patents, in whole or in part, and may order a patent to issue; or
he may have remedy against the decision of the Commissioner of
Patents, or the decision of the Chief Justice of the United States
Court for the District of Columbia, by filing a bill in equity in any
of the United States Courts having jurisdiction, as hereinafter
explained.

(_To be continued._)


=Consolation for the Christian.=

'Eye hath not seen; nor ear heard; neither have entered into the heart
of man, the things which God hath prepared for those that love
Him.'--1 Cor. ii: 9. But it is said in the words following, that God
hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit. In this, we are not to
understand, that the excellent things spoken of, are _communicated_ to
men; but that by the aid of the divine Spirit they are enabled to
receive such sublime and brilliant ideas of the glorious things which
are prepared for them, that they are filled with sublime and
unspeakable joy, though they find it utterly impracticable to
describe these things to another, so as to be understood. It is like
the new name which no man can know, but him to whom it is given: and
although, in the solicitude of those who have been favored with a view
of these things, to represent them to others, the most full and
expressive forms of language have been put in requisition, it has in
every instance failed to convey the least correct idea on the subject:
because no man can see, or in anywise appreciate the excellence of
these things, without the aid of the Spirit of Truth. But to those who
obtain such enlightened views--and every man may, or might, obtain
them,--the glorious things prepared are as the 'pearl of great price,'
which, when a man hath found, he is ready to sacrifice all things
else,--riches, honors, friends, pleasures, reputation in the world, or
even life itself,--to obtain it. Neither Adam nor Eve, in their
sinless, paradisaical state, could have had any correct idea of such
delectable and glorious excellence of blessings as are prepared for
these who become 'joint heirs of the Son of God,' through the blood of
a crucified Saviour: for, had they been capable of seeing or imagining
such things, they would never have fallen. There can be no question
but that the glorious consolation of the faithful and obedient
believers, will incomparably, not to say infinitely, excel that of the
primitive state of man, or anything which could have been by man
attained, if the blessed SON had not suffered. Let the most brilliant
and soaring imagination exert its most strenuous and happy efforts in
conceiving, arranging and representing to itself the highest possible
state of bliss and glory, and it will fall as far short of the reality
of the immortal state of the glorified saints,--the salvation
purchased by the suffering of Christ,--as a mere shadow of the most
beautiful picture comes short of the rich coloring of the original.
And this fact is well known to those who have had the beauties of the
'world to come' revealed to them by the divine Spirit. These
statements may appear strange to those who are accustomed to look upon
the popular _reverend clergy_, fashionable church members and wealthy
deacons, as choice specimens of the saints of the Lord. The true, and
most favored saints, are generally found among those who are subject
to poverty and tribulation, in this world. But these blessings of the
gospel are free for all who will conform to the requisitions plainly
expressed by our Savior, and recorded by the evangelist, and
practicable by all who are willing to forsake all things else, for the
sake of this great and everlasting salvation.

    *    *    *    *    *

A cotton manufacturer in New-Haven lost his operatives, last week, by
attempting to reduce their wages.


=THE COLOR PRINTING MACHINE.=

[Illustration:]

INTRODUCTION.--There have appeared, in modern times, but few machines,
to which more importance apparently attaches, than to the one here
presented. It is well known that the best paper hangings, or
room-papers command from $1 to $1,50 per piece, of eight yards, while
most of those of American manufacture are sold for 25 to 50 cents per
piece; and this difference is occasioned by the difficulty and extra
labor of applying a great variety of different colors. But by means of
this machine, seven, twelve, or even twenty different colors, may be
accurately applied by one operation, and with less labor than is
required to print with a single color, by the ordinary method; and
thus the manufacturer will be enabled to sell, for 50 cents, such
patterns as ordinarily cost a dollar or more, to either import or
manufacture them.

EXPLANATION.--The first row of gear wheels, A B, are attached to the
ends of a row of cylinders, each cylinder being 30 inches long, and 3
inches in diameter. These cylinders support a broad, endless apron or
belt, which passes over the whole series, and supports the strip of
paper as it passes through the machine to receive the colors. The
second series of wheels, C D, are attached to cylinders of the same
dimensions of those in the first row, and are connected to each other
by intervening pinions, whereby a uniform velocity is maintained
through the whole series. The peripheries of this row of cylinders are
cut in figures, according to the design of the pattern to be worked.
The figures are left prominent, so as to come in contact with the
paper upon the apron, as the cylinder revolves; the surface between
the figures, being cut away to the depth of one eighth of an inch.
Each of these printing cylinders contains sections of the figures to
be printed, and is calculated to work a different color from the
others; and the sections of figures on each cylinder are calculated to
match those of the others, so as to complete the entire figure in all
its colors on the paper. The entire machine is put in operation by a
band, passing over the band-wheel, H. The third row of cylinders, E F,
are distributing cylinders, which are put in motion by mere contact
with the series below, and receives the several colors from the small
cylinders in the upper rows, and distributes the same upon the
prominent figures of the printing cylinders. The fourth series, I J,
are called the receiving cylinders, because they receive the colors
from the hoppers or reservoirs, M N, and impart them to the series
below. The cylinders of the third and fourth rows, are covered with
cloth, and the bottom of each hopper is so nicely fitted to its
respective cylinder, that but a small quantity of each color (which
passes through an aperture at the bottom of the hopper) adheres to the
cloth periphery of the cylinder. The colors ordinarily used consist of
various pigments, ground and mixed in water, with a solution of glue.
The principles of this mode of color printing have been satisfactorily
tested, though the entire machine has not yet been constructed: and
any person who may be disposed to construct and enjoy the exclusive
use of this invention, may have the most favorable terms.


NEW INVENTIONS.

=A New Brick Machine.=

Messrs. Culbertson, McMillen & Co. of Cincinnati, have recently put in
successful operation, a new machine, a description of which is given
in a Cincinnati paper, as follows:

'A frame of fourteen moulds, one brick to each is drawn by the power
of steam between two press rollers, the lower one of which enables the
frame to support the pressure of the upper roller, and being run
through backwards and forwards equalizes the pressure over the entire
face of the brick. These, after undergoing in this mode a pressure of
nearly one hundred tons to each brick, a pressure which covers clay,
apparently perfectly dry, with a coat of glossy moisture, are raised
above the surface of the mould by parallel levers, and are then
delivered over to a bench or table by self-acting machinery, whence
they are taken in barrows to the stacker at the kiln.

The dry clay is shoveled into a hopper, and if more of the material is
pressed into a mould than serves to make a brick, a knife which ranges
with the surface of the mould, shaves off the surplus.

Two hands shoveling, two more taking off, and one at the barrow,
constitute a gang of five persons who turn out from 30,000 to 35,000
per day of ten hours. As brick makers' days are from sun to sun, say
twelve working hours per day, during the season, from 46 to 50,000
bricks, per day, may be made by a single machine. This is, however, by
no means the most important feature in the invention.

In the ordinary mode of making bricks, the manufacturer cannot begin
operations for the season, until the spring has so far advanced that
working in wet clay will no longer chill his moulders' hands. On the
same account, he loses also morning hours, until the advance of summer
enables his hands to put in the whole period of daylight. He loses,
also, sometimes days together--from the entire stoppage of his
operations in the rainy weather, which forbids the bricks being put
out to dry. In making press brick, all these difficulties are
obviated. As a theory, operations in this mode can go on throughout
the entire winter, frost never extending into solid clay; but as a
practical business, it can be conveniently carried on two months
earlier and one month later than in the ordinary mode. Pressed brick,
made by these machines, are also stronger than their competitive
article, the last of equal hardness in burning, always giving way
when struck by the pressed bricks, as I have witnessed. Indeed, it
cannot be otherwise, the one being porous and the other as compact as
the enormous pressure employed can make it.

The machine, it must be apparent, offers peculiar advantages in
turning out brick without occupying the ordinary brick yard space
necessary for spreading wet brick out to dry. It affords great economy
in time, owing to its operations being independent of frost or rains.
To every new and thriving place commencing the making of bricks, it
dispenses with the necessity of bringing skilful workmen from other
places--in short, it enables every man to be his own brick-maker.
Under these considerations, I anticipate an extensive sale of these
machines, especially for places at a distance.


=Marble Saw Mills.=

We are informed that a large mill for sawing marble is in course of
erection at Brandon, Vt. The marble in that vicinity is principally of
a beautiful white, and of a fine texture, though not very hard.


=Railroad Locks.=

It is reported that locks for elevating railroad trains, from one
