screaming at the Earthmen. As they came within range, each native
stabbed himself, tumbling on a quickly growing pile of bodies. In
minutes the Earthmen were surrounded by a heap of bleeding Cascellan
flesh, which was steadily growing higher.

"All right!" Fannia shouted. "Stop it." He yanked Donnaught back with
him, to profane ground. "Truce!" he yelled in Cascellan.

The crowd parted and the chief was carried through. With two knives
clenched in his fists, he was panting from excitement.

"We have won the first battle!" he said proudly. "The might of our
warriors frightens even such aliens as yourselves. You shall not profane
our temple while a man is alive on Cascella!"

The natives shouted their approval and triumph.

The two aliens dazedly stumbled back to their ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

"So that's what Galactic meant by 'a unique social structure,'" Fannia
said morosely. He stripped off his armor and lay down on his bunk.
"Their way of making war is to suicide their enemies into capitulation."

"They must be nuts," Donnaught grumbled. "That's no way to fight."

"It works, doesn't it?" Fannia got up and stared out a porthole. The sun
was setting, painting the city a charming red in its glow. The beams of
light glistened off the spire of the Galactic cache. Through the open
doorway they could hear the boom and rattle of drums. "Tribal call to
arms," Fannia said.

"I still say it's crazy." Donnaught had some definite ideas on fighting.
"It ain't human."

"I'll buy that. The idea seems to be that if enough people slaughter
themselves, the enemy gives up out of sheer guilty conscience."

"What if the enemy doesn't give up?"

"Before these people united, they must have fought it out tribe to
tribe, suiciding until someone gave up. The losers probably joined the
victors; the tribe must have grown until it could take over the planet
by sheer weight of numbers." Fannia looked carefully at Donnaught,
trying to see if he understood. "It's anti-survival, of course; if
someone didn't give up, the race would probably kill themselves." He
shook his head. "But war of any kind is anti-survival. Perhaps they've
got rules."

"Couldn't we just barge in and grab the fuel quick?" Donnaught asked.
"And get out before they all killed themselves?"

"I don't think so," Fannia said. "They might go on committing suicide
for the next ten years, figuring they were still fighting us." He looked
thoughtfully at the city. "It's that chief of theirs. He's their god and
he'd probably keep them suiciding until he was the only man left. Then
he'd grin, say, 'We are great warriors,' and kill himself."

Donnaught shrugged his big shoulders in disgust. "Why don't we knock him
off?"

"They'd just elect another god." The sun was almost below the horizon
now. "I've got an idea, though," Fannia said. He scratched his head. "It
might work. All we can do is try."

       *       *       *       *       *

At midnight, the two men sneaked out of the ship, moving silently into
the city. They were both dressed in space armor again. Donnaught carried
two empty fuel cans. Fannia had his paralyzer out.

The streets were dark and silent as they slid along walls and around
posts, keeping out of sight. A native turned a corner suddenly, but
Fannia paralyzed him before he could make a sound.

They crouched in the darkness, in the mouth of an alley facing the
cache.

"Have you got it straight?" Fannia asked. "I paralyze the guards. You
bolt in and fill up those cans. We get the hell out of here, quick. When
they check, they find the cans still there. Maybe they won't commit
suicide then."

The men moved across the shadowy steps in front of the cache. There were
three Cascellans guarding the entrance, their knives stuck in their
loincloths. Fannia stunned them with a medium charge, and Donnaught
broke into a run.

Torches instantly flared, natives boiled out of every alleyway,
shouting, waving their knives.

"We've been ambushed!" Fannia shouted. "Get back here, Donnaught!"

Donnaught hurriedly retreated. The natives had been waiting for them.
Screaming, yowling, they rushed at the Earthmen, slitting their own
throats at five-foot range. Bodies tumbled in front of Fannia, almost
tripping him as he backed up. Donnaught caught him by an arm and yanked
him straight. They ran out of the sacred area.

