trolls which infested these northlands. Hideous and soulless dwellers
underground, they knew not old age; a sword could hew them asunder, but
before it reached their deep-seated life, their unhuman strength had
plucked a man apart. Then they ate him--

Small wonder the northmen feared them. Cappen threw back his head and
laughed. He had once done a service for a mighty wizard in the south,
and his reward hung about his neck, a small silver amulet. The wizard
had told him that no supernatural being could harm anyone who carried a
piece of silver.

The northmen said that a troll was powerless against a man who was not
afraid; but, of course, only to see one was to feel the heart turn to
ice. They did not know the value of silver, it seemed--odd that they
shouldn't, but they did not. Because Cappen Varra did, he had no reason
to be afraid; therefore he was doubly safe, and it was but a matter of
talking the troll into giving him some fire. If indeed there was a troll
here, and not some harmless fisherman.

He whistled gaily, wrung some of the water from his cloak and ruddy
hair, and started along the beach. In the sleety gloom, he could just
see a hewn-out path winding up one of the cliffs and he set his feet on
it.

At the top of the path, the wind ripped his whistling from his lips. He
hunched his back against it and walked faster, swearing as he stumbled
on hidden rocks. The ice-sheathed ground was slippery underfoot, and the
cold bit like a knife.

Rounding a crag, he saw redness glow in the face of a steep bluff. A
cave mouth, a fire within--he hastened his steps, hungering for warmth,
until he stood in the entrance.

"_Who comes?_"

It was a hoarse bass cry that rang and boomed between walls of rock;
there was ice and horror in it, for a moment Cappen's heart stumbled.
Then he remembered the amulet and strode boldly inside.

"Good evening, mother," he said cheerily.

The cave widened out into a stony hugeness that gaped with tunnels
leading further underground. The rough, soot-blackened walls were hung
with plundered silks and cloth-of-gold, gone ragged with age and damp;
the floor was strewn with stinking rushes, and gnawed bones were heaped
in disorder. Cappen saw the skulls of men among them. In the center of
the room, a great fire leaped and blazed, throwing billows of heat
against him; some of its smoke went up a hole in the roof, the rest
stung his eyes to watering and he sneezed.

The troll-wife crouched on the floor, snarling at him. She was quite the
most hideous thing Cappen had ever seen: nearly as tall as he, she was
twice as broad and thick, and the knotted arms hung down past bowed
knees till their clawed fingers brushed the ground. Her head was
beast-like, almost split in half by the tusked mouth, the eyes wells of
darkness, the nose an ell long; her hairless skin was green and cold,
moving on her bones. A tattered shift covered some of her monstrousness,
but she was still a nightmare.

"Ho-ho, ho-ho!" Her laughter roared out, hungry and hollow as the surf
around the island. Slowly, she shuffled closer. "So my dinner comes
walking in to greet me, ho, ho, ho! Welcome, sweet flesh, welcome, good
marrow-filled bones, come in and be warmed."

"Why, thank you, good mother." Cappen shucked his cloak and grinning at
her through the smoke. He felt his clothes steaming already. "I love you
too."

Over her shoulder, he suddenly saw the girl. She was huddled in a
corner, wrapped in fear, but the eyes that watched him were as blue as
the skies over Caronne. The ragged dress did not hide the gentle curves
of her body, nor did the tear-streaked grime spoil the lilt of her face.
"Why, 'tis springtime in here," cried Cappen, "and Primavera herself is
strewing flowers of love."

"What are you talking about, crazy man?" rumbled the troll-wife. She
turned to the girl. "Heap the fire, Hildigund, and set up the roasting
spit. Tonight I feast!"

"Truly I see heaven in female form before me," said Cappen.

The troll scratched her misshapen head.

"You must surely be from far away, moonstruck man," she said.

"Aye, from golden Croy am I wandered, drawn over dolorous seas and empty
wild lands by the fame of loveliness waiting here; and now that I have
seen you, my life is full." Cappen was looking at the girl as he spoke,
but he hoped the troll might take it as aimed her way.

"It will be fuller," grinned the monster. "Stuffed with hot coals while
yet you live." She glanced back at the girl. "What, are you not working
yet, you lazy tub of lard? Set up the spit, I said!"

The girl shuddered back against a heap of wood. "No," she whispered. "I
cannot--not ... not for a man."

"Can and will, my girl," said the troll, picking up a bone to throw at
her. The girl shrieked a little.

"No, no, sweet mother. I would not be so ungallant as to have beauty
toil for me." Cappen plucked at the troll's filthy dress. "It is not
meet--in two senses. I only came to beg a little fire; yet will I bear
away a greater fire within my heart."

"Fire in your guts, you mean! No man ever left me save as picked bones."

