
Mister had explained that he was an albino, and he needed the glasses to
dim the glare on his eyes. Jack stopped being Uncas for a minute to
listen. He had never seen an albino before, and, indeed, he did not know
what one was.

"I don't mind the youngster," said Mister. "Let him play here if he
wants to. He's developing his imagination, and he may be finding more
stimuli in this front room than he could in all of outdoors. We should
never cripple the fine gift of imagination in the young. Imagination,
fancy, fantasy--or whatever you call it--is the essence and mainspring
of those scientists, musicians, painters, and poets who amount to
something in later life. They are adults who have remained youths."

Mister addressed Jack, "You're the Last of the Mohicans, and you're
about to sneak up on the French captain and tomahawk him, aren't you?"

Jack blinked. He nodded his head. The opaque rose lenses set in Mister's
face seemed to open a door into his naked grey skull.

The man said, "I want you to listen to me, Jack. You'll forget my name,
which isn't important. But you will always remember me and my visit,
won't you?"

Jack stared at the impenetrable lenses and nodded dumbly.

Mister turned to Jack's father. "Let his fancy grow. It is a necessary
wish-fulfillment play. Like all human young who are good for anything at
all, he is trying to find the lost door to the Garden of Eden. The
history of the great poets and men-of-action is the history of the
attempt to return to the realm that Adam lost, the forgotten Hesperides
of the mind, the Avalon buried in our soul."

Mr. Crane put his fingertips together. "Yes?"

"Personally, I think that some day man will realize just what he is
searching for and will invent a machine that will enable the child to
project, just as a film throws an image on a screen, the visions in his
psyche.

"I see you're interested," he continued. "You would be, naturally, since
you're a professor of philosophy. Now, let's call the toy a
specterscope, because through it the subject sees the spectres that
haunt his unconscious. Ha! Ha! But how does it work? If you'll keep it
to yourself, Mr. Crane, I'll tell you something: My native country's
scientists have developed a rather simple device, though they haven't
published anything about it in the scientific journals. Let me give you
a brief explanation: Light strikes the retina of the eye; the rods and
cones pass on impulses to the bipolar cells, which send them on to the
optic nerve, which goes to the brain ..."

"Elementary and full of gaps," said Jack's father.

"Pardon me," said Mister. "A bare outline should be enough. You'll be
able to fill in the details. Very well. This specterscope breaks up the
light going into the eye in such a manner that the rods and cones
receive only a certain wavelength. I can't tell you what it is, except
that it's in the visual red. The scope also concentrates like a
burning-glass and magnifies the power of the light.

"Result? A hitherto-undiscovered chemical in the visual purple of the
rods is activated and stimulates the optic nerve in a way we had not
guessed possible. An electrochemical stimulus then irritates the
subconscious until it fully wakes up.

"Let me put it this way. The subconscious is not a matter of location
but of organization. There are billions of possible connections between
the neurons of the cortex. Look at those potentialities as so many cards
in the same pack. Shuffle the cards one way and you have the common
workaday _cogito, ergo sum_ mind. Reshuffle them, and, bingo! you have
the combination of neurons, or cards, of the unconscious. The
specterscope does the redealing. When the subject gazes through it, he
sees for the first time the full impact and result of his underground
mind's workings in other perspectives than dreams or symbolical
behavior. The subjective Garden of Eden is resurrected. It is my
contention that this specterscope will some day be available to all
children.

"When that happens, Mr. Crane, you will understand that the world will
profit from man's secret wishes. Earth will be a far better place.
Paradise, sunken deep in every man, can be dredged out and set up
again."

"I don't know," said Jack's father, stroking his chin thoughtfully with
a finger. "Children like my son are too introverted as it is. Give them
this psychological toy you suggest, and you would watch them grow, not
into the outside world, but into themselves. They would fester. Man has
been expelled from the Garden. His history is a long, painful climb
toward something different. It is something that is probably better than
the soft and flabby Golden Age. If man were to return, he would regress,
become worse than static, become infantile or even embryonic. He would
be smothered in the folds of his own dreams."

"Perhaps," said the salesman. "But I think you have a very unusual child
here. He will go much farther than you may think. Why? Because he is
sensitive and has an imagination that only needs the proper guidance.
Too many children become mere bourgeois ciphers with paunches and round
'O' minds full of tripe. They'll stay on earth. That is, I mean they'll
be stuck in the mud."

"You talk like no insurance salesman I've ever met."

"Like all those who really want to sell, I'm a born psychologist,"
Mister shrilled. "Actually, I have an advantage. I have a Ph.D. in
psychology. I would prefer staying at home for laboratory work, but
since I can help my starving children--I am not joking--so much more by
coming to a foreign land and working at something that will put food in
their mouths, I do it. I can't stand to see my little ones go hungry.
Moreover," he said with a wave of his long-fingered hand, "this whole
planet is really a lab that beats anything within four walls."

"You spoke of famine. Your accent--your name. You're a Greek, aren't
you?"

"In a way," said Mister. "My name, translated, means gracious or kindly
