
The Mace, symbol of Alexander's power, was a pretty little baton barely
two feet long. Its staff was mastodon ivory, the paleontologists had
determined. One end sported a solid ball of gold hardly as big as a
fist; studded with rubies, but none set quite so close as to actually
touch.

The other end, balancing the ball of gold, mounted the largest single
polished emerald crystal in the discovered universe. Neither the Moon or
Mars had produced anything in the emerald line equivalent to what had
come out of the mists of Earthly history.

       *       *       *       *       *

Disregarding the bulletin, Jason kept Moglaut at the servo-tracer. In
the night's smallest hours it began placidly to hum on Lonnie's aura
again.

"What happened?" Jason said. "What did you do?"

Moglaut shrugged.

"You must have done something. What was it?"

Moglaut, not looking up from the purring machine, shook his head.

"All right. You can go now." Jason watched the genius disappear
hurriedly through the door. From the door he watched the man scutter
down the long, long corridor out of sight. The first thing in the
morning, Jason promised himself, he'd have a session about Moglaut with
Lab Nine's chief.

The first thing in the morning brought word that Lab Nine's erratic
genius had stumbled himself out of the seventeenth-floor window of his
suburban apartment to his death. Lab Nine's chief clucked sorrowfully.

Jason shook his head and wondered. After exhaustive investigation (zero
data) he still wondered. That's all he was able to do, wonder.

The second time Jason's servo-tracer on Lonnie hiccupped and dozed off
was at 12:01 a.m., August 7th, 2008, just one day after the Diamond
Throne arrived on Earth. The single, glittering diamond crystal,
misshapen like an armchair and larger than one, had been mined out of
the core of Tycho's crater. And it was also just two days before the
Moon Throne would have been installed in the unbreakable safety of
Raichi Museum!

"Jason, you're insane," his superior told him when Jason, reinforced by
an astounding public furore, brought the matter up. "He owned it. He had
no reason to steal it from himself. Besides, one man alone couldn't
budge that enormous--"

"It won't do any harm to look-see."

"It can do a lot of harm!" The Commissioner glanced quickly at the
ceiling. "I'll have nothing to do with it. That's all."

Officially, Jason's hands were tied. But secretly he maneuvered the
transfer of a five-layers-down undercover man from Madras to Government
City. And, coincidentally, in the ordinary routine of operation, Raichi
Museum took on a new janitor; a little brown man who grinned constantly
and was fanatical about dust. He was a good, reliable man and when he
reported that neither the Diamond Throne nor any of the other missing
glories were anywhere in the Museum, Jason had to believe him.

As a matter of fact, it wouldn't have done Jason any good to have
installed the little brown man in Lonnie's mansion, either. The
lock--not the apparent one openly in the den door, but the real one--was
as unobtrusive and foolproof as twenty-first-century engineering could
make it. And Lonnie always made sure he was alone and unobserved in the
den before he locked it and sauntered across to bestow a peculiar,
multiple tweak to the nose of Genghis Khan.

He enjoyed the gesture. On Christmas Eve he grinned broadly while the
triptych pivoted in the wall, let him off in the Kruppmartite-walled,
pulsing radiance of his very secret, very, very personal throne room,
and swung back into place.

His grin changed to an expression of imperial dignity as he encased
himself in Catherine the Great's ermine Robe of State and grasped the
Mace of Alexander in his good left hand. But then the royal mien gave
way to a sullen scowl as he hesitated between Charlemagne's Crown and
Amenhotep's Uraeus.

Actually, neither one was worthy of him. Both purely regional coronets
belonged over in the farthest dusty corner behind the curtain, along
with Schicklehitler's shabby baton and that crummy Peacock Throne. What
he really needed was a crown worthily symbolic of the position he'd make
it possible to publicly assume in the not-too-distant future.

It was a damned imposition that he had to put up with. Well, he'd make
them do since they were the best to be had. Adjusting the Crown of
Charlemagne upon his brow, he stood on tiptoe to wriggle his way back
into the embrace of the titanic crystal that was the Diamond Throne.
There, he relaxed and gave himself over to the contemplation of the
glories of Lonnie.

Who but he had developed such an efficient philosophy to such an
unfailingly incisive point? Certainly not Old Boswell who, back in the
early days had thought to be teaching him.

"Rule One, my boy," he remembered the old patrician twittering, "there's
always someone to pull your chestnuts out of the fire for you--for a
price. Pay it. Then add a plus to the payment and the man's yours to use
again and again."

But even in those days as a callow, trusting youth, he'd been smarter
than Boswell. Observing, from the safety of the sidelines, the way the
old fool had finally tripped up, he'd added a codicil of his own to
Rule One: "Make sure the payment's _final_!"

(... witness the Berlin chestnut pullers. And the unobtrusive and
undiscovered spate of their predecessors whose usefulness had become
outweighed ...)

Then Boswell had said, "Rule Two: You don't have to know the how of
anything. All you have to know is _the man who does_. He always has a
price. The currency is usually odd, but find it, pay it, then proceed
per Rule One."

Even tonight, in his own Throne Room, Lonnie flushed heavily at the way
he'd accepted at face value what came next. "By the way," Old Boswell
had added smoothly, "no connection of course, my boy, but the topic
reminded me. Here are the keys to that daffodil-hued tri-phibian you
ogled at Sporter's exhibit. I must admit you have an eye for dashing
machinery even though I can't agree with your esthetics. No--no ... It's
yours. I feel that you've earned it and more by--"

He'd rushed to the garage to gloat over the mono-cyclic,
gyro-stabilized, U-powered model with the seat that flattened into a
convenient bed at the touch of a button. The tri-phib, he recalled, in
which he'd coaxed Agnes into taking her first ride.


III

The details of that recollection brought up his spirits again and, he
reminded himself, the lesson had sunk in; had developed into his most
useful ethic. After his narrow scrape with Jason's quantum analyzer in
the Berlin incident, it hadn't taken long for a good, one-man detective
agency to locate Physlab Nine's frenetic genius, Moglaut. It had taken
longer to discover Moglaut's currency but, after much shadowing, the
'tec had come through handsomely. Lonnie, automatically applying his
fully-developed Ethic One, always considered it a nice sentimental touch
that the one-man agency's final case was successful.

Moglaut's price was a prim, brunette soprano who wore her eyes disguised
behind heavy tortoiseshell. The ill-cut garb she could afford added
greatly to her staid appearance, obscuring a certain full-bodied
litheness. She earned a throttled existence soloing at funerals and in
the worship halls of obscure, rigidly fanatic offshoot sects.

