mean we don't know where we are or where we're going, and I don't think
Norris does either. _We're lost!_"

That was in August. By the last of September we had landed on two more
planets, to which Norris gave the simple names of R-12 and R-14. Each
had crude forms of vegetable life, represented principally by the blue
_hensorr_ trees, but in neither case did the organic surveyor reveal the
slightest traces of animal life.

There was, however, a considerable difference in physical appearance
between R-12 and R-14, and for a time that fact excited Norris
tremendously. Up to then, each successive planet, although similar in
size, had exhibited signs of greater age than its predecessor. But on
R-12 there were definite manifestations of younger geologic development.

Several pieces of shale lay exposed under a fold of igneous rock. Two of
those pieces contained fossils of highly developed _ganoids_, similar to
those found on Venus. They were perfectly preserved.

It meant that animal life had existed on R-12, even if it didn't now. It
meant that R-12, though a much older planet than Earth, was still
younger than Stragella or the rest.

For a while Norris was almost beside himself. He cut out rock samples
and carried them back to the ship. He personally supervised the tuning
of the surveyors. And when he finally gave orders to take off, he was
almost friendly to Mason, whereas before his attitude toward him had
been one of cold aloofness.

But when we reached R-14, our eighth landing, all that passed. For R-14
was old again, older than any of the others.

And then, on October sixteenth, Mason opened the door of the locked
cabin. It happened quite by accident. One of the _arelium-thaxide_
conduits broke in the _Marie Galante's_ central passageway, and the
resulting explosion grounded the central feed line of the instrument
equipment. In a trice the passageway was a sheet of flame, rapidly
filling with smoke from burning insulation.

Norris, of course, was in the bridge cuddy with locked doors between us
and him, and now with the wiring burned through there was no way of
signalling him he was wanted for an emergency. In his absence Mason took
command.

That passageway ran the full length of the ship. Midway down it was the
door leading to the women's lounge. The explosion had jammed that door
shut, and smoke was pouring forth from under the sill. All at once one
of the women rushed forward to announce hysterically that Mason's wife,
Estelle, was in the lounge.

Adjoining the lounge was a small cabin which since the beginning of our
voyage had remained locked. Norris had given strict orders that that
cabin was not to be disturbed. We all had taken it as a matter of course
that it contained various kinds of precision instruments.

Now, however, Mason realized that the only way into the lounge was by
way of that locked cabin. If he used a heat blaster on the lounge door
there was no telling what would happen to the woman inside.

He ripped the emergency blaster from its wall mounting, pressed it to
the magnetic latch of the sealed cabin door and pressed the stud. An
instant later he was leading his frightened wife, Estelle, out through
the smoke.

The fire was quickly extinguished after that and the wiring spliced.
Then when the others had drifted off, Mason called Brandt and me aside.

"We've been wondering for a long time what happened to Ganeth-Klae, the
Martian inventor who worked with Norris to invent _Indurate_," he said
very quietly. "Well, we don't need to wonder any more. He's in there."

Brandt and I stepped forward over the sill--and drew up short.
Ganeth-Klae was there all right, but he would never trouble himself
about making a voyage in a locked cabin. His rigid body was encased in a
transparent block of amber-colored solidifex, the after-death
preservative used by all Martians.

Both of us recognized his still features at once, and in addition his
name-tattoo, required by Martian law, was clearly visible on his left
forearm.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a brief instant the discovery stunned us. Klae dead? Klae whose IQ
had become a measuring guide for the entire system, whose Martian head
held more ordinary horse sense, in addition to radical postulations on
theoretical physics, than anyone on the planets. It wasn't possible.

And what was the significance of his body on Norris' ship? Why had
Norris kept its presence a secret and why had he given out the story of
Klae's disappearance?

Mason's face was cold as ice. "Come with me, you two," he said. "We're
going to get the answer to this right now."

We went along the passage to the circular staircase. We climbed the
steps, passed through the scuttle and came to the door of the bridge
cuddy. Mason drew the bar and we passed in. Norris was bent over the
chart table. He looked up sharply at the sound of our steps.

"What is the meaning of this intrusion?" he said.

It didn't take Mason long to explain. When he had finished, he stood
there, jaw set, eyes smouldering.

Norris paled. Then quickly he got control of himself, and his old bland
smile returned.

"I expected you to blunder into Klae's body one of these days," he said.
"The explanation is quite simple. Klae had been ill for many months, and
he knew his time was up. His one desire in life was to go on this
expedition with me, and he made me promise to bury him at the site of
our new colony. The pact was between him and me, and I've followed it to
