
Williams, when he eased his slight body through the door a few minutes
later, found a suspicious scene. The little doctor, his face flushed and
rage-twisted, his effortless and almost contemptuous composure shaken
for once, was on his feet. Speechless, he faced the grinning
space-engineer who was waving a huge and warning finger in his face.

"Easy, Doc," Donnelly roared in a friendly voice. "I might take
advantage of it if you keep on giving me a good excuse. Then where would
all your psychiatry and your fine overlording manners get you?"

"Joe," yelled Williams in explosive sudden fright. "Leave him alone.
You're liable to have the Government Police down on us."

"Sure, Williams. The police and the newspapers too. They'd just love to
have the taxpayers find out what they're doing to those kids out in deep
space. What would they call it, Doc? Just an interesting psychological
experiment? Is that what it's meant to be, eh, Doc?"

He chuckled suddenly as the little doctor flinched under his virulent
attack. "I really hit the spot that time, didn't I, Doc? So that's what
the Government's so scared and hush-hush about. They're really scared to
hell and back, aren't they? I wonder what's really going on behind all
this?"

He leaned forward, suddenly roaring and ferocious. "Why are Williams and
I followed everywhere we go when we leave here? To see who we talk to?
Is that the way of it? Why do quite a few of the ships you and I and
Williams have rescued in the past few years never show up again? Just
where are they? I don't see them reported missing in the newspapers,
either."

He leaned back in exhausted satisfaction at the look on the little
doctor's face. "Yeah, Doc, the only way to get anything out of you is to
blast it out, isn't it?"

Pale and frightened, Williams hurried across the room to the table and,
with shaky hands, took out three containers of coffee from the paper bag
and passed them out.

Nobody bothered to thank him.

The hidden tension in the room had begun to mount steadily, so Donnelly
helped it out a little.

"Is this the first time you've ever been on the defensive, Doc?" he
asked.

Williams jumped in before the explosion. "When will the rocket get to
the kid's ship, Doctor?" he asked.

"In about thirty days," the little man answered, coldly and
deliberately.

Williams blinked in surprise. "Good Lord," he said. "I thought it was
supposed to be in twelve hours or so?"

"That's the whole point," snapped Donnelly. "That's what I'm so fighting
mad about. Think of it yourself, Williams. Suppose you had a son or a
brother up there, how would you feel about this whole infernal, lying
business?

"I don't get it," he went on. "I just don't get the big central idea
behind it. Don't all these tugs we send out ever get there? First they
tell the kid he'll have his life saved in twelve hours or so. Then they
get him to take a shot so his mind won't crack up while he's waiting.

"Now they know very well the shot won't last for thirty days. If it did
he'd starve to death. So what have they accomplished? Nothing. As a
matter of fact they've made things worse instead of better. What's going
to happen to that poor kid when he wakes up in twelve hours and finds
out he still has to wait for thirty more days? What's going to happen to
him then, Doc? Don't you think that kid will really go off his rocker
for sure?"

Donnelly and Williams both looked at the little psychiatrist. He sat
again at his former place at the table, white and shaken. His face was
once again buried in one hand.

"Come on, Doc," whispered Williams, quietly. "What's going on here,
anyway?"

"That's enough," cried the doctor, suddenly. He sprang up and strode
toward the door. "Leave me alone," he exclaimed, almost in tears. "By
heaven, I've had enough of this. I've had all I can stand."

Donnelly moved to block the door and the psychiatrist came abruptly to a
halt. "That ain't enough, Doc. You get out after you talk."

"For God's sake, Joe."

"Shut up, Williams, I'm warning you for the last time."

"Let me by. I warn you, Donnelly. Let me by."

Williams moved in, regaining a sudden spurt of assurance. "What about
that kid up there, Doc? Nobody's letting him by, are they, Doc?"

A look of utter weariness swept across the doctor's face.

"All right," he said. "You may as well know the truth then. You won't
