reason for the frozen look of malice and hatred.

"She was mine. When she betrayed me, I killed her. Is that wrong?"

The stick men snorted and poked each other in the ribs with derisive
elbows.

There were more words and more questions. He looked at the face of the
judge and wondered, for a moment, if perhaps the color of the robe was
to match the apparent disposition of the man.

And then came the silence, a time of sitting and waiting. He sensed the
wondering stares of the stick men, wide-eyed in apprehension, suspended
from the drabness of their own lives for the moment by the stark
visitation of tragedy in his. They gabbled among themselves and wagered
on the verdict.

The man next to him leaned over and tapped him on the arm. Everyone
stood up and then, curiously, sat down again almost at once. He felt the
tension present in the courtroom, but was strangely relaxed himself. It
was peculiar that they were all so excited.

"Your Honor, having duly considered the seriousness of the crime and the
evidence presented ..."

The balloon faces on the stick men stretched in anticipation.

"... taking full cognizance of the admitted passion on the part of the
defendant and the circumstances ..."

The balloons were strained, contorted out of all proportion in their
eagerness.

"... we find the defendant guilty of murder, making no recommendation
for consideration by the Court."

The balloons exploded!

       *       *       *       *       *

Deafening and more than deafening, the uproar of the voices was beyond
belief. He threw his hands up over his ears to shut out the noise.

The gavel crashed again and again, striking the polished oak in deadly
cadence, stifling the voices. Over the stillness, one man spoke. He
recognized the black voice of the judge and took his hands from his ears
and put them in his lap. He was told to stand and he obeyed.

"Oliver Symmes, there has been no taking of human lives in this nation
for many years, until your shockingly primitive crime. We had taken
pride in this record. Now you have broken it. We must not only punish
you adequately and appropriately, but we must also make of your
punishment a warning to anyone who would follow your irrational example.

"Naturally, we no longer have either the apparatus to execute anyone or
an executioner. We do not believe that a stupidly unreasoning act should
incite us to equally unreasoning reprisal, for we would then be as
guilty of irrationality as you.

"We must establish our own precedent, since there is no recent one and
the ancient punishments are not acceptable to us. Therefore, because we
are humane and reasoning persons, the Court orders that the defendant,
Oliver Symmes, be placed in the National Hospital for observation, study
and experimentation so that this crime may never again be repeated. He
is to be kept there under perpetual care until no possible human skill
or resource can further sustain life in his body."

Someone jumped erect beside him, quivering with horror and indignation.
It was his lawyer.

"Your Honor, we throw ourselves upon the mercy of the Court. No matter
what the crime of the defendant, this is a greater one. For this is a
crime not just against my client, but against all men. This sentence
robs all men of their most precious freedom--the right to die at their
appointed times. Nothing is more damaging to the basic dignity of the
human race than this most hideous ..."

"... This Court recognizes only the four freedoms. The freedom of death
is not one of these. The sentence stands. The Court is adjourned."

There were tears in the eyes of his lawyer, although young Oliver Symmes
did not quite comprehend, as yet, their meaning. Hands, rougher than
before, grasped his arms with strange firmness and led him off into ...

       *       *       *       *       *

Shadows. They come in cycles, each prompted to activity by the one
preceding it. They flutter in unbelievable clusters, wheel in
untranslatable formations through the cerebric wasteland that is the
aged mind of Oliver Symmes. They have no meaning to him, save for a
furtive spark of recognition that intrudes upon him once in a while.

The woman in the green uniform, standing to one side of the window,
smiled at him again. It was much simpler to care for him, she thought,
if only one conceived of him as being a sort of sweet little worn-out
teddy bear. Yes, that was what he was, a little teddy bear that had
gotten most of its stuffing lost and had shriveled and shrunk. And one
can easily love and pamper a teddy bear.

"Can you see the crowd all right, Mr. Symmes? This is a good place to
watch from, isn't it?"

Her words fell upon his ears, setting up vibrations and oscillations in
the basilar membranes. Nerve cells triggered impulses that sped along
neural pathways to the withered cortex, where they lost themselves in
the welter of atrophy and disintegration. They emerged into his
consciousness as part of a gestaltic confusion.

"Isn't it exciting, watching from here?" she asked, showing enthusiasm
at the sight of the crowd below. "You should be enjoying this immensely,
you know. Not all the people here have windows to look out of like
this." There, now, that should make him feel a little better.
