       *       *       *       *       *

We were weary, and we plodded along slowly, twin trails of air-bubbles
like plumes waving behind us, rushing upwards to the surface. I felt
strangely alone at the moment, isolated, cut off from all mankind, on
the bottom of the Atlantic.

"Coming to meet you, all of us," Imee signaled us. "Be careful where
you step, so that you do not walk in a circle and find again the Place
of Darkness. It is very large."

"Probably some uncharted deep," threw in Mercer. "Only the larger ones
have been located."

For my part, I was too weary to think. I just staggered on.

A crowd of slim, darting white shapes surrounded us. They swam before
us, showing the way. The five patriarchs walked majestically before
us; and between us, smiling at us through the thick lenses of our
headpieces, walked Imee. Oh, it was a triumphal procession, and had I
been less weary, I presume I would have felt quite the hero.

       *       *       *       *       *

Imee pictured for us, as we went along, the happiness, the
gratefulness of her people. Already, she informed us, great numbers of
young men were clearing away the bodies of the dead Rorn. She was so
happy she could hardly restrain herself.

A dim skeleton shape bulked up at my left. I turned to look at it, and
Imee, watching me through the lights of my head-piece, nodded and
smiled.

Yes, this was the very hulk by which she had been swimming when the
shark had attacked her, the shark which had been the cause of the
accident. She darted on to show me the very rib upon which her head
had struck, stunning her so that she had drifted, unconscious and
storm-tossed, to the shore of Mercer's estate.

I studied the wreck. It was battered and tilted on its beam ends, but
I could still make out the high poop that marked it as a very old
ship.

"A Spanish galleon, Mercer," I conjectured.

"I believe so." And then, in pictured form, for Imee's benefit, "It
has been here while much time passed?"

"Yes." Imee came darting back to us, smiling. "Since before the
Teemorn, my people were here. A Rorn we made prisoner once told us his
people discovered it first. They went into this strange skeleton, and
inside were many blocks of very bright stone." She pictured quite
clearly bars of dully-glinting bullion. Evidently the captive had told
his story well.

       *       *       *       *       *

"These stones, which were so bright, the Rorn took to their city,
which is three swims distant." How far that might be, I could not even
guess. A swim, it seemed, was the distance a Teemorn could travel
before the need for rest became imperative. "There were many Rorn, and
they each took one stone. And of them, they made a house for their
leader." The leader, as she pictured him, being the most hideous
travesty of a thing in semi-human form that the mind could imagine:
incredibly old and wrinkled and ugly and gray, his noseless face
seamed with cunning, his eyes red rimmed and terrible, his teeth
gleaming, white and sharp, like fangs.

"A whole house, except the roof," she went on. "It is there now, and
it is gazed at with much admiration by all the Rorn. All this our
prisoner told us before we took him, with a rock made fast to him, out
over the Place of Darkness. He, too, was very proud of their leader's
house."

"Treasure!" I commented to Mercer. "If we could find the city of the
Rorn, we might make the trip pay for itself!"

I could sense his wave of amusement.

"I think," he replied, "I'd rather stand it myself. These Rorn don't
appeal to me."

It was over half an hour before we were at last free of our diving
suits.

The first thing Captain Bonnett said:

"We've got to get to the surface, and that quickly. Our air supply is
running damnably low. By the time we blow out the tanks we'll be just
about out. And foul air will keep us here until we rot. I'm sorry,
sir, but that's the way matters stand."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mercer, white-faced and ill, stared at him dazedly.

"Air?" he repeated groggily--I knew just how he felt--"We should have
lots of air. The specifications--"

"But we're dealing with facts, not specifications, sir," said Captain
Bonnett. "Another two hours here and we won't leave ever."

"Then it can't be helped, Captain," muttered Mercer. "We'll go up. And
back. For more compressed air. We must remember to plot our course
exactly. You kept the record on the way out as I instructed you?"

"Yes, sir," said Captain Bonnett.

"Just a minute, then," said Mercer.

Weakly he made his way forward to the little cubbyhole in which was
housed the central station of his thought-telegraph. I didn't even
inspect the gleaming maze of apparatus. I merely watched him dully as
he plugged in an antenna similar to the one we had left with Imee, and
adjusted the things on his head.

       *       *       *       *       *

His eyes brightened instantly. "She's still wearing her antenna," he
said swiftly over his shoulder. "I'll tell her that something's
happened; we must leave, but that we will return."

He sat there, frowning intently for a moment, and then dragged the
antenna wearily from his head. He touched a switch somewhere, and
several softly glowing bulbs turned slowly red and then dark.

"You and I," he groaned, "had better go to bed. We overdid it. She
understands, I think. Terribly sorry, terribly disappointed. Some
sort of celebration planned, I gather. Captain Bonnett!"

"Yes, sir?"

"You may proceed now as you think best," said Mercer. "We're retiring.
Be sure and chart the course back, so we may locate this spot again."

"Yes, sir!" said Captain Bonnett.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I awoke we were at anchor, our deck barely awash, before the
deserted beach of Mercer's estate. Still feeling none too well, Mercer
and I made our way to the narrow deck.

Captain Bonnett was waiting for us, spruce in his blue uniform, his
shoulders bowed as always.

"Good morning, gentlemen," he offered, smiling crisply. "The open air
seems good, doesn't it?"

It did. There was a fresh breeze blowing in from the Atlantic, and I
filled my lungs gratefully. I had not realized until that instant just
how foul the air below had been.

"Very fine, Captain," said Mercer, nodding. "You have signaled the men
on shore to send out a boat to take us off?"

"Yes, sir; I believe they're launching her now."

"And the chart of our course--did the return trip check with the
other?"

"Perfectly, sir." Captain Bonnett reached in an inner pocket of his
double-breasted coat, extracted two folded pages, and extended them,
with a little bow, to Mercer.

Just as Mercer's eager fingers touched the precious papers, however,
the wind whisked them from Bonnett's grasp and whirled them into the
water.

Bonnett gasped and gazed after them for a split second; then, barely
pausing to tear off his coat, he plunged over the side.

       *       *       *       *       *

He tried desperately, but before he could reach either one of the
tossing white specks, they were washed beneath the surface and
disappeared. Ten minutes later, his uniform bedraggled and shapeless,
he pulled himself on deck.

"I'm sorry, sir," he gasped, out of breath. "Sorrier than I can say. I
tried--"

Mercer, white-faced and struggling with his emotions, looked down and
turned away.

"You don't remember the bearings, I suppose?" he ventured tonelessly.

"I'm sorry--no."

"Thank you, Captain, for trying so hard to recover the papers," said
Mercer. "You'd better change at once; the wind is sharp."

       *       *       *       *       *

The captain bowed and disappeared down the conning tower. Then Mercer
turned to me, and a smile struggled for life.

"Well, Taylor, we helped her out, anyway," he said slowly. "I'm sorry
that--that Imee will misunderstand when we don't come back."

"But, Mercer," I said swiftly, "perhaps we'll be able to find our way
back to her. You thought before, you know, that--"

"But I can see now what an utterly wild-goose chase it would have
been." Mercer shook his head slowly. "No, old friend, it would be
impossible. And--Imee will not come again to guide us; she will think
we have deserted her. And"--he smiled slowly up into my eyes--"perhaps
it is as well. After all, the photographs and the data I wanted would
do the world no practical good. We did Imee and her people a good
turn; let's content ourselves with that. I, for one, am satisfied."

"And I, old timer," I said, placing my hand affectionately upon his
shoulder. "Here's the boat. Shall we go ashore?"

We did go ashore, silently. And as we got out of the boat, and set
foot again upon the sand, we both turned and looked out across the
smiling Atlantic, dancing brightly in the sun.

The mighty, mysterious Atlantic--home of Imee and her people!




Murder Madness

BEGINNING A FOUR-PART NOVEL

_By Murray Leinster_

[Illustration: _The heads leveled the revolver in spite of him, while
he flung his head from side to side in a frantic attempt to disturb
their aim._]

[Sidenote: Murder Madness! Seven Secret Service men had completely
disappeared. Another had been found a screaming, homicidal maniac,
whose fingers writhed like snakes. So Bell, of the secret "Trade,"
plunges into South America after The Master--the mighty, unknown
octopus of power whose diabolical poison threatens a continent!]


CHAPTER I

The engines of the _Almirante Gomez_ were going dead slow. Away up
beside her monster funnels her siren blew dismally, _Whoo-oo-oo-oo!_
and was silent for the regulation period, and blew desolately again
into the clinging gray mist that ringed her all about.

Her decks were wet and glistening. Droplets of water stood upon the
deck-stanchions, and dripped from the outer edge of the roof above the
promenade deck. A thin, swirling fog lay soggily upon the water and
the big steamer went dead slow upon her course, sending dismal and
depressing blasts from her horn from time to time. It was barely
possible to see from one side of the ship to the other. It was surely
impossible to see the bow from a point half astern.

Charley Bell went forward along the promenade deck. He passed Senor
Ortiz, ex-Minister of the Interior of the Argentine Republic. Ortiz
bowed to him punctiliously, but Bell had a sudden impression that the
Argentine's face was gray and ghastly. He checked himself and looked
back. The little man was climbing the companion-ladder toward the
wireless room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bell slipped on toward the bow. He did not want to give an impression
of furtiveness, but the _Almirante Gomez_ was twelve days out of New
York and Bell was still entirely ignorant of why he was on board. He
had been called into the office of his chief in the State Department
and told curtly that his request for leave of absence had been
granted. And Bell had not asked for a leave of absence. But at just
that moment he saw a rubber band on the desk of his immediate
superior, a fairly thick rubber band which had been tied into a
certain intricate knot. And Bell had kept quiet. He went to his
apartment, found his bags packed and tickets to Rio via the _Almirante
Gomez_ in an envelope on his dressing-table, and went out and caught a
train to the ship.

[Illustration]

And that was all he knew. The siren up above blared dolefully into the
fog. It was damp, and soggy, and depressing. The other passengers were
under cover, and the decks seemed to be deserted. From the saloon came
the sound of music. Bell pulled the collar of his light topcoat about
his throat and strolled on toward the bow.

He faced a row of steamer chairs. There was a figure curled up in one
of them. Paula Canalejas, muffled up against the dampness and staring
somberly out into the mist. Bell had met her in Washington and liked
her a great deal, but he swore softly at sight of her in his way.

The afternoon before, he had seen a stoker on the _Almirante Gomez_
pick up a bit of rope and absently tie knots in it while he exchanged
Rabelasian humor with his fellows. He had not looked at Bell at all,
but the knots he tied were the same that Bell had last seen tied in a
rubber band on a desk in the State Department in Washington. And Bell
knew a recognition signal when he saw one. The stoker would be off
watch, just now, and by all the rules of reason he ought to be out
there on the forecastle, waiting for Bell to turn up and receive
instructions.

       *       *       *       *       *

But Bell paused, lit a cigarette carefully, and strolled forward.

"Mr. Bell."

He stopped and beamed fatuously at her. It would have been logical for
him to fall in love with her, and it is always desirable to seem
logical. He had striven painstakingly to give the impression that he
had fallen in love with her--and then had striven even more
painstakingly to keep from doing it.

"Hullo," he said in bland surprise. "What are you doing out on deck?"

Brown eyes regarded him speculatively.

"Thinking," she said succinctly. "About you, Mr. Bell."

Bell beamed.

"Thinking," he confided, "is usually a bad habit, especially in a
girl. But if you must think, I approve of your choice of subjects.
What were you thinking about me?"

The brown eyes regarded him still more speculatively.

"I was wondering--" said Paula, glancing to either side, "I was
wondering if you happen to be--er--a member of the United States
Secret Service."

Bell laughed with entire naturalness.

"Good Lord, no!" he said amusedly. "I have a desk in the State
Department building, and I read consular reports all day long and
write letters bedeviling the consuls for not including unavailable
statistics in their communications. That's my work. I'm on leave now."

       *       *       *       *       *

She looked skeptical and, it may be, disappointed.

"You look as if you didn't believe me," said Bell, smiling. "I give
you my word of honor I'm not a member of the United States Secret
Service. Will that do to relieve your suspicions?"

"I believe you," she said slowly, "but it does not relieve my mind. I
shall think about other people. I have something important to tell a
member of the United States Secret Service."

Bell shrugged.

"I'm sorry," he said amiably, "that I can't oblige you by tipping one
of them off. That's what you wanted me to do, isn't it?"

She nodded, and the gesture was very much like a dismissal. Bell
frowned, hesitated, and went on. He was anxious to meet the stoker,
but this....

The siren droned dismally over his head. Fog lay deep about the ship.
The washing of the waves and dripping of water on the decks was
depressing. It seemed to be getting thicker. Four stanchions ahead,
the mist was noticeable. He found that he could count five, six,
seven.... The eighth was indefinite. But a bar materialized in the fog
before him, and the grayness drew away before him and closed in
