but a wall of semi-solid vapor. And still, with eyeballs straining in
their sockets, the victims watched.

Suddenly all were seized with the same spasm of mad terror. Again they
hurled themselves against the electrified lines, and again they were
hurled back, masses of boys and girls tumbling against one another,
and screaming in one wail that, could it have been heard in
Washington, would have driven all insane. Again and again, till they
fell back, panting and helpless. And solidly the wall of devils was
creeping up from every side.

Ruth Deane, one of the few who had themselves in control, lay some
distance back from the electrified field. From the moment when she was
surprised in her apartment by the Government representatives, she had
known that there was no hope of escape.

       *       *       *       *       *

She had slipped the ring off her finger, snapped the plastic metal,
and attached it to a thread torn from her dress. She had managed to
insert it in the door, hoping that Kay would find it. It would serve
as a last message of love to him.

Every removal of a selected victim was in the nature of a kidnapping.
At dead of night her apartment had been opened. She had been ordered
to dress. Nothing could be written, no arrangements made. She was
already considered as one dead.

She had been hurried out of the upper entrance to the monorail, which
conveyed her in a special car to the landing station. A few minutes
later she had been on her way to join the camp of other victims, a
hundred miles away. Within two hours she was on her way southward.

Stunned by the tragedy, none of the victims had made much of an
outcry. They had been given water by the airship police. No food for
boys and girls already dead. Days and nights had passed, and now she
was here, faint from exhaustion, and wondering at the despair shown by
those others. What difference would it make in half an hour? Besides,
that Government pamphlet had insisted that this death was painless!

But an immense longing to see Kay once more came over her. There had
been a time when she thought she loved Cliff; then Kay had come into
her life, and she had known that other affair was folly. She had
never told Kay of the bitter scene between Cliff and herself, how he
had raved against Kay and sworn to win her in the end.

Cliff had calmed down and apologized, and Ruth had never seen him
again. She wished he had not taken it like that. But above all she
wanted to see Kay, just to say good-by.

And she tried to send out her whole heart to him in an unspoken
message of love that would surely somehow convey itself to him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The wall of devils was creeping up on every side, slowly,
lethargically. The monsters took their time, because they knew they
were invincible. The sobs and shrieks had died away. Collected into a
mass almost as rigid as that of the Earth Giants, the victims waited,
palsied as a rabbit that awaits the approach of the serpent.

A humming overhead. An airplane shooting down from the sky. Rescue?
No. Only a solitary pilot, armed with a woodsman's ax.

Kay drifted down, touched ground, leaped to his feet. Chance had
brought him within five hundred yards of where Ruth was standing. But
Ruth had known who that lone flyer must be. She broke through the
throng; she rushed to meet him. Her arms were around him.

"Kay, darling Kay!"

"Ruth, dearest!"

"I knew you'd come."

"I've come to die beside you!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was perhaps odd that it did not enter the head of either as a
possibility that Kay should simply place Ruth in the plane and fly
away with here to safety. Had the thought occurred to Kay, he might
have been tempted. But such black treachery was something
inconceivable by either. So long as the Federation remained, so long
as man moved in an organized society, he was bound to his fellows, to
fight, suffer, and die with them.

"Stand by me, Ruth. We're going down fighting."

They moved back toward the throng, which, momentarily stirred to hope
by Kay's appearance, had fallen into the former apathy of despair. And
now the monsters were beginning to enter the electrified zone at one
point. As they passed the line of posts, the high tension current made
their bodies luminous, but it had no appreciable effect upon them.
They moved on, inevitably.

A score or so of semi-human forms, agglutinated into a mass, and yet
individually discernible. They bore down slowly upon the crowd of
victims, who pressed backward as they advanced. On the other sides,
though they almost encircled the field of death, the monsters were
making no maneuvers to entrap their prey. Their sluggish minds were
incapable of conceiving anything of the kind. But for the electrified
zone, the great majority of the victims could have effected their
escape. The monsters were simply pressing forward to their meal; they
did not interpret its capture in terms of strategy at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

A new frenzy of horror seized the crowd. They fled, struggling back
until the foremost in flight reached the other side of Golgotha, to be
repulsed by the electrified zone there. They fell in tumbled heaps.
Appalling shrieks rang through the air.

Another line of the monsters was seeping forward, converging toward
the first. As the two lines met, they coalesced into a wall of
protoplasm, a thousand feet in length by a hundred high. A wall out of
which leered phantasmal faces, like those in a frieze.

Kay stood alone, his arm around Ruth. To follow the flying mob would
but prolong the agony. He raised the ax. He looked into the girl's
eyes. She understood, and nodded.

One last embrace, one kiss, and Kay placed her behind him. He sprang
forward, shouting, and plunged into the very heart of the wall.

And Ruth, watching with eyes dilated with horror, saw it yield with a
sucking sound, and saw Kay disappear within it.

       *       *       *       *       *

She saw the hideous mass fold itself upon him, and a hundred extruded
tentacles wave in the air as they blindly grappled for him. And then
Kay had broken through, and was hewing madly with great sweeps of the
ax that slashed great streamers of the amorphous tissue from the wall
of protoplasm.

It recoiled and then folded once more, and Kay's mighty sweeps were
slashing phantom limbs from phantom bodies; and lopping off tentacles
that curled and coiled, and put forth caricatures of hands and
fingers, and then, uniting with other slashed off tentacles, began to
mould themselves into the likeness of dwarf monsters. Kay's struggle
was like that of a man fighting a fog, for again and again he broke
through the wall, and always it reunited.

And behind it another wall of protoplasm was pressing forward, and on
another side a wall was drifting up. As Kay stopped, panting, and
momentarily free, Ruth saw that they were almost encircled.

She saw the nature of that fight. Inevitably that wall would close
about them; and, though the bones of last year's victims had been
gathered up and carried away by the Federation, she guessed what would
occur.

She ran to Kay and dragged him back through the closing gap. It met
behind them, and again they stood face to face with the devils. Only
this time, instead of a wall of protoplasm, it was a veritable
mountain that confronted them, and there could be no more breaking
through.

Kay thought afterward that the one touch of absolute horror was that
the reforming monsters, the young ones growing visibly before his
eyes, had the gamboling instinct of young lambs or other creatures.
They were much more lively than the parent creatures.

       *       *       *       *       *

By this time perhaps a third of the space within the electrified lines
had been occupied by the devils. The wall was slowly and sluggishly
advancing, and a fresh infiltration was drifting in on another side.
As the victims were pressed closer and closer together in their
flight, half of them seemed to go insane. They raced to and fro,
laughing and screaming, flinging their arms aloft in extravagant
gestures. One young fellow, rushing across the ground, hurled himself
like a bolt from a catapult into the heart of the grisly mass, which
opened and received him.

There was a struggle, a convulsion; then the mass moved on.

Kay wiped his ax. He stood beside Ruth, gathering strength and breath
to fight again. What else was there to do?

Suddenly a humming sound came to his ears. Still some little distance
from the monsters, he glanced back. The victims were shouting, staring
upward. Over the tops of the jungle trees Kay saw a second airplane
flying toward them, a larger one than the plane which he had flown.

It opened its helicopter wings and drifted downward. Kay saw a single
pilot, and, in the baggage compartment something that at first he did
not recognize. Then he recognized both this object and the aviator.

"It's Cliff," he whispered hoarsely. "He's brought the top!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The crowd was milling about Cliff as he stepped out of the plane. Kay
broke through their midst, shouting to them to clear a space, that it
was their chance, their only chance. They heard him and obeyed. And
Cliff and Kay clasped hands, and there was Ruth beside them.

The two men carried the top out of the baggage compartment and set it
up.

"Thank God I came in time," Cliff hissed. "How long have we got, Kay?"

"Five minutes, I think," Kay answered, glancing at the oncoming wall.
"They're slow. Will it work, Cliff? God, when I found you'd gone last
night--"

Cliff did not answer. Ignoring Kay's offer of assistance, he fitted
the top tightly into its socket of craolite, much heavier than the
former one. Beneath this, three heavy craolite legs formed a sort of
tripod.

"I looked forward to this possibility, Kay," said Cliff, as he
adjusted the top and turned the clamps that held it in position.
"Sorry I had to deceive you, but you we're so set on the cosmic rays,
and I knew the psenium emanations wouldn't appeal to you. You wouldn't
have believed. I had a hunch Ruth would draw one of those numbers....
_How long?_"

The swaying masses of gray jelly were very near them. Cliff worked
feverishly at the top.

"Let me help. Cliff!"

"No! I'm through! Stand back!" shouted Cliff.

       *       *       *       *       *

Even then--he regretted it afterward, and knew that he would regret it
to his dying day--even then the thought flashed through Kay's mind
that Cliff wanted all the glory. Behind him the milling, screaming
crowd was huddling, as if for protection. Slowly a wisp-like tentacle
protruded from the advancing wall. Kay swung his ax and lopped it from
the phantom body. But the wall was almost upon them, and from the
other side it was advancing rapidly.

"I'm ready! Stand back!" Cliff turned upon Kay, his face white, his
voice hoarse. "I've one request to make, Kay. Keep everybody back,
including you and Ruth. Nobody is to come within twenty-five yards of
this machine!"

"That shall be done," said Kay, a little bitterness in his tone.

"Ruth, I think I'm going to save you all." Cliff looked into the
girl's face for a moment. "Please stand back twenty-five yards," he
repeated.

Kay took Ruth by the arm and drew her back. The crowd moved back,
their pressure moving back the vast multitudes behind them. The vast
mob was almost packed into the quarter of the Golgotha; there was
scarcely room to move.

Kay saw Cliff press the lever.

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly the giant top began to whirl. Faster ... faster.... Now it was
revolving so fast that it had become totally invisible. But Cliff was
almost surrounded by the wall of jelly. Only his back could be seen,
and then space was narrowing fast.

Kay gripped Ruth's arm tightly. He held his breath. The crowd, of whom
only a small part knew what was taking place, was screaming with
terror as the mass of jelly on the other side pressed them inexorably
backward. And Cliff had almost vanished. Would the machine work? Was
it possible that the psenium emanations would succeed where the
Millikan rays, the W-ray had failed?

Then of a sudden the air grew dark as night. Kay began to sneeze. He
gasped for air. He was choking. He could see nothing, and he strained
Ruth to him convulsively, while the terrified multitudes behind him
set up a last wail of despair.

He could see nothing, and he stood with the ax ready for the onset of
the monsters, more terrible now, in their invisibility, than before.
Then of a sudden there sounded subterranean rumblings. The ground
seemed to open almost under Kay's feet.

He leaped back, dragging Ruth with him. Slowly the dust was settling,
the darkness lessening. A faint, luminous glow overhead revealed the
sun. Kay was aware that Cliff had swung the top, so that the psenium
rays were being brought to bear upon the second mass of the monsters
on the other side.

The sun vanished in appalling blackness. Again the dust-choked air was
almost unbreathable. The shrieks of the crowd died away in wheezing
gasps; and then a wilder clamor began.

"The earthquake! The earthquake!" a girl was shrilling. "God help us
all!"

Kay stood still, clutching Ruth tightly in his arms. He dared not
stir, for all the world seemed to be dissolving into chaos.

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly the dust began to settle again. Perhaps five minutes passed
before the sunbeams began to struggle through. A cloud of grey dust
still obscured everything. But the wall of protoplasm was gone!

Cliff's voice came moaning out of the murk, calling Kay's name.

Kay moved forward cautiously, still holding Ruth. He seemed to be
skirting the edge of a vast crater. At the edge of it he found the
top, revolving slowly. And Cliff's voice came from beside the top.

"Kay, we've won. Don't look at me. Don't let Ruth see me! Look down!"

Kay looked down into the bottomless pit, extending clear across the
plain to the distant jungle. An enormous canyon cloven in the earth,
filled with the slowly settling cloud of dust.

"They're there, Kay. Don't look this way!"

But Kay looked--and could see nothing except a pile of debris, from
the bottom of which Cliff's voice issued.

"Cliff, you're not hurt?"

"A--a little. You must listen while I tell you how to clean up the
monsters. It's the psenium emanation. It has the same effect when our
method is applied to it. It disintegrates everything inorganic--not
organic.

"I thought, if I couldn't get them, I'd crumble the earth away--bury
them. They're underneath the debris, Kay, a mile deep, buried, beneath
the impalpable powder that represented the inorganic salts and
minerals of the earth. They'll never get out of that. Protoplasm needs
oxygen. They'll trouble us no more.

"You must take the top, Kay. Use our old method. You'll find its
application to the psenium emanation written in a book fastened
beneath the hood. Wipe out the rest of them. If any more come, you'll
know how to deal with them."

"Cliff, you're not badly hurt?" Kay asked again.

"Don't look, I tell you! Keep Ruth away!"

       *       *       *       *       *

