my physiographic models at your disposal; you may use them to the
fullest extent!"

"I'll be pleased for the opportunity," declared Murphy. "But tomorrow
I'd like to prowl around the valley, meet your people, observe their
customs, religious rites, courtships, funerals ..."

The Sultan pulled a sour face. "We are ditch-water dull. Festivals are
celebrated quietly in the home; there is small religious fervor;
courtships are consummated by family contract. I fear you will find
little sensational material here in Singhalut."

"You have no temple dances?" asked Murphy. "No fire-walkers,
snake-charmers--voodoo?"

The Sultan smiled patronizingly. "We came out here to Cirgamesc to
escape the ancient superstitions. Our lives are calm, orderly. Even the
_amoks_ have practically disappeared."

"But the sjambaks--"

"Negligible."

"Well," said Murphy, "I'd like to visit some of these ancient cities."

"I advise against it," declared the Sultan. "They are shards, weathered
stone. There are no inscriptions, no art. There is no stimulation in
dead stone. Now. Tomorrow I will hear a report on hybrid soybean
plantings in the Upper Kam District. You will want to be present."

       *       *       *       *       *

Murphy's suite matched or even excelled his expectation. He had four
rooms and a private garden enclosed by a thicket of bamboo. His bathroom
walls were slabs of glossy actinolite, inlaid with cinnabar, jade,
galena, pyrite and blue malachite, in representations of fantastic
birds. His bedroom was a tent thirty feet high. Two walls were dark
green fabric; a third was golden rust; the fourth opened upon the
private garden.

Murphy's bed was a pink and yellow creation ten feet square, soft as
cobweb, smelling of rose sandalwood. Carved black lacquer tubs held
fruit; two dozen wines, liquors, syrups, essences flowed at a touch from
as many ebony spigots.

The garden centered on a pool of cool water, very pleasant in the
hothouse climate of Singhalut. The only shortcoming was the lack of the
lovely young servitors Murphy had envisioned. He took it upon himself to
repair this lack, and in a shady wine-house behind the palace, called
the Barangipan, he made the acquaintance of a girl-musician named Soek
Panjoebang. He found her enticing tones of quavering sweetness from the
_gamelan_, an instrument well-loved in Old Bali. Soek Panjoebang had the
delicate features and transparent skin of Sumatra, the supple long limbs
of Arabia and in a pair of wide and golden eyes a heritage from
somewhere in Celtic Europe. Murphy bought her a goblet of frozen
shavings, each a different perfume, while he himself drank white
rice-beer. Soek Panjoebang displayed an intense interest in the ways of
Earth, and Murphy found it hard to guide the conversation. "Weelbrrr,"
she said. "Such a funny name, Weelbrrr. Do you think I could play the
_gamelan_ in the great cities, the great palaces of Earth?"

"Sure. There's no law against _gamelans_."

"You talk so funny, Weelbrrr. I like to hear you talk."

"I suppose you get kinda bored here in Singhalut?"

She shrugged. "Life is pleasant, but it concerns with little things. We
have no great adventures. We grow flowers, we play the _gamelan_." She
eyed him archly sidelong. "We love.... We sleep...."

Murphy grinned. "You run _amok_."

"No, no, no. That is no more."

"Not since the sjambaks, eh?"

"The sjambaks are bad. But better than _amok_. When a man feels the knot
forming around his chest, he no longer takes his kris and runs down the
street--he becomes sjambak."

This was getting interesting. "Where does he go? What does he do?"

"He robs."

"Who does he rob? What does he do with his loot?"

She leaned toward him. "It is not well to talk of them."

"Why not?"

"The Sultan does not wish it. Everywhere are listeners. When one talks
sjambak, the Sultan's ears rise, like the points on a cat."

"Suppose they do--what's the difference? I've got a legitimate interest.
I saw one of them in that cage out there. That's torture. I want to know
about it."

"He is very bad. He opened the monorail car and the air rushed out.
Forty-two Singhalusi and Hadrasi bloated and blew up."

"And what happened to the sjambak?"

"He took all the gold and money and jewels and ran away."

"Ran where?"

"Out across Great Pharasang Plain. But he was a fool. He came back to
Singhalut for his wife; he was caught and set up for all people to look
at, so they might tell each other, 'thus it is for sjambaks.'"

"Where do the sjambaks hide out?"

"Oh," she looked vaguely around the room, "out on the plains. In the
mountains."

"They must have some shelter--an air-dome."

"No. The Sultan would send out his patrol-boat and destroy them. They
roam quietly. They hide among the rocks and tend their oxygen stills.
Sometimes they visit the old cities."

"I wonder," said Murphy, staring into his beer, "could it be sjambaks
who ride horses up to meet the space-ship?"

Soek Panjoebang knit her black eyebrows, as if preoccupied.

"That's what brought me out here," Murphy went on. "This story of a man
riding a horse out in space."

"Ridiculous; we have no horses in Cirgamesc."

"All right, the steward won't swear to the horse. Suppose the man was up
there on foot or riding a bicycle. But the steward recognized the man."

"Who was this man, pray?"

"The steward clammed up.... The name would have been just noise to me,
anyway."

"_I_ might recognize the name...."

"Ask him yourself. The ship's still out at the field."

She shook her head slowly, holding her golden eyes on his face. "I do
not care to attract the attention of either steward, sjambak--or
Sultan."

Murphy said impatiently. "In any event, it's not who--but _how_. How
does the man breathe? Vacuum sucks a man's lungs up out of his mouth,
bursts his stomach, his ears...."

"We have excellent doctors," said Soek Panjoebang shuddering, "but alas!
I am not one of them."

       *       *       *       *       *

Murphy looked at her sharply. Her voice held the plangent sweetness of
her instrument, with additional overtones of mockery. "There must be
some kind of invisible dome around him, holding in air," said Murphy.

"And what if there is?"

"It's something new, and if it is, I want to find out about it."

Soek smiled languidly. "You are so typical an old-lander--worried,
frowning, dynamic. You should relax, cultivate _napau_, enjoy life as we
do here in Singhalut."

"What's _napau_?"

"It's our philosophy, where we find meaning and life and beauty in every
aspect of the world."

"That sjambak in the cage could do with a little less _napau_ right
now."

"No doubt he is unhappy," she agreed.

"Unhappy! He's being tortured!"

"He broke the Sultan's law. His life is no longer his own. It belongs to
Singhalut. If the Sultan wishes to use it to warn other wrongdoers, the
fact that the man suffers is of small interest."

"If they all wear that metal ornament, how can they hope to hide out?"
He glanced at her own bare bosom.

"They appear by night--slip through the streets like ghosts...." She
looked in turn at Murphy's loose shirt. "You will notice persons
brushing up against you, feeling you," she laid her hand along his
breast, "and when this happens you will know they are agents of the
Sultan, because only strangers and the House may wear shirts. But now,
let me sing to you--a song from the Old Land, old Java. You will not
