civilian newspapermen--not a word from any Iron Curtain country for a
day and half. Everybody's frantic. The last item we had--it was a
coded message the Reds'd tried to censor--was an indication of
something big in the works."

"A day and half ago," Andy mused. "Just about the time we knew we had
an epidemic. And about the time they knew it."

"It could be just propaganda," Bettijean said hopefully, "proving that
they could cripple us from within."

The general nodded. "Or it could be the softening up for an all-out
effort. Every American base in the world is alerted and every
serviceman is being issued live ammunition. If we're wrong, we've
still got an epidemic and panic that could touch it off. If we're
right ... well, we've got to know. What can you do?"

Andy dropped his haggard face into his hands. His voice came through
muffled. "I can sit here and cry." For an eternity he sat there,
futility piling on helplessness, aware of Bettijean's hand on his arm.
He heard the colonel try to speak and sensed the general's movement
that silenced him.

Suddenly he sat upright and slapped a palm down on the desk. "We'll
find your answers, sir. All we ask is co-operation."

The general gave both Andy and Bettijean a long, sober look, then
launched himself from the chair. Pivoting, he said, "Colonel, you and
your captains will be stationed by that switchboard out there. For the
duration of this emergency, you will take orders only from the
sergeant and the corporal here."

"But, general," the colonel wailed, "a noncom? I'm assigned--"

The general snorted. "Insubordination cannot be tolerated--unless you
find a two-star general to outrank me. Now, as I said before, let's
get out of here and let these people work."

       *       *       *       *       *

The brass exited wordlessly. Bettijean sighed noisily. Andy found his
cigarette dead and lit another. He fancied a tiny lever in his brain
and he shifted gears to direct his thinking back into the proper
channel. Abruptly his fatigue began to lift. He picked up the new pile
of reports Bettijean had brought in.

She move around the desk and sat, noting the phone book he had used,
studying the names he had crossed off. "Did you learn anything?" she
asked.

Andy coughed, trying to clear his raw throat. "It's crazy," he said.
"From the Senate and House on down, I haven't found a single
government worker sick."

"I found a few," she said. "Over in a Virginia hospital."

"But I did find," Andy said, flipping through pages of his own
scrawl, "a society matron and her social secretary, a whole flock of
office workers--business, not government--and new parents and newly
engaged girls and...." He shrugged.

"Did you notice anything significant about those office workers?"

Andy nodded. "I was going to ask you the same, since I was just
guessing. I hadn't had time to check it out."

"Well, I checked some. Practically none of my victims came from big
offices, either business or industry. They were all out of one and
two-girl offices or small businesses."

"That was my guess. And do you know that I didn't find a doctor,
dentist or attorney?"

"Nor a single postal worker."

Andy tried to smile. "One thing we do know. It's not a communicable
thing. Thank heaven for--"

He broke off as a cute blonde entered and put stacks of reports before
both Andy and Bettijean. The girl hesitated, fidgeting, fingers to her
teeth. Then, without speaking, she hurried out.

Andy stared at the top sheet and groaned. "This may be something. Half
the adult population of Aspen, Colorado, is down."

"What?" Bettijean frowned over the report in her hands. "It's the same
thing--only not quite as severe--in Taos and Santa Fe, New Mexico."

"Writers?"

"Mostly. Some artists, too, and musicians. And poets are among the
hard hit."

"This is insane," Andy muttered. "Doctors and dentists are
fine--writers and poets are sick. Make sense out of that."

Bettijean held up a paper and managed a confused smile. "Here's a
country doctor in Tennessee. He doesn't even know what it's all about.
Nobody's sick in his valley."

"Somebody in our outer office is organized," Andy said, pulling at his
cigarette. "Here're reports from a dozen military installations all
lumped together."

