to him. But, after all, the Tr'en knew their business, better than
anyone else could know it. They had the technique and the logic and
the training.

He hoped they were right.

The Ruler was frowning at him. Korvin did his best to look receptive.
"Why did you land your ship on this planet?" the Ruler said.

"My job required it," Korvin said.

The Ruler nodded. "Your job is to crash your ship," he said. "It is
wasteful but the machines tell me it is true. Very well, then; we
shall find out more about your job. Was the crash intentional?"

Korvin looked sober. "Yes," he said.

The Ruler blinked. "Very well," he said. "Was your job ended when the
ship crashed?" The Tr'en word, of course, wasn't _ended_, nor did it
mean exactly that. As nearly as Korvin could make out, it meant
"disposed of for all time."

"No," he said.

"What else does your job entail?" the Ruler said.

Korvin decided to throw his first spoke into the wheel. "Staying
alive."

The Ruler roared. "Do not waste time with the obvious!" he shouted.
"Do not try to trick us; we are a logical and scientific race! Answer
correctly."

"I have told the truth," Korvin said.

"But it is not--not the truth we want," the Ruler said.

Korvin shrugged. "I replied to your question," he said. "I did not
know that there was more than one kind of truth. Surely the truth is
the truth, just as the Ruler is the Ruler?"

"I--" The Ruler stopped himself in mid-roar. "You try to confuse the
Ruler," he said at last, in an approximation of his usual one. "But
the Ruler will not be confused. We have experts in matters of
logic"--the Tr'en word seemed to mean _right-saying_--"who will advise
the Ruler. They will be called."

Korvin's guards were standing around doing nothing of importance now
that their captor was strapped down in the lie-detector. The Ruler
gestured and they went out the door in a hurry.

The Ruler looked down at Korvin. "You will find that you cannot trick
us," he said. "You will find that such fiddling"--_chulad-like_ Korvin
translated--"attempts will get you nowhere."

Korvin devoutly hoped so.

       *       *       *       *       *

The experts in logic arrived shortly, and in no uncertain terms Korvin
was given to understand that logical paradox was not going to confuse
anybody on the planet. The barber who did, or didn't, shave himself,
the secretary of the club whose members were secretaries, Achilles and
the tortoise, and all the other lovely paradox-models scattered around
were so much primer material for the Tr'en. "They can be treated
mathematically," one of the experts, a small emerald-green being, told
Korvin thinly. "Of course, you would not understand the mathematics.
But that is not important. You need only understand that we cannot be
confused by such means."

"Good," Korvin said.

The experts blinked. "Good?" he said.

"Naturally," Korvin said in a friendly tone.

The expert frowned horribly, showing all of his teeth. Korvin did his
best not to react. "Your plan is a failure," the expert said, "and you
call this a good thing. You can mean only that your plan is different
from the one we are occupied with."

"True," Korvin said.

There was a short silence. The expert beamed. He examined the
indicators of the lie-detector with great care. "What is your plan?"
he said at last, in a conspiratorial whisper.

"To answer your questions, truthfully and logically," Korvin said.

The silence this time was even longer.

"The machine says that you tell the truth," the experts said at last,
in a awed tone. "Thus, you must be a traitor to your native planet.
You must want us to conquer your planet, and have come here secretly
to aid us."

Korvin was very glad that wasn't a question. It was, after all, the
only logical deduction.

But it happened to be wrong.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The name of your planet is Earth?" the Ruler asked. A few minutes had
passed; the experts were clustered around the single chair. Korvin was
