though Horab shouted a vehement reply.

Luhra was speaking to him. "Horab says the earth has shaken before;
that it is not your _Tao_ who shakes it. He asks for another sign."

Garry was not surprised. He had fired this shot at random; the tremor
itself had suggested it. And now--

"Another sign!" Garry had to fight hard for self-control to keep from
shouting the truth to this evil thing--to keep from telling him of the
time that had passed, and of the world that was waiting for him. But
that would never do: he must play upon this black one's superstitions.
Let Horab once leave this cave with that devilish, soundless scream
ringing in his ears and he, Garry Connell, was lost. And Luhra!--what
hope for her out there?... The black hands were moving impatiently
toward the machine....

Garry found himself speaking slowly--short sentences that Luhra
quickly repeated. And something within him rose to frame words such as
Garry Connell, man of the desert, would never have thought to
speak--phrases that best might reach a savage, vicious mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

He glanced once at the watch on his wrist. He did not feel the torture
of the tight gold cord. He was thinking in terms of daylight, and of
how much time had passed since he had seen the sun....

"Horab shall have a sign--a terrible sign," he said. "Death waits for
Horab in the world outside, my _Tao_ tells me. Horab shall die
horribly. I see him choking in the hot sand. His tongue fills his
mouth. The hot sun burns, and he is filled with fire. He tries to
scream--to call upon his _Tao_--but he makes no sound.... And so shall
Horab die."

The girl translated swiftly; the answer was a wild cry of rage from
the black. He sprang beside the helpless man and his spear was raised
high.

Garry felt the weight of Luhra's body thrown protectingly across him,
and looked up to see murder in the savage, slitted eyes. "Tell Horab,"
he directed sharply, "that if be harms you or me the burning death is
his! But--" He waited deliberately after Luhra had spoken, and he saw
plainly the flicker of fear in the ugly face. Now was the time.

"Unbind my feet!" he ordered, and he put into his voice all the force
and menace he could muster. "Take me to the outer world. Take your
spear. If I do not speak truth, kill me there. My _Tao_ will show you
a sign; he will fill your heart with fear as it now is filled with
evil. But, it may be I can save you. Unbind my feet! Be quick!"

Again he waited while Luhra spoke, and he cursed silently with the
agony of waiting. To be playing a part, speaking these absurdly
childish things, when what he wanted was his hand upon a gun or in a
grip of death about that black throat! Yet he lay as still as if the
vibrations of the bell were upon him, and his eyes held unwaveringly
upon the savage face, until he felt the fumbling of hands about his
feet....

       *       *       *       *       *

A square-cut portal!--and beyond it a golden sun that shone through
mists of purple and rose! Was he too late? Garry pressed forward in
what would have been a clumsy run, but for the spear that had prodded
him through all the long passage, and that warned now against
attempted escape.

The brilliance and heat that struck him when he stepped, out into the
open brought Garry in a flash from the world of horror and
make-believe into the world he knew. He wanted to shout for sheer joy;
but more than all else he wanted to leap at the ugly thing who stood
blinking his eyes in the mouth of the cave.

The thought of escape was strong upon him, but the touch of a timid
hand showed the folly of that. Luhra was beside him, her filmy
lacework shining softly in the sun, to make more lovely the delicate
flush beneath. Her eyes, shielded from the sun, were upon him with a
look half hopeful, half despairing. No, he must see it through--go on
with his play-acting--meet magic with magic. Horab had come out from
the cave, and spear in hand he stood commandingly above them on a huge
boulder. Yes, the magic must go on.

The harsh voice of the savage ripped out unintelligible words. Luhra
translated. "It is changed," she said, "and Horab fears. But the water
is there, and there is no burning death.... He says your _Tao_ is
weak."

Garry stared with thankful eyes across the blue expanse where a line
of white marked ghostly breakers on a distant shore; where hills were
reflected in the shimmering blue. But the sun was still above their
tops, so he must spar for time--

"My _Tao_ is strong," he said, and went on with whatever fantastic
thoughts came into his mind. He was talking against time. He told of
the new world his _Tao_ had built, of men harnessing the lightning and
flying through the air; of cannon that roared like the thunder and
threw death and destruction upon those that the _Tao_ would
destroy.... And his eyes watched the slow descent of the dropping sun,
while the figure above stirred impatiently and raised his spear.

"A sign!" Luhra was imploring. "He does not believe!"

The golden ball was touching now on a distant, purple peak. The
amazing magic of the desert!--its moment had come! Garry indicated as
best he could the phantom sea, so real, below.

"My _Tao_ has spoken," he shouted: "watch! The waters shall be dried
up; the seas shall become a desert of hot sand; the lands and waters
that Horab knows shall be no more! There shall be no food for his
stomach nor water for his lips where Horab wanders in torment....
Unless I save him."

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned to stare at the vast mirage. He knew that the eyes of the
others had followed his, and he knew that they saw the first change
that crept over the land.

The blue that was so unmistakably a sea was dissolving; it seemed
sucked into the sand. And, while yet the hot rays cast their lingering
gold over mountain and plain, the seas faded and were gone ... and
where they had been in unquestioned reality was only yellow sand that
whirled hotly and drifted in the first breath of the coming night....

The towering figure above them stood rigid. Garry had found a sharp
edge of rock, and sawed frantically upon it to cut the soft gold of
the cords at his wrists. The one above them paid no heed; his eyes
were held in horror of this silent death that swept across the world.

The hand that Garry extended was steady and cautious; his arm crept
about the body of white and gold to draw the amazed and wondering girl
silently into the open cave.

"Follow!" he ordered, and dashed headlong down the darkened way where
an automatic was waiting for his eager fingers.

The pack was there, and he tore at it with frenzied hands to grip at
the pistol within. And there was also an open chest whose contents
glittered in the green light, and whose weight was not too great for
him to carry....

He had both chest and gun when he returned. The stumbling falls in his
mad rush had not served to allay the hurts of his tortured body, nor
still his raging fury. He called to Luhra as he ran--and realized that
Luhra was gone. The chest fell forgotten at his feet as he rushed out;
he shouted her name and cursed himself for leaving her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Had the fascination of the outer world drawn her back? Had she trusted
too greatly in the power of his Tao to shield her from harm? Connell
could not know. He knew only that he saw her struggling in the grip of
the long arms where the black one held her on an outthrust rock.

They were a hundred feet away, yet the black face beneath its pointed
skull showed plainly its bestial fury as Garry sprang forward. With
one motion the tall figure dashed the girl to the stone at his feet
and raised his spear. He paused to laugh harshly at the man who rushed
toward him--who could never reach him to stop the fatal thrust.

A threat, it might have been, to hold the attacker off, or a murderous
intent to end now and forever this one captive's life: Garry did not
wait to learn. And the hundred-foot distance that meant a hundred feet
of safety to the savage was spanned by a stream of lead from a gun
whose stabbing flashes cracked sharply upon the still air. The ringing
clatter of a spear that fell among granite stones came thinly to Garry
as he saw the black form of Horab, king of another day, spin dizzily
from the rock on which he stood.

He had hit him--wounded him at least--and the firing of that wild
fusillade might have emptied the magazine! Gary waited for nothing
more, but gathered the limp body of the girl within his outstretched
arms and carried her stumblingly across the welter of rocks on the
boulder-strewn slope. Nor did he stop until he had gained the safety
of open ground beyond the marks of the great slide.

       *       *       *       *       *

The earth was shivering and weaving as he laid her down; a rock
crashed sharply in the distance. Garry turned to retrace his steps and
leap wildly from rock to rock toward the mouth of the cave in a
granite cliff. And the metal chest was in his arms when he returned
where Luhra waited.

The ground was alive with sickening motion, he was nauseated with
earthquake sickness, but he gave thought only to his gun and the one
cartridge that he found in the chamber. He steadied his arm upon a
rock to take aim at a figure on a distant slope.

Horab had climbed back upon the rock. A lean figure and black, he was
sharply outlined in the last rays of the setting sun; the target was
clear beyond the pistol's sights. But the fingers of the grim-faced
man refused to tighten upon the trigger.

Savage and cruel--a relic of a bygone age! He stood there, ludicrous
and unreal in his stark black nakedness, his frayed robes of crimson
whipping to tatters in the breeze. Yet he had forgotten his
wounds--Horab was standing upright--and Garry's hand that held the
pistol fell loosely at his side. The hate melted from his heart as he
watched where Horab drew himself painfully erect.

A barbarous figure was Horab, and evil beyond redemption, yet there
were not lacking the attributes of a king in the grotesque form whose
head was still held high. The sun made flashing brilliance of the
jewels on that distorted head, while he stared with hopeless, savage
eyes across the changed world where he could have no part. His _Tao_
had failed him; his enemy had struck him down; and now--

The rock that had been a rest for Garry's arm was swaying, and to his
ears came a rumble and groan. Sentinel Mountain, that had watched the
ages pass, that had seen the oceans truly change to sand, protested
again at this disturbance of its own long sleep.

Garry heard the coming of the masses from above; the crashing din was
deadening to his ears. They were safe--and his eyes were upon a savage
figure, black and tall, that stared and stared, silently, across a sea
of yellow sand. He watched it, clear-cut, motionless--until it
vanished beneath the roaring flood of rocks.

       *       *       *       *       *

And close in his arms there pressed the soft body of a trembling girl
who touched his face and whispered: "Your _Tao_, my brave one, is
strong. Hold me closely that he may count me as your friend."

His own whispered words, though differing somewhat, were a fervent
echo of hers. He saw the rocky masses piled high where the mouth of a
cave had been; and "Thank God!" Garry Connell said, "we got out of
there in time!"

The casket of jewels lay neglected among the rocks: to-morrow would be
time enough to salvage the wealth for which he had risked his life. He
swept the girl into his arms, and the sun's last rays made golden
splendor of his burden as he carried her across the broken stones.

His ranch showed far below him when he stopped, but the green of date
palms had vanished under the last great sweep of rocks. Some few that
remained made dark splotches among the shadows that were engulfing the
world.

What did it matter? Miramar--"Beautiful Sea!" He laughed grimly at
thought of how that sea had served him, but his eyes were tender in
his tanned and blood-stained face.

Miramar could be restored. And it would be less lonely now....


ROBOT CHEMIST

A robot chemist with an electric eye, radio brain and magnet hands
functioned without human supervision in an improvised laboratory
recently before members of the New York Electrical Society.

The automatic chemist performed several experiments. Its work was
explained by William C. MacTavish, professor of chemistry at New York
University, and was part of a program in which cold light was
reproduced, a sample weighing a millionth of a gram analyzed, a
photo-electric cell used to control analysis and new scientific
apparatus demonstrated.

In his talk on "The Magic of Modern Chemistry," Professor MacTavish
demonstrated the separation of para-hydrogen and ortho-hydrogen. In
the micro-analysis of a millionth of a gram, Professor MacTavish
exhibited in the micro-projector a ball of gold weighing one
thousandth of a milligram (one twenty-eight millionth of an ounce),
having a value of less than one ten-thousandth of a cent.

The robot chemist was the joint creation of Dr. H. M. Partridge and
Professor Ralph H. Muller of the department of chemistry at New York
University. In explaining what the automatic chemist can do, Professor
MacTavish said:

"The ability of the automatic chemist to control chemical operations
is due to its sensitivity to slight variations in color and light
intensity. Its working parts are very simple. They consist of a
standard light source, in this case an electric light, a
photo-electric cell which detects differences in the amount of light
impinging on it, a radio tube which amplifies the signal received from
the photo-electric cell and which operates the relays controlling the
automatic valves.

"Between the electric light and the photo-electric cell is placed a
glass vessel holding an alkali that is to be neutralized. Above is a
tube from which an acid passes, drop by drop, through an automatic
valve, into the alkali. A small amount of chemical indicator added to
the alkali maintains a red color in it until it is neutralized. When a
sufficient amount of the acid has dropped into the alkali, the red
color disappears, indicating complete neutralization.

"When the solution is colored red, an insufficient amount of lights
gets through to the photo-electric cell. As the red color gradually
diminishes, the amount of light passing through increases, and when
the solution is entirely clear the light reaches a critical value
which causes the photo-electric cell to pass a signal to the radio
tube. This tube operates the relay which closes a valve and shuts off
the supply of acid.

"Using a device of this sort to perform such operations around a
laboratory will save a great deal of a chemist's time. Its electric
eye is about 165 times as sensitive to differences in color as any
human eye."




Beyond the Vanishing Point

A COMPLETE NOVELETTE

_By Ray Cummings_

CHAPTER I

_The Fragment of Quartz_

[Sidenote: The tale of a golden atom--an astounding adventure in
size.]

[Illustration: The fly landed with a thud on the center table.]


It was shortly after noon of December 31, 1960, when the series of
weird and startling events began which took me into the tiny world of
an atom of gold, beyond the vanishing point, beyond the range of even
the highest-powered electric-microscope. My name is George Randolph. I
was, that momentous afternoon, assistant chemist for the Ajax
International Dye Company, with main offices in New York City.

It was twelve-twenty when the local exchange call-sorter announced
Alan's connection from Quebec.

"You, George? Look here, we've got to have you up here at once.
Chateau Frontenac, Quebec. Will you come?"

I could see his face imaged in the little mirror on my desk; the
anxiety, tenseness in his voice, was duplicated in his expression.

"Well--" I began.

"You must, George. Babs and I need you. See here--"

He tried at first to make it sound like an invitation for a New Year's
Eve holiday. But I knew it was not that. Alan and Barbara Kent were my
best friends. They were twins, eighteen years old. I felt that Alan
would always be my best friend; but for Babs my hopes, longings, went
far deeper, though as yet I had never brought myself to the point of
telling her so.

"I'd like to come, Alan. But--"

"You must! George, I can't tell you over the public air. It's--I've
seen _him_! He's diabolical! I know it now!"

_Him!_ It could only mean, of all the world, one person!

"He's here!" he went on. "Near here. We've seen him to-day! I didn't
want to tell you, but that's why we came. It seemed a long chance, but
it's he, I'm positive!"

I was staring at the image of Alan's eyes; it seemed that there was
horror in them. And in his voice. "God, George, it's weird! Weird, I
tell you. His looks--he--oh I can't tell you now! Only, come!"

