outside.

His wife sat at the table, staring at nothing in the room.

The farmer walked across the barnyard, listening to the sound of the
chickens and the sound of the breeze going through the corn. Near the
barn, he sat upon an old tree stump and filled his pipe with tobacco. He
lit the pipe, cupping his hands, and sat there, smoking, the smoke
spiraling up into the bright warm air.

He took his pipe from his teeth and looked at it. "Pipe of peace," he
said, laughing inside himself.

The breeze was soft and the sun warm on his back. He sat there, smoking,
feeling the quiet of the morning, the peace of the great sky above.

He had no time to stand or to take his pipe from his mouth, when the two
men crossed the yard and lifted him up by the arms. He dropped the pipe,
while he was dragged past the house, to the road beyond. He had no time
to yell or scream, before his hat was swept from his head, the overalls
and the blue shirt stripped from his body.

He had not even thought about what it was that had happened, before he
was thrust inside a white truck, with strong steel sides and with
grilled windows like those of a cell.

He was just sitting there, in the truck, without his clothes, speeding
away with August Brown and Clyde Briggs and Alfred Swanson.

       *       *       *       *       *

Outside, the sun was warm upon the earth. Chickens clucked in their
pens, while birds fluttered about the top of the barn. A pig squealed.
The corn rustled. And beside the farmhouse, on the ground, lay a pipe,
its tobacco spilled, the last of its smoke swirling out of its bowl into
the air, disappearing.

The woman sat in the kitchen of the farmhouse and turned her head when
the door opened. She widened her eyes and caught at her throat with her
hand.

The sun through the doorway shone down on metallic hands and a metallic
face, gleaming on the surface which the straw hat and the overalls and
the blue shirt didn't hide. The door snapped shut, and there was a sound
of heavy metal footsteps against the kitchen floor.

The woman pressed against her chair. "Who are you?" she screamed.

"Henry," said the mechanical thing.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_ May
    1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
