Brenn shoved the paper to one side. The script was somewhat different
from that of Vogar.

_The Vogarian inspection and guard system is no more than an expected
precaution against sabotage. The Vogarians must be regarded as
potential friends who now treat us with suspicion and arrogance only
because they do not yet realize the sincerity of our desire to help
them to any extent short of surrender--_

Kane looked up from the uncompleted, surprisingly humble, edict and
Brenn asked:

"Your commander, sir--he is now pleased with our actions?"

"Not exactly. He will disintegrate a town seven days from sunrise this
morning if all the fuel isn't produced by then."

"_Seven_--only _seven_ days?" There was startled disbelief on Brenn's
face. "But how can he expect us to produce so much fuel in so short a
time?"

"I don't know. I'm sorry--it's something I would have argued against
if I hadn't had too much sense to try."

"Seven days--" Brenn said again. "We can only pray that God will let
it be time enough."

       *       *       *       *       *

Kane walked on to the plant. The hilltop where he had met the girl was
deserted and he felt a vague disappointment.

The plant was hot without the air-conditioner, especially in the
vicinity of the electronic roasters. The girls looked flushed and
uncomfortable, but for the redhead who still wore her scanty sunsuit.
The armed Vogarians looked incongruously out of place among the girls
and were sweating profusely. Kane made a mental note to have them
ordered into tropical uniforms.

He found Dalon prowling like a wolf among his guards.

"It's inconceivable that these women could ever be a menace," Dalon
said, "but I'm taking no chances."

He saw Graver, the cruiser's Chief Technician; a thin, dry man who
seemed to be as emotionless as the machines and electronic circuits
that were his life.

"They're doing everything with astonishing competence," Graver said.
"My technicians are watching like hawks, though."

Larue was not in his office. His secretary, a brown-eyed woman of
strikingly intelligent appearance, said, "I'm sorry, sir--Dr. Larue
had to go back to town for a few minutes. May I give him your
message?"

"No, thanks," he said. "Father Brenn is probably performing that
unpleasant chore right now."

       *       *       *       *       *

Since Dalon and Graver seemed to have the situation at the plant well
in hand, Kane decided to make a tour of the outer provinces where the
ores were being mined. An efficient plant would be worthless if it did
not receive sufficient ore.

He spent four days on the inspection tour; much longer than he had
expected to be gone but made necessary by the fact that the small
Elusium mines were widely scattered in rugged, roadless areas and he
had to walk most of the distance. The single helicopter on Sanctuary
was being used to fly the ore out but it was operating on a schedule
that caused him to miss it each time.

Each mine was being worked by full day-and-night crews; in fact, by
more men than necessary. The reason for that, and for the way the men
silently withheld their hostility, was made apparent in a bit of
conversation between two miners that he overheard one day:

_"... So why all of us here when not this many are needed?"_

_"They say Father Brenn wanted to get all the men out of town, away
from the cruiser, so there would be no trouble--and you know there
would have been if we had stayed. He wants to get the cruiser on its
way back to Vogar, they say, so we can get busy producing weapons to
fight the Occupation force...."_

He returned on the fifth evening of the allotted seven days and
stopped by Brenn's cottage before going on to the ship. The old man
was working in his garden, his trembling hands trying to tie up a
red-flowered vine.

Kane tied it for him and he said, "Thank you, sir. Did you find the
mining to be as I had said?"

"I found more than that. You know, don't you, that Y'Nor will return
with the Occupation force a hundred days after leaving here?"

"Yes--I know that that is his intention."

"I understand that you're going to try to build weapons while he's
gone. Don't, if you think anything of your people, let them do it.
Nothing you could build in a hundred days would last a minute against
a cruiser's disintegrators."

"I know," Brenn said. "We are supposed to choose between bloody,
hopeless resistance and eternal slavery, aren't we? But why should
either fate befall a peaceful race?"

Kane asked the logical question: "Why shouldn't it?"

"The laws of God have always been laws of justice and mercy. Not even
the Vogarian State can change them."

He thought of the way the State had changed the Lost Islands in one
bloody, violent afternoon. Brenn, watching his face, said:

"You are skeptical and bitter, my son--but you will learn that a
harmless old man can speak with wisdom."

"No," he said. "There is neither justice nor mercy in the universe. I
know from experience. A man can only choose between the lesser of two
evils--and almost anything is less evil than Y'Nor when he's mad."

       *       *       *       *       *

He went to the plant the next morning. Inside, wherever he looked, he
saw girls in shorts and halters. The place seemed to be alive with
partially clad women. He went to the nearest bulletin board and read
Brenn's edict of four days before:

_Since the excessively warm temperature of the plant causes much
discomfort and thereby impairs the efficiency of all workers, and
since maximum efficiency will be required to produce the fuel in the
extremely short time permitted us, it is suggested that the cool
sunsuits of the Beachville girls become the standard work uniform
until further notice. These may be obtained for the asking in
Department 5-A._

The next day's edict read:

_Some have hesitated to follow yesterday's edict through a sense of
modesty. This is most commendable. However, the situation is very
critical, our lives depend upon the highest degree of efficiency we
can attain, and a hot, miserable worker is not efficient. Your bodies
are God's handwork--do not be ashamed of them._

The edict for the next day read simply, warningly:

_THOU SHALT NOT COMMIT ADULTERY._

       *       *       *       *       *

The Vogarian guards and inspectors, now in tropical uniforms, still
looked out of place with their holstered weapons but their former
cold arrogance was gone and the attitude of the girls had changed from
polite reserve to laughing, chattering friendliness.

He found Dalon in a far corner; cornered, literally, by the red-haired
