
"The confusion comes from your not allowing me to tell it as I wished.
There is a gap between Lenster and Hillerman; one which--with your
permission--I will fill."

"Talk, man! Talk!"

"You have all heard of Formula 652, known also as the Wyckoff Chemical
Transformation Process."

There were expressions of both understanding and bewilderment. Noting
these, Pardeau said, "For those of you who haven't made a point of
looking into the thing, I'll explain. Wyckoff, in case you don't recall,
was a chemical engineer of more than average ability who stumbled onto
this formula before he died, most regretfully, four years ago, in 1984."

Leiderman continued to scowl. "We all know each other, Pardeau. Call a
spade a spade. Wyckoff was a reactionary scoundrel whom you did away
with for reasons of security."

"Precisely," Pardeau said. "In its essence, the formula is a process for
taking over a man's brain--his body--his personality."

"You mean--"

Pardeau refused to be interrupted. "We were of the opinion that Wyckoff,
though he and Lenster were great friends, was not able to impart his
knowledge to the latter. We took him into custody shortly after he
perfected the formula and were fortunate in persuading him to give it to
us."

"But he gave it to Lenster also?"

"We were certain, at the time of his death, that he had not been able to
do that--we are still certain."

Keeley, with a gesture, requested the floor. "I wonder if you could go
into a little more detail concerning the formula--for those of us who--"

"Of course," Pardeau said. "The formula is a combination of six
chemicals and the process of transformation is relatively simple, yet
highly dangerous to both subjects involved. It means sure death for the
proposed host, and if not delicately handled will also result in death
for the usurper. The transformation requires three hours to perform.
Once completed successfully, the usurper can never return to his own
body. It must be destroyed. Also, the mentality of the host vanishes
after it is pushed from its original brain tissue through the influence
of the formula."

"Then if Wyckoff didn't give the formula to Lenster, it was stolen from
our vaults--or wherever it was kept?"

"Exactly. Certain investigations I have made prove beyond doubt that
Lenster got to my Deputy, Hillerman. I never considered Hillerman very
bright, but I thought him to be honest and loyal. But beyond all doubt,
with his aid, Lenster stole the formula--possibly got it verbally--and
used it to take Hillerman's body from him." Pardeau smiled grimly.
"Therefore, gentlemen, we have a traitor in a high place. My Deputy of
Vital Intelligence."

       *       *       *       *       *

Pardeau sat silent now, seeming to enjoy the fear he had engendered in
his colleagues--sat silent until Leiderman said, "You've arrested him of
course."

"No. I have not."

"Then get at it, man--get at it."

"I have no intention of arresting Hillerman."

Leiderman's eyes widened as did those of the rest of the company. But
Blanchard, even under the impact of such a bombshell had the presence of
