As they were pulled swiftly downward into the tunnel by the tentacles
that grasped them an involuntary cry of horror came from Randall and
Lanier alike. They twisted frantically in the cold grip that held
them, but found it of the quality of steel. And as Randall twisted in
it to strike frantically down through the darkness at whatever thing
of horror held them, his clenched fist met but the cold smooth skin
of some big, soft-bodied creature!

Down--down--remorselessly they were being drawn farther into the black
depths of the tunnel by the great thing crawling down below them.
Again and again the two twisted and struck, but could not shake its
hold. In sheer exhaustion they ceased to struggle, dragged helplessly
farther down.

Was it minutes or hours, Randall wondered afterward, of that horrible
progress downward, that passed before they glimpsed light beneath? A
feeble glow, hardly discernible, it was, and as they went lower still
he saw that it was caused by the tunnel passing through a strata of
radio-active rock that gave off the faint light. In that light they
glimpsed for the first time the horror dragging them downward.

It was a huge worm creature! A thing like a giant angleworm, three
feet or more in thickness and thrice that in length, its great body
soft and cold and worm-like. From the end nearest them projected two
long tentacles with which it had gripped the two men and was dragging
them down the tunnel after it! Randall glimpsed a mouth-aperture in
the tentacled end of the worm body also, and two scarlike marks above
it, placed like eyes, although eyes the monstrous thing had not.

       *       *       *       *       *

But a moment they glimpsed it and then were in darkness again as the
tunnel passed through the radio-active strata and lower. The horror of
that moment's glimpse, though, made them strike out in blind
repulsion, but relentlessly the creature dragged them after it.

"God!" It was Lanier's panting cry as they were dragged on. "This worm
monster--we're hundreds of feet below the surface!"

Randall sought to reply, but his voice choked. The air about them was
close and damp, with an overpowering earthy smell. He felt
consciousness leaving him.

A gleam of soft light--they were passing more radio-active patches. He
felt the wild convulsive struggles of Lanier against the thing; and
then suddenly the tunnel ended, debouched into a far-stretching,
low-ceilinged cavity. It was feebly illuminated by radio-active
patches here and there in walls and ceiling, and as the monster that
held them halted on entering the cavity, Randall and Lanier lay in its
grip and stared across the weird place with intensified horror.

For it was swarming with countless worm monsters! All were like the
one who held them, thick long worm bodies with projecting tentacles
and with black eyeless faces. They were crawling to and fro in this
cavern far beneath the surface, swarming in hordes around and over
each other, pouring in and out of the awful place from countless
tunnels that led upward and downward from it!

       *       *       *       *       *

A world of worm monsters, beneath the surface of the Martian jungles!
As Randall stared across that swarming, dim-lit cave of horror,
physically sick at sight of it, he remembered the countless tunnel
openings they had glimpsed in their flight through the jungle, and
remembered the remark of the Martian who had first guided them across
the city, that in the jungles were living things, of a sort. These
were the things, worm monsters whose unthinkable networks of tunnels
and burrows formed beneath the surface a veritable worm world!

"Randall!" It was Lanier's thick exclamation. "Randall--those
scar-marks on their--faces--you see--?"

"See?"

"Those marks! These creatures had eyes once but must have been forced
down here by the Martians. These may once have been--ages ago--human!"

At that thought Randall felt horror overcoming his senses. He was
aware that the great worm monster holding them was dragging them
forward through the cavern, that others of the swarms there were
crowding around them, feeling them blindly with their tentacles,
helping to drag them forward.

Half-carried and half-dragged they went, scores of tentacles now
holding them, great worm shapes crawling forward on all sides of them
and accompanying them along the cavern's length. He glimpsed worm
monsters here and there emerging from the upward tunnels with masses
of strange plant stuff in their grasp that others blindly devoured.
His senses reeled from the suffocating air, the great cavity being but
a half-score feet in height, burrowed from the damp earth by these
numberless things.

       *       *       *       *       *

The faint, strange light of the radio-active patches showed him that
they were approaching the cavern's end. Tunnels opened from its end as
from all its walls and floor, and into one Randall was dragged by the
creatures, one before and one behind, grasping him, and Lanier being
brought behind him in the same way. In the close tunnel the heavy air
was deadly, and he was but partly conscious when again, after moments
of crawling along it, he felt himself dragged out into another cavern.

This earth-walled cavity, though, seemed to extend farther than the
first, though of the same height as the first and with a few
radio-active illuminating patches. In it seethed and swarmed literally
hundreds on hundreds of the worm monsters, a sea of great crawling
bodies. Randall and Lanier saw that they were being carried and
dragged now toward the farther end of this larger cavity.

As they approached it, pushing through the swarming creatures who felt
them with inquisitive tentacles as their captors took them forward,
the two men saw that a great shape was looming up in the faint light
at the cave's far end. In moments they were close enough to discern
its nature, and a horror and awe filled them at sight of it more
intense than they had yet felt.

For the looming shape was a huge earthen image or statue of a worm! It
was shaped with a childish crudeness from the solid earth, a giant
earthen worm shape whose body looped across the cave's end, and whose
tentacled head or front end was reared upward to the cavity's roof.
Before this awful earthen shape was a section of the cave's floor
higher than the rest, and on it a great crudely shaped rectangular
earthen block.

"Lanier--that shape!" whispered Randall in his horror. "That earthen
image, made by these creatures--it's the worm god they've made for
themselves!"

"A worm god!" Lanier repeated, staring toward it as they were dragged
nearer. "Then that block...."

"Its altar!" Randall exclaimed. "These things have some dim spark of
intelligence or memory! They're brought us here to--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Before he could finish, the clutching tentacles of the worm monsters
about them had dragged them up onto the raised floor beside the block,
beneath the looming earthen worm shape. There they glimpsed for the
first time in the faint light another who stood there held tightly by
the tentacles of two worm monsters. It was a Martian!

The big crocodilian shape was apparently a prisoner like themselves,
captured and brought down from above. His reptilian eyes surveyed
Lanier and Randall quickly as they were dragged up and held beside
him, but he took no other interest. To the two men, at the moment, it
seemed that his great crocodilian shape was human, almost, so much
more man-like was it than the grotesque worm monsters before them.

With a half-dozen of the creatures holding the two men and the Martian
tightly, another great worm monster crawled to the edge of the raised
earth floor in front of the giant worm god's image, and then reared up
the first third of his thick body into the air. By then the great,
faint-lit cavity stretching before them was filled with countless
numbers of the monsters, pouring into it from all the tunnels that
opened into it from above and below, packing it thick with their
grotesque bodies as far as the eye could reach in the dim light.

They were seething and crawling in that great mass; but as the worm
monster on the elevation upreared, all in the cavity seemed suddenly
to quiet. Then the upreared eyeless thing began to move his long
tentacles. Very slowly at first he waved them back and forth, and
slowly the masses of monsters in the cavity, all turned by some sense
toward him, did likewise, the cavity becoming a forest of upraised
tentacles waving rhythmically back and forth in unison with those of
the leader.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back and forth--back and forth--Randall felt caught in some torturing
nightmare as he watched the countless tentacle-feelers waving thus
from one side to the other. It was a ceremony, he knew--some strange
rite springing perhaps from dim memory alone, that these worm monsters
carried out thus before the looming shape of their worm god. Only the
six that held the three captives never relaxed their grip.

Still on and on went the strange and senseless rite. By then the
close, damp air of that cavity far beneath Mars' surface was sinking
Randall and Lanier deeper into a half-consciousness. The Martian
beside them never moved or spoke. The upstretched tentacles of the
leader and of the great worm horde before him never ceased swaying
rhythmically from side to side.

Randall, half-hypnotized by those swaying tentacles and but
semi-conscious by then, could only estimate afterward how long that
grotesque rite went on. Hours it must have endured, he knew, hours in
which each opening of his eyes revealed only the dimly-illuminated
cavern, the worm monsters that filled it, the forest of tentacles
waving in unison. It was only toward the end of those hours that he
noticed vaguely that the tentacles were waving faster and faster.

And as the tentacles of leader and worm horde waved alike ever more
swiftly an atmosphere of growing excitement and expectation seemed to
hold the horde. At last the upstretched feelers were whipping back and
forth almost too swiftly for the eye to follow. Then abruptly the worm
leader ceased the motion himself, and while the horde before him
continued it, turned and crawled to the three captives.

       *       *       *       *       *

In an instant, as though in answer to a second command, the two worm
monsters who held the Martian dragged him forward toward the great
earthen block before the worm god's image. Two others of the creatures
came from the side, and the four swiftly stretched the Martian flat on
the block's top, each of the four grasping with their tentacles one of
his four taloned limbs. They seemed to hesitate then, the worm leader
beside them, the tentacles of the horde waving swiftly still.

Abruptly the tentacles of the leader flashed up as though in a signal.
There was a dull ripping sound, and in that moment Randall and Lanier
saw the Martian on the block torn literally limb from limb by the four
great worm monsters who had held his four limbs!

The tentacles of the horde waved suddenly with increased, excited
swiftness at that. Randall shrank in horror.

"They've brought us here for that!" he cried. "To sacrifice us on that
altar that way to their worm god!"

But Lanier too had cried out, appalled, as he saw that awful
sacrifice, and both strained madly against the grip of the worm
creatures. Their struggles were in vain, and then in answer to another
unspoken command the two monsters that held Randall were dragging him
also to the earthen altar!

He felt himself gripped by the four great creatures around the block,
felt as he struggled with his last strength that he was being
stretched out on the block, each of the four at one of its corners
grasping one of his limbs. He heard Lanier's mad cries as though from
a great distance, glimpsed as he was held thus on his back the great
shape of the earthen worm god reared over him, and then glimpsed the
leader of the monsters rearing beside him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dull sound of the swift-waving tentacles of the horde came to him,
there was a tense moment of agony of waiting, and then the tentacles
of the leader flashed up in the signal!

But at the same moment Randall felt his limbs released by the four
monsters that had held them! There seemed sudden wild confusion in the
great cave. The strange rite broke off; the horde of worm monsters
crawled frantically this way and that in it. Randall slipped off the
block; staggered to his feet.

The worm monsters in the cave were swarming toward the downward tunnel
openings! The two captives forgotten, the creatures were pouring in
crawling, fighting swarms toward those openings. And then, as Randall
and Lanier stared stupefied, there came a red flash from one of the
upward tunnels and a brilliant crimson ray stabbed down and mowed a
path of annihilation in the cave's earthen side!

The two heard great thumping sounds from above, saw the tunnels
leading from above becoming suddenly many times greater in size as red
rays flashed down along them to gouge the tunnel's walls. Then down
from those enlarged tunnels there were bursting long shining shapes,
great centipede-machines crawling down the tunnels which their rays
made larger before them! And as the centipede-machines burst down into
the cavern their crimson rays stabbed right and left to cut paths of
annihilation among the worms.

"The Martians!" Lanier cried. "They didn't find us above--they knew we
must have been taken by these things--and they've come down after us!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Back, Lanier!" Randall shouted. "Quick, before they see us, behind
this--"

As he spoke he was jerking Lanier with him behind the looming earthen
statue of the great worm god. Crouched there between the statue and
the cave's wall they were hidden precariously from the view of those
in the cavern. And now that cavern had become a scene of horror
unthinkable as the centipede-machines pouring down into it blasted the
frantically crawling worm monsters with their rays.

The worm monsters attempted no resistance, but sought only to escape
into their downward tunnels, and in moments those not caught by the
rays had vanished in the openings. But the centipede-machines, after
racing swiftly around the cavity, were following them, were going down
into those downward tunnels also, their rays blasting down ahead of
each to make the tunnel large enough for them to follow.

In a moment all but one had vanished down into the openings, the
remaining one having its front or head jammed in one of the openings
from the failure of its operator to blast a large enough opening
before him. As Lanier and Randall watched tensely they saw the
machine's control room door open and a Martian descend. He inspected
the tunnel opening in which his vehicle was jammed, then with a hand
ray-tube began to disintegrate the earth around that opening to free
his machine.

Randall clutched his companion's arm. "That machine!" he whispered.
"If we could capture it, it would give us a chance to get back to the
city--to Milton and the matter-transmitter!"

Lanier started, then nodded swiftly. "We'll chance it," he whispered.
"For our twenty-four hours here must be almost up."

       *       *       *       *       *

They hesitated a moment, then crept forward from behind the great
earthen statue. The Martian had his back to them, his attention on the
freeing of his mechanism. Across the dim-lit cavern they crept softly,
and were within a dozen feet of the Martian when some sound made him
wheel quickly to confront them with the deadly tube. But even as he
whirled the two had leaped.

The force of their leap sent them flying through that dozen feet of
space to strike the Martian at the moment his tube levelled. One
hissing call he uttered as they struck him, and then with all his
strength Lanier had grasped the crocodilian body and bent it backward.
Something in it snapped, and the Martian collapsed limply. The two
looked wildly around.

Nothing showed that the Martian's call had been heard, and after a
moment's glance that showed the head of the centipede machine already
freed, they were clambering up into its control room, closing the
door. Randall seized the knob with which he had seen the machines
operated. As he pulled it toward him the machine moved across the
tunnel opening and raced smoothly over the cavern's floor. As he
turned the knob the machine turned swiftly in the same direction.

He headed the long mechanism toward one of the upward-curving tunnels
which the Martians had blasted larger in descending. They were almost
to it when there flashed up into the cavity from one of the downward
tunnel openings a centipede-machine, and then another, and another.
The Martians in their transparent-windowed control rooms took in at a
glance the dead crocodilian on the floor, and then the three great
machines were darting toward that of Randall and Lanier.

"The Martian we killed!" Randall cried. "They heard his call and are
coming after us!"

"Turn to the wall!" Lanier shouted to him. "I have the rays--"

       *       *       *       *       *

At that moment there was a clicking beside Randall and he glimpsed
Lanier pulling forth two small grips he had found, then saw that two
crimson rays were stabbing from tubes in their machine's front toward
the others even as their own rays darted back. The beams that had been
loosed toward them grazed past them as Randall whirled their machine
to the wall, and he saw one of the three attacking mechanisms vanish
as Lanier's beams struck it.

Around--back--with instinctive, lightninglike motions he whirled their
centipede-machine in the great dim-lit cave as the two remaining ones
leapt again to the attack. Their rays shot right and left to catch the
two men's vehicle in a trap of death, and as Randall swung their own
mechanism straight ahead he glimpsed at the cavern's far end the great
earthen worm god still upreared.

On either side of them the red beams burned as they leapt forward, but
as though running a gauntlet of death Randall kept the machine racing
forward in the succeeding second until the two others loomed on either
side of it. Then Lanier's beams were driving in turn to right and left
of them and the two vanished as though by magic as they were struck.

"Up to the surface!" Lanier cried, his eyes on the glowing dial of his
wrist-watch. "We've been held hours here--we've but a half-hour or
