believed that while the situation described by the spokesman would be
true today, it should not take many years to train the populations of
Earth to run their affairs quite as efficiently as the Machine had
done, and without loss of personal and political liberties.

At any rate, the Mars Convicts and their descendants did not intend
to give up the independence they had acquired. On the other hand, they
had two vital reasons for wanting to come to an agreement with Earth.
One was that they might waste centuries in attempting to accomplish by
themselves what they could now do immediately if Earth's vast
resources were made available to them. And the other, of course, was
the obvious fact that Earth would not remain indefinitely without a
stardrive of its own. If an unfriendly government was in control when
it obtained one, the Mars Convicts would be forced either to abandon
their newly settled planets and retreat farther into the galaxy or
submit to Earth's superior strength.

Meanwhile, however, they had developed the principles of Oneness.
Oneness was in essence a philosophy, but it had many practical
applications; and it was in such practical applications that he,
Rainbolt, was a trained specialist. He had, therefore, been dispatched
to Earth to introduce the principles, which would in time bring about
the orderly disintegration of the system of the Machine, to be
followed by the establishment of an Earth government with which the
Mars Convicts could deal without detriment to themselves.

Menesee had listened with a sense of growing angry incredulity. The
fellow couldn't be as much of a fool as he seemed! Therefore, he had
devised this hoax after he realised he would be captured, to cover up
his real purpose which could only be that of a spy. Menesee saw that
Administrator Bradshaw was saying something in a low voice to the
spokesman, his face stony. Dorn glanced over at him, then looked back
at the prisoner and said impassively, "So the goal of your missionary
work here is the disintegration of the Machine?"

Rainbolt nodded, with an air almost of eagerness. "Yes, sir, it is!
And if I will now be permitted to--"

"I am afraid you will be permitted to do nothing," Spokesman Dorn said
dryly, "except, of course, to answer the number of questions we intend
to ask you."

Rainbolt checked himself, looking startled. The spokesman's hand had
moved very slightly on the desk before him and Rainbolt had just had
his first experience with direct nerve stimulation. He stood kneading
his right hand with his left, staring up at the spokesman, mouth half
open.

Menesee smiled in grim amusement. It would have been a low-level
pulse, of course; but even a low-level pulse, arriving unexpectedly,
was a very unpleasant surprise. He had foreseen the spokesman's
action, had, in fact, felt a sympathetic imaginary twinge in his own
right hand as the pulse reached the prisoner.

Rainbolt swallowed, said in a changed voice, "Sir, we heard from the
two captured men that the Machine has retained its practice of torture
during interrogations. It isn't necessary to convince me that you are
serious about this. Do the questions you referred to have to do with
the stardrive?"

The spokesman nodded. "Of course."

Rainbolt said stubbornly, "Then, sir, it can do you no good at all to
torture me. I simply don't have such information. We do plan to make
the stardrive freely available to Earth. But not while Earth is ruled
by the organization of the Machine."

This time, Menesee did not observe the motion of the spokesman's hand.
Instead he saw Rainbolt jerk violently to the right. At the same
moment, a blast of intense, fiery, almost unbearable pain shot up his
own arm. As he grasped his arm, sweat spurting out on his face, he
heard screams from the box on his left and realized it was Director
Cornelius who screamed.

There were answering screams from around the hall.

[Illustration]

Then the pain suddenly subsided.

       *       *       *       *       *

Menesee started about, breathing raggedly. The pain-reaction had been
severe enough to affect his vision; the great hall looked momentarily
darker than it should have been. And although the actual pain had
ended, the muscles of his arm and shoulder were still trying to cramp
into knots.

There was no more screaming. From the right came Director Ojeda's
gasping voice. "What happened? Did something go wrong with the
stimulating devices? We might all have been killed--!"

Menesee didn't reply. Wherever he looked, he saw faces whitened with
shock. Apparently everyone in the Tribunal Hall, from the
administrator and Spokesman Dorn on down to the directors' attendants
and the two guards flanking the prisoner's area, had felt the same
thing. Here and there, men who had collapsed were struggling awkwardly
back to their feet. He heard a hoarse whisper behind him. "Sir,
Director Cornelius appears to have fainted!"

Menesee glanced around, saw Cornelius' attendant behind the box, then
Cornelius himself, slumped forward, face down and motionless,
sprawling half across his table. "Let him lie there and keep quiet,
fool!" Menesee ordered the man sharply. He returned his attention to
the center of the hall as Spokesman Dorn announced in a voice which
held more of an edge than was normal but had lost none of its strength
and steadiness, "Before any moves are suggested, I shall tell you what
has been done.

"The Tribunal Hall has been sealed and further events in it will be
monitored from without. No one will be able to leave until the matter
with which we are now concerned here has been settled to the
satisfaction of the Machine.

"Next, any of you who believe that an instrument failure was involved
in the experience we shared can disabuse themselves. The same effect
was reported immediately from two other auditoriums on the Great
Circuit, and it is quite possible that it was repeated in all of
