dead, and I'll be surprised."

"It was close enough, this time," The Barbarian growled. He jerked his
head toward Geoffrey. "That young buck over there knows how to handle
his enemies. Once he learns what to do about his friends, I may have to
retire."

Myka arched her burning eyebrows. "Oh? What's the story behind that, I'd
like to know."

"We can always talk," Geoffrey said a little edgily. "But we can't
always find an empty tankette."

"Quite right, lad," The Barbarian said. "I saw some vehicles parked over
that way."

"Those belong to the nobles. There ought to be some captured ones of
yours somewhere around here."

"With plenty of guards on them. No, thanks."

"That didn't trouble you earlier."

"Myka, as you may have noticed, is more than a tank. This time the prize
isn't worth it. I'd rather just slip over to where I can get
transportation for the choosing."

"Not with my help."

The Barbarian looked at him and grunted. He seemed oddly disappointed.
"I would have bet the other way," he muttered. Then the shaggy head
rose, and he circled Myka's waist with one arm. "All right, I'll do it
without your help."

"Is Myka trained to drive a tankette and fight at the same time?"

"No."

"Then you'd better do it my way. You'd make a poor showing, kicking
drive levers with a broken leg." Geoffrey nodded toward The Barbarian's
right shin. "It's been that way since before you picked me up, hasn't
it? I saw it wobble when you kneed that man-at-arms."

Myka looked at The Barbarian sharply, worry on her face, but the man was
chuckling. "All right, bucko, we'll do it your way."

"Fine." Geoffrey wasn't so sure it was. Suddenly he was committed not
only to helping The Barbarian escape, but also to escape with him. He
was faintly surprised at himself. But there was something about the man.
Something worth saving, no matter what. And there was the business now
of having been recognized. Once Dugald learned he was still alive, there
would be a considerable amount of danger in staying in the vicinity. Of
course, he had only to stoop over the unconscious guard with The
Barbarian's knife....

With a quick motion, he tossed the weapon back to its owner.

_That_ one was an easy choice, Geoffrey thought. Simply stealing--or was
it recapturing?--a tankette and using it to drive away with Myka and The
Barbarian didn't mean he had to go all the way to the barbarian lands
with them. Let the guard revive and run to Dugald with the news. All
Geoffrey had to do was to remove himself a few miles, find shelter, and
bide his time.

One recaptured barbarian tankette might not even be missed. And the
guard might not be believed--well, that was a thin hope--but, in any
case, no one had any reason to suspect The Barbarian was still alive.
There'd be no general pursuit.

Well ... maybe not. There was a man-at-arms choked to death, by a
stronger arm than Geoffrey's, and it was The Barbarian's woman who would
be missing. There might be quite a buzz about that.

Geoffrey shook his head in impatient annoyance. This kind of life
demanded a great deal more thinking than he was accustomed to. All these
unpredictable factors made a man's head spin.

And then again, maybe they didn't. The thing to do was to act, to do
what would get him out of here now, and leave him free tomorrow to do
whatever thinking tomorrow demanded. With a little practice, too,
thinking would undoubtedly come more easily.

"All right," he said decisively, "let's get moving over in that
direction, and see if the guards haven't gotten a little careless." He
motioned to Myka and The Barbarian, and began to lead the way into the
underbrush. He thrust out a hand to pull a sapling aside, and almost ran
full-tilt into Harolde Dugald.

       *       *       *

Dugald was almost exactly Geoffrey's age and size, but he had something
Geoffrey lacked--a thin-lipped look of wolfish wisdom. His dark eyes
were habitually slitted, and his mouth oddly off-center, always poised
between a mirthless grin and a snarl. His long black hair curled under
at the base of his skull, and his hands were covered with heavy gold and
silver rings. There was one for each finger and thumb, and all of them
were set with knobby precious stones.

His lips parted now, and his long white teeth showed plainly in the
semi-darkness. "I was coming back to inspect my prizes," he said in a
voice like a fine-bladed saw chuckling through soft metal. "And look
what I've found." The open mouth of his heavy, handmade side pistol
pointed steadily between Geoffrey's eyes. "I find my erstwhile neighbor
risen from the dead, and in the company of a crippled enemy and his
leman. Indeed, my day is complete."

The one thing Geoffrey was not feeling was fear. The wire-thin strand of
his accumulated rage was stretched to breaking. Somewhere, far from the
forefront of his mind, he was feeling surprise and disappointment. He
was perfectly aware of Dugald's weapon, and of what it would do to his
head at this range. But Geoffrey was not stopping to think. And Dugald
was a bit closer to him than he ought to have been.

Geoffrey's hands seemed to leap out. One tore the pistol out of Dugald's
hand and knocked it spinning. The other cracked, open-palmed, against
the other man's face, hard enough to split flesh and start the blood
trickling down Dugald's cheek. The force of the combined blows sent
Dugald staggering. He fell back, crashing into a bush, and hung against
it. Stark fear shone in his eyes. He screamed: "Dugald! _Dugald!_ To me!
To me!"

For a second, everything went silent; nobles quarreling, guards
roistering among the captures--suddenly the battlefield was still. Then
the reaction to the rallying cry set off an entirely different kind of
hubbub. The sound now was that of an alerted pack of dogs.

Once more, Geoffrey swept his hand across Dugald's face, feeling his own
skin break over the knuckles. But there was no time for anything else.
Now they had to run, and not in silence. Now everything went by the
board, and the nearest safety was the best. Behind them as they tore
through the brush, they could hear Dugald shouting:

"That way! The Barbarian's with him!" The Barbarian was grunting with
every step. Myka was panting. Geoffrey was in the lead, his throat
burning with every breath, not knowing where he was leading them, but
trying to skirt around the pack of nobles that would be running toward
them in the darkness.

He crashed against plated metal. He peered at it in the absolute
darkness this far from the fires and torches. "Tankette!" he said
hoarsely. "Empty." They scrambled onto it, Geoffrey pulling at The
Barbarian's arm. "Down, Myka--inside. Ought to be room between steering
posts and motor." He pushed the woman down through the hatch, and
dropped back to the ground. He ran to the crank clipped to one track
housing and thrust it into place. "You--you'll have to hang
onto--turret," he panted to The Barbarian. "Help me start." He wound
furiously at the starting crank until he felt the flywheel spin free of
the ratchet, and then engaged the driveshaft. The tankette shuddered to
the sudden torque. The motor resisted, turned its shaft reluctantly,
spun the magneto, ignited, stuttered, coughed, and began to roar. The
