while, it looked as though Earth's credit problem might be solved.
Tourism has always been a fine method for getting money from other
countries--especially if one's own country is properly picturesque.
Tourists always had money, didn't they? And they spend it freely,
didn't they?

No.

Not in this case.

Earth had nothing to sell to the tourists.

Ever hear of _baluts_? The Melanesians of the South Pacific consider
it a very fine delicacy. You take a fertilized duck egg and you bury
it in the warm earth. Six months later, when it is nice and overripe,
you dig it up again, knock the top off the shell the way you would a
soft-boiled egg, and eat it. Then you pick the pinfeathers out of your
teeth. _Baluts._

Now you know how the greatest delicacies of Earth's restaurants
affected the Galactics.

Earth was just a little _too_ picturesque. The tourists enjoyed the
sights, but they ate aboard their ship, which was evidently somewhat
like a Caribbean cruise ship. And they bought nothing. They just
looked.

And laughed.

And of course they all wanted to meet Professor John Hamish McLeod.

When the news leaked out and was thoroughly understood by Earth's
population, there was an immediate reaction.

Editorial in _Pravda_:

     The stupid book written by the American J. H. McLeod has
     made Earth a laughingstock throughout the galaxy. His
     inability to comprehend the finer nuances of Galactic
     Socialism has made all Earthmen look foolish. It is too bad
     that a competent Russian zoologist was not chosen for the
     trip that McLeod made; a man properly trained in the
     understanding of the historical forces of dialectic
     materialism would have realized that any Galactic society
     must of necessity be a Communist State, and would have
     interpreted it as such. The petty bourgeois mind of McLeod
     has made it impossible for any Earthman to hold up his head
     in the free Socialist society of the galaxy. Until this
     matter is corrected....

News item Manchester _Guardian_:

     Professor James H. McLeod, the American zoologist whose book
     has apparently aroused a great deal of hilarity in Galactic
     circles, admitted today that both Columbia University and
     the American Museum of Natural History have accepted his
     resignation. The recent statement by a University spokesman
     that Professor McLeod had "besmirched the honor of Earthmen
     everywhere" was considered at least partially responsible
     for the resignations. (See editorial.)

Editorial, Manchester _Guardian_:

     ... It is a truism that an accepted wit has only to say,
     'Pass the butter,' and everyone will laugh. Professor
     McLeod, however, far from being an accepted wit, seems
     rather to be in the position of a medieval Court Fool, who
     was laughed _at_ rather than _with_. As a consequence, all
     Earthmen have been branded as Fools....

Statement made by the American Senator from Alabama:

     "He has made us all look like jackasses in the eyes of the
     Galactics, and at this precarious time in human history it
     is my considered opinion that such actions are treasonous to
     the human race and to Earth and should be treated and
     considered as such!"

Book review, _Literary Checklist_, Helvar III, Bornis Cluster:

     "Interstellar Ark, an Earthman's View of the Galaxy,"
     translated from the original tongue by Vonis Delf, Cr. 5.00.
     This inexpensive little book is one of the most
     entertainingly funny publications in current print. The
     author, one John McLeod, is a member of a type 3-7B race
     inhabiting a planet in the Outer Fringes.... As an example
     of the unwitting humor of the book, we have only to quote
     the following:

     "I was shown to my quarters shortly before takeoff. Captain
     Benarly had assigned me a spacious cabin which was almost
     luxurious in its furnishings. The bed was one of the most
     comfortable I have ever slept in."

     Or the following:

     "I found the members of the crew to be friendly and
     co-operative, especially Nern Cronzel, the ship's
     physician."

     It is our prediction that this little gem will be enjoyed
     for a long time to come and will be a real money-maker for
     its publishers.

       *       *       *       *       *

_They haven't hanged me yet_, McLeod thought. He sat in his apartment
alone and realized that it would take very little to get him hanged.

How could one book have aroused such wrath? Even as he thought it,
McLeod knew the answer to that question. It wasn't the book. No one
who had read it two and a half years before had said anything against
it.

No, it wasn't the book. It was the Galactic reaction to the book.
Already feeling inferior because of the stand-offish attitude of the
beings from the stars, the Homeric laughter of those same beings had
been too much. It would have been bad enough if that laughter had been
generated by one of the Galactics. To have had it generated by an
Earthman made it that much worse. Against an Earthman, their rage was
far from impotent.

Nobody understood _why_ the book was funny, of course. The joke was
over their heads, and that made human beings even angrier.

He remembered a quotation from a book he had read once. A member of
some tribal-taboo culture--African or South Pacific, he forgot
which--had been treated at a missionary hospital for something or
other and had described his experience.

"The white witch doctor protects himself by wearing a little round
mirror on his head which reflects back the evil spirits."

Could that savage have possibly understood what was humorous about
that remark? No. Not even if you explained to him why the doctor used
the mirror that way.

_Now what?_ McLeod thought. He was out of a job and his bank account
was running low. His credit rating had dropped to zero.

McLeod heard a key turn in the lock. The door swung open and Jackson
entered with his squad of U.B.I. men.

"Hey!" said McLeod, jumping to his feet. "What do you think this is?"

"Shut up, McLeod," Jackson growled. "Get your coat. You're wanted at
headquarters."

McLeod started to say something, then thought better of it. There was
nothing he could say. Nobody would care if the U.B.I. manhandled him.
Nobody would protest that his rights were being ignored. If McLeod got
