
Dan attempted to move. She leaned over him, shifted his weight and
smoothed the sheet with strong, capable hinds. "You want to know about
what happened to the machine monsters?"

He winked.

"Well, you remember when they found us, and shot the green ray at us.
They left you there--I thought you were dead--and carried me up here
on the hill. Perhaps they wanted me for a laboratory subject to test
the green ray on, or something of the kind. Anyhow, they carried me
into a big shed filled with strange machines.

"They kept me there until that night. Then, all of a sudden, they
all--stopped! They froze! They were dead!

"The tentacles of the one that was holding me were set about me. But I
worked free, and got out of the shed. It took all night. And when I
came out, just at sunrise, I saw that the purple fire was gone from
the great ring. The needle was knocked down, and the apparatus
smashed.

"I found you there in the wreckage. You made a human bullet of
yourself to smash it! The greatest thing a man ever did!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Though normally rather modest, Dan felt a glow of pride at the honest
admiration ringing in her clear voice, and shining from her warm brown
eyes.

"So I gathered up what was left of you," she went on, "and tried to
put you back together again. A good many bones were broken, and you
had more cuts and bruises than I could mention; but the apparatus had
broken the force of the fall, and you were still alive. You are
remarkably well put together, I should say; and unusually lucky, as
well!

"And, well, the machines and apparatus are scattered about all over
the island. Every one of them stopped the instant you smashed the
connection with the directing intelligence on Mars. There'll be quite
a stir in the scientific world, I imagine, in about three weeks, when
the yacht comes and carries us back with a lot of plans and specimens.
We must send about a thousand engineers back here to study what we
leave behind us.

"And do you want anything else?" She bent over and watched his
bandaged face. Looking up into her bright eyes, thrilling to the cool,
comforting pressure of her hand on his forehead, Dan reflected. Then
he winked.

"Something you want me to do?"

He winked.

"When? Right now?"

No response.

"After the yacht comes."

He winked.

"What is it?" She looked him in the eye, blushed a little, and
laughed.

"You mean--"

Dan winked.


[Illustration: Advertisement.]




The Hands of Aten

A COMPLETE NOVELETTE

_By H. G. Winter_

[Illustration: The sharp roar of an explosion thundered through the
Temple.]

[Sidenote: Out of solid ice Craig hews three long-frozen
Egyptians--and is at once caught up into amazing adventure.]


The sleek black monoplane came scudding out of the south, flying low
over fields of ice and snow that were thawing slowly under the heat of
the arctic sun. After a long time it wheeled, circled gradually, and
then, as if it had found what it had been looking for, came lightly
down and skidded to a graceful halt in a low flat area between some
round-topped hillocks. A fur-clad figure emerged from the enclosed
cockpit and climbed a low ridge into the wan sunlight above.

For a while the man looked around, getting his bearings. Miles on
every side stretched the great rough plains of ice--ice that became a
broad path of glittering diamonds where it led toward the low-hung
sun, far in the south. Perhaps a quarter mile in that direction lay
the white rise of a hill much larger than its fellows, probably, the
man thought, a volcano. Towards it he laboriously made his way. His
tiny figure was only a speck on the far-flung, deserted landscape--a
human mite, puny and futile against the giant, hostile white waste.

The sky was clear and cloudless, the sun unusually warm. So warm,
indeed, that long clefts, caused by the unequal expansion of the ice,
appeared here and there. The man from the plane had not gone more than
fifty yards when he halted sharply. With a crack like thunder, a
cleft had opened at his very feet--a rift ten feet deep in places,
apparently bottomless in others, and very long. Not wanting to go
around it, he slid down one side and, with an ice pick, started to
hack a foothold in the opposite bank.

It was then that the man saw the thing--something sticking from the
ice just above his head. As he stared at it, amazement appeared on his
bronzed face. He looked around bewilderedly, then peered still more
closely into the bluish depths of the crystal wall.

The head of a spear was jutting from the ice. And the spear was held
by a man entrapped within the wall.

       *       *       *       *       *

The details of the ice-held figure were but slightly blurred, for it
was only a few feet from the surface. It was that of a man, and it was
plain that he was not an Eskimo. He was locked in a distorted
position, as if caught unawares by a terrific weight of sliding snow.
And he had been caught, seemingly, when in the act of hurling his
weapon.

For a long time the man from the plane peered at his discovery. Then
his blue eyes followed slowly the direction in which the spear was
pointing, and he gasped, and took a few quick steps further down the
cleft. There, in the opposite wall, were two more bodies.

These, though, were of man and woman. They were even closer to the
surface of the ice. Crouched over, the man's left hand was craned as
if to protect his companion from some peril--from the cataclysm that
had trapped them, it might have been. Or perhaps from the spear of the
other.

The fur-muffled figure stood motionless, gazing at them. His ice pick
was held limply, his eyes were wide. Then, suddenly, the pick was
grasped firmly, and flakes of ice flew under its level blows as he
started to carve his find from their frozen tomb.

The man was trembling with wild excitement when at last the stiff form
of the woman was extricated. She was not so much a woman as a girl,
really--and she was beautiful. But the man from the plane evidently
didn't care so much about that; nor even her almost miraculous state
of preservation. He rubbed away some of the coating of ice from her
face, and stared most intently at her forehead. Then he stood upright,
and said, simply:

"Well, I'll be damned!"

       *       *       *       *       *

If Wesley Craig had been merely what he was listed as on the roster of
the Somers Arctic Expedition of 1933--that is, a geologist--he would
not have been so astounded. But his life work, really, was
archaeology. He had spent years delving in the ruins of ancient
temples, especially, those of old Egypt. He knew the ancient language
as well as anyone knew it, and was familiar with every known detail of
the civilization of the Pharaohs. And, being so, he was now properly
confused. For every bit of his knowledge told him that this girl, whom
he had found in the wastes of the arctic, was of Egyptian stock.

A certain tiny hieroglyph traced on her smooth forehead--the intricate
band around her fine hair--the very cut of the frozen robe she
wore--Egyptian--every one of them!

Yet, stubbornly, Wesley Craig wouldn't admit it. Not until he had cut
the two men from the ice and hauled all three laboriously up the side
of the cleft and stretched them out on the level ice, did he have to.
He couldn't deny it, then. In some mysterious way, Egypt was connected
with the three rigid bodies.

For the two men were garbed as warriors, and their helmets and harness
and sword-sheaths were indisputably of Egyptian design.

There, however, the similarity between the two ended. The one with the
spear was big-muscled and burly; the other much slighter of build.
This latter, Craig guessed, had been fleeing with the girl when icy
death had overwhelmed them.

       *       *       *       *       *

But he did not then try to go into that, the story that some sudden
cataclysm had cut short. His fervor, as an Egyptologist, was afire. He
was burning with eagerness to get these bodies back to the main base
of the Somers Expedition, some three hundred miles south. Into the
learned circles of Egyptology, of archaeology, they'd throw a
bomb-shell that would make nitroglycerine seem like weak tea.

Craig couldn't taxi his plane closer; he would have to carry them to
it; and to do this he began to carefully massage all the larger pieces
of ice from the girl's limbs and clothing, to make her lighter. At the
Somers base they could all be re-frozen, to maintain their perfect
preservation.

It was while he was diligently rubbing that he fully realized the
girl's beauty. Delicate, cleanly cut features; fine, large eyelids;
tiny, slender hands. Save for her icy pallor, she might almost have
been merely asleep as she lay on the snow.

Wes Craig finished massaging the girl and then went on and did the
same for the two warriors. For an hour he carefully and reverently
released them from the reluctant fingers of their icy death, and he
was a little tired from his exertions and his great excitement when at
last he finished and stood erect, resting. But he did not stand quiet
for long. A sudden gleam lit his eyes: a mad idea had come to him.

"Won't hurt to try!" he muttered excitedly, and the next moment his
lithe figure was running over the slippery ice bank to his airplane,
out of sight behind the nearby hillocks.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wes Craig worked from a sub-base on his sole expeditions to chart the
various mountains and ranges in the islands off north-east King
Charles Land, within the Arctic Circle. He had only one partner, a
mechanic, who stayed behind on his shorter trips. And therefore all
manner of emergency devices were stowed in the cockpit of his plane: a
tiny folding tent, an amazingly light sled, a large store of
compressed food--and a large vial of Kundrenaline and a hypodermic
needle.

Kundrenaline was still somewhat of an unknown quantity in 1933. Kund,
the German, had developed it but a year before. The fluid was already
standard beside the operating tables of the world's most modern
hospitals, so valuable had its qualities proven to be. It had actually
restored life after hours of death. A complex mixture of concentrated
adrenaline and highly compressed liquid food, it gave a tremendous
stimulation to the heart, at the same time providing the body with
energy food to withstand the shock.

It was meant for emergency use on the Somers Expedition. But Wes Craig
wasn't going to use it for that. He was going to use it for an
experiment--a crazy experiment, he told himself. Fish--many forms of
life--withstand freezing in solid ice without hurt. Human beings--? It
wouldn't hurt to try, anyway, his mind kept repeating.

Fifteen minutes saw him back beside the rigid bodies, and kneeling
over the girl. The sun had warmed her body somewhat, and the
glistening rheum of frost had melted from all three. Hardly breathing
from his suspense, Wes filled the needle's chamber full and plunged it
into the firm white flesh just above the girl's silent heart.

A short laugh came from him--an ironic laugh. It seemed idiotic to
even think of restoring her to life, even if she _had_ been dead only
a week or so. It was quite--

And then his thoughts stopped.

"My God!" he said suddenly.

For a tide of faintest color had surged through the girl's wan cheeks.
And her slim figure had stirred perceptibly on the sheet of ice!

"By heaven, she's coming to!" Craig muttered unbelievingly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pressing his ear to her chest, he detected a faint and labored beating
of her heart, stirring from its cold sleep as the terrific stimulation
jolted it back to life. The girl's eyelids flickered; a tiny sigh
escaped her full lips. Craig took off his heavy parka and laid it over
her. Trembling with tremendous excitement, he tore himself away from
the miracle of re-created life, and strode to the body of the young
man who was apparently her partner.

Again he administered the Kundrenaline. Then he went to his first
discovery--the heavily built, powerful warrior whose spear had stuck
out of the ice. The hypodermic was once more filled, and the fluid
plunged into his body. Even as a faint moan came from the younger man,
the warrior's heart started to beat.

Perspiring, breathing quickly, vial and needle still in his hands, Wes
stood off and surveyed the three.

The girl's hands were moving fitfully; strange, racking gasps came
from her throat. The other two were similarly affected. Almost
frightened, held motionless by the weirdness of it, the American
watched.

The heavily built warrior was tossing in a series of convulsions. His
legs kicked out spasmodically, arms jerked and clenched, and the
helmeted head rolled from side to side. Then the man lay still for as
long as a minute; but, just as Craig was about to go to him, his legs
tensed once again, and, staggering drunkenly, he got to his feet.

He looked around wildly, but did not see the dumbfounded Craig, for
his eyes fell on the figure of the younger man. He too had risen,
swaying on weak legs. And the girl was sitting up and staring at the
two of them.

       *       *       *       *       *

And then, grotesquely, preluded by a cry from the woman, the tragedy
which death had once cut short was enacted out, there on the rough
sheet of ice and snow.

The man with the spear fixed his eyes on the girl's young partner,
raised his weapon, leveled it unsteadily, and tossed it weakly
forward. The pointed end clipped its target and sent him reeling, with
a thin trickle of slow blood running from his right shoulder. The girl
staggered to her feet and ran between the two. But the big warrior's
hand swept her aside, and a short sword leaped from its sheath at his
waist.

Wes was stupidly staring, unable to move. The combatants were utterly
unconscious of him. The younger one, painfully wounded, drew his own
sword and swayed forward to meet his enemy.

The fight was grotesque. Both were weak, unsteady. The short swords
stabbed slowly, missing by yards in their drunken course. Hatred was
on the big man's dark face, and a fierce lust for blood. It was only
when the weapons clashed loudly together that Craig came out of his
daze.

"Stop!" he yelled, jumping forward. "Wait! Stop!"

All three turned and looked full at him. And then death, which had
been banished for but a few minutes, swooped swiftly once more on the
young man. While he stood peering, bewildered, at Craig, the huge
warrior steadied his blade and drove it home through his unguarded
chest. The man slid over the edge of the ice into the cleft below.

The girl shrieked again and went down to his fallen figure, while the
victor waved his bloody sword aloft with a shout of triumph. Then,
without hesitation, he leaped at the American.

Wes was taken wholly by surprise. He dropped the vial of Kundrenaline
and the hypodermic, and he heard them crash and break at his feet as
he fumbled for his automatic, in a holster at his belt. But the
warrior was upon him. His crimsoned blade swung high, gleamed
downward, and smote Wesley Craig square on the side of the head.

Lucky for him, the flat of the sword had been used--but it was enough.
The American reeled under the terrific swipe. He had a last glimpse of
two inflamed eyes, of a savage, contorted face; then the universal
whiteness went black, and he fell, and the whole incredible scene
passed from his consciousness....

       *       *       *       *       *

Just how long he had remained unconscious, Wesley Craig had no means
