At that moment Lusine's voice floated up from the bottom of her cell.
"Jean-Jacques, my love, my brave, my own, would you abandon me to the
Chalice? Please take me with you! You will need somebody to hide you
when the Minister of Ill-Will sends his mucketeers after you. I can
hide you where no one will ever find you." Her voice was mocking, but
there was an undercurrent of anxiety to it.

Mapfarity muttered, "She will hide us, yes, at the bottom of a
sea-cave where we will eat strange food and suffer a change.
Never...."

"Trust an Amphib," finished Archambaud for him.

Mapfarity forgot to whisper. "_Bey-t'cul, vu nu fez yey! Fe'm sa!_" he
roared.

A shocked hush covered the courtyard. Only Mapfarity's wrathful
breathing could be heard. Then, disembodied, Lusine's voice floated
from the well.

"Jean-Jacques, do not forget that I am the foster-daughter of the King
of the Amphibians! If you were to take me with you, I could assure you
of safety and a warm welcome in the halls of the Sea-King's Palace!"

"Pah!" said Mapfarity. "That web-footed witch!"

Rastignac did not reply to her. He took the broad silk belt and the
sheathed epee from Archambaud and buckled them around his waist.
Mapfarity handed him a mucketeer's hat; he clapped that on firmly.
Last of all, he took the Skin that the fat egg-stealer had been
holding out to him.

For the first time he hesitated. It was his Skin, the one he had been
wearing since he was six. It had grown with him, fed off his blood for
twenty-two years, clung to him as clothing, censor, and castigator,
and parted from him only when he was inside the walls of his own
house, went swimming, or, as during the last seven days, when he laid
in jail.

A week ago, after they had removed his second Skin, he had felt naked
and helpless and cut off from his fellow creatures. But that was a
week ago. Since then, as he had remarked to Lusine, he had experienced
the birth of a strange feeling. It was, at first, frightening. It made
him cling to the bars as if they were the only stable thing in the
center of a whirling universe.

Later, when that first giddiness had passed, it was succeeded by
another intoxication--the joy of being an individual, the knowledge
that he was separate, not a part of a multitude. Without the Skin he
could think as he pleased. He did not have a censor.

Now, he was on level ground again, out of the cell. But as soon as he
had put that prison-shaft behind him he was faced with the old second
Skin.

Archambaud held it out like a cloak in his hands. It looked much like
a ragged garment. It was pale and limp and roughly rectangular with
four extensions at each corner. When Rastignac put it on his back, it
would sink four tiny hollow teeth into his veins and the suckers on
the inner surface of its flat body would cling to him. Its long upper
extensions would wrap themselves around his shoulders and over his
chest; the lower, around his loins and thighs. Soon it would lose its
paleness and flaccidity, become pink and slightly convex, pulsing with
Rastignac's blood.


V

Rastignac hesitated for a few seconds. Then he allowed the habit of a
lifetime to take over. Sighing, he turned his back. In a moment he
felt the cold flesh descend over his shoulders and the little bite of
the four teeth as they attached the Skin to his shoulders. Then, as
his blood poured into the creature he felt it grow warm and strong. It
spread out and followed the passages it had long ago been conditioned
to follow, wrapped him warmly and lovingly and comfortably. And he
knew, though he couldn't feel it, that it was pushing nerves into the
grooves along the teeth. Nerves to connect with his.

A minute later he experienced the first of the expected _rapport_. It
was nothing that you could put a mental finger on. It was just a
diffused tingling and then the sudden consciousness of how the others
around him _felt_.

They were ghosts in the background of his mind. Yet, pale and
ectoplasmic as they were, they were easily identifiable. Mapfarity
loomed above the others, a transparent Colossus radiating streamers of
confidence in his clumsy strength. A meat-eater, uncertain about the
future, with a hope and trust in Rastignac to show him the right way.
And with a strong current of anger against the conqueror who had
inflicted the Skin upon him.

Archambaud was a shorter phantom, rolypoly even in his psychic
manifestations, emitting bursts of impatience because other people did
not talk fast enough to suit him, his mind leaping on ahead of their
tongues, his fingers wriggling to wrap themselves around something
valuable--preferably the eggs of the golden goose--and a general
eagerness to be up and about and onwards. He was one round fidget on
two legs, yet a good man for any project requiring action.

Faintly, Rastignac detected the slumbering guard as if he were the
tendrils of some plant at the sea-bottom, floating in the green
twilight, at peace and unconscious.

And even more faintly he felt Lusine's presence, shielded by the walls
of the shaft. Hers was a pale and light hand, one whose fingers tapped
a barely heard code of impotent rage and voiceless screaming fear. Yet
beneath that anguish was a base of confidence and mockery at others.
She might be temporarily upset, but when the chance came for her to do
something she would seize it with every ability at her command.

Another radiation dipped into the general picture and out. A wild
glowworm had swooped over them and disturbed the smooth reflection
built up by the Skins.

This was the way the Skins worked. They penetrated into you and found
out what you were feeling and emoting, and then they broadcast it to
other closeby Skins, which then projected their hosts' psychosomatic
responses. The whole was then integrated so that each Skin-wearer
could detect the group-feeling and at the same time, though in a much
duller manner, the feeling of the individuals of the _gestalt_.

That wasn't the only function of the Skin. The parasite, created in
the bio-factories, had several other social and biological uses.

Rastignac almost fell into a reverie at that point. It was nothing
unusual. The effect of the Skins was a slowing-down one. The wearer
thought more slowly, acted more leisurely, and was much more
contented.

But now, by a deliberate wrenching of himself from the
feeling-pattern, Rastignac woke up. There were things to do, and
standing around and drinking in the lotus of the group-rapport was
not one of them.

He gestured at the prostrate form of the mucketeer. "You didn't hurt
him?"

The Ssassaror rumbled, "No. I scratched him with a little venom of the
dream-snake. He will sleep for an hour or so. Besides, I would not be
allowed to hurt him. You forget that all this is carefully staged by
the King's Official Jail-breaker."

"_Me'dt!_" swore Rastignac.

Alarmed, Archambaud said, "What's the matter, Jean-Jacques?"

"Can't we do anything on our own? Must the King meddle in everything?"

"You wouldn't want us to take a chance and have to shed _blood_, would
you?" breathed Archambaud.

"What are you carrying those swords for? As a decoration?" Rastignac
snarled.

"_Seelahs, m'fweh_," warned Mapfarity. "If you alarm the other guards,
you will embarrass them. They will be forced to do their duty and
recapture you. And the Jail-breaker would be reprimanded because he
had fallen down on his job. He might even get a demotion."

Rastignac was so upset that his Skin, reacting to the negative fields
racing over the Skin and the hormone imbalance of his blood, writhed
away from his back.

"What are we, a bunch children playing war?"

Mapfarity growled, "We are all God's children, and we mustn't hurt
anyone if we can help it."

"Mapfarity, you eat meat!"

"_Voo zavf w'zaw m'fweh_," admitted the Giant. "But it is the flesh of
unintelligent creatures. I have not yet shed the blood of any being
that can talk with the tongue of Man."

Rastignac snorted and said, "If you stick with me you will some day do
that, _m'fweh_ Mapfarity. There is no other course. It is inevitable."

"Nature spare me the day! But if it comes it will find Mapfarity
unafraid. They do not call me Giant for nothing."

Rastignac sighed and walked ahead. Sometimes he wondered if the
members of his underground--or anybody else for that matter--ever
realized the grim conclusions formed by the Philosophy of Violence.

The Amphibians, he was sure, did. And they were doing something
positive about it. But it was the Amphibians who had driven Rastignac
to adopt a Philosophy of Violence.

"_Law_," he said again. "Let's go."

The three of them walked out of the huge courtyard and through the
open gate. Nearby stood a short man whose Skin gleamed black-red in
the light shed by the two glowworms attached to his shoulders. The
Skin was oversized and hung to the ground.

The King's man, however, did not think he was a comic figure. He
sputtered, and the red of his face matched the color of the skin on
his back.

"You took long enough," he said accusingly and then, when Rastignac
opened his mouth to protest, the Jail-breaker said, "Never mind, never
mind. _Sa n'apawt_. The thing is that we get you away fast. The
Minister of Ill-Will has doubtless by now received word that an
official jail-break is planned for tonight. He will send a company of
his mucketeers to intercept you. By coming in advance of the appointed
time we shall have time to escape before the official rescue party
arrives."

"How much time do we have?" asked Rastignac.

The King's man said, "Let's see. After I escort you through the rooms
of the Duke, the King's foster-brother--he is most favorable to the
Violent Philosophy, you know, and has petitioned the King to become
your official patron, which petition will be considered at the next
meeting of the Chamber of Deputies in three months--let's see, where
was I? Ah, yes, I escort you through the rooms of the King's brother.
You will be disguised as His Majesty's mucketeers, ostensibly looking
for the escaped prisoners. From the rooms of the Duke you will be let
out through a small door in the wall of the palace itself. A car will
be waiting.

"From then on it will be up to you. I suggest, however, that you make
a dash for Mapfarity's castle. Follow the _Rue des Nues_; that is your
best chance. The mucketeers have been pulled off that boulevard.
However, it is possible that Auverpin, the Ill-Will Minister, may see
that order and will rescind it, realizing what it means. If he does, I
suppose I will see you back in your cell, Rastignac."

He bowed to the Ssassaror and Archambaud and said, "And you two
gentlemen will then be with him."

"And then what?" rumbled Mapfarity.

"According to the law, you will be allowed one more jail-break. Any
more after that will, of course, be illegal. That is, unthinkable."

Rastignac unsheathed his epee and slashed it at the air. "Let the
mucketeers stand in my way," he said fiercely. "I will cut them down
with this!"

The Jail-breaker staggered back, hands outthrust.

"Please, Monsieur Rastignac! Please! Don't even talk about it! You
know that your philosophy is, as yet, illegal. The shedding of blood
is an act that will be regarded with horror throughout the sentient
planet. People would think you are an Amphibian!"

"The Amphibians know what they're doing far better than we do,"
answered Rastignac. "Why do you think they're winning against us
Humans?"

Suddenly, before anybody could answer, the sound of blaring horns came
from somewhere on the ramparts. Shouts went up; drums began to beat,
calling the mucketeers to alert.

And above it all came the roar of a giant Ssassaror voice: "_An
Earthship has landed in the sea! And the pilot of the ship is in the
hands of the Amphibians!_"

As the meaning of the words seeped into Rastignac's consciousness he
made a sudden violent movement--and began to tear the Skin from his
body!


VI

Rastignac ran down the steps, out into the courtyard. He seized the
Jail-breaker's arm and demanded the key to the grilles. Dazed, the
white-faced official meekly and silently handed it to him. Without his
Skin Rastignac was no longer fearfully inhibited. If you were forceful
enough and did not behave according to the normal pattern you could
get just about anything you wanted. The average Man or Ssassaror did
