mop his bald scalp, scowling while he pretended to think.

Then he'd say, "Not today, Joey," or, "Thought so yesterday, but this
fellow had two eyes on him. 'Twasn't Charlie."

Then he'd pedal away, shaking his head. Later on the handyman would
come around to swap sanitary tanks under the trailers and Joey would
ask him the same question. Once a month the power company sent out a
man to read the electric meters and he was part of Joey's routine too.

It was hard on Ethel. Sometimes the kid would dream at night that
Charlie had come home and was scratching at the trailer ramp to be let
in, and he'd wake Ethel and beg her to go out and see. When that
happened Doc and I could hear Ethel talking to him, low and steady,
until all hours of the morning, and when he finally went back to sleep
we'd hear her open the cupboard and take out the gin bottle.

But there came a night that was more than Ethel could take, a night
that changed Joey's routine and a lot more with it. It left a mark
you've seen yourself--everybody has that's got eyes to see--though
you never knew what made it. Nobody ever knew that but Joey and Ethel
Pond and Doc and me.

Doc and I were turning in around midnight that night when the kid sang
out next door. We heard Ethel get up and go to him, and we got up too
and opened a beer because we knew neither of us would sleep any more
till she got Joey quiet again. But this night was different. Ethel
hadn't talked to the kid long when he yelled, "Charlie! _Charlie!_"
and after that we heard both of them bawling.

A little later Ethel came out into the moonlight and shut the trailer
door behind her. She looked rumpled and beaten, her hair straggling
damply on her shoulders and her eyes puffed and red from crying. The
gin she'd had hadn't helped any either.

She stood for a while without moving, then she looked up at the sky
and said something I'm not likely to forget.

"Why couldn't You give the kid a break?" she said, not railing or
anything but loud enough for us to hear. "You, up there--what's
another lousy one-eyed mutt to You?"

Doc and I looked at each other in the half-dark of our own trailer.
"She's done it, Roy," Doc said.

I knew what he meant and wished I didn't. Ethel had finally told the
kid that Charlie wasn't coming back, not ever.

That's why I was worried about Joey when I came home the next evening
and found him watching the sky instead of the palmetto flats. It meant
he'd given up waiting for Charlie. And the quiet way the kid spoke of
moving the stars around worried me more, because it sounded outright
crazy.

Not that you could blame him for going off his head. It was tough
enough to be pinned to a wheelchair without being able to wiggle so
much as a toe. But to lose his dog in the bargain....

I was on my third beer when Doc Shull rolled in with a big package
under his arm. Doc was stone sober, which surprised me, and he was hot
and tired from a shopping trip to Tampa, which surprised me more. It
was when he ripped the paper off his package, though, that I thought
he'd lost his mind.

"Books for Joey," Doc said. "Ethel and I agreed this morning that the
boy needs another interest to occupy his time now, and since he can't
go to school I'm going to teach him here."

He went on to explain that Ethel hadn't had the heart the night
before, desperate as she was, to tell the kid the whole truth. She'd
told him instead, quoting an imaginary customer at the Sea Shell
Diner, that a tourist car with Michigan license plates had picked
Charlie up on the highway and taken him away. It was a good enough
story. Joey still didn't know that Charlie was dead, but his waiting
was over because no dog could be expected to find his way home from
Michigan.

"We've got to give the boy another interest," Doc said, putting away
the books and puncturing another beer can. "Joey has a remarkable
talent for concentration--most handicapped children have--that could
be the end of him if it isn't diverted into safe channels."

I thought the kid had cracked up already and said so.

"Moving _stars_?" Doc said when I told him. "Good Lord, Roy--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Ethel Pond knocked just then, interrupting him. She came in and had a
beer with us and talked to Doc about his plan for educating Joey at
home. But she couldn't tell us anything more about the kid's new
fixation than we already knew. When she asked him why he stared up at
the sky like that he'd say only that he wants something to remember
Charlie by.

It was about nine o'clock, when Ethel went home to cook supper. Doc
and I knocked off our cribbage game and went outside with our folding
chairs to get some air. It was then that the first star moved.

It moved all of a sudden, the way any shooting star does, and shot
across the sky in a curving, blue-white streak of fire. I didn't pay
much attention, but Doc nearly choked on his beer.

"Roy," he said, "that was Sirius! _It moved!_"

I didn't see anything serious about it and said so. You can see a
dozen or so stars zip across the sky on any clear night if you're in
the mood to look up.
