wouldn't always be asking such stupid questions."

She shivered. "Well, I hope they get it over with right away. If we just
have to sit here waiting and waiting and waiting, I'll go mad. I know I
will."

"You should try to keep your nerves in check, Louisa," Miss Anspacher
snapped. _Silly little fool._

"At least I can control my glands!" Mrs. Bernardi flared back.
_Sex-starved spinster._

"I shall make some tea, ladies," Jrann-Pttt interposed. "I'm sure we
will all feel the better for it."

Mrs. Bernardi smiled at him feebly. "You're such a comfort, Pitt. I
don't know why you of all creatures should be the one to remind me of
home."

"Home," remarked Mortland, emerging from the airlock, "is where the
heart is. Did I hear someone say 'tea'?"

       *       *       *       *       *

As Jrann-Pttt hung the kettle over the fire, suddenly the air erupted in
stunning violence of sound. The ground undulated under their feet and
water slopped out of the kettle, almost putting out the fire that rose
high to claw at it. Rivulets of thick, muddy liquid welled out of the
ground and drabbled their feet. The women turned pale. Algol gave a
faint cry and hid under Mrs. Bernardi's skirts, trembling, while the
mosquito-bat tried to lift Mortland's toupee and hide in his hair. The
ship itself quivered and seemed to jump slightly in the air, then
returned to its resting place.

All was quiet again, quieter than it had been before. Mortland anxiously
gnawed his light mustache. "Better hurry with that tea, there's a good
fellow. I'm violently allergic to loud noises."

"They'll probably continue all day," the professor said with almost
malevolent cheerfulness, "so you might as well get used to them." _Who
is he to have nerves? I am easily the most sensitive person here, but I
manage to control myself._

"I don't know how I'm going to stand it!" Mrs. Bernardi shrieked. "I
just know something terrible is going to happen."

"Please try to restrain yourself, Louisa," her husband ordered. "After
it's over, you'll find we'll be much more comfortable and secure with
the ship resting on rock."

"If you ask me, that blast made it sink a little," Mortland said. "I
wonder whether--"

He was interrupted by a thrashing in the bushes. Dfar-Lll burst forth,
shedding scales. _Do not despair, Jrann-Pttt. I am here, ready to save
you or die at your side._

The women clutched each other, Miss Anspacher praying silently and
fervently to Juno, Lakshmi, Freya, Isis and a host of other esoteric
female deities she had picked up in the course of her avocational
researches.

"He seems to be one of Jrann-Pttt's people," Bernardi observed, "so
there should be nothing to fear."

_Dfar-Lll, you fool!_ Jrann-Pttt ideated angrily. _Nothing's wrong.
They're just blasting out a better berth for their vessel. And now
you've spoiled my plans._

"What did you think at that poor little creature!" Mrs. Bernardi blazed.
"He's crying!" And, sure enough, amethyst tears were oozing out of the
young saurian's large, liquid eyes.

_I du-didn't mean any harm._

"Monster!" Mrs. Bernardi accused Jrann-Pttt. "All men are monsters,
whether they're aliens or not."

"You're so right, Louisa!" Miss Anspacher exclaimed, regarding the
younger creature in an almost kindly manner.

_I'm sorry, r-Lll_, Jrann-Pttt apologized. _I was upset by that noise,
too. How could you possibly know what it was? Come, let me introduce you
to the creatures._

Dfar-Lll stepped forward diffidently. Jrann-Pttt put a hand on the
moss-green shoulder. "Allow me to introduce my companion, Dfar-Lll," he
said aloud.

The youngster looked at him.

Mrs. Bernardi thrust out her hand. "I'm very glad to meet you, Lil."

_Agitate it with one of yours. It's a courtesy. Don't let her see how
repulsive she is to you. Remember, you're just as repulsive to her._

Dfar-Lll offered a shy, seven-fingered hand. "Pleased ... to meet
you ... ma'am," the young lizard squeaked.

"Why, he's just a baby, isn't he?" Mrs. Bernardi asked.

_I am not a baby!_ Dfar-Lll thought indignantly. _At the end of this
year, I shall celebrate my pre-maturity feast, or I would have. And
furthermore--_

There was another thunderous blast of sound. After the ground had
stopped trembling, the six found themselves ankle-deep in muddy water.
Algol, who was in considerably deeper than his ankles, mewed fretfully.
Mrs. Bernardi picked him up and comforted him.

"Perhaps blasting wasn't such a good idea," the professor muttered.
"Maybe I should tell Greenfield to call a halt and we'll take our
chances with the storm. As a matter of fa--"

"The ship!" Mortland cried. "It _is_ sinking!"

And the big metal ball slowly but visibly was indeed subsiding into the
mud.

"Stop it, somebody!" Miss Anspacher snapped in her customary schoolroom
manner.

The professor was pale, but he held on to his calm. "What can we do?
Even if we could get the captain back in time, there's no way we can
stop it. It's too heavy to pull out manually, and the engines, of
course, are inside."

As they watched in horror, the ship sank deeper and deeper, picking up
momentum as more of it went under. With a loud, sucking sound, it
vanished into the ooze. Muddy water gurgled over it and, where the ship
had been, there was now a small lake.

"This could be the beginning of a legend," Miss Anspacher murmured. "Or
the end."

There was another vibrant detonation. "Someone ought to go tell the
captain there's no use blasting any more," Bernardi said wearily. "We
have nothing to put on the rock when he smooths it off." He began to
laugh. "I suppose you could call this poetic justice." And he went on
laughing, losing a bit of his former self-control.

_There goes Plan B_, Jrann-Pttt thought.

A star of intensely bright green lightning split the clouds and widened
to cover the visible expanse of sky. There was a planet-shaking clap of
thunder that made Greenfield's puny efforts sound like the snapping of
twigs in comparison and it began to rain hard and fast.

       *       *       *       *       *

"If only I hadn't gone and blasted that damn rock," the captain
grumbled, squeezing water out of his shirt-tails, "we'd have been all
right. Probably the storm wouldn't have done a thing to the ship except
get it wet. If you can even call it a storm."

"I can and I do," Jrann-Pttt replied, haughtily squeegeeing his wet
scales. "All I said was that a storm might be coming up and it might be
dangerous. How was I to know it would last only half an hour?"

"Even the camp stools pulled through," Greenfield pointed out, "and you
said shelters wouldn't stand up."

"I only said they might not. Can't you understand your own language?"

The fissure in the clouds had not quite closed yet and through it the
enormous, blazing disk of the sun glared at them, twice as large as it
appeared from Earth. It was a moot point as to whether they'd be dried
out or steamed alive first.

"Might as well collect whatever gear we have left and get it to higher
ground," Miss Anspacher said efficiently. "Two feet of water won't do
anything any good--even those camp stools."

"It's my belief you wanted this to happen," Greenfield accused
Jrann-Pttt. "You wanted to get rid of us."

"My dear fellow," Jrann-Pttt replied loftily, "the information I gave
you was, to the best of my knowledge, accurate. However, I happen to be
a professor of zoology and not a meteorologist. Apparently you people
live out in the open like primitives," he continued, ignoring Dfar-Lll's
admiring interjection, "and are accustomed to the vicissitudes of
weather. I am a civilized creature; I live--" _or used to live_--"in an
air-conditioned, light-conditioned, weather-conditioned city. It is only
when I rough it on field trips like this to trackless parts of
the--globe that I am forced to experience weather. Even then, I have
never before been caught in a situation like this."

_In fact, I was never before caught or I wouldn't be in this situation
at all._

"Oh, Jrann-Pttt," sighed Miss Anspacher, "I knew you couldn't be just an
ordinary native!"

"How did you get into this situation then?" Professor Bernardi asked. He
had an unfortunate talent for going directly to the point.

"The third member of our expedition died," Jrann-Pttt explained. "He was
our dirigational expert. Our guide."

"How did he happen to--"

"Are we just going to stand here chatting," Miss Anspacher demanded, "or
are we going to do something about this?"

"What can we do?" Mrs. Bernardi asked weakly. "We might just as well lie
down and--"

"Never say die, Louisa," Miss Anspacher admonished.

"I suggest we go to my camp to see what shape it's in," Jrann-Pttt said,
furiously putting together Plan C. "Some of the supplies there might
prove useful."

Captain Greenfield looked questioningly at Bernardi. The professor
shrugged. "Might as well."

"All right," the captain growled. "Let's pick up whatever we can save."

       *       *       *       *       *

Since there wasn't much that could be rescued, the little safari was
soon on its way. Jrann-Pttt led, carrying Algol in his arms. Behind came
