
"They're--they're _real_. They're _alive_!" said Harold Potter
hoarsely. That was the thing about them. They had the elusive quality
of life about them--and of course they were thus infinitely more
terrifying than the prop department's fake monsters.

"They're alive all right," said Dr. Mildume chattily. "Took me quite a
bit of experimenting to discover what to feed them. They like
glass--broken glass. They're evidently a silicon rather than a carbon
form of life."

"This I'll buy," said Mr. Untz, still staring.

"Of course," said Mildume. "I knew you would. They will cost you
exactly ten thousand dollars per day. Per twenty-four hour period."

"Profiteer--burglar!" said Mr. Untz, glaring at Mildume.

Mildume shrugged.

There was an abrupt, high-pitched squeak. Harold stared at the
monsters. The smaller one was quivering.

"They do that when they're angry," Dr. Mildume said. "Some sort of
skin vibration. This smaller one here seems to take the initiative in
things. Must be a male. Unless there's female dominance, as in birds
of prey, wherever these things come from. I've--uh--been unable to
ascertain which is which, if any."

Mr. Untz frowned suddenly. "Look--just how dangerous are these
things?"

"Don't know _exactly_," said Dr. Mildume. "A pigeon got too near the
cages the other day. They seemed to enjoy it. Although, as I say,
their staple appears to be silicon forms. I carelessly set a Weston
analyzer too near them the other day and they had it for lunch."

"If they're too dangerous ..." began Mr. Untz.

"What if they are?" said Mildume. "You make pictures with wild lions
and tigers and alligators, don't you? Seems to me you can find a way.
I don't recommend letting them out of the cage however."

Mr. Untz nodded and said, "Well, maybe we can get Etienne Flaubert to
do something with them. He's the animal trainer we call on. Anyway
Untz always figures something out. Only that's why I like musicals
better. There isn't so much to figure out and you can play Victor
Herbert backwards and get new tunes out of him. So anyway, we'll get a
truck and get these monsters to the studio right away."

It was arranged. It was arranged with utmost secrecy too. There were
other studios, after all, and in spite of their wealth of creative
talent it was easier to steal an idea than cook up a new one. Atom
bomb secrecy descended upon the Crusader Pictures lot and most
especially upon Sound Stage Six, where the dream sequence for the
psychological thriller, "Jolt!" was being filmed.

Even Jimsy LaRoche, the star of the picture, was excluded from the big
barn-like stage. Mr. Untz prepared to get his first stock shots of the
beasts.

There were gasps and much popping of eyebrows when Dr. Mildume--who
had come along as technical adviser--removed the tarpaulins from the
cages. The cameramen, the grips, the electricians, the sound men--all
stared unbelievingly. The script girl grabbed Mr. Untz's hand and dug
her fingernails into it. The makeup stylist clutched the lapels of his
mauve jacket and fainted.

"Nothing to be afraid of," Mr. Untz said to everybody. He was sort of
convincing himself too. "Dr. Mildume here knows all about the
monsters. He's got everything under control. So tell everybody about
them, Doctor."

Mildume nodded, bobbing his short white beard. He thrust his hands
into his tweed jacket, looked all around for a moment, then said, "I
don't know exactly where the monsters are from. I had my Q-beam
pointed into space, and I was focussing it, intending to put it on
Mars at the time of proper conjunction. All very complicated. However
the beam must have worked prematurely. These monsters began to form in
the hydrogen chamber."

Several of the listeners looked at other listeners with unmistakable
doubt. Unruffled, Dr. Mildume went on, "Now, we can make certain rough
assumptions from the form and structure of these monsters. You will
notice that except for their appendages they are globularly formed.
Any engineer can tell you that the arch and hemisphere sustain the
greatest weight for their mass.

"We may concede that they come from a planet of very strong gravity.
Their skin, for instance, is tough and rigid compared with ours. They
have difficulty staying rooted to earth--often a simple multipod
movement will send them bouncing to the top of the cage. There is one
other factor--the smaller of these creatures seems the more
dominant--suggesting that on their home planet smaller beings are more
agile and therefore better able to take care of themselves."

"There, you see?" interrupted Mr. Untz, slipping into a pause. "That's
all there is to it. So now let us please get down to business."

So they got down to business. And it was not easy business,
photographing these monsters. Keeping the cage wires out of focus
required a critical distance for each lens but whenever a camera came
too near a fibrilla would shoot forward--at the glass, no doubt--and
scare the wits out of the cameramen.

The shorter lenses got too much of the surrounding area into the
picture. The crew tried and tried. One technician muttered darkly that
the organization contract didn't cover this sort of thing. Mr. Untz
pleaded and cajoled and heckled and moved about and tried to keep
things going. Somehow, anyhow.

Eddie Tamoto, the chief cameraman, finally came up to him and said,
"It's no use, Max. These cages simply don't allow us to do anything.
Why don't we put them in the cages they use for jungle pictures?
