took a firm grip on the hand holds on his desk, began to breathe deeply.
The gong sounded again. Final warning that the ship was going into
hyper-flight. Thompson took as deep a breath as possible, held it.

The gong went into silence. The ship throbbed. The jump was in progress.
Thompson had the dazed impression that every atom in his body tried to
turn over at once. For a moment, there was a feeling of intense strain.
Then the feeling was gone as the ship and its contents passed into
hyper-flight. Thompson began to breathe again. In his lap, Buster
relaxed his claw holds, began to purr. Buster was an old hand at taking
these jumps.

"EEEEEEyooow!"

The eerie scream that came echoing through the ship seemed to lift up
every single strand of hair on Thompson's head. Thompson ran out of the
cabin. The scream came again, from the lounge. Thompson entered the
lounge just in time to see Kurkil standing in the middle of the room,
rip the last remnant of clothing from his body. Revealed under the
lights, his skin was turning a vivid green.

Fortune was trying to approach him. Kurkil was warning the man off.

"Stay away, stay away. Don't touch me. You'll get it."

In the split second that was needed for Thompson to take in the
situation, the green color flowing over Kurkil's body deepened in
intensity.

As the color deepened, the screams bubbling on his lips began to die
away. He fell slowly, like a man who is coming unhinged one joint at a
time.

He was dead before he hit the floor. Dead so completely that not even a
convulsive tremor passed through his body.

A frozen silence held the lounge. For this was a dream, a nightmare,
wild, distorted imagery.

Fortune's hand waved vaguely in the direction of Sol Cluster. "It looks
as if we're not as bug and stress proof as they said we were."

"What happened?"

"He was sitting there in the chair and I thought he was asleep. Then he
was screaming and tearing his clothes off." Ross spread his hands. "I
tried to help--"

"I know," Thompson said. He was trying to decide what to do. This ship
possessed no facilities for handling the dead. Such a contingency had
been thought too remote for consideration. Well, there was the ejection
port. "Get sheets," Thompson said. With Fortune and Ross helping, he set
about doing what had to be done.

       *       *       *       *       *

Later, in the lounge, they met to decide what had to be done. Neff,
leaving the drivers on automatic control, came up from the engine room.
Grant came forward from the control room. If any danger presented
itself, warning bells would call them back to their posts.

They were a silent and an uneasy group. Only Buster remained unaffected.

"There seems no doubt that we brought the infection back on board ship
with us," Thompson said.

He had stated the obvious. It got the answer it deserved. Silence.

"We also must consider the possibility that another of us, possibly all
of us, are infected."

No man stirred, no man spoke. Apparently they hoped they had not heard
correctly the words that had been spoken. In Thompson's lap Buster
grumbled as if he had understood and did not like what had been said.

"What are we going to do?"

"How can we find out what's causing this disease?"

Two voices came. Then came Fortune's voice. "And even if we find out,
what can we do about it? _They_ couldn't do anything about it."

"The fact that the race back there couldn't stop the disease, doesn't
mean we can't stop it. We're a different race with a different
metabolism and a different body structure--"

"Kurkil had the same metabolism and the same body structure," Ross said.

"We will do what we can," Thompson spoke flatly. In spite of the fact
that these men were supposed to be nerve proof, there was panic in the
air. He could sense it, knew that it had to be stopped before it got
started. Inwardly he cursed the fact that there was no doctor aboard,
but he knew only too well the line of reasoning that had led to the
omission of a physician.

"We have a medical library," Ross said, tentatively.

"Yes," Fortune spoke. "And it tells you exactly how to treat every
conceivable form of accident but it doesn't say a single damned word
about infections, and if it did we don't have any medicine to treat
them.

Again silence fell. In Thompson's lap, Buster squirmed, dropped to the
