Casker wrenched himself away from a vision of five juicy roast beefs
dancing tantalizingly before him. "What if their meat is our _poison_?
What then?"

"Then," Hellman said, "we will assume that their poison is our meat."

"And what happens if their meat _and_ their poison are our poison?"

"We starve."

"All right," Casker said, standing up. "Which assumption do we start
with?"

"Well, there's no sense in asking for trouble. This _is_ an oxygen
planet, if that means anything. Let's assume that we can eat some
basic food of theirs. If we can't we'll start on their poisons."

"If we live that long," Casker said.

Hellman began to translate labels. They discarded such brands as
ANDROGYNITES' DELIGHT AND VERBELL--FOR LONGER, CURLIER, MORE SENSITIVE
ANTENNAE, until they found a small gray box, about six inches by three
by three. It was called VALKORIN'S UNIVERSAL TASTE TREAT, FOR ALL
DIGESTIVE CAPACITIES.

"This looks as good as any," Hellman said. He opened the box.

Casker leaned over and sniffed. "No odor."

       *       *       *       *       *

Within the box they found a rectangular, rubbery red block. It
quivered slightly, like jelly.

"Bite into it," Casker said.

"Me?" Hellman asked. "Why not you?"

"You picked it."

"I prefer just looking at it," Hellman said with dignity. "I'm not too
hungry."

"I'm not either," Casker said.

They sat on the floor and stared at the jellylike block. After ten
minutes, Hellman yawned, leaned back and closed his eyes.

"All right, coward," Casker said bitterly. "I'll try it. Just
remember, though, if I'm poisoned, you'll never get off this planet.
You don't know how to pilot."

"Just take a little bite, then," Hellman advised.

Casker leaned over and stared at the block. Then he prodded it with
his thumb.

The rubbery red block giggled.

"Did you hear that?" Casker yelped, leaping back.

"I didn't hear anything," Hellman said, his hands shaking. "Go ahead."

Casker prodded the block again. It giggled louder, this time with a
disgusting little simper.

"Okay," Casker said, "what do we try next?"

"Next? What's wrong with this?"

"I don't eat anything that giggles," Casker stated firmly.

"Now listen to me," Hellman said. "The creatures who manufactured this
might have been trying to create an esthetic sound as well as a
pleasant shape and color. That giggle is probably only for the
amusement of the eater."

"Then bite into it yourself," Casker offered.

Hellman glared at him, but made no move toward the rubbery block.
Finally he said, "Let's move it out of the way."

They pushed the block over to a corner. It lay there giggling softly
to itself.

"Now what?" Casker said.

Hellman looked around at the jumbled stacks of incomprehensible alien
goods. He noticed a door on either side of the room.

"Let's have a look in the other sections," he suggested.

Casker shrugged his shoulders apathetically.

Slowly they trudged to the door in the left wall. It was locked and
Hellman burned it open with the ship's burner.

It was a wedge-shaped room, piled with incomprehensible alien goods.

The hike back across the room seemed like miles, but they made it only
slightly out of wind. Hellman blew out the lock and they looked in.

It was a wedge-shaped room, piled with incomprehensible alien goods.

"All the same," Casker said sadly, and closed the door.

"Evidently there's a series of these rooms going completely around the
building," Hellman said. "I wonder if we should explore them."

Casker calculated the distance around the building, compared it with
his remaining strength, and sat down heavily on a long gray object.

"Why bother?" he asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hellman tried to collect his thoughts. Certainly he should be able to
find a key of some sort, a clue that would tell him what they could
