
"I mean what does he like?"

"Women, mostly," she said, her expression clouded. "Come on now. What
about it?"

I stalled. "What do you want Arthur for?"

She gave me a disgusted look. "What do you think? To relieve the
manpower shortage, naturally. There's more work than there are men.
Now if the Major could just get hold of a couple of prosthetics, like
this thing here, why, he could put them in the big installations. This
one used to be an engineer or something, Vern said."

"Well ... _like_ an engineer."

       *       *       *       *       *

Amy shrugged. "So why couldn't we connect him up with the power
station? It's been done. The Major knows that--he was in the Pentagon
when they switched all the aircraft warning net over from computer to
prosthetic control. So why couldn't we do the same thing with our
power station and release forty men for other assignments? This thing
could work day, night, Sundays--what's the difference when you're just
a brain in a sardine can?"

Clatter-rattle-_bang_.

She looked startled. "Oh. I forgot he was listening."

"No deal," I said.

She said: "A hundred and fifty thousand?"

A hundred and fifty thousand dollars. I considered that for a while.
Arthur clattered warningly.

"Well," I temporized, "I'd have to be sure he was getting into good
hands--"

The typewriter thrashed wildly. The sheet of paper fluttered out of
the carriage. He'd used it up. Automatically I picked it up--it was
covered with imprecations, self-pity and threats--and started to put a
new one in.

"No," I said, bending over the typewriter, "I guess I couldn't sell
him. It just wouldn't be right--"

That was my mistake; it was the wrong time for me to say that, because
I had taken my eyes off her.

The room bent over and clouted me.

I half turned, not more than a fraction conscious, and I saw this Amy
girl, behind me, with the shoe still in her hand, raised to give me
another blackjacking on the skull.

The shoe came down, and it must have weighed more than it looked, and
even the fractional bit of consciousness went crashing away.




III


I have to tell you about Vern Engdahl. We were all from the _Sea
Sprite_, of course--me and Vern and even Arthur. The thing about Vern
is that he was the lowest-ranking one of us all--only an electricians'
mate third, I mean when anybody paid any attention to things like
that--and yet he was pretty much doing the thinking for the rest of
us. Coming to New York was his idea--he told us that was the only
place we could get what we wanted.

Well, as long as we were carrying Arthur along with us, we pretty much
needed Vern, because he was the one who knew how to keep the lash-up
going. You've got no idea what kind of pumps and plumbing go into a
prosthetic tank until you've seen one opened up. And, naturally,
Arthur didn't want any breakdowns without somebody around to fix
things up.

The _Sea Sprite_, maybe you know, was one of the old
liquid-sodium-reactor subs--too slow for combat duty, but as big as a
barn, so they made it a hospital ship. We were cruising deep when the
missiles hit, and, of course, when we came up, there wasn't much for a
hospital ship to do. I mean there isn't any sense fooling around with
anybody who's taken a good deep breath of fallout.

So we went back to Newport News to see what had happened. And we found
out what had happened. And there wasn't anything much to do except pay
off the crew and let them go. But us three stuck together. Why not? It
wasn't as if we had any families to go back to any more.

Vern just loved all this stuff--he'd been an Eagle Scout; maybe that
had something to do with it--and he showed us how to boil drinking
water and forage in the woods and all like that, because nobody in his
right mind wanted to go near any kind of a town, until the cold
weather set in, anyway. And it was always Vern, Vern, telling us what
to do, ironing out our troubles.

It worked out, except that there was this one thing. Vern had bright
ideas. But he didn't always tell us what they were.

So I wasn't so very surprised when I came to. I mean there I was, tied
up, with this girl Amy standing over me, holding the gun like a club.
Evidently she'd found out that there weren't any cartridges. And in a
couple of minutes there was a knock on the door, and she yelled, "Come
in," and in came Vern. And the man who was with him had to be somebody
important, because there were eight or ten other men crowding in close
behind.

I didn't need to look at the oak leaves on his shoulders to realize
that here was the chief, the fellow who ran this town, the Major.

It was just the kind of thing Vern _would_ do.

       *       *       *       *       *

Vern said, with the look on his face that made strange officers wonder
why this poor persecuted man had been forced to spend so much time in
the brig: "Now, Major, I'm sure we can straighten all this out. Would
you mind leaving me alone with my friend here for a moment?"

The Major teetered on his heels, thinking. He was a tall,
youngish-bald type, with a long, worried, horselike face. He said:
"Ah, do you think we should?"

"I guarantee there'll be no trouble, Major," Vern promised.

The Major pulled at his little mustache. "Very well," he said. "Amy,
you come along."

"We'll be right here, Major," Vern said reassuringly, escorting him to
the door.

"You bet you will," said the Major, and tittered. "Ah, bring that gun
along with you, Amy. And be sure this man knows that we have bullets."

They closed the door. Arthur had been cowering in his suitcase, but
now his eyestalk peeped out and the rattling and clattering from that
typewriter sounded like the Battle of the Bulge.

I demanded: "Come on, Vern. What's this all about?"

Vern said: "How much did they offer you?"

Clatter-bang-BANG. I peeked, and Arthur was saying: WARNED YOU SAM
THAT ENGDAHL WAS UP TO TRICKS PLEASE SAM PLEASE PLEASE PLEASE HIT HIM
ON THE HEAD KNOCK HIM OUT HE MUST HAVE A GUN SO GET IT AND SHOOT OUR
WAY OUT OF HERE

"A hundred and fifty thousand dollars," I said.

Vern looked outraged. "I only got forty!"

Arthur clattered: VERN I APPEAL TO YOUR COMMON DECENCY WERE OLD
SHIPMATES VERN REMEMBER ALL THE TIMES I

"Still," Vern mused, "it's all common funds anyway, right? Arthur
belongs to both of us."

I DONT DONT DONT REPEAT DONT BELONG TO ANYBODY BUT ME

"That's true," I said grudgingly. "But I carried him, remember."

SAM WHATS THE MATTER WITH YOU Q Q I DONT LIKE THE EXPRESSION ON YOUR
FACE LISTEN SAM YOU ARENT

Vern said, "A hundred and fifty thousand, remember."

THINKING OF SELLING

"And of course we couldn't get out of here," Vern pointed out.
"They've got us surrounded."

ME TO THESE RATS Q Q SAM VERN PLEASE DONT SCARE ME

       *       *       *       *       *

I said, pointing to the fluttering paper in the rattling machine:
"You're worrying our friend."

Vern shrugged impatiently.

I KNEW I SHOULDNT HAVE TRUSTED YOU, Arthur wept. THATS ALL I MEAN TO
YOU EH

Vern said: "Well, Sam? Let's take the cash and get this thing over
with. After all, he _will_ have the best of treatment."

It was a little like selling your sister into white slavery, but what
else was there to do? Besides, I kind of trusted Vern.

"All right," I said.

What Arthur said nearly scorched the paper.

Vern helped pack Arthur up for moving. I mean it was just a matter of
pulling the plugs out and making sure he had a fresh battery, but Vern
wanted to supervise it himself. Because one of the little things Vern
had up his sleeve was that he had found a spot for himself on the
Major's payroll. He was now the official Prosthetic (Human)
Maintenance Department Chief.

The Major said to me: "Ah, Dunlap. What sort of experience have you
had?"

"Experience?"

"In the Navy. Your friend Engdahl suggested you might want to join us
here."

"Oh. I see what you mean." I shook my head. "Nothing that would do you
any good, I'm afraid. I was a yeoman."

"Yeoman?"

"Like a company clerk," I explained. "I mean I kept records and cut
orders and made out reports and all like that."

"Company clerk!" The eyes in the long horsy face gleamed. "Ah, you're
mistaken, Dunlap! Why, that's _just_ what we need. Our morning reports
are in foul shape. Foul! Come over to HQ. Lieutenant Bankhead will
give you a lift."

"Lieutenant Bankhead?"

I got an elbow in my ribs for that. It was that girl Amy, standing
alongside me. "I," she said, "am Lieutenant Bankhead."

Well, I went along with her, leaving Engdahl and Arthur behind. But I
must admit I wasn't sure of my reception.

Out in front of the hotel was a whole fleet of cars--three or four of
them, at least. There was a big old Cadillac that looked like a
gangsters' car--thick glass in the windows, tires that looked like
they belonged on a truck. I was willing to bet it was bulletproof and
also that it belonged to the Major. I was right both times. There was
a little MG with the top down, and a couple of light trucks. Every one
of them was painted bright orange, and every one of them had the
star-and-bar of the good old United States Army on its side.

It took me back to old times--all but the unmilitary color. Amy led me
