"I'll be down right away, Mummy."

His mother was waiting for him in the pantry. Under the glaring
overhead light he stopped for her last minute inspection. She used a
pocket-stick to touch up a spot on his chest where the oil gleam had
faded a little. And she gave him a glass of the compound to drink.

"Jenny really wants to marry you, George," she confided. "I know the
symptoms; half our battle's won for us. And my former husband won't be
around to worry us with his aches and pains. I made the trade this
afternoon."

He followed her into the dining room where the cocktails were being
served. Aside from the Harpers, George's mother had rented two
handsome, muscular escorts for his sisters. In the confusion, George
saw Jenny Harper's mother stealthily lace his water glass with a dose
of the compound. He suppressed a grin. Apparently she was anxious to
complete the deal, too.

George found it almost impossible to hold back hilarious laughter when
Jenny herself shyly pressed a capsule of the compound into his hand
and asked him to use it. Three full-size slugs of the drug! George
wondered what would have happened if he hadn't been immune.
Fortunately, he knew how to act the lusty, eager, drooling male which
each of the women expected.

The negotiations moved along without a hitch. George's mother held out
for twenty-eight thousand shares, and got it. The only problem left
was the date for the wedding, and Jenny settled that very quickly. "I
want my man, Mom," she said, "and I want him now."

Jenny always got what she wanted.

When she and her mother left that evening, she held George's hand in
hers and whispered earnestly, "So they were married and lived happily
ever after. That's the way it's going to be with us, isn't it,
George?"

"It's up to you, Jenny; for as long as you want me."

That was the conventional answer which he was expected to make, but he
saw unmasked disappointment in her face. She wanted something more
genuine, with more of himself in it. He felt suddenly sorry for her,
for the way he was going to use her. She was a pretty girl, even sweet
and innocent--if those words still had any real meaning left after
what his mother's world had done to them. Under other circumstances,
George would have looked forward with keen pleasure to marrying Jenny.
As it was, Jenny Harper was first a symbol of the fakery he intended
to destroy, and after that a woman.

       *       *       *       *       *

Five days later they were married. In spite of the short engagement,
Mrs. Harper and George's mother managed to put on a splendid show in
the church. George received a business sedan from his mother, the
traditional gift given every bridegroom; and from Mrs. Harper he
received a good job in a company where she was the majority
stockholder. And so, in the customary pageantry and ceremony, George
became Mr. Harper.

"Think of it--Mr. Harper," Jenny sighed, clinging to his arm. "Now
you're really mine, George."

On the church steps the newlyweds posed for photographs--George in the
plain, white trunks which symbolized a first marriage; Jenny in a
dazzling cloud of fluff, suggestively nearly transparent. Then Mrs.
Harper drew Jenny aside and whispered in her daughter's ear: the
traditional telling of the secret. Now Jenny knew where the compound
was manufactured; and for George revenge was within his grasp.

George's mother had arranged for their honeymoon at Memory Lodge, a
resort not far from the Directorate capital in Hollywood. It was the
national capital as well, though everyone conscientiously maintained
the pretense that Washington, with an all-male Congress, still
governed the country. George considered himself lucky that his mother
had chosen Memory Lodge. He had already planned to desert Jenny in the
mountains.

George knew how to drive; his mother had wanted him to do a great deal
of chauffeuring for her. But he had never driven beyond town, and he
had never driven anywhere alone. His mother gave him a map on which
his route to the lodge was indicated in bright red. In the foothills
George left the marked highway on a paved side road.

He gambled that Jenny wouldn't immediately realize what he had done,
and the gamble paid off. Still wearing her nearly transparent wedding
gown, she pressed close to him and ran her hands constantly over his
naked chest, thoroughly satisfied with the man she had bought. In the
church George had been given a tall glass of the compound; he acted
the part Jenny expected.

But it was far less a role he played than George wanted to admit. His
body sang with excitement. He found it very difficult to hold the
excitement in check. If he had been addicted to the compound, it would
have been out of the question. More than ever before he sympathized
with the men who were enslaved by love. In spite of his own immunity,
he nearly yielded to the sensuous appeal of her caress. He held the
wheel so hard his knuckles went white; he clenched his teeth until his
jaw ached.

All afternoon George drove aimless mountain roads, moving deeper into
the uninhabited canyons. Carefully judging his distances with an eye
on the map, he saw to it that he remained relatively close to the
city; after he forced Jenny to give him the information he wanted, he
wanted to be able to get out fast.

By dusk the roads he drove were no longer paved. Ruts carved deep by
spring rains suggested long disuse. The swaying of the car and the
constant grinding of gears eventually jolted Jenny out of her romantic
dreams. She moved away from George and sat looking at the pines which
met above the road.

