Then, as suddenly as it had come, he felt the freedom slip away, and
though he struggled to keep hold of it, it seemed irretrievably gone.
Once more the omnipotent voice clamped over him like a harsh hand over
the mouth of a squalling babe. "You will go to Section AA-39 of the
control board. What's the schedule, Joe? Thanks. M-75, your movement
pattern is as follows: Z-29-a-q-39-8...."

Powerless to resist, though every crystal and atom of his reasoning
self fought to thrust aside the command, M-75 obeyed. He moved along
the prescribed pattern, clipping wires with metal fingers that
sprouted blades, rewiring with a dexterity beyond anything human,
soldering with a thumb that generated a white heat, removing bulbs
and parts and fetching replacements from the vent where they popped up
at precisely the right moment. He could not help doing the job
perfectly: the design of the board to its littlest detail was
imprinted indelibly on his memory tapes.

But that certain portion of him, a little fragment greater than
before, remained detached and watchful. Vividly recorded was the
passage of the two men into, through, and out of the room, and the
things they had done while there. So even while he worked on the board
he ran and re-ran that memory pattern through a segment of his
analyzer. From the infinite store of data filed away in his great
chest, his calculator sifted and selected, paired and compared, and
long before the repair job on the big board was done, M-75 knew how to
get out of the room. The world was getting a little small for him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gaines dialed a number on the plant phone and swayed back casually in
his chair as he listened to the muted ringing on the other end. The
buzz broke off in midburp and a dour voice said: "Dirty work and odd
jobs division, Lister talking."

"Joe Gaines, Harry. Got a hot squad lying around doing nothing?"

"Might be I could scare up a couple of the boys."

"Well, do so. One of our servos--"

A metallic bang interrupted Gaines, a loud, incisive bang that echoed
dankly through the quiet of the chamber.

"What the hell was that?" growled Lister.

Gaines blinked, his eyes following Sokolski as the latter looked up
from his work and rose to his feet.

"Joe--still there?" came Lister's impatient voice.

"Yeah, yeah. Anyway, this baby's ready for the demo treatment. And a
real hot one, Harry. Coupla years inside that Einstein oven and you
ain't exactly baked Alaska when you come out."

"Shortly."

Once again came the same sharp, metallic clang, ringing through the
room. Unmistakably, it came from the direction of the pile. Slowly, as
though reluctant to let go, Gaines dropped the receiver back on its
cradle.

"Bert--" he began, and felt his face grow bloodless.

Sokolski walked over in front of the opening into the maze and stood,
arms akimbo, huge head cocked to one side, listening.

"Bert, funny noises coming out of nuclear--"

Sokolski ignored him and took a step forward. Gaines shuffled to his
side, and they listened.

Out of the maze rattled half a dozen loud, grinding, metallic
concussions.

"Bert--"

"You said that before."

"Bert, _listen_!" screeched Gaines.

Sokolski looked up at the high ceiling, squinted, and tried to place
the perfectly familiar but unidentifiable sound that came whispering
down the maze.

And then he knew. "_The door to the pile!_" he spluttered.

Gaines was beside himself with horror. "Bert, let's get going. I
don't like this--"

All of a sudden Geiger counters in the room began their deadly
conversation, a rising argument that swooped in seconds from a low
mumble to a shouting thunder-storm of sound. Gamma signals hooted, the
tip off cubes on either side of the maze entrance became red, and the
radiation tabs clipped to their wrists turned color before their eyes.

Then they were staring for what seemed like an eternity, utterly
overwhelmed by its very impossibility, at a sight they had never
imagined they might ever see: a pile servomech wheeling silently
around the last bend in the maze and straight toward them.

Sokolski had sense enough to push the red emergency button as they
fled past it.

