scoundrel. You have a choice of exposing him, with great personal
danger to yourself--Tournay is a dangerous and ruthless man--or
remaining silent and knowing that you are a coward. The difficulty of
that choice is causing your headaches."

"You may be right," Bennett admitted without hesitation. "I haven't
had time to think the matter through quite that far. What would you
advise me to do?"

"That is something which cannot be advised. The answer lies within
yourself. You are either a big enough man to do the right thing--which
you yourself recognize--or you are a small man and will take the
safer, less honorable course. The decision and the integrity lie
within yourself."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bennett slumped. "I see that. Then there's nothing more that you can
do for me?"

"But there is," Lima replied. "I can cure your headaches, if you
wish--for an additional hundred dollars."

"That would be a cheap price." Bennett drew his wallet from his
pocket. "My cash is rather low. Would you accept a personal check?"

"Certainly," Lima said. "But, first, let me explain about my cure.
There is some mental unpleasantness involved which you may consider
worse than the ailment."

"I doubt that. I can't imagine anything worse than this agony."

"Your mind will be placed under my control and led through a dream
sequence. I will follow a logical progression of events, using your
actual past as background. While you are under my control, your
experiences will be far from pleasant. I will allow your mind to
follow its own anticipated course of events, influencing your thoughts
only slightly--directing them into as unpleasant channels as possible.
In fact, to make the cure certain, at least the culmination must be
quite devastating. Do you agree to undergo such rigorous mental
punishment?"

"But why do I have to?" Bennett asked, astonished and worried.

"That pattern will act in the manner of a counter-irritant. Your mind
is like a spoiled child, rejecting anticipated unpleasantness. Under
my influence it is subjected to possible alternative experiences,
which are so much worse than the one it originally feared that it will
gratefully accept the lesser evil."

"That sounds reasonable," Bennett agreed. "When could we begin this
treatment?"

"Immediately, if you are willing."

"I see no reason for waiting."

"Then, if you are ready," Lima told him, "lie on this couch. Keep your
eyes on mine." She spoke slowly, evenly. "Remember that you are doing
this of your own free will, that you trust me. I am your friend and
would do you no harm."

Her voice droned on as Bennett looked into her eyes. They merged until
they became one large, placid pool of restfulness, and he found
himself drawn into them.

He sank peacefully, quietly--completely.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the telephone rang, Bennett knew it was the district attorney
returning his call, and that the die was cast. Until this ugly
business was brought to a conclusion, his life would be in constant
danger.

"Leroy Bennett speaking," he said. "I have had collected some
information that I think will be of very great interest to your
office."

"Information about what?" the voice at the other end asked briskly.

"I have proof that John Tournay is responsible for the death of two
men, in an action involving criminal collusion."

"If what you say is true, I will be glad to see your evidence," the
district attorney said. "Could you deliver it in person? There may be
some questions I would like to ask you about it."

"Certainly," Bennett replied. "When would be the most convenient
time?"

"Later in the day. I have a case going on. How would four-thirty this
afternoon suit you?"

"That would be fine."

The rest of the day dragged slowly. At four o'clock Bennett left his
office and took the elevator to the ground floor. Under his arm he
clutched the briefcase which might spell death for him.

A moment after he left his office building, he knew he had made a
mistake--a fatal one!

Idly, at first, his mind's eye watched the driver of a long gray
sedan, parked at the curb, start up its motor as he approached. The
car pulled away from the curb when he came alongside it.

Through an open rear window, Bennett saw a man with a dark, brooding
face--with black eyebrows that joined over the bridge of the
nose--glowering at him. At the same instant he saw the blunt nose of
an automatic resting on the lowered glass of the window, just below
the chin of the frowning man.

Incredibly, even as he realized that he was about to die, Bennett's
first thought was not one of fear, but rather that this dark man was
the other person he had seen in his hallucinations of the city of
Thone!

Then, as one part of his mind drew back in terror at what it knew was
about to happen, another part wondered at the mystery of Thone and the
people in it. Where did that hallucination fit in this mist of life
which was about to end?

