that smallness and quietness, a certain strength. Quay had seen that
look on Cutter's face before, and it meant simply that Cutter would
wait, analyzing expertly in the meantime, until he found his advantage.
Quay wondered, if this gadget worked, how long Bolen would own the
rights to it.


Cutter drove the Cadillac into Hallery Boulevard, as though the
automobile were an English Austin, and just beyond the boundaries of the
city, cut off into the hills, sliding into the night and the relative
darkness of the exclusive, sparsely populated Green Oaks section.

Ten minutes later, his house, a massive stone structure which looked as
though it had been shifted intact from the center of some medieval moat,
loomed up, gray and stony, and Capra, his handyman, took over the car
and drove it into the garage, while Cutter strode up the wide steps to
the door.

Niels took his hat, and Mary was waiting for him in the library.

She was a rather large woman, although not fat, and when she wore high
heels--which she was not prone to do, because although Cutter would not
have cared, she kept trying to project into other people's minds and
trying, as she said, "Not to do anything to them, that I wouldn't want
them to do to me."--she rose a good inch above Cutter. She was pleasant
humored, and cooperative, and the one great irritant about her that
annoyed Cutter, was the fact that she was not capable of meeting life
wholeheartedly and with strength.

She steadily worried about other people's feelings and thoughts, so that
Cutter wondered if she were capable of the slightest personal
conviction. Yet that weakness was an advantage at the same time, to him,
because she worked constantly toward making him happy. The house was run
to his minutest liking, and the servants liked her, so that while she
did not use a strong enough hand, they somehow got things done for her,
and Cutter had no real complaint. Someday, he knew, he would be able to
develop her into the full potential he knew she was capable of
achieving, and then there wouldn't be even that one annoyance about her.

He sat down in the large, worn, leather chair, and she handed him a
Scotch and water, and kissed his cheek, and then sat down opposite him
in a smaller striped-satin chair.

"Did you have a nice day, dear?" she asked.

She was always pleasant and she always smiled at him, and she was
indeed a handsome woman. They had been married but five years, and she
was almost fifteen years younger than he, but they had a solid
understanding. She respected his work, and she was careful with the
money he allowed her, and she never forgot the Scotch and water. "The
day was all right," he said.

"My goodness," she said, "you worked late. Do you want dinner right
away?"

"I had some sandwiches at the office," he said, drinking slowly.

"That isn't enough," she said reproachfully, and he enjoyed her concern
over him. "You'd better have some nice roast beef that Andre did just
perfectly. And there's some wonderful dressing that I made myself, for
just a small salad."

He smiled finally. "All right," he said. "All right."

She got up and kissed him again, and he relaxed in the large chair,
sipping contentedly at his drink, listening to her footsteps hurrying
away, the sound another indication that she was doing something for him.
He felt tired and easy. He let his mind relax with his body. The gadget,
the Confidet; that was going to work, he knew. It would erase the last
important bug in his operational efficiency, and then he might even
expand, the way he had wanted to all along. He closed his eyes for a
moment, tasting of his contentment, and then he heard the sound of his
dinner being placed on the dining room table, and he stood up briskly
and walked out of the library. He really was hungry, he realized. Not
only hungry but, he thought, he might make love to Mary that evening.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first indication that the Confidet might be working, came three
weeks later, when Quay handed Cutter the report showing an efficiency
increase of 3.7 percent. "I think that should tell the story," Quay said
elatedly.

"Doesn't mean anything," Cutter said. "Could be a thousand other factors
besides that damned gimmick."

"But we've never been able to show more than one point five variance on
the administrative checks."

"The trouble with you, Quay," Cutter said brusquely, "is you keep
looking for miracles. You think the way to get things in this world is
to hope real hard. Nothing comes easy, and I've got half a notion to get
those damned silly things jerked out." He bent over his work, obviously
finished with Quay, and Quay, deflated, paced out of the office.

Cutter smiled inside the empty office. He liked to see Quay's enthusiasm
broken now and then. It took that, to mold a really good man, because
that way he assumed real strength after a while. If he got knocked down
and got up enough, he didn't fall apart when he hit a really tough
obstacle. Cutter was not unhappy about the efficiency figures at all,
and he knew as well as Quay that they were decisive.

Give it another two weeks, he thought, and if the increase was
comparable, then they might have a real improvement on their hands.
Those limp, jumpy creatures on the desks out there might actually start
earning their keep. He was thinking about that, what it would mean to
the total profit, when Lucile opened his door and he caught a glimpse of
the office outside, including the clerk with the sad, frightened eyes.
Even you, Linden, Cutter thought, we might even improve you.


The increase _was_ comparable after another two weeks. In fact, the
efficiency figure jumped to 8.9. Quay was too excited to be knocked down
this time, and Cutter was unable to suppress his own pleasure.

"This is really it this time, George," Quay said. "It really is. And
here." He handed Cutter a set of figures. "Here's what accounting
estimates the profit to be on this eight-nine figure."

Cutter nodded, his eyes thinning the slightest bit. "We won't see that
for a while."

"No," Quay said, "but we'll see it! We'll sure as hell see it! And if it
goes much higher, we'll absolutely balance out!"

"What does Bolen figure the top to be?"
