most advanced minds of Aztlan can understand. We merely operate the
machines."

Matson shrugged. He had expected something like this. Now they would
stall him off about the machines after handing him a fast line of
double-talk.

"As I said," Ixtl went on, "there is no basis for understanding.
Still, if it will satisfy you, we will show you our machines--and the
mathematics that created them although I doubt that you will learn
anything more from them than you have from our explanation."

"I could try," Matson said grimly.

"Very well," Ixtl replied.

He led the way into the center of the ship where the seamless housings
stood, the housings that had baffled some of the better minds of
Earth. Matson watched while the star men proceeded to be helpful. The
housings fell apart at invisible lines of juncture, revealing
mechanisms of baffling simplicity, and some things that didn't look
like machines at all. The aliens stripped the strange devices and Ixtl
attempted to explain. They had anti-gravity, forcefields, faster than
light drive, and advanced design computers that could be packed in a
suitcase. There were weird devices whose components seemed to run out
of sight at crazily impossible angles, other things that rotated
frictionlessly, suspended in fields of pure force, and still others
which his mind could not envisage even after his eyes had seen them.
All about him lay the evidence of a science so advanced and alien that
his brain shrank from the sight, refusing to believe such things
existed. And their math was worse! It began where Einstein left off
and went off at an incomprehensible tangent that involved psychology
and ESP. Matson was lost after the first five seconds!

Stunned, uncomprehending and deflated, he left the ship. An impression
that he was standing with his toe barely inside the door of knowledge
became a conscious certainty as he walked slowly to his car. The wry
thought crossed his mind that if the aliens were trying to convince
him of his abysmal ignorance, they had succeeded far beyond their
fondest dreams!


They certainly had! Matson thought grimly as he selected five
cartridges from the box lying beside him. In fact they had succeeded
too well. They had turned his deflation into antagonism, his ignorance
into distrust. Like a savage, he suspected what he could not
understand. But unlike the true primitive, the emotional distrust
didn't interfere with his ability to reason or to draw logical
inferences from the data which he accumulated. In attempting to
convince, Ixtl had oversold his case.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was shortly after he had returned to Washington, that the aliens
gave the waiting world the reasons for their appearance on Earth. They
were, they said, members of a very ancient highly evolved culture
called Aztlan. And the Aztlans, long past the need for conquest and
expansion, had turned their mighty science to the help of other, less
fortunate, races in the galaxy. The aliens were, in a sense,
missionaries--one of hundreds of teams travelling the star lanes to
bring the benefits of Aztlan culture to less favored worlds. They
were, they unblushingly admitted, altruists--interested only in
helping others.

It was pure corn, Matson reflected cynically, but the world lapped it
up and howled for more. After decades of cold war, lukewarm war, and
sporadic outbreaks of violence, that were inevitably building to
atomic destruction, men were willing to try anything that would ease
the continual burden of strain and worry. To Mankind, the Aztlans'
words were as refreshing as a cool breeze of hope in a desert of
despair.

And the world got what it wanted.


Quite suddenly the aliens left the Northwest, and accompanied by
protective squads of FBI and Secret Service began to cross the nation.
Taking widely separated paths they visited cities, towns, and farms,
exhibiting the greatest curiosity about the workings of human
civilization. And, in turn, they were examined by hordes of hopeful
humans. Everywhere they went, they spread their message of good will
and hope backed by the incredibly convincing power of their telepathic
minds. Behind them, they left peace and hopeful calm; before them,
anticipation mounted. It rose to a crescendo in New York where the
paths of the star men met.

The Aztlans invaded the United Nations. They spoke to the General
Assembly and the Security Council, were interviewed by the secretariat
and reporters from a hundred foreign lands. They told their story with
such conviction that even the Communist bloc failed to raise an
objection, which was as amazing to the majority of the delegates as
the fact of the star men themselves. Altruism, it seemed, had no
conflict with dialectic materialism. The aliens offered a watered-down
variety of their technology to the peoples of Earth with no strings
attached, and the governments of Earth accepted with open hands, much
as a small boy accepts a cookie from his mother. It was impossible for
men to resist the lure of something for nothing, particularly when it
was offered by such people as the Aztlans. After all, Matson reflected
bitterly, nobody shoots Santa Claus!

From every nation in the world came invitations to the aliens to visit
their lands. The star men cheerfully accepted. They moved across
Europe, Asia, and Africa--visited South America, Central America, the
Middle East and Oceania. No country escaped them. They absorbed
languages, learned customs, and spread good will. Everywhere they went
relaxation followed in their footsteps, and throughout the world arose
a realization of the essential brotherhood of man.

It took nearly three years of continual travelling before the aliens
again assembled at UN headquarters to begin the second part of their
promised plan--to give their science to Earth. And men waited with
calm expectation for the dawn of Golden Age.


Matson's lips twisted. Fools! Blind, stupid fools! Selling their
birthright for a mess of pottage! He shifted the rifle across his
knees and began filling the magazine with cartridges. He felt an empty
loneliness as he closed the action over the filled magazine and turned
the safety to "on". There was no comforting knowledge of support and
sympathy to sustain him in what he was about to do. There was no real
hope that there ever would be. His was a voice crying in the
wilderness, a voice that was ignored--as it had been when he visited
the President of the United States....

       *       *       *       *       *

Matson entered the White House, presented his appointment card, and
was ushered past ice-eyed Secret Service men into the presidential
office. It was as close as he had ever been to the Chief Executive,
and he stared with polite curiosity across the width of desk which
separated them.

"I wanted to see you about the Aztlan business," the President began
without preamble. "You were there when their ship landed, and you are
also one of the few men in the country who has seen them alone. In
addition, your office will probably be handling the bulk of our
requests in regard to the offer they made yesterday in the UN. You're
in a favorable spot." The President smiled and shrugged. "I wanted to
talk with you sooner, but business and routine play the devil with
one's desires in this office.

"Now tell me," he continued, "your impression of these people."

"They're an enigma," Matson said flatly. "To tell the truth, I can't
figure them out." He ran his fingers through his hair with a worried
gesture. "I'm supposed to be a pretty fair physicist, and I've had
quite a bit of training in the social sciences, but both the
mechanisms and the psychology of these Aztlans are beyond my
comprehension. All I can say for sure is that they're as far beyond us
