
"But now! These mountains are lifting, vanishing from my sight. A great
_thing_ which I cannot comprehend hovers before me. It has many colors,
but mostly there is the orange of the mountains. It hangs in the air,
and from the portion nearest me grow dark trees as round as myself and
as tall. There is a great redness above, that opens like the Katus
flower, exposing the ivory white from which puffs the Tongue of Death.
Beyond this I cannot see well, but ever so high are two gigantic caverns
from which the Winds of the Legends blow--and suck. As dangerous as the
Katus, by Dal! Alternately they crush me to the ground, then threaten to
tear me from it and hurl me away."

_My nose was the cavern from which issued the horrifying wind. I noticed
that my breath distressed the little man as I leaned over to stare at
him, so drew back._

_Upstairs, the visor buzzed. Before answering, so that I would not lose
the little man, I very gingerly pinched his shirt with the tongs, and
lifted him to the table._

"My breath! I am shot into the heavens like Milo and his rocket! I
traverse a frightful distance! Everything changes constantly. A million
miles below is chaos. This world is mad! A giant landscape passes
beneath me, so weird I cannot describe it. I--I cannot understand. Only
my heart trembles within me. Neither Science nor the gods can help or
comfort in this awful world of Greatness!

"We stop. I hang motionless in the air. The ground beneath is utterly
insane. But I see vast uncovered veins of rare metal--and crystal,
precious crystal, enough to cover the mightiest Temple we could build!
Oh, that Mortia were so blessed! In all this terrifying world, the
richness of the crystal and the marvelous metal do redeem.

"Men!----I see ... I believe it is a temple! It is incredibly tall, of
black foundation and red spire, but it is weathered, leaning as if to
fall--and very bare. The people cannot love their Gods as we--or else
there is the Hunger.... But the gods may enlighten this world, too, and
if lowered, I will make for it. A sacred Temple should be a
haven--friends! I descend."

_The little man's eye had caught my scissors and a glass ruler as I
suspended him above my desk. They were his exposed vein of metal and the
precious crystal. I was searching for something to secure him. In the
last second before I lowered him, his heart swelled at the sight of the
"Temple"--my red and black pen slanting upward from the desk holder._

_A stamp lying on my desk was an inspiration. I licked it, turned it gum
side up, and cautiously pressed the little man against it feet first.
With the thought, "That ought to hold him," I dashed upstairs to answer
the call._

_But it didn't hold him. There was quite a bit of strength in that tiny
body._

"Miserable fate! I flounder in a horrid marsh," the upset thought-waves
came to the men of Mortia. "The viscous mire seeks to entrap me, but I
think I can escape it. Then I will make for the Temple. The Gods may
recognize and protect me there."

       *       *       *       *       *

I missed the call--I had delayed too long--but the momentary diversion
had cleared my mind and allowed new thoughts to enter. I now knew what
my first step would be in presenting the little man to the world.

I'd write a newspaper account myself--exclusive! Give the scoop to Earl.
Would that be a sensation for _his_ paper! Then I'd be made. A friend of
the family, this prominent publisher had often promised he would give me
a break when I was ready. Well, I _was_ ready!

Excited, dashing downstairs, I half-formulated the idea. The
