
"That's a darned poor answer," Higgins said.

"It's the only answer," Craig replied. "Your dove is coming back."

"What? Have you gone wacky on me?" the startled captain answered.

Craig pointed to the sea. Barely visible on the horizon was a tiny dot.

"Oh, the plane," the captain said, watching the dot. It was moving
swiftly toward them.

Craig watched it, a frown on his face. "I thought you sent out only
_one_ plane," he said.

"That's right. I did send one."

"Well," Craig said slowly, "unless my eyes have gone bad, three planes
are coming back."

"What?--But that's impossible?" Higgins snatched a pair of glasses,
swiftly focused them on the plane. It was still only a dot in the sky.
Two smaller dots were following swiftly behind it.

"Maybe a couple of those lizard-birds are chasing it?" Craig hazarded.

"Nonsense!" the captain retorted. "It can fly rings around those things.
Those lizards are too slow to keep up with it. But there is something
following it."

Higgins kept the glasses to his eyes, straining to see the approaching
dots.

"If those things are planes," he muttered, and there was a note of
exultation in his voice, "then Michaelson, and his talk of space-time
faults, is nuts."

What Higgins meant was, that if the two dots were planes, then what had
happened to the Idaho had been an illusion of some kind. Planes could
exist only in a modern world. They were one of mankind's most recent
inventions.

The stubby-winged scouting plane from the ship was easily visible now.
It was driving hell for leather for the Idaho. Craig watched it with
growing apprehension.

"That pilot is running away from something," he said.

"Impossible!" Higgins snapped.

The plane swept nearer. It was flying at a low altitude. The two dots
were hard on its heels. They were overtaking it. And--they were no
longer dots.

"Planes!" Higgins shouted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Craig kept silent. They were planes all right, but--He saw something
lance out from one of them. The scouting plane leaped upward in a
screaming climb. Something reached toward it again, touched it. It began
to lose altitude. It was still coming toward the Idaho but it was on a
long slant.

"It's being attacked!" Higgins shouted, pain in his voice.

Over the Idaho the call to battle stations rolled. Again the mighty
vessel surged to the tempo of men going into action.

The scouting plane was dropping lower and lower. It hit the water. One
of the pursuing ships dived down at it.

The anti-aircraft batteries let go. For the second time the Idaho was
defending herself. Thunder rolled across the waters.

The attacking plane was within point-blank range. Mushrooms of black
smoke puffed into existence around it, knocked it around in the air,
caught it with a direct hit.

A gigantic explosion sounded.

A ball of smoke burst where the plane had been. Fragments floated
outward, slid downward to the sea. There was not enough of the plane
left for identification.

The second plane lifted upward. For the first time Craig got a good look
at it. His first impression, illogical as that was, was that it was a
Jap ship. When it lifted up he got a good look at it. It wasn't a Jap
plane. No marks of the rising sun were visible on its body.

Craig saw then that it wasn't a plane at all. It had stubby, sloping
wings, but the wings were apparently more for the purpose of stabilizing
flight than for the lift they might impart. It looked like a flying
wedge.

He could not tell how it was propelled. If it had a motor, he could not
see it.

It was fast, faster than greased lightning.

Apparently its pilot had not noticed the battleship until the barrage of
anti-aircraft fire had destroyed the first plane. Not until then did he
even know the Idaho existed. Like a bird that had been suddenly startled
by the appearance of a hawk, the plane leaped into the air. Shells were
still bursting around it. It went up so fast it left the barrage
completely behind. Its climb was almost vertical. It rose to about
twenty thousand feet, leveled off. Twice it circled the battleship,
ignoring the shell bursts, that tried to keep up with it.

Then it turned in the direction from which it had come. It was out of
sight in seconds.

There was silence on the bridge of the Idaho.

"Holy cats!" Craig heard an officer mutter. "Somebody is crazy as hell.
_We_ don't have planes that will fly like that and I know damned good
and well they didn't have them a hundred thousand years ago!"

Was Michaelson wrong? Was he talking through his hat when he said the
Idaho had been precipitated through a time fault into the remote past?
He had said they might be a hundred thousand years in the past, or a
million years--he didn't know which. The appearance of the lizard-birds,
the great winged dragons of mythology, had seemed to prove that the
scientist was correct.

Did these two mysterious planes, of strange shape and design and with
the ability to fly at such blinding speed, prove that he was wrong?

Was it possible--the thought stunned Craig--that they had been
precipitated into the future?

The winged dragons belonged to the past. The planes, theoretically at
least, belonged to the future.

"Something is crazy!" Captain Higgins said. "Go get that scientist," he
spoke to one of his aides. "I want to talk to him."

       *       *       *       *       *

Michaelson came to the bridge and listened quietly to what Higgins had
to say. His grave face registered no emotion but his eyes were grim.

"I can definitely tell you _two_ things," he said at last. "One of them
is that we are not in what could be called the future."

"But those two planes were better than anything we have invented!"
Captain Higgins insisted. "The airplane was not invented until 1907.
This _has_ to be the future."

"_Men_ invented airplanes in 1907," Michaelson said. Ever so slightly he
emphasized the word "_men_."

Higgins stared at him. Slowly, as he realized the implication of what
the scientist had said, his face began to change. "What are you driving
at?" he said, his voice a whisper.

Michaelson spread his hands in a helpless gesture. "The Wright brothers
invented the lighter-than-air ship early in the twentieth century," he
said. "They were the first men to fly a plane, the first men of our
race. But how do we know what happened on earth a million years ago, and
I can definitely tell you that we are at least a million years in the
past? The history that we know fairly well does not cover a span of more
than five thousand years. How can we be certain what happened or did not
happen on earth millions of years ago?"

The scientist spoke quietly, his voice almost a whisper. "We are before
the time of the airplane. Yet we find airplanes? What do you think that
might mean?"

"I--" Higgins faltered, his mind flinching away from facing the unknown
gulfs of time. He forced his mind to heel. "It means there are people
here in this time," he said huskily. "People, or _something_, who know
how to make planes."

Michaelson nodded. "That would be my conclusion," he said.

"But that is impossible," Higgins flared. "If there had been
civilizations in the past, we would have a record of them. I mean, we
would have found their cities, even if the people had disappeared. We
would have found traces of their factories, of their buildings--"

"Would we?" Michaelson asked.

"Certainly. Don't you agree with me?"

"Not necessarily," the scientist said. "You are forgetting one important
fact--the size of a million years. A million years from now will anyone
be able to find New York? Chicago? London? The steel mills of
Pittsburgh? I think not. In that length of time, the action of the rain,
the frost, and the sun will have completely destroyed every sign that
these places once existed. Besides, the continents we now know may have
sunk and new ones appeared. How could we locate the ruin of Pittsburgh
if the city were at the bottom of the Atlantic? A million years ago
there may have been huge cities on earth. Man is not necessarily the
first race ever to appear on the planet."

Craig, listening, recognized the logic in what Michaelson had said.
There might have been other races on earth! The vanity of men blinded
them to that fact, when they thought about it at all. They wanted to
believe they were the most important, and the only effort of creation,
that the earth had come into being expressly for their benefit. Nature
might have other plans.

Michaelson had suggested a logical solution for the dilemma of airplanes
and flying dragons existing in the same world.

Craig saw the officers glancing uneasily in the direction from which the
planes had come. Off yonder somewhere below the horizon was _something_.
They were worried about it. Against the beasts of this time, the Idaho
was all-powerful. But how would the Idaho stack up against the
_something_ that lay below the horizon? Or would the ship be able to
escape back through the time fault before the threat of the mysterious
planes became greater?

Out around the ship, small boats were planting charges of explosive. One
boat was dashing out to the wrecked scouting plane to rescue the pilot.

"We have to see if we can get away from here, at once," Higgins said.
"We have to set off those explosives and see if they will force us back
through the time fault."

They had to get away from this world. There was danger here. Planes
that flew as fast as the one that had gone streaking off across the sky
represented danger.

Higgins ordered the planting of the explosives to proceed at the
double-quick.

"I said I could definitely tell you two things," Michaelson spoke again.
"One of them was that we are in the past, millions of years in the
past." He spoke slowly, his eyes on the busy boats around the ship. "Are
you not interested in the second of the two things I said I could tell
you?"

"Yes," said Higgins. "What is it?"

The scientist sighed. "It is that we will never be able to return to our
own time!"

"What? But--we are planting mines. If the explosion of the Jap bombs
sent us through the time fault, maybe a second explosion will send us
back through it."

Michaelson shook his head. "I have investigated the mathematics of it,"
he said. "It is impossible. You might as well call in your boats and
save your explosives. The fact is, we are marooned in this time,
_forever_!"

Marooned in time, forever! The words rang like bells of doom. Marooned
forever. No chance of escape. No hope for escape.

"Are you sure?" Higgins questioned.

"Positive," the scientist answered.

Craig looked at the sea. He lit a cigarette, noting that it was the last
one in the package. He drew the smoke into his lungs, feeling the bite
of it.

Marooned in time, forever!




CHAPTER IV

Silver on the Sea


Night had come hours ago. Craig stood on the deck, watching the sea and
the sky and the stars in the sky. Up overhead the constellations had
changed. They were not the familiar star clusters that he knew.
Completely blacked out, the Idaho moved very slowly through the
darkness. Her speed was kept to almost nothing because the charts of the
navigators were useless. The charts had been made in that far future
which the battle wagon had quitted forever and they revealed nothing
about this sea. There might be a mile of water under the ship. She might
be scraping bottom. The navigators were going mad worrying about what
might be under the ship. Captain Higgins was going mad worrying not only
about what might be under the ship but about what might soon be over it,
when the mysterious planes returned. The pilot of the scouting plane had
been rescued. He had not lived to tell what he had found.

Craig was aware of a shadow near him but he thought it was one of the
crew until the match flared. It was Margy Sharp. She was lighting a
cigarette.

A sharp reprimand from an officer caused her to drop the match.

"What's wrong?" she demanded. "Why can't I smoke?"

"Blackout," Craig said.

"Oh, it's _you_," the girl spoke.

"Where have you been?" Craig asked. "I looked around for you but I
couldn't find you."

"In the hospital," she said. "Helping out a baffled doctor."

"How is English?" Craig asked.

"English has been dead for hours," she said. "I've been with Mrs.
Miller."

"Oh! How is she?"

"Fine. But the doctor almost went nuts. He said it was the first time in
naval history that a baby had been born on a battleship. He seemed to
think it violated the rules of etiquette, or something. It was a girl,"
she went on, a little breathlessly now, as if talking about babies made
her excited. "Mrs. Miller said she was going to name it Margaret, after
me. Isn't that nice? She says her husband will be worried to death about
her and she wants to use the ship's radio to send him a message. Do you
think she could do that?"

"Do I--" Craig choked. "Listen, girl, do you know what has happened?"

The tone of his voice alarmed her. "No," she said quickly. "I don't
know. What has happened?"

She had been busy down in the hospital bay, too busy to wonder what was
going on up above. Craig told her the whole story. She listened in
incredulous amazement. He had to tell it twice before she began to
understand it. And then she didn't believe it.

"You're kidding me," she said.

"Sorry," Craig answered. "But I'm not kidding."

"You mean--you actually mean we're back somewhere in the past?"

"Exactly."

"But--but what are we going to do?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The big man shrugged. "We're going to wait and see what happens. That's
all we can do. Wait and see." There were tones of excitement in his
voice.

"You sound pleased about this," she challenged.

"I'm not pleased," he quickly corrected her. "I'm sorry for Mrs. Miller
and for Margaret, for you, for Captain Higgins, and the men on the
Idaho. But as for myself--well, I'm not sorry. This is the ultimate
adventure. We have a new world to explore, new things to see. I know
hundreds of men who would give an arm to be dropped back here into this
world. I've met them in every mining camp I ever saw, in every trading
post on the frontiers of civilization, in every corner of earth. They
were misfits, most of them. I'm a misfit, or I was, back in our time. I
didn't belong, I didn't fit in. I wasn't a business man, I never would
have made a business man. I couldn't have been a lawyer or a clerk or a
white-collar worker. But here--well I seem to belong here. This is my
time, this is my place in the world." He broke off. "I don't know why I
am telling you all this," he said shortly.

She had listened quietly and sympathetically. "You can tell me," she
said. "Remember, back in the life-boat, when I told you we were two of a
kind? I didn't fit in, either, back home. I belong here too."

She had moved closer to him, in the soft darkness. He could sense her
nearness, sense her womanliness. He started to put his arms around her.

"Well," a voice said behind him.

Craig turned. Voronoff stood there. "What do you want?" Craig said.

"From you, I want nothing," Voronoff answered. "I was not speaking to
you. I, at least, have not forgotten about the water."

"The water?" Craig said puzzled. "What are you talking about?"

"The water that wasn't in the cask we had in the life-boat," Voronoff
answered. "The water that you drank in the night when the rest of us
were asleep."

"Damn you--" Craig said.

Voronoff walked away. Craig made no attempt to follow him. He had
completely forgotten about the water. With an effort, he got his temper
under control and turned back to the girl.

She had turned away and was looking at the sea. When Craig spoke, she
did not answer. A moment before, a warm magic had been between them.
Voronoff's words had changed the warmth to coldness.

       *       *       *       *       *

That night the lookouts on the Idaho were constantly reporting that the
ship was being shadowed. Overhead in the darkness were planes, silent
planes. The lookout occasionally spotted them against the moon.

The fact that the planes flew silently, like shadows in the night,
perturbed the lookouts and their uneasiness was communicated to the
crew. No one would have much minded planes that made the proper amount
of noise, but ghost planes that made no noise at all were dreadful
things. The silent planes scouted the ship, then seemed to disappear. At
least they were no longer visible, but whether or not they were still
