the word I sat down and turned my head away for a moment. When I looked
back Joe was looking very disappointed. It made Sue so sad that she held
out a wedge of sweet melon to him. Joe accepted the gift easily,
gracefully and with a small smile of "thank you". He turned back,
squatted as near the blaze as comfort would permit and chewed absently
at the melon.

Thereafter he ignored the animated conversation that sprang up among us.
Jane wanted to know why we didn't give him one of our lighters. "He's
just as intelligent as we are," she insisted. She got no argument on
that score, but her husband pointed out that the golden people were
unaccustomed to handling fire, and that during the present dry season
even the green foliage might take off in a holocaust if ignited in this
rich, oxygen air.

Even as he spoke, a long, slender pole, flaming at one end, toppled from
the settling fire and rolled near Joe. With scarcely a pause to debate,
he leaped to his feet, grabbed the pole by the cool end and waved it
aloft like a torch.

With a triumphant yell he plunged through us and out across the field
bearing his prize aloft trailing sparks.

I tried to shoot low, but my light caliber pellet caught him rather high
in the thigh. He dived to the ground senseless in a shower of sparks.
His fellow creatures immediately gathered around him. When we closed in
to retrieve the fire-wand and stamp out the sparks, the other natives
faded away, crinkling their noses. They made no effort to remove Joe,
but cast many admiring glances back at the fire he had stolen.

Sue came up storming at me. "You didn't have to _shoot_ him." She
started to kneel down beside him, but Dr. Bailey restrained her.

"Easy, Susan. Remember the quarantine."

"We can't let him lie there and bleed to death," I said, feeling
unaccountably ashamed for my deed, although there was scarcely an
alternative.

Benson came up, "Nice shot, Sam."

I said, "Phil, I want permission to enter quarantine with Joe, here. Let
me have the instruments, and I'll probe for the bullet and take care of
him."

Benson shook his head. "We can't take that chance. We couldn't spare you
if you caught something."

"Who could you spare better?" I demanded. "See here, we've got to find
out sooner or later whether these little fellows carry anything
contagious. If they do, well, then we have a decision to face, but we
can't decide anything until we know."

Sue was at my side now. She said. "You have a dozen people who can punch
a micro-writer. Sam and I aren't indispensable. Besides, it was he who
crippled the poor little fellow."

Without waiting for an answer she called out, "Larson, where are you?"
The lucky carpenter tried to draw back in the shadows, knowing full well
what she had in mind.

Benson stared at me for a minute. He said gruffly, "Very well, if you
can talk Larson out of his cottage, go ahead, play hero!"

I didn't feel very heroic right then. Two hours later, when we had the
bullet out of Joe and had him bedded down comfortably for the night, Sue
cosied up to me in our double sleeping silks and murmured, "What a guy
has to go through out here to get a little privacy!"

Poor Larson!

       *       *       *       *       *

Bailey and Sorenson set up their lab outside our cabin door. Joe's wound
was seriously infected, and none of our cautiously applied remedies
would control the raging fever with which he awoke the first morning. He
lay, apathetic, eyes half closed, murmuring, "Tala! Tala!"

The doctors seized the opportunity to launch a study of Sirian microbes,
diseases and earth molds. Sue and I took cultures from Joe's wound, and
the medics experimented with the effects of local mold products similar
to the penicillin series. By force-feeding we managed to keep Joe alive
until Bailey, one morning, held up a hypo full of clear liquid and told
us how to administer it.

Joe responded at once. The following day he began sitting up and
vociferously demanding, "Tala, Tala!"

"Must be his wife or girl-friend," Sue deduced. She was wrong. Joe began
making motions of a person lifting a vessel and drinking. When we
offered him water he refused, repeating, "Tala!" and making more
drinking motions. He tried to rise, but the pain in his swollen thigh
stopped him. He sank back licking his lips like a man dying of thirst,
and in spite of his general improvement, he stayed in a sullen, subdued
attitude.

As his wound closed and the swelling reduced, Joe's temperature, which
had reached a fabulous 142 degrees F., stabilized at 137 F., thereby
confirming Benson's prediction that the natives would display a much
higher metabolism. Sue, who had spent hours stroking the fevered brow,
had grown used to Joe's hot-bloodedness, and she teased me about my
relative "frigidity".

Until Joe got his "tala" I made disappointing progress at teaching him
our language. He picked up our words for those few items that pertained
to his comfort, such as food, drink, bedpan and pillow--he revelled in
the luxury of our down-filled pillows. But at first he evinced little
interest in communication.

Then one morning we arose to find him standing and clinging weakly to
the door jamb, searching the perimeter of the clearing with frantic
eyes.

We scolded him, but he ignored us. He spotted a fellow native examining
one of the unfinished huts, which were going up at the rate of one a
day. He called out in a loud, clear voice, and the little golden
creature came running over to investigate.

It was a lovely little female, and I told Sue, "We have a reunion on our
hands. Must be his mate."

But Joe was quite indifferent to her charms. She seemed tolerably happy
to see him, touched his bandages with long, gentle fingers, then hurried
off to the forest as if in response to his commands. Joe made no effort
to follow. He seemed still to realize that he was in good hands and was
profiting by the care he was receiving.

However, he chafed for the ten minutes or so before her return. We
waited with high curiosity. I bet Sue that we were about to learn what
"tala" was. When the female approached again we were mystified. "Why
it's just a mango," Sue said. Indeed, the yellow-skinned, kidney-shaped
fruit which the little native bore carefully in both hands appeared to
be one of the over-sized specimens we had named after its smaller Earth
counterpart.

Joe reached greedily for the fruit, poked a hole in the rind with a
pointed forefinger and drank deeply. Watching from the door of our
bedroom, we could smell a delightful, tangy scent that was only vaguely
typical of the Sirian mangoes we had eaten.

To our surprise, as Joe drank, the skin collapsed like a plastic bag.
"It must be a different species, or else it's much riper than any we've
gathered," Sue said.

When Joe paused to breathe, the female took the fruit from him and
sucked at it enthusiastically. They sank down on Joe's bed and took
turns drinking the juice until the quart-sized skin was crumpled and
empty.

I fear I interrupted an incipient romance in order to retrieve the
discarded skin. The female wrinkled her nose and made for the door. I
watched her roll unsteadily across the clearing with eccentric little
lurches. The bland smile on Joe's handsome face deepened my suspicion. I
pointed to the skin and asked, "Tala?"

He nodded, patted his stomach and repeated, "Tala!"

From that moment our relations improved immensely. Joe enlisted the help
of various females to keep him supplied with skins of tala, and with the
satiation of his craving he took a completely new interest in life.

       *       *       *       *       *

We spent hours every day working out our language difficulties. He
learned so rapidly that I abandoned learning his language in favor of
teaching him ours. Even such abstract concepts as time and space proved
no obstacles. He grasped the purpose of my wristwatch after a single
day's demonstration of its relationship to the passage of Sirius across
the sky.

Using a pencil I had managed to convey our symbols for large numbers.
Joe could count up to any number now, and he seemed actually to
understand the open-end nature of our system of enumeration.

It made possible a mutual agreement on such matters as the number of
"days" in a year, which he was mildly interested to learn numbered 440
on his planet. Then a startling piece of information came from him when
I asked how long his people lived.

"Two years. Maybe three," he replied. Because of the shorter days, a
Sirian year about equalled an Earth year, and I found it difficult to
believe that these wonderful little animals lived only two or three
years. He persisted until I believed him.

He was strangely vague when I tried to determine the common manner of
death. Indeed, personal death was a concept either so hazy or
distasteful to him that he refused to dwell on it. The most he would
convey was that there were always new faces in the tribe, and the old
faces rarely remained more than three years. At this time, he described
himself as being more than a year old.

This was only one of several startling items that were revealed in our
conversations. The golden people matured in three months to fully grown
adults. A female could bear several babies a year and usually did. Yet
Joe insisted that his tribe was the only clan on the face of the planet,
so far as he knew, and that it numbered fewer than a thousand
individuals.

There was no such thing as monogamy or even polygamy. True, at night
when the air was cooler, they paired off, male and female, and each male
chose from among several favorites. But there was no formal nor
