violence could take place. After a few minutes of hurried talk, MacCulloch
steered the Colonel in the direction of the speaker's platform for the
meeting with his great-great-great-great-granddaughter.

Peter Johns' bewilderment faded into astonishment, but he still
gripped his sword as the Professor guided him through the throngs of
excited ladies onto the stage. He paused momentarily to look at the
brilliant lights and at the huge number of American flags which hung
overhead. A picture of George Washington, hung among the flags, seemed
to reassure him and he allowed the Professor to lead him to Mrs.
Johns-Hayes.

That lady had drawn herself together at the approach of her ancestor and
had obviously decided to carry it off as best she could. She advanced to
meet him crying, "Dear, dear great-great-great-great-grandfather! This is
such a pleasure! You can't know how proud all of us in the family have
always been of you."

The young Continental officer stared open mouthed at the red-faced,
big-bosomed woman who was twice his age, but who addressed him as
great-great-great-great-grandfather. Then he turned to MacCulloch who
stood beside him. "Are you sure you have the right man?" he asked.

"Oh yes! Perfectly, perfectly! You're Colonel Peter Johns of Pamworth,
Pennsylvania, and this is your great-great-great-great-granddaughter,
Rebecca Johns-Hayes."

"Rebecca? You mean she's named after Becky Sayles?" The Colonel rubbed
a hand across his several days' growth of beard.

"That's right, dear great-great-great-great-grandfather. I'm named
after great-great-great-great-grandmother," Mrs. Johns-Hayes
announced.

"Then I married Becky Sayles?" the Colonel asked.

"Why, of course! Aren't you planning on getting married in a few
days?" Clark Decker asked.

The Colonel was embarrassed but he grinned, "Well, I don't rightly
know. Miss Sayles and I have been courtin' for some months but there's
little Jennie Taylor down in Trenton.... To tell the truth, I haven't
quite made up my mind."

"Well! Of all things! What would the family think! What would great
Aunt Mary Hayes say?" Mrs. Johns-Hayes puffed out even farther than
usual.

"Well, we can ease your mind on that subject, Colonel. The history
books say that you married Miss Sayles--and here is Mrs. Johns-Hayes
to prove it."

The Colonel scratched his chin again as he looked at Mrs. Johns-Hayes.
"Is that so? Is that so? What's all this about history books? You mean
I got in history because I married Becky Sayles?"

The Professor laughed. "Well, not exactly. It was because of your
heroism in the defeat of Burgoyne's army. If you hadn't blocked
Captain Fenwick's flanking move at Temple Farm, the American army
under General Gates might have been defeated and the Colonies might
even have lost the war."

"Well, I'll be.... Me? I did all that? I didn't even know there was
going to be a battle. Did I end up a live hero or a dead one?" The
Colonel was beginning to feel a bit more easy in his surroundings,
and, to the horror of Mrs. Johns-Hayes, took a plug of tobacco out of
his pocket and bit off a piece and began to chew it.

"You came through the battle with only a slight wound and lived to a
ripe old age surrounded by grandchildren," the Professor told him.

"Then I reckon I won't go back to Pennsylvania with the other boys.
They figure that since their enlistments are up, it's time to get back
to the farm and let them New Yorkers do some of their own fighting."

"Oh no! You weren't thinking of going back--of leaving the fighting?"
Mrs. Johns-Hayes demanded.

The Colonel shifted his wad of tobacco and looked at the woman
carefully as though he couldn't quite believe the evidence of his
eyes. "No, ma'am, I don't reckon I am. I don't exactly look on it the
same as the other boys do. I kind of feel like if we're ever going to
have a country, it's worth fighting for."
