He caught himself smiling, and immediately resumed the mask of
dignity.

The Jursans, it developed, would give up demands for autonomy and
resume allegiance to the Empire. They pleaded, however, for freedom of
scientific research, promising that their discoveries would be placed
promptly at Vyrtl's disposal.

In the matter of indemnities, they were willing, Daphne Foster said
with an intimate glance for Vyrtl alone, to rely upon his generosity.
They asked only that they be allowed a reasonable time to restore the
damage suffered in the fighting and that they be permitted to make
part of the payments in the technical equipment they were so skilled
at manufacturing.

Some of the officers raised objections that Vyrtl thought well-put,
but he overruled them. The main point, he pronounced, was to restore a
valuable possession to productivity. There would be no looting and
destruction.

He felt less sure of himself when old Tzyfol protested that free
research was one of the roots of the trouble. Consequently, perhaps,
the imperial glare that silenced the Marshal was the more withering.

After that, Vyrtl sat back and allowed his cohorts to promulgate a
number of minor, harassing conditions. These would satisfy their egos
to some degree, keep the Jursans aware of the folly of questioning his
authority again, and show their envoy how things might have gone had
Vyrtl not been merciful.

In the end, he added one condition of his own.

"It will be necessary," he said, "to hold frequent conferences on
these affairs. If the Jursan Council should appoint their envoy as
permanent ambassador to our court, we should be inclined to approve."

It was tantamount to a command, but the girl showed no resentment. Not
that Vyrtl expected anything so rash as outward reluctance--but a
lifetime of piercing the flattery of courtiers had made him a shrewd
reader of facial expressions.

He granted permission for an immediate broadcasting of the treaty,
overriding Tzyfol's desire for deeper consideration in favor of Daphne
Foster's plea that delay would cost lives.

After having copies of the rather simple document drawn up for the
facsimile broadcasters, Vyrtl gave her leave to depart. Without
seeming to watch, he admired her gait as she walked from the
conference chamber.

       *       *       *       *       *

Afterwards, he left the generals to their post-mortem and retired with
Wilkins to a private balcony for a bottle of wine.

"How did it go?" he asked, leaning back more comfortably when his aide
had removed the heavy robe.

"You were most generous, Sire, or so I thought."

"It is a virtue that requires a public display now and then, to
strengthen the roots of the myth that grows from it. Too bad old
Tzyfol failed to see that. Why do you suppose he tried to be
obstinate?"

"I expect, Sire, he disliked having an old woman seem to get the
better of him after he had won the military victory."

Vyrtl laughed indulgently and sipped his wine.

"Even Tzyfol," added Wilkins, "might have been generous had she been
young and pretty. Unfortunately, I suppose, it takes an old head to be
an envoy."

The Emperor set his glass down very carefully.

"What did you say?" he demanded evenly.

Wilkins stared, with the expression of a man who fears he may suddenly
recall having used an obscene word in polite company, or having
bragged falsely and unwittingly of tax-evasion to an imperial
collector.

Vyrtl repeated his question in a tone a note higher.

"I-I-I said that if she were young and p-pretty--"

"How old do you think she was?" rasped Vyrtl.

"About s-s-seventy. Maybe seventy-five."

"_What?_"

He surged to his feet, overturning the table. Immediately the glass
doors opening on the balcony were flung back with a splintering crash.

Four gleaming guardsmen charged out with drawn weapons, each obviously
aching to become a hero. Wilkins prudently stood rooted, peering at
them from the corner of his eye.

Vyrtl recovered his poise with an effort.

"As you were!" he ordered. "Help General Wilkins pick up the table I
knocked over. Clumsy thing!"

It was done, and the guard captain apologized for the doors.

"Relax, Wilkins," said Vyrtl when they were again alone. "It just
