Somehow the phone never stopped ringing. Sextus gave up and retired to
dress for dinner. He finished his fifth of whiskey and descended to the
hotel's swank Oceania Room, where he made himself known to the maitre
d'hotel. That frenzied little moustachioed person sniffed Sextus' breath
and seated him behind a potted palm.

Discreetly avoiding the wine list, Sextus dined well, noting several
movie stars and other vip's in the crowded dining room. He couldn't
escape the illusion that he was dining at the Ambassador or the Waldorf
Astoria--instead of in a five-story rat-trap. Where did they all come
from?

As he awaited the elevator, he was approached by the bell-captain. "Mr.
Forsyte?" Sextus nodded stiffly. "Here's an envelope Mr. Patterson left
for you. He was the last G. M. Incidentally, sorry I was a little rough
on the phone, but you can see our situation here. Understaffed and
overcrowded. It gets thick, real thick, brother."

Sextus felt his belly muscles tighten. "Confusion is never improved by
discourtesy or insubordination," he said coldly.

At that moment a bellman rushed up to the rebuffed captain who was
regarding Sextus with a restrained loathing. "The guy in C332 keeps
screaming for his beer, but the service elevator to 'C' vector keeps
dumping me off in 'F'."

The captain said, "Try riding to fourth on 'C' and then walk down a deck
and come out through the linen room."

"Can't I just ride up the guest elevator, Jack?"

The captain stared at Sextus. "Our Mr. Forsyte wouldn't approve. Now,
move!"

He turned to Sextus and said acidly, "Just one of our little extra
problems." He moved off with a disgusted shake of his carefully barbered
head.

The nature of the bell-captain's special problem sounded interesting,
but the details confused Sextus. _Ride to four on "C", walk down to
three and out by the linen closet._ Sounded like three-dimensional
chess.

His cage arrived and he returned to his suite. He removed his shoes,
stripped to the waist and sank gratefully into the soft bed, nestling
the last bottle of his suitcase reserve in the crook of his bare arm.

He considered the sealed envelope marked: TO MY SUCCESSOR. URGENT
MATTERS.

First he opened a fresh bottle and then the envelope. He flipped through
the papers. There were some tax reports ready for signature, two union
contracts up for renegotiation and an estimate on re-doing 520 rooms in
vectors "B" and "F". Vectors? Did they mean "Wings"?

The last paper was a personal letter, apparently addressed to him.
Before he could begin it the phone at his bedside jangled. Operator
said, "Would you take this, please, Mr. Forsyte? I dispatched a house
man, but the guest is hysterical."

Without awaiting his permission she cut in the woman. "Hello, manager?
There's a man in my bed!"

"What is your room number, madame?" Sextus asked with drowsy detachment.

"I'm in H-408," she said, and on the "8" her voice ran up the scale in a
quivering crescendo that launched Sextus briskly from his bed. H-408 was
his floor and his wing, luckily. He tore out of the suite and down the
hall without shirt or shoes.

The door stood ajar, and he pushed it open. In the middle of the floor,
still gabbling into the phone, stood a lumpy, pallid woman about his own
age, naked except for a pillow which she hugged fiercely to her navel.
Her bleached hair was a frayed bird's-nest.

In bed, decently clad in a pair of blue and white striped pajamas, was a
rather distinguished, gray-haired gentleman of about fifty, leaning on
one elbow and watching the woman with an expression of mild astonishment
and interest. To Sextus' practiced eye, the man was guilty of nothing.

The house detective arrived at that moment, but Sextus dismissed him
with a wave of his hand. He went in alone.

"I'm the manager, madam," he assured her. He noted that despite her
excited wails, her eyes drooped half shut. A bottle of sleeping pills on
the table was uncapped.

"Thizz man, thizz man, thizz man!" she kept repeating and pointing her
elbow at the bed. The man in question raised his eyebrows and shook his
head.

"Damndest sensation I ever felt," he said. "I'm Johnathan P. Turner,
attorney. Before I tell you my story, please check with the desk and
verify that I was assigned this room."

Sextus took the phone from the woman's pudgy hand which darted to rescue
the sagging pillow. The room-clerk reported that Mr. J. P. Turner was
registered to room 408, but in "J" vector, not "H".

Sextus' eyes swept the room. It was an unexplainable mess. Two sets of
luggage were jumbled on and around the baggage rack at the foot of the
bed. Rinsed out nylons hung from the shower rod, but a man's shaving kit
occupied the shelf over the lavatory. Despairing of ever arriving at a
sensible explanation, Sextus went to work.

Although hampered somewhat without his shirt, coat and tie, Sextus
