
He had not the faintest doubt who they were--even though he could not
see their faces in the blackness. Maybe he should lay low--let them have
their way.... But how could he--even apart from his raging temper, and
his honor as a man--when they were making off with his family's and his
own means of survival?

He had to throw Rose and the kids into the balance--risking them to the
danger that he knew lay beyond his own possible ignoble demise. He did
just that when he raised his pistol, struggling against the awful
impulse of the rage in him--lifted it high enough so that the explosive
bullets that spewed from it would be sure to pass over the heads of the
dark silhouettes that were moving about.

"Damn you, Neely!" Endlich yelled into his helmet mike, his finger
tightening on the trigger. "Drop that stuff!"

At that moment the sun's rim appeared at the landscape's jagged edge,
and on this side of airless Vesta complete night was transformed to
complete day, as abruptly as if a switch had been turned.

Alf Neely and John Endlich blinked at each other. Maybe Neely was
embarrassed a little by his sudden exposure; but if he was, it didn't
show. Probably the bully in him was scared; but this he covered in a
common manner--with a studiedly easy swagger, and a bravado that was not
good sense, but bordered on childish recklessness. Yet he had a trump
card--by the aggressive glint in his eyes, and his unpleasant grin,
Endlich knew that Neely knew that he was afraid for his wife, and
wouldn't start anything unless driven and goaded sheerly wild. Even now,
they were seven to his one.

"Why, good morning, Neighbor Pun'kin-head!" Neely crooned, his voice a
burlesque of sweetness. "Glad to oblige!"

He hurled the great box down. As he did so, something glinted in his
gloved paw. He flicked it expertly into the open side of the wooden case
which contained so many things that were vital to the Endlichs--

It was only a tiny nuclear priming-cap, and the blast was feeble. Even
so, the box burst apart. Splintered crates, sealed cans, great torn
bundles and what not, went skittering far across the plain in every
direction, or were hurled high toward the stars, to begin falling at
last with the laziness of a descending feather.

       *       *       *       *       *

Neely and his companions hadn't attempted to move out of the way of the
explosion. They only rolled with its force, protected by their space
suits. Endlich rolled, too, helplessly, clutching his pistol and rifle:
still, by some superhuman effort, he managed to regain his feet before
the far more practiced Neely, who was hampered, no doubt, by a few too
many drinks, had even stopped rolling. But when Neely got up, he had
drawn his blaster, a useful tool of his trade, but a hellish weapon,
too, at short range.

Still, Endlich retained the drop on him.

Alf Neely chuckled. "Fourth of July! Hallowe'en, Dutch," he said
sweetly. "What's the matter? Don't you think it's fun? Honest to
gosh--you just ain't neighborly!"

Then he switched his tone. It became a soft snarl that didn't alter his
insolent and confident smirk--and a challenge. He laughed derisively,
almost softly. "I dare you to try to shoot straight, pal," he said.
"Even you got more sense than that."

And John Endlich was spang against his terrible, blank wall again. Seven
to one. Suppose he got three. There'd be four left--and more in the
camp. But the four would survive him. Space crazy lugs. Anyway half
drunk. Ready to hoot at the stars, even, if they found no better
diversion. Ready to push even any of their own bunch around who seemed
weaker than they. For spite, maybe. Or just for the lid-blowing hell of
it--as a reaction against the awful confinement of being out here.

"I was gonna smear you all over the place, Greenhorn," Neely rumbled.
"But maybe this way is more fun, hunh? Maybe we'll be back tonight. But
don't wait up for us. Our best regards to your sweet--family."

John Endlich's blazing and just rage was strangled by that same crawling
dread as before, as he saw them arc upward and away, propelled by the
miniature drive-jets attached to the belts of their space-suits. Their
return to camp, hundreds of miles distant, could be accomplished in a
couple of minutes.

Rose and the kids were crouched in the deflated tent. But returning
there, John Endlich hardly saw them. He hardly heard their frightened
questions.

To the trouble with Neely, he could see no end--just one destructive
visitation following another. Maybe, already, mortal damage had been
done. But Endlich couldn't lie down and quit, any more than a snake,
tossed into a fire, could stop trying to crawl out of it, as long as
life lasted. Whether doing so made sense or not, didn't matter. In
Endlich was the savage energy of despair. He was fighting not just Neely
and his crowd, but that other enemy--which was perhaps Neely's main
trouble, too. Yeah--the stillness, the nostalgia, the harshness.

"No--don't want any breakfast," he replied sharply to Rose' last
question. "Gotta work...."

       *       *       *       *       *

He was like an ant-swarm, rebuilding a trampled nest--oblivious to the
certainty of its being trampled again. First he scrambled and leaped
around, collecting his scattered and damaged gear. He found that his
main atomic battery--so necessary to all that he had to do--was damaged
and unworkable. And he had no hope that he could repair it. But this
didn't stop his feverish activity.

Now he started unrolling great bolts of a transparent, wire-strengthened
plastic. Patching with an adhesive where explosion-rents had to be
repaired, he cut hundred-yard strips, and, with Rose's help, laid them
edge to edge and fastened them together to make a continuous sheet.
Next, all around its perimeter, he dug a shallow trench. The edges of
the plastic were then attached to massive metal rails, which he buried
in the trench.

"Sealed to the ground along all the sides, Honey," he growled to Rose.
"Next we fit in the airlock cabinet, at one corner. Then we've got to
see if we can get up enough air to inflate the whole business. That's
the tough part--the way things are...."

By then the sun was already high. And Endlich was panting
raggedly--mostly from worry. After the massive airlock was in place,
they attached their electrolysis apparatus to the small atomic battery,
which had been used to run the well-driller. The well was in the area
covered by the sheet of plastic, which was now propped up here and there
with long pieces of board from the great box. Over their heads, the
tough, clear material sagged like a tent-roof which has not yet been run
up all the way on its poles.

Sluggishly the electrolysis apparatus broke down the water, discharging
the hydrogen as waste through a pipe, out over the airless surface of
Vesta--but freeing the oxygen under the plastic roof. Yet from the start
it was obvious that, with insufficient electric power, the process was
too slow.

"And we need to use heat-coils to thaw the ground, Johnny," Rose said.
"And to keep the place warm. And to bring nitrogen gas up out of the
soil. The few cylinders of the compressed stuff that we've got won't be
enough to make a start. And the carbon dioxide...."

So John Endlich had to try to repair that main battery. He thought,
after a while, that he might succeed--in time. But then Rose opened the
airlock, and the kids came in to bother him. With all the triumph of a
favorite puppy dragging an over-ripe bone into the house, Bubs bore a
crooked piece of a black substance, hard as wood and more gruesome than
a dried and moldy monkey-pelt.

"A tentacle!" Evelyn shrilled. "We were up to those old buildings! We
found the people! What's left of them! And lots of stuff. We saw one of
their cars! And there was lots more. Dad--you gotta come and see!..."

Harassed as he was, John Endlich yielded--because he had a hunch, an
idea of a possibility. So he went with his children. He passed through a
garden, where a pool had been, and where the blackened remains of plants
still projected from beds of dried soil set in odd stone-work. He passed
into chambers far too low for comfortable human habitation. And what did
he know of the uses of most of what he saw there? The niches in the
stone walls? The slanting, ramplike object of blackened wood, beside
which three weird corpses lay? The glazed plaque on the wall, which
could have been a religious emblem, a calendar of some kind, a
decoration, or something beyond human imagining? Yeah--leave such stuff
for Cousin Ernest, the school teacher--if he ever got here.

In the cylindrical stone shed nearby, John Endlich had a look at the
car--low slung, three-wheeled, a tiller, no seats. Just a flat platform.
All he could figure out about the motor was that steam seemed the link
between atomic energy and mechanical motion.

Beyond the car was what might be a small tractor. And a lot of odd
tools. But the thing which interested him most was the pattern of copper
ribbons, insulated with a heavy glaze, similar to that which he had seen
traversing walls and ceiling in the first building he had entered. Here,
as before, they connected with queer apparatus which might be stoves and
non-rotary motors, for all he knew. And also with the globes overhead.

The suggestiveness of all this was plain. And now, at the far end of
that cylindrical shed, John Endlich found the square, black-enamelled
case, where all of those copper ribbons came together.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was sealed, and apparently self-contained. Nothing could have damaged
it very much, in the frigid stillness of millions of years. Its secrets
were hidden within it. But they could not be too unfamiliar. And its
presence was logical. A small, compact power unit. Nervously, he turned
a little wheel. A faint vibration was transmitted to his gloved hand.
And the globe in the ceiling began to glow.

He shut the thing off again. But how long did it take him to run back to
his sagging creation of clear plastic, while the kids howled gleefully
around him, and return with the end of a long cable, and pliers? How
long did it take him to disconnect all of the glazed copper ribbons, and
substitute the wires of the cable--attaching them to queer
terminal-posts? No--not long.

The power was not as great as that which his own large atomic battery
would have supplied. But it proved sufficient. And the current was
direct--as it was supposed to be. The electrolysis apparatus bubbled
vigorously. Slowly the tentlike roof began to rise, under the beginnings
of a tiny gas-pressure.
