
       *       *       *       *       *

Later that day, she overheard him tell Sam that, theoretically at least,
there could be millions of versions of the Earth, each removed an
infinitesimal point from the next. There was the chance the flaw in the
torque motor, which still eluded him, might not automatically take them
back to the right cross-section, even if he found it. They might have to
make an incredible number of trials, and then again they might hit it on
the very next combination.

"And you might not!" she cut into the conversation, with perhaps more
acid in her voice than she intended. "It might not be your next, nor
tomorrow, nor next spring--nor ever!"

Odd that she had felt an obscure satisfaction at the stricken looks on
their faces when she had said it. Yet they had it coming to them. It was
time someone shocked them into a sense of reality. It took a woman to be
a realist. She had already faced the possibility and was reconciled to
it. They were still living in an impossible dream.

Still she was sorry. She was sorry in the way she had always regretted
having to make a bad boy in kindergarten go stand with his face to the
wall. She tried to make up for it that evening.

[Illustration]

"I understand," she said as they sat near the campfire outside the
half-finished cabin. "You alter the torque, then try the various radio
wave bands in the new position."

They both looked at her, a little surprised.

"It must be a slow and tedious procedure," she continued.

"Very," Sam said with a groan.

A shifting air current, carrying the sound of the waterfall, gave her an
idea.

"Too bad you can't borrow the practice of Tibetan monks," she mused.
"They tie their prayers to a wheel, set it in a running stream. Every
turn of the wheel is a prayer sent up to their gods. That way they can
get their praying done for them while they go about the more urgent
matters of providing a living for themselves and their families."

She hadn't meant it to be so pointed, implying that all they were doing
was sending up futile prayers to unheeding gods, implying they should be
giving more attention to setting in winter stores. But even so....

"Miss Kitty," Sam said in a kind of awe. "You are a wonderful woman!"

In spite of her sudden flush of pleasure, she was irritated. As pointed
as she had made it, he had missed it.

[Illustration]

He turned and began talking excitedly to Lt. Harper. Yes, of course,
they could rig up an automatic method instead of doing it by hand. It
could be done faster and more smoothly with electric motors, but the
idea was the same. If Lt. Harper could rig a trip to kick the warp over
another notch each time, they could run it night and day. Just let some
kind of alarm bell start ringing, if they hit anything at the other end!

The two of them jumped to their feet then, grabbed her arms, squeezed
them, and rushed away to the little shed they'd constructed beside the
lifeship to hold some of their scattered equipment.

She felt vaguely regretful that she had mentioned it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Still she gained a great deal. The men finished the cabin in a hurry
after that, and they put up their own bunkhouse in less than a week.
Both jobs were obviously not done by experts, and she had fussed at
them, although not unkindly, because she had had to chink such wide
cracks with a mixture of clay and dried grass.

She moved into the larger cabin, discovered a dozen roof leaks during
the first hard rain they'd had; got them patched, began molding clay
into dishes and containers, started pressuring the boys to build her a
ceramics kiln, began to think about how their clothes would eventually
wear out and how she would have to find some way to weave cloth to
replace them. Day by day she was less irritable, as the boys settled
into a routine.

"I do believe," she said to herself one day, "I would be disappointed if
they found a way back!" She straightened up and almost spilled the
container of wild rice she had been garnering from the swampy spot at
the upper reaches of the lake. "Why! The very idea of saying such a
thing, Katheryn Kittredge!" But her heart was not in the self chiding.

But what reason, in heaven's name, would they have for staying here?
Three people, marooned, growing old, dying one by one. There was no
chance for Man's survival here. From the evidence about them, they had
come to the conclusion that on this New Earth, in the tree of evolution,
the bud to grow into a limb of primates had never formed.

She turned and looked at the tall, straight pines ahead of her. She saw
the deciduous hardwoods, now gold and red, to one side of her. Behind
her the lake was teeming with fish. The spicy smell of fall was all
around her, and a stray breeze brought a scent of grapes she had
overlooked when she was gathering all she could find to make a wine to
pleasantly surprise the boys.

She thought of the flock of wild chickens which had learned to hang
around the cabin for scraps of food, the grunting lazy pigs, grown quite
tame, begging her to find their acorns for them, the nanny goat with two
half-grown kids Lt. Harper had brought back from a solitary walk he had
taken.

New Earth was truly a paradise--and all to be wasted if there were not
Man to appreciate it truly.

A thought knocked at her mind, but she resolutely shut it out, refused
it even silent verbalization.

Yet, while she stooped over again and busied her hands with stripping
the rice from the stalks without cutting them on the sharp dry leaves,
she found herself thinking about Mendelian law. Line breeding from
father to daughter, or brother to sister--in domestic animals, of
course--was all right in fixing desirable traits, providing certain
recessives in both the dam and the sire did not thus become dominant.

"There, Katheryn Kittredge," she mumbled with satisfaction. "Assuming
the responsibilities of domesticity has not made you forget what you
learned."

But the danger of fixing recessives into dominants through inbreeding
was even less with half-brothers and sisters. Now daughters by
one--er--sire could be bred to another sire to get only a quarter
relationship to a similar cross from the other father--er--sire. She
must work it out with a stylus in smooth clay. The boys had preempted
every scrap of paper for their pointless calculations. But she could
remember it, and it would be valuable in breeding up a desirable
barnyard stock.

Yet it was odd that she assumed two males and only one female!

       *       *       *       *       *

Then and there, standing ankle deep in the bog of wild rice, muddy to
her knees in her torn coveralls, slapping at persistent mosquitoes, she
came to terms with herself. In the back of her mind she had known it all
the time. All this was without meaning unless there was Man--and a
continuity of Man. Even so little as this gathering of wild rice, before
the migrating ducks got it, was without meaning, if it were merely to
stave off death from a purposeless existence. If there were no other
fate for them than eventually to die, without posterity, then they might
as well die tomorrow, today, now.

The men were still living in a dream of getting back. No doubt their
lusting appetites were driving them to get back to their brazen,
heavy-breasted, languorous-eyed hussies who pandered to all comers
