
Back on his bed, he drifted into sleep, into what he knew was the final
sleep. He was more fortunate than the others. Within an hour he would be
dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

Somewhere, someone was screaming.

The sounds rose higher and higher. A human body, somewhere ... pain
unimaginable twisting up through clouds of belching steam ... muscles
quivering, nerves twitching ... and somewhere a body floating and
bobbing and crying ... sheets of agony sweeping and returning in waves
and the horror of unescapable pain expanding like a volcano of
madness....

Somewhere was someone alive who should be dead.

And then in the dark, in absolute silence, Marquis moved a little. He
realized, vaguely, that the screaming voice was his own.

He stared into the steamy darkness and slowly, carefully, wet his lips.
He moved. He felt his lips moving and the whisper sounding loud in the
dark.

_I'm alive!_

He managed to struggle up out of the bed. He could scarcely remain
erect. Every muscle in his body seemed to quiver. He longed to slip down
into the darkness and escape into endless sleep. But he'd tried that.
And he was still alive. He didn't know how much time had passed. He was
sure of the poison's effects, but he wasn't dead. They had gotten to him
in time.

Sweat exploded from his body. He tried to remember more. Pain. He lay
down again. He writhed and perspired on the bed as his tortured mind
built grotesque fantasies out of fragments of broken memory.

The routine of the unceasing bells went on. Bells, leap up. Bells,
calisthenics. Bells, eat. Bells, march. Bells, work. He tried to shut
out the bells. He tried to talk to 4901. 4901 covered up his ears and
wouldn't listen. The girl wouldn't listen to him.

There were other ways. And he kept the poison hidden in the capsule in
his hollow tooth. He had been counting the steps covering the length of
the hall, then the twenty steps to the left, then to the right to where
the narrow corridor led again to the left where he had seen the
air-lock.

After the bells stopped ringing and the darkness was all around him, he
got up. He counted off the steps. No guards, no alarms, nothing to stop
him. They depended on the conditioners to take care of everything. This
time he would do it. This time they wouldn't bring him back.

No one else could even talk with him about it, even though he knew they
all wanted to escape. Some part of them still wanted to, but they
couldn't. So it was up to him. He stopped against the smooth, opaque,
up-curving glasite dome. It had a brittle bright shine that reflected
from the Moon's surface. It was night out there, with an odd metallic
reflection of Earthlight against the naked crags.

He hesitated. He could feel the intense and terrible cold, the
airlessness out there fingering hungrily, reaching and whispering and
waiting.

He turned the wheel. The door opened. He entered the air-lock and shut
the first door when the air-pressure was right. He turned the other
wheel and the outer lock door swung outward. The out-rushing air spun
him outward like a balloon into the awful airless cold and naked
silence.

His body sank down into the thick pumice dust that drifted up around him
in a fine powdery blanket of concealment. He felt no pain. The cold
airlessness dissolved around him in deepening darkening pleasantness.
This time he was dead, thoroughly and finally and gloriously dead, even
buried, and they couldn't find him. And even if they did finally find
him, what good would it do them?

Some transcendental part of him seemed to remain to observe and triumph
over his victory. This time he was dead to stay.

       *       *       *       *       *

This time he knew at once that the twisting body in the steaming pain,
the distorted face, the screams rising and rising were all Charles
Marquis.

Maybe a dream though, he thought. So much pain, so much screaming pain,
is not real. In some fraction of a fraction of that interim between life
and death, one could dream of so much because dreams are timeless.

Yet he found himself anticipating, even through the shredded,
dissociated, nameless kind of pain, a repetition of that other time.

The awful bitterness of defeat.

       *       *       *       *       *

He opened his eyes slowly. It was dark, the same darkness. He was on the
same bed. And the old familiar dark around and the familiar
soundlessness that was now heavier than the most thunderous sound.

Everything around him then seemed to whirl up and go down in a crash. He
rolled over to the floor and lay there, his hot face cooled by the cold
metal.

As before, some undeterminable interim of time had passed. And he knew
he was alive. His body was stiff. He ached. There was a drumming in his
head, and then a ringing in his ears as he tried to get up, managed to
drag himself to an unsteady stance against the wall. He felt now an icy
surety of horror that carried him out to a pin-point in space.

A terrible fatigue hit him. He fell back onto the bed. He lay there
