Shivering, Chichester glanced fearfully around. And Gest said: "God--if
Ascott Keane were here----"




_3. The Stopped Watch_


Down at the lobby door, a long closed car slid to a stop. From it
stepped two people. One was a tall, broad-shouldered man with a
high-bridged nose, long, strong jaw, and pale gray eyes under heavy
black eyebrows. The other was a girl, equally tall for her sex,
beautifully formed, with reddish brown hair and dark blue eyes.

The two walked to the registration desk in the lobby.

"Ascott Keane," the man signed. "And secretary, Beatrice Dale."

"Your suite is ready for you, Mr. Keane," the clerk said obsequiously.
"But we had no word of your secretary's coming. Shall we----"

"A suite for her on the same floor if possible," Keane said crisply. "Is
Mr. Gest in the hotel?"

"Yes, sir. He is in the tower office."

"Have the boy take my things up. I'll go to the office first. Send word
up there what suite you've given Miss Dale."

Keane nodded to Beatrice, and walked to the elevators.

"Secretary!" snorted the key clerk to the head bellhop. "What's he want
a secretary for? He's never done any work in his life. Inherited umpteen
million bucks, and plays around all the time. Wish I was Ascott Keane."

The head bellhop nodded. "Pretty soft for him, all right. Hardest job he
has is to clip coupons...."

Which would have made Keane smile a little if he could have heard, for
the clerk and the bellhop shared the opinion of him held by the rest of
the world; an opinion he carefully fostered. Few knew of his real
interest in life, which was that of criminal detection.

He tensed as he swung into the anteroom of the office suite. Gest, one
of the rare persons who knew of his unique detective work, had babbled
something of a Doctor Satan when he phoned long distance. Doctor Satan!
The mention of that name was enough to bring Keane instantly from
wherever he was, with his powers pitched to their highest and keenest
point in an effort to crush at last the unknown individual who lived for
outlawed thrills.

As soon as he opened the door, it was apparent that something was wrong.
There was no one sitting at the information desk, and from closed doors
beyond came the hum of excited voices.

Keane went to the door where the hum sounded loudest and opened that.

He stared in at three men bending over a fourth who lay on the floor,
stark and motionless--obviously dead! Keane strode to them.

"Who are you, sir?" grated Kroner. "What the devil----"

"Keane!" breathed Gest. "Thank God you're here! There has just been a
murder. I'm sure it's murder--though how it was done, and who did it,
are utterly beyond me."

"This is your Ascott Keane?" said Kroner, in a slightly different tone.
His eyes gained a little respect as they rested on Keane's light gray,
icily calm eyes.

"Yes. Keane--Kroner, vice president. And this is Chichester, treasurer
and secretary."

Keane nodded, and stared at the dead man.

"And this?"

"Wilson, assistant manager. He came in a minute or two ago, saying he
had something of the utmost importance to tell us about the players in
the roulette room...."

Keane nodded. He had been told of that just before he took a plane for
Blue Bay. Gest swallowed painfully and went on:

"Wilson had just started to explain. He said something about the
roulette wheel, and then fell dead. Literally. He fell forward on his
face as though he had been shot. But he wasn't. There isn't a mark on
his body. And he couldn't have been poisoned before he came in here. No
poison could act so exactly, striking at the precise second to keep him
from disclosing his find."

"Doctor's report?" said Keane.

"Grays, house physician, is on his way up now. We sent the information
girl to get him. Didn't want to telephone. You know how these things
spread. We didn't want the switchboard girls to hear of this just yet."

Keane's look of acknowledgment was grim.

"The publicity. Of course. We'll have to move fast to save Blue Bay."

"If you can save it, now," muttered Chichester.

       *       *       *       *       *

The door opened, and Doctor Grays stepped in, with consternation in his
brown eyes as he saw the man on the floor.

They left him to examine the body, and the three officials told Keane
all the details they knew of the strange tragedy that had overtaken
Weems and, two and a half hours later, the nine in the roulette room.

They returned to the conference room. Grays faced them.

"Wilson died of a heart attack," he said. "The symptoms are
unmistakable. His death seems normal...."

"Normal--but beautifully timed," murmured Keane.

"Right," nodded the doctor. "We'll want an autopsy at once. The police
are on their way here. They're indirectly in our employ, as are all in
Blue Bay; but they won't be able to keep this out of the papers for very
long!"

"Where are Weems and the rest?"

"In my suite."

"I'd like to see them, please."

In Doctor Grays' suite, Keane stared with eyes that for once had lost
some of their calm, at the weird figures secluded in the bedroom. This
room was kept locked against the possibility of a chambermaid or other
hotel employee coming in by mistake. An unwarned person might well have
gone at least temporarily insane at the sudden sight of the ten in that
bedroom.

In a chair near the door sat Weems. He was bent forward a little as
though leaning over a table. He stared unwinkingly at space. In his hand
was still a champagne glass, raised near his lips.

Standing around the room were the nine others, each in the position he
or she had been in when rigidity overtook them in the roulette room.
They stared wide-eyed ahead of them, motionless, expressionless. It was
like walking into a wax-works museum, save that these statuesque figures
were of flesh and blood, not wax.

"They're all dead as far as medical tests show," Grays said. There was
awe and terror in his voice. "Yet--they're not dead! A child could tell
that at a glance. I don't know what's wrong."

"Why don't you put them to bed?" said Keane.

"We can't. Each of the ten seems to be in some kind of spell that makes
it impossible for his body to take any but that one position. We've laid
them down--and in a moment they're up again and in the former position,
moving like sleep-walkers, like dead things! Look."

He gently pulled Weems' arm down.

Slowly, it raised again till the champagne glass was near his lips.
Meanwhile the man's eyes did not even blink. He was as oblivious of the
touch as if really dead.

"Horrible!" quavered Chichester. "Maybe it's some new kind of disease."

"I think not," said Keane, voice soft but bleak. He looked at a night
table, heaped with jewelry, handkerchiefs, wallets, small change. "That
collection?"

"The personal effects of these people," said Gest, wiping sweat from his
pale face.

Keane went to the pile, and sorted it over. He was struck at once by a
curious lack. He couldn't place it for an instant; then he did.

"Their watches!" he said. "Where are they?"
