intelligence is below that of a five-year-old child! Perhaps that is
why you and I get along so well together: we are both morons."

       *       *       *       *       *

He started to protest, but she silenced him with a gesture and hurried
on. "I am not supposed to tell you this, but I want you to know that
your examination to-day has resulted in a complete change in their
plans for the expedition to the surface. They have consulted with the
leaders of our masters, and they agree with them."

She was plainly agitated.

"What is it, dear?" asked Abbot, with ominous foreboding.

Milli continued: "Early during your test, when you demonstrated that
you couldn't do the very simplest mathematical problems in your head,
they began to doubt your boastings that you are a scientist. But you
were so ingenuous in your answers about conditions on the surface,
that finally their faith in your honesty returned. If you are a
scientist among men, as they now believe, then the average run of your
people must be mere animals. This explains what has puzzled them
before; namely, how the people of the earth tolerate poverty and
unemployment and crime, and disease and war."

"Well?"

"And so a mere handful of our people, by purely peaceful means, could
easily make themselves the rulers of the earth. Probably this would be
all for the best; but somehow, my feelings tell me that it is not. I
know only too well what it is to be an inferior among intelligent
beings; so will not your people be happier, left alone to their
stupidity, just as I would be?"

       *       *       *       *       *

George Abbot was crushed. This frank acceptance by Milli of the
alleged fact that he was a mere moron, was most humiliating. And
swiftly he realized what a real menace to the earth, was this
contemplated invasion from the deeps.

All that was worst in the world above would taint these intellectual
giants of the undersea. They would rise to supremacy, and then would
become rapacious tyrants over those whom they would regard as being no
more than animals.

He had witnessed jealousies among them down below. Might not these
jealousies flame into huge wars when translated to the world above?
Giants striving for mastery, using the human cattle as cannon fodder!
He painted to the girl a word-picture of the horrible vision which he
foresaw.

The invasion must be stopped at all costs! He and Milli must pit their
puny wits against these supermen!

But what could they do? As they were pondering this problem, a girl
entered their sitting room--the same who had brought Abbot's
breakfast on his first day in the caves. Milli introduced George to
the newcomer, whose name was Romehl.

Romehl appeared so woebegone that the young American ventured to
inquire if she too had been having difficulty with one of her tests.
But that was not the trouble; hers was rather of the heart.

About the same age as Milli, Romehl had recently passed her twentieth
birthday test and hence was eligible to marry; so she and a young man
named Hakin had requested the fish-masters to give them the requisite
permission. But their overlords for some reason had peremptorily
denied the request. Romehl and Hakin were desolate.

       *       *       *       *       *

Young Abbot's sympathies were at once aroused.

"Can't something be done?" he started to ask.

But Milli silenced him with a warning glance. "Of course not!" she
said. "Who are we to question the judgment of our all-knowing
masters?"

Romehl had really come to Milli just to pour her troubles into a
friendly ear, rather than because she hoped to get any helpful ideas.
So she had a good cry, and finally left, somewhat comforted.

George and Milli then took up again the problem of saving the outer
earth from the threatened invasion. Milli suggested that they go
peaceably with the expedition, and then warn the authorities of
America at the first opportunity after their arrival; but Abbot
pointed out that this would merely result in their both being shut up
in some insane asylum, as no one would believe such a crazy story as
theirs.

The time for lights to be put out arrived without their thinking of
any better idea.

Next day Milli spent considerable time with Dolf, and on her return
excitedly informed Abbot that he had evolved a most diabolical plot.
There were sufficient quantities of explosives in storage to blast a
hole through the wall of the caves, letting in the sea and killing
everyone in the city. Dolf planned to set this off with a time fuse,
upon the departure of the expedition. Thus Thig and the people who
were left behind--about two-thirds of the total population of the
city--would be destroyed, and the fish would have no one to send after
Dolf and his followers to dictate to them on the upper earth.

Relieved of the thraldom of the fish, Dolf could make himself Emperor
of the World, and rule over the human cattle, with Milli at his side
as Empress. An alluring program--from Dolf's point of view.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I didn't expect such treason even from Dolf!" exclaimed the young
American. "We must tell Thig!"

"What good would that do?" remonstrated the girl. "If you failed to
convince Thig, Dolf would make an end of us both. And if you convinced
Thig, it would mean the end of Dolf, whose influence is all that keeps
me alive. We must think of something else."

"Right, as always," replied Abbot.

A growl came from the doorway. It was Dolf, his bearded face black
with wrath.

"So?" he sputtered. "Treachery, eh?"

He whistled twice and two guards appeared.

"Take them to the prison!" he raged, indicating Abbot and Milli. "Our
expedition will have to do without a guide. I have learned enough of
the American language to make a good start, and I guess I can pick up
another guide when we reach the surface." Then, bending close to the
frightened girl, he whispered, "And another Empress."

The guards hustled them away and locked them up. As an added
precaution, a sentinel was posted in front of each cell door.

Abbot immediately got busy.

"Can you get word for me at once to Thig?" he whispered to the man on
guard.

"Perhaps," replied that individual non-committally.

"Then tell him," said Abbot, "that I have proof that Dolf is planning
to destroy this city behind him, and never return from the surface."

The sentry became immediately agitated.

"So you know this?" he exclaimed. "How did it leak out? But--through
Milli, of course. And the guard on her cell is not a member of the
expedition! Curses! I must get word to Dolf, and have that guard
changed at once."

And he darted swiftly away.

       *       *       *       *       *

The young prisoner was plunged into gloom. Now he'd gone and done it!
Why hadn't he first made appropriate inquiries of his guard?

A new guard appeared in front of the door.

"Are you going on the expedition?" asked Abbot.

"Yes, worse luck," replied the guard.

The prisoner forgot his own gloom, in his surprise at the gloominess
of the other.

"Don't you want to go?" he exclaimed incredulously.

"No."

"Why not?"

"Do you know Romehl?" asked the guard.

"Yes," Abbot replied.

"Well, that's why."

"Then you must be Hakin!" exclaimed Abbot, with sudden understanding.

"Yes," replied the other dully.

"You are going on the expedition, and Romehl is not?"

"Quite correct."

"Say, look here!" exclaimed Abbot, and then he launched into the
description of a plan, which just that moment had occurred to him, for
him, Milli, Romehl and Hakin to make their getaway ahead of the
expedition--in fact, that very night--and to set off the time-fuse
before leaving.

It turned out that Hakin knew where the explosives were planted, and
where the submarines were kept, and even how to operate them. He
eagerly accepted the plan; and when next relieved as sentinel, he
hurried away to inform Romehl.

Three hours later he was back on post. Quickly he explained to his
prisoner all about the workings of the submarines of the expedition.
The lights-out bell rang, and all the city became dark, except for dim
lights in the passageways. Hakin at once unlocked the door of Abbot's
cell, and together the two young men sneaked down the corridor to the
cell where Milli was confined.

Silently Hakin and Abbot sprang upon the guard and throttled him; then
released Milli. There was no time for more than a few hurried words of
explanation before the three of them left the prison and made for the
locks of the subterranean canal, picking up Romehl at a preappointed
spot on the way.

       *       *       *       *       *

The canal locks were unguarded, as well as the storerooms of the
submarines. Each of the rooms held two subs, and could open onto the
second lock and be separately flooded.

The submarines were of steel as thick as Abbot's bathysphere. Their
shape was that of an elongated rain drop, with fins. In the pointed
tip of their tails were motors which could operate at any pressure. At
the front end were quartz windows. In the top fin was an expanding
device which could be filled with buoyant gas, produced by chemicals,
when the craft neared the surface. Each submarine also contained a
radio set, so tuned as to be capable of opening and closing the
radio-controlled gates of the locks. Each would carry comfortably two
or three persons.

Having picked out two submarines and found them to be in order, Hakin
sneaked back into the corridor to set off the time-fuse, leaving his
three companions in the dark in the storeroom. Abbot put a protecting
arm around Milli, while Romehl snuggled close to her other side.

Their hearts were all racing madly with excitement, and this was
intensified when they heard Hakin talking with someone just outside
their door.

Then Hakin returned unexpectedly.

"Something terrible has happened!" he breathed. "The explosives have
been discovered and are gone. One of the expedition men has just
informed me. Someone must have gotten word to Thig--"

"Why, _I_ did," interrupted Milli. "I told my guard, just before they
came and changed him."

Abbot groaned.

Hakin continued hurriedly: "So Dolf plans to leave at once. He is
already rounding up his followers. Come on! We must get out ahead of
him!"

An uproar could be heard drawing near in the corridor outside. Abbot
opened the door and peered out; then shut it again and whispered, "The
two factions are fighting already."

"Then come on!" exclaimed Hakin.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he spoke he turned on the lights, wedged the door tight against its
gaskets and threw the switch which started the water seeping into the
storeroom; then he led Romehl hurriedly to one of the two submarines,
while George and Milli rushed to the other. Heavy blows sounded
against the storeroom door.

The water rapidly rose about them, and the four friends crawled
inside the two machines and clamped the lids tight. Then they waited
for sufficient depth, so that they could get under way.

The water rose above their bow windows, but suddenly and inexplicably
it began to subside again. A man waded by around the bow of Abbot's
machine.

"They've crashed in the door, and are pumping out the water again!"
exclaimed Abbot. "We're trapped!"

"Not yet!" grimly replied the girl at his side. "Can you work the
radio door controls?"

"Yes."

"Then quick! Open the doors into the lock!"

He pressed a button. Ahead of them two gates swung inward, followed by
a deluge of water.

"Come on!" spoke the girl. "Full speed ahead, before the water gets
too low."

Abbot did so. Out into the lock they sped, in the face of the surging
current. Then Abbot pushed another button to close the gates behind
them. But the water continued to fall, and they grounded before they
reached the end of the lock. Quite evidently the rush of the current
had kept the doors from closing behind them. The city was being
flooded through the broken door of the storeroom.

But Abbot opened the next gate, and again they breasted the incoming
torrent. This time, although the level continued to fall, their craft
did not quite ground.

"They must have got the gates shut behind us at last," said he, as he
opened the next set and pressed on.

       *       *       *       *       *

And then he had an idea. Why not omit to close any further gates
behind him? As a result, the sea pressure would eventually break down
the inmost barriers, and destroy the city as effectively as Dolf's
bomb would have done. But he said nothing to Milli of this plan: she
might wish to save her people.

Gate after gate they passed. This was too simple. A few more locks and
they would be out in open water. The submarine of Hakin and Romehl
swept by--evidently to let George and Milli know their presence--and
then dropped behind again. But was it their two friends after all? It
might have been some enemy! They could not be sure.

This uncertainty cast a chill of apprehension over them, which was
immediately heightened by the sudden extinguishing of the overhead
lights of the tunnel. Abbot pressed the radio button for the next set
of locks, but they did not budge.

"What can be the matter?" he asked frantically.

"My people must have turned off the electric current," Milli replied.
"The gates won't open without electricity to feed the motors. We're
trapped again."

For a moment they lay stunned by a realization that their escape was
blocked.

"Kiss me good-by, dear," breathed Milli. "This is the end."

As the young man reached over to take her in his arms, the submarine
was suddenly lifted up and spun backward, end over end: then tumbled
and bumped along, as though it were a chip on an angry mountain
torrent.

Stunned and bruised and bleeding, the young American finally lost
consciousness....

       *       *       *       *       *

