children from school, because they become exhausted {34} or, perchance,
have lost their health from intense and protracted mental application.

[Sidenote: 24. The result of gymnastics in our colleges and other
institutions of learning?]

24. Were gymnastics more common in our educational institutions we should
not so often witness the sad spectacle of young men and women leaving our
colleges and seminaries, with finished educations it may be, but with
constitutions so impaired, that the life which should be devoted to the
accomplishment of noble purposes must be spent in search of health. Spinal
curvatures, which, according to the experience of physicians, are now
extremely frequent, especially among ladies, would give place to the steady
gait and erect carriage which God designed his human creatures should
maintain.

25. All the exercises necessary for the proper development of the body may
be obtained from the use of a few simple contrivances that every one can
have at home, at little cost--less by far than is spent for useless toys.
Many of these may be made available in the parlor or chamber, though all
exercises are far more useful in the open air. A small portion of the day
thus spent will afford agreeable recreation as well as useful exercise. The
Indian club, the wand, the ring, and the dumb-bells answer ordinary
purposes very well. Illustrations are here introduced of a few simple
contrivances that may be useful for general exercises, and are specially
suitable for persons with _weak spines_, or with spines that are the
subject of lateral curvature.

26. One of the simplest appliances for strengthening the muscles of the
spine, designed chiefly to exercise the muscles on either side of the
spine, consists of two wooden handles attached to india-rubber cords, one
of which is attached to a hook made fast in the ceiling, or in the top of
the door-case; and the other to another hook fastened in the wall,
door-post, or window-casing, about the height {35} of the shoulder. When
traction is made with the left hand, it exercises the muscles on the left
side of the spine, while those on the opposite side are left almost at
rest, owing to the oblique direction given to the shoulders when the right
hand grasps the horizontal cord. (This appliance will be understood by
referring to Fig. 13.)

[Illustration: FIG. 11.]

[Illustration: FIG. 12.]

{36}

27. Fig. 11 shows an appliance consisting of two strong elastic cords, with
handles, secured to a hook in the floor, so arranged that the patient has
to stoop forward to reach them. On raising the body the spinal muscles are
powerfully exercised. Fig. 12 shows other modes of using the elastic cords
for strengthening the spine and chest.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.]

28. These various appliances have been combined so as to form a system of
gymnastics suitable for parlor use; other appliances have been added by
which the muscles of {37} the legs may be called into action as well as
those of the spine and upper part of the body (Fig. 13). Combinations of
cords suitable for particular cases may also be made, and by using one or
several cords on the same hook, their power may be adapted to the strength
of the most robust as well as to that of the invalid, or of the most
delicate child. The entire apparatus is quite simple in its construction
and inexpensive, requiring but little space, and at the same time affording
a great variety of exercises.

EXERCISES THAT MAY BE PRACTISED ON THIS APPARATUS.

    EXERCISE I. (Fig. 13).--Stand erect under the cords and place the heels
    together. Grasp the handles firmly, keeping the knees and elbows stiff,
    and pull downward and forward until the fingers nearly touch the toes.
    Return slowly to the erect position. Repeat.

    EXERCISE II. (Fig. 13).--Stand erect, and having grasped the handles
    overhead firmly, separate them and bring them down slowly until they
    touch the sides: then return them slowly to the original position.
    Repeat.

    EXERCISE III. (Fig. 13).--Stand erect, heels together, grasp the
    handles overhead, and charge forward with the right foot. Return to
    first position, and then charge with the left. Repeat, using the right
    and left foot alternately.

    EXERCISE IV. (Fig. 13).--Stand erect, heels together. Grasp the handle
    overhead, and charge forward with the right foot, knee bent. Remain in
    this position and bring the arms down to the sides so that the arm and
    fore-arm may form a right angle. Still holding the handles, thrust
    forward, first the right hand and then the left, until the arm is
    straight. Repeat. Return to first position, then charge forward with
    the left foot, performing the same movements as before.

    EXERCISE V. (Fig. 13).--In this exercise we change to the pulleys
    leading from the side posts, which can be used in several different
    ways. 1st. Stand erect, heels together, facing one of the posts, grasp
    the handle with the right hand, the arm being extended, then flex the
    fore-arm on the arm. Repeat. Perform the same movements with the left
    hand. 2d. Stand with back to the post; grasp the pulley behind with the
    right hand, then gradually bring the hand forward until it is extended
    in a straight line in front. Repeat. Perform the same exercise with the
    left hand.

    {38} EXERCISE VI. (Fig. 13).--This exercise is especially adapted to
    the legs. Stirrups are so arranged that they can be attached to the
    pulleys overhead, and can hang down to within three or four feet of the
    floor. Place the foot in the stirrup, and then press down until it
    touches the floor. Repeat. Exercise the left foot in the same way.

    EXERCISE VII. (Fig. 13.)--This exercise requires a little attention in
    the adjustment of the apparatus. Under the pulleys in the floor are
    passed ropes which can be attached to the snap-hooks that hold the
    handles overhead. Stoop forward with the knees stiff, and take hold of
    the handles, and then raise the body to the erect position. Repeat.

    EXERCISE VIII. (Fig. 13).--Sit on the floor or on a seat three or four
    inches high; bend forward, take hold of the handles, and perform the
    same movements that you would in rowing a boat.

    EXERCISE IX. (Fig. 13).--The trapeze can now be let down; take hold of
    it with both hands, sustaining the weight of the body with the arms,
    then rotate the body first from right to left, then from left to right
    alternately. This exercise is especially suitable for females.

    EXERCISE X. (Fig. 13).--Grasp the trapeze as before, bearing all the
    weight with the arms: then draw the body up slowly until you can place
    the chin over the bars. This requires strength of muscle, and might
    strain if done too violently; if slowly performed there is no danger.

    These are but a few of the exercises that can be practised with this
    apparatus. As these become familiar they can easily be modified, and
    new ones can be arranged to meet the requirements of particular cases.
    Most of the exercises described can be practised with one hand so as to
    strengthen the muscles on one side.

[Sidenote: 29. Need of repose? How do we obtain rest? Alfred the Great? The
eight-hour division of time?]

29. REST.--We cannot always be active: repose must succeed labor. We obtain
this rest partly by suspending all exertion, as in sleep, and partly by a
change of employment. It is said that Alfred the Great recommended that
each day should be divided in the following manner: "Eight hours for work,
eight hours for recreation, and eight hours for sleep." This division of
time is as good as any that could now be made, if it be borne in mind that,
when the work is physical, the time of recreation should {39} be devoted to
the improvement of the mind; and when mental, we should then recreate by
means of physical exercise.

[Sidenote: 30. Cessation of voluntary activity? Temperature of the body?
Consequence? Body and mind during sleep? Nutrition? Describe it.
Consequences of insufficient sleep?]

30. During sleep, all voluntary activity ceases, the rapidity of the
circulation and breathing diminishes, and the temperature of the body falls
one or two degrees. In consequence, the body needs warmer coverings than
during the hours of wakefulness. During sleep, the body seems wholly at
rest, and the mind is also inactive, if we except those involuntary mental
wanderings which we call dreams. Nevertheless a very active and important
physical process is going on. Nutrition, or the nourishing of the tissues,
now takes place. While the body is in action, the process of pulling down
predominates, but in sleep, that of building up takes place more actively.
In this way we are refreshed each night, and prepared for the work and
pleasures of another day. If sleep is insufficient, the effects are seen in
the lassitude and weakness which follow. Wakefulness is very frequently the
forerunner of insanity, especially among those who perform excessive mental
labor.

[Sidenote: 31. Amount of sleep in different persons? Cases? Frederick the
Great? Bonaparte? Instances of long deprivation of sleep?]

31. All persons do not require the same amount of sleep, but the average of
men need from seven to nine hours. There are well-authenticated cases where
individuals have remained without sleep for many days without apparent
injury. Frederick the Great required only five hours of sleep daily.
Bonaparte could pass days with only a few hours of rest. But this long
continued absence of sleep is attended with danger. After loss of sleep for
a long period, in some instances, stupor has come on so profoundly, that
there has been no awaking.

[Sidenote: 32. Instances of sailors? French soldiers? During torture?]

32. There are instances related of sailors falling asleep {40} on the
gun-deck of their ships while in action. On the retreat from Moscow, the
French soldiers would fall asleep on the march, and could only be aroused
by the cry, "The Cossacks are coming!" Tortured persons are said to have
slept upon the rack in the intervals of their torture. In early life, while
engaged in a laborious country practice, the writer not unfrequently slept
soundly on horseback. These instances, and others, show the imperative
demand which nature makes for rest in sleep.

QUESTIONS FOR TOPICAL REVIEW.

                                                                       PAGE
  1. What can you state of the number and division of the muscles?   25, 26
  2. Describe the structure of the muscles.                          25, 26
  3. Their arrangement in pairs and consequent action.                   26
  4. What is the difference between the motion called flexion and that
        called extension?                                                26
  5. Describe their action, and state which are the more powerful.       26
  6. What is the difference between voluntary and involuntary muscles?   26
  7. Illustrate the difference between the two.                          26
  8. State all you can of the tendons or sinews.                         27
  9. What is meant by contraction of the muscles?                    27, 28
  10. In how many and what ways may contraction be effected?             28
  11. What is stated of after-death contraction?                         28
  12. Why cannot a muscle in life continue contracted a long time?       28
  13. How then can the constant beating of the heart be explained?       28
  14. How does the strength of a man compare with that of a horse?       29
  15. What can you state in relation to the relative strength
        of animals?                                                  28, 29
  16. What, in relation to physical strength?                            29
  17. What, in relation to physical degeneracy?                      29, 30
  18. What, in relation to the importance of exercise?                   30
  19. What is the effect of exercise upon the heart, skin,
        and appetite?                                                30, 31
  20. How does exercise affect the current of the body's circulation?    31
  21. How does judicious exercise affect the muscles?                    31
  22. What is stated of violent and spasmodic exercise?                  31
  23. Of the exercise of walking?                                31, 32, 33
  24. Of running, leaping, and other modes of exercise?                  32
  25. Of physical culture, in connection with out-door exercises?        33
  26. Of the importance of gymnastics in our schools and colleges?   33, 34
  27. Of the importance of rest from labor or exercise?              38, 39
  28. What processes take place during sleep?                            39
  29. What effects follow insufficient sleep?                            39

       *       *       *       *       *


{41}

CHAPTER III.

THE INTEGUMENT, OR SKIN.

_The Integument--Its Structure--The Nails and Hair--The Complexion--The
Sebaceous Glands--The Perspiratory Glands--Perspiration and its
Uses--Importance of Bathing--Different kinds of Baths--Manner of
Bathing--The Benefits of the Sun--Importance of Warm Clothing--Poisonous
Cosmetics._

[Sidenote: 1. What is the skin? Parts directly beneath? What is shown?]

1. THE INTEGUMENT.--The skin is the outer covering of the body. The parts
directly beneath it are very sensitive, and require protection. This is
shown whenever by accident the skin is broken, pierced, or torn off, the
bared surface being very tender, and painful to the touch. Nature has
provided the body with a garment that is soft, pliable, close-fitting, and
very thin, and yet sufficiently strong to enable us to come in contact with
the objects that surround us, without inconvenience or suffering.

[Sidenote: 2. Microscopic examination? What is the cutis? The cuticle?
Their union? How separated? What further is said of the cuticle?]

2. THE STRUCTURE OF THE SKIN.--When examined with the aid of the
microscope, the skin is found to be made up of two layers--the outer and
the inner. The inner one is called the _cutis_, or true skin; the outer one
is the _epidermis_, or scarf-skin. The latter is also known as the
_cuticle_. These two layers are closely united, but they may be separated
from each other. This separation takes place whenever, from a burn, or
other cause, a blister is formed; a watery fluid is poured out between the
two layers, and lifts the epidermis from the true skin.

Of the two layers, the cuticle is the thinner in most parts of the body,
and has the appearance of a whitish membrane. It is tough and elastic, is
without feeling, and does {42} not bleed, when cut. Examine it more
closely, and we observe that it is composed of minute flat cells, closely
compacted, and arranged layer upon layer.

[Sidenote: 3. Wearing out of the cuticle? What then? Variety in thickness
of cuticle? How accounted for?]

3. The outer layer is constantly being worn out, and falls from the body in
the form of very fine scales. It is, also, continually forming anew on the
surface of the inner layer. Its thickness varies in different parts of the
body. Where exposed to use, it is thick, hard, and horn-like, as may be
seen on the soles of the feet, or on the palms of the hands, especially of
those who are accustomed to perform much manual labor. This is an admirable
provision for the increased protection of the sensitive parts below the
skin against all extraordinary exposure. Even the _liabilities_ of these
parts to injury, are thus kindly provided for by "the Hand that made us."

[Sidenote: 4. Location and office of the cutis? What further is said of it?
Papillae? Touch?]

4. The cutis, or true skin, lies beneath the epidermis, and is its origin
and support. It is firm, dense, elastic, very sensitive, and is freely
supplied with blood-vessels. It is closely connected with the tissues below
it, but may be separated by means of a sharp instrument. The surface of the
cutis is not smooth, but is covered here and there with minute elevations,
called _papillae_. These are arranged in rows, along fine lines, or ridges,
such as those which mark the palm and fingers; their number is about 80 to
the square line (a line being one-twelfth of an inch). These _papillae_
contain the blood-vessels which carry the supply of blood needed by the
ever-wasting skin. They contain nerves also, and are largely concerned in
the sense of touch; hence they are particularly abundant where the touch is
most delicate, as at the ends of the fingers.

[Sidenote: 5. What are the nails and hair? The growth of the nail? The
rapidity of its growth? Accident to the nail?]

{43} [Illustration: Fig. 14.

_a, b._ THE ROOT OF A HAIR.

1, 2, 3. The skin forming the hair sac. 4. Sebaceous glands. 5. The hair
sac.

_c._ TRANSVERSE SECTION OF A HAIR.]

5. THE NAILS AND HAIR.--These are appendages of the skin, and although very
unlike the cuticle as it appears on the surface of the body, they are, in
reality, modified forms of that layer of the skin. The nail grows from a
fold of the cuticle at the root, and from the under surface. As fast as it
is formed, it is constantly being pushed outward. The rapidity of its
growth can be ascertained by filing a slight groove on its surface, and
noticing how the space between it and the root of the nail increases, in
the course of a few weeks. When the nail is removed by any accident, it
will be replaced by a new one, if the root be not injured.

[Sidenote: 6. How are the hairs produced? Difference in their length?]

6. The hairs are produced in a similar manner; the skin forming
depressions, or hair sacs, from the bottom of which they grow and are
nourished (Fig. 14). They are found, of greater or less length, on almost
all parts of the surface, except the palms of the hands and soles of the
feet. On certain parts of the body, they grow to great length; on other
parts they are so short, that they do not rise beyond the hair sac in which
they originate.

[Sidenote: 7. Root of the hair? Shaft? Firmness and softness of the hair?]

7. The bulb, or root, from which the hair arises, is lodged in a small
pouch, or depression in the skin. The shaft is the part which grows out
beyond the level of the skin. Its growth is altogether in one direction, in
length alone. The outer part of the hair is quite firm, while its {44}
interior is softer, and probably conveys the fluids by which it is
nourished. The hair is more glossy in health than at other times.

[Sidenote: 8. Office of the nail? Of the hair? Give the illustrations.]

8. The nail serves as a protection to the end of the finger, and also
enables us to grasp more firmly, and to pick up small objects. The hair,
too, is a protection to the parts it covers. On the head, it shields the
brain from extremes of heat and cold, and moderates the force of blows upon
