or streets.

Mr. George Richards, of Boxbury, Mass., has patented a steam muffler
composed of two plates of a diameter very much greater than the
diameter of the pipe through which the steam escapes from the boiler,
so that the steam has room to expand before escaping to the outer air,
its expansion effectually deadening the noise caused by the passage
through the contracted escape pipe.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BABY ELEPHANT TAKES A BATH.

It is customary with traveling menageries in hot weather when
convenient to a river to allow the elephants to take a bath. The
London Circus passed through Woonsocket, R. I., the other day, when
the keeper let loose all the elephants, including "Hebe" and her baby,
for the above purpose. The mother and her offspring were permitted to
approach a river for the first time since the baby was born, and they
were, therefore, watched with great interest by their keeper. The
mother cautiously approached the Blackstone River, which flows past
the circus grounds, and waded in a short distance, carefully feeling
her way; she then encouraged the baby to follow her, which the
obedient little fellow did. When far enough in the mother caught the
baby between her fore legs, and then lay down in the water and rolled
over, giving the baby the first bath. The mother then felt perfectly
satisfied with her job, and rising up approached the bank, bringing
the little one with her. On reaching terra firma she drove the younger
before her, and would not allow it to approach the water again, though
it showed a disposition to do so.

       *       *       *       *       *




PHYLLIRHOE BUCEPHALA.

This little animal belongs to the family of snails, class Heteropoda,
is about an inch long, and is devoid of any shell or covering
whatever. It is flat, and so absolutely transparent that a person
can read through its body. It is provided with a pair of feelers. The
little animal is very luminous if placed in fresh water or disturbed,
but this phenomenon is most beautiful when an ammonia solution is
poured over the animal. It will shine with a vivid blue light, which
extinguishes with life. But even after death the nerve cells, which
are directly below the skin and produce the light, can be irritated
sufficiently to become luminous. It is a singular fact that
electricity has no effect upon these nerve cells.

[Illustration: PHYLLIRHOE BUCEPHALA--AS SEEN IN THE LIGHT.

_a b_, ganglion; _c_, intestines; _d_, liver; _f_, kidneys; _g_,
generative organs.]

[Illustration: PHYLLIRHOE BUCEPHALA--SHOWING IN THE DARK THE LUMINOUS
SPOTS.]

       *       *       *       *       *




CARE OF TREES AND SHRUBS.

In view of the drought which prevails in many parts of the country and
its unusual severity over extensive districts, the _Rural New Yorker_
suggests to those who have planted trees or shrubs the past spring
that there is one method, and so far as we know, says the writer, only
one, by which they may be protected against injury or death from that
cause. Surface watering has been shown to do more harm than good. The
ground is made hard and compact, thus becoming a better conductor of
heat while it becomes less pervious to air and moisture. A portion of
the surface soil should be removed, and then pailful after pailful
of water thrown in until the ground, to a depth of two feet and to
a width about the stem of not less than three feet in diameter, has
become saturated. Then, as soon as the water has disappeared from the
surface, the removed soil should be well pulverized and returned. A
covering of boards, straw, or hay, or even of sand or gravel, may then
be applied, and the tree or shrub, thus treated, will pass through ten
days of additional drought in safety.

As soon as rain comes to wet the earth thoroughly, we think it is
better to remove the mulch. Nothing is then gained by permitting it
to remain. Mellowing the surface soil about the trees, thus keeping it
free from grass and weeds, is then the most that is needed. We would
repeat that the present is the season when the female borer deposits
her eggs on the stems of fruit trees, and the wash of lime, potash,
sulphur, etc. (darkened with lampblack), should now be applied and
reapplied during June and July, as soon as washed off by rain.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FORCE OF TREE GROWTH.

[Illustration: THE FORCE OF TREE GROWTH.]

The disruptive power of tree roots, growing in the crevices of rocks,
is well known. Masses of stone weighing many tons are often dislodged
in this way from the faces of cliffs, and no one gives them more than
a passing glance. When, however, the sanctity of the tomb is
invaded, despite the graven warning of the occupant, the case is very
different, and superstitious people are apt to think there must be
something in it more than accident and the unconscious expression of
the resistless force of growing vegetation.

The engraving herewith is copied from a photograph sent to us by
a European correspondent, of a grave in the Garten churchyard, in
Hanover, Germany, the invasion of which by a birch tree has been the
occasion of much wonderment by country people, who come from great
distances to examine it.

The monument, so unfeelingly disrupted, was erected in 1782, and bears
on its base the following inscription: "This grave, which was bought
for all eternity, must never be opened." A chance birch seed, lodging
in a crevice of the monument, has displayed the irony of nature in
slowly yet surely thwarting the desire of the person who designed it
for a perpetual memorial. All the joints are separated, the strong
iron clamps are broken, and the birch tree has embraced the upper
large block, which weighs about one and a quarter tons, and the
tree is driving its roots below, gradually but surely tilting the
structure.

       *       *       *       *       *




PERSEVERANCE WITH THE DROWNED.

In a recent communication to the French Academy, Professor Fort
asserts that he was enabled to restore to life a child three years
old, by practicing artificial respiration on it four hours, commencing
three hours and a half after apparent death. He mentions also a case
in which Dr. Fournol, of Billancourt, reanimated, in July, 1878, an
apparently drowned person by four hours of artificial respiration
begun one hour after the patient was taken from the water. At this
season, when cases of drowning are apt to be frequent, the possible
benefit that may come from a persevering effort to revive victims
of drowning, should encourage friends not to despair of their
resuscitation, even after several hours of seemingly fruitless labor.

       *       *       *       *       *




SIMPLE TEST FOR CHLORAL HYDRATE.

A new test for chloral hydrate has been devised by Frank Ogston,
namely, yellow sulphide of ammonium. On adding this reagent to a
solution of chloral of moderate strength there is at first no change
noticed, but in a short time the colorless solution acquires an orange
yellow color, and on longer standing turns brown and evolves a gas
of very disagreeable odor. Ogston's experiments show that a solution
containing ten milligrammes turns brown in six hours, and gives the
peculiar odor. With one milligramme the orange-yellow color appears
in twelve hours, but no odor. Croton chloral gives the same reactions,
but chloroform, chloric ether, and formic acid do not.

       *       *       *       *       *




NATURAL HISTORY NOTES.

_The Propagation of Oysters._--At the recent meeting in this city
of the American Fish Cultural Association, a paper was read on the
propagation of the oyster, by Dr. W. J. Brook, of the Johns Hopkins
University. The manner in which this propagation takes place had never
before, he said, been thoroughly understood. Through studies made by
him last summer, however, great light was thrown on the subject. He
found that the American oysters do not breed their young in the
shell, as had been supposed, and that consequently the eggs can be
impregnated artificially. An average oyster contains from six to nine
million eggs, and one of large size may contain fifty millions. The
plan pursued by him in fertilizing these eggs was to chop the male
and female oyster up together; thus the fluids are mixed and the
impregnation is made complete. The process of development immediately
begins, and goes on so rapidly that a change may be noted every
fifteen seconds. In a very few hours the embryo is sufficiently formed
to swim in the water. The shells at first are very small, and are not
adjacent to each other. They grow very rapidly, closing down over the
sides, and finally unite and form the hinge. In the short space of
twenty-four hours the young oyster is able to take food, and from
three days to a week it attains perfect form. During its early life it
is a swimming animal. The oyster is able to reproduce its species at
the end of a year's growth, and it is marketable at the age of three
years.

       *       *       *       *       *




S. P. RUGGLES.

S. P. Ruggles died at Lisbon, N. H., May 28. He was principally known
as the inventor of the Ruggles printing press, which was among the
first of machine presses. His invention was what printers call an
"upside-down press," the type being upside down when in the bed. About
twenty-five years ago Mr. Ruggles sold out his interest for nearly
$200,000, and since then has not been in active business. He was the
inventor of the raised alphabet for the blind, and always showed great
interest in the amelioration of the condition of the sightless. He was
also a great friend of mechanical education, and has written much on
the subject.

       *       *       *       *       *




SYDNEY INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION.--1879-1880.

EXTRACTS FROM THE REPORT OF THE JUDGES IN HOROLOGY.

DEPARTMENT III.--EDUCATION AND SCIENCE.

_Group_--_Scientific and Philosophical Instruments and Methods._

Class 310.--Chronometric Apparatus, Chronometers, Astronomical Clocks,
Watches, Chronographs, etc., etc.

  _Judges_.--John McGarvie Smith, New South Wales.
  P. E. Bound, Switzerland.
  H. C. Russell, B.A., F.R.A.S., Great Britain.
  E. Beckmann, Germany.
  Gregory P. Harte, United States.

_To the Honorable Committee on Judging and Awards, Sydney
International Exhibition._

GENTLEMEN: I have the honor to hand you herewith the report of the
judges of Class 310, as above,

And remain, sirs, your obedient servant,

GREGORY P. HARTE, Chairman.

       *       *       *       *       *


The following exhibits were submitted for examination:

U. S. Exhibit, 537, American Watch Company, Waltham, Mass., U. S.
A.--Watches and Chronographs.

British Exhibit, 1,048, Victor Kullberg, London, England--Watches and
Chronographs.

British Exhibit, 1,054, Nicole & Nielsen, London, England--Watches,
Chronographs, etc.

British Exhibit, 1,060, T. Russell & Sons, London, England--Watches,
Chronographs, etc.

British Exhibit, 1,041, Castleberg & Co., London, England--Watches,
etc.

British Exhibit, 1,060a, S. Backschmid, Switzerland--Watches.

       *       *       *       *       *


German Exhibit, 36, A. Lange & Sons, Dresden, Germany--Watches, etc.

Swiss Exhibit, L. Audemars, Brassus, Switzerland--Watches, etc.

French Exhibit, 146, A. H. Rodanet, Paris, France--Chronometers.

French Exhibit, 177, G. Tribandeau, Besancon, France--Watches.

Swiss Exhibit, 14a, International Watch Company--Watches.

In presenting the following report, the judges desire to make some
explanations, which, we trust, will excuse them in the minds of the
impartial for any apparent neglect in the form of their report, and
for the limited number of tests made of the horological exhibits.

The judges were appointed too late to do the full amount required,
inasmuch as the number of exhibits was so much in excess of any
reasonable allotment for examination and report before the closing of
the Exhibition.

Commencing their labors, however, immediately after the first
call, the examinations were not complete until March 3d, which only
permitted a time test to be made of nine days in a single position.
This single position was objected to by some of the exhibitors,
but ill-advisedly, for the ratings observed in the watches of the
objecting exhibitors were of such character as to establish in the
minds of the judges the conclusion that their watches would not have
made so good a comparative showing if there had been more time to
observe the ratings in other positions.

Great care was taken by the individual judges in making up their note
books during the examination of the watches, and scrutinizing the
inherent and comparative merits of exhibits under the ten different
heads unanimously agreed upon, as follows:

1. Originality.
2. Invention and discovery.
3. Utility and quality of material.
4. Skill in workmanship.
5. Fitness for purposes intended.
6. Adaptation to public wants.
7. Economy.
8. Cost.
9. Finish and elegance of cases.
10. Time-keeping qualities.

It was agreed the judges should use the number 100 as expressing the
highest degree of excellence in each of these ten elements of inherent
and comparative merit, and adjudge individually to each of the several
exhibits such rating as their respective judgments would warrant after
careful examination; each set of opinions being made a portion of
this report, and in the _resume_ the mean average being taken as the
unanimous verdict of the judges.

It was also decided we should take up each exhibit in the order
originally examined, and, beginning with the first element of merit
(originality), each judge should in numbers express his judgment of
the inherent and comparative merit attaching to each exhibit in this
one element; this being done, to proceed with each succeeding element
in order and in the same manner. The five judgments being complete and
in numbers, the aggregated verdict is arrived at simply by addition
and division.

This is not only a verdict as to the inherent and comparative merits
of each exhibit, but also a full analysis of each order of merit in
any exhibit as compared with all the others....

In giving this verdict it was absolutely necessary to ascertain to the
fullest extent the time-keeping qualities of the exhibits. The judges
were led to this conclusion from the fact that in some of the
exhibits we were shown watches of equal finish containing every
known application of horological science in practically the same
construction, which should, as far as they could determine by merely
optical examination, keep quite as good time as watches of double and
treble the costs in other exhibits, thus involving their judgment in
doubt upon several elements of merit.

In justice to themselves and to the exhibitors the judges determined
to make the test in only one position, and give the whole of the time
at their disposal to testing the watches in what might be considered
their normal position, if such term is allowable--that is, "pendent
up," or hanging.

At the solicitations of the judges Prof. H. C. Russell, Astronomer
Royal at the Sydney Observatory, kindly consented to make the tests,
and each of the exhibitors was requested to send three watches of his
own selection to the Observatory for this trial.

As will be seen by the report of Professor Russell, eight of the
ten exhibitors availed themselves of this opportunity. It is proper,
however, to state here that none of the exhibitors apparently
anticipated this test, and that it is possible some of the watches
might have made a better record if they had been differently attended
to since the opening of the Exhibition; but they were in this respect
all upon a par.

The majority of the watches had been made for exhibition purposes and
specially prepared to that end; and some had been previously rated at
observatories before sending.

_Notably, however, to the contrary of the above, the exhibit of the
American Watch Company was the ordinary and regular product of the
factory, such as is finished every day._

Notwithstanding the possibility that these exhibits might have been
better prepared for observatory time tests, some of the exhibits, as
will be seen by the rating, demonstrate the wonderful advances made in
the application of horological sciences to the manufacture of watches,
and that their rating is being made equal to that of the best marine
chronometers.

The following is the report of Professor Russell, and the accompanying
diagram (see next page) will readily give an idea of the comparative
performance of the different watches.

"_Sydney Observatory, 26th February, 1880_.

"GREGORY P. HARTE, ESQ.,

"_Chairman of the Judges in Horology_.

"SIR: I have the honor to report that, in response to your circular,
inviting exhibitors of watches each to send three watches to the
Observatory to be tested, I received on Monday, February 16th:

"Three watches, Nos. 611, 669, 237, from Mr. Dolman, agent for Mr.
Tribandeau, Besancon.

"Three watches, Nos. 987271, 670068, 1221336, from Mr. Manson, agent
for Waltham Watch Company.

"Three watches, Nos. 3171, 1935, 2526, from Mr. Allerding, agent for
Mr. Kullberg.

"And on the forenoon of February 17th:

"Three watches, Nos. 11527, 19967, 12629, from Mr. Hoffnung, agent for
Lange & Sons.

"Three watches, Nos. 1004, 8632, 8370, from Mr. Jacob, as agent for
Nicole & Nielsen.

"Three watches, Nos. 70690, 23496, 113516, from Mr. Jacob, as agent
for Thomas Russell & Sons.

"One watch, No. 47150, from Mr. Jacob, as agent for Castleberg.

"Three watches, Nos. 12731, 12483, 11680, from Mr. Wiesener, as agent
for L. Audemars.

"And on 18th February:

"Two watches, Nos. 2724, 3528, from Mr. Jacob, as agent for
Castleberg.

"On the 17th I began rating these watches, keeping them all in one
position (hanging), and subject to the same conditions of temperature;
in fact, they were all hung on one board, and kept in a compartment
locked up so as to avoid change of temperature, except such changes as
were due to changes in the weather.

"They were rated once a day by the standard clock, which affords
special convenience for this work, and the error of which was found by
daily astronomical observations giving the absolute time; great care
was taken in rating so as to get the exact error of each watch every
day, care being taken at the same time to avoid errors in the seconds
dials, a fault sufficiently obvious in some of these exhibits.

"In presenting the result of this test in the form of a diagram (see
diagram on the opposite page), it is necessary to explain that the
curves show only the change of rate in each case, and nothing is shown
here of the actual rate, which was large in several instances.

"In the diagram spaces between faint lines represent seconds; and the
thicker faint lines represent the mean rate in each case: When the
curve rises it shows that the watch was gaining on its previous rate,
and when it falls the watch was losing on its previous rate. For
example, in No. 4 curve the thicker line shows the position of a
gaining rate of 3 sec. per day; on the 18th, watch No. 4 had a gaining
rate of 2.7 sec., and is plotted below the thick line; on the 19th and
20th it was less than 3 sec., but on the 21st the rate increased
to 4.8 sec., and the curve rises above the line. The same rule is
followed with losing rates; and, therefore, each curve shows whether
the watch was gaining or losing on its own rate.

"For convenient reference the barometer and temperature curves are
plotted on the same sheet; although from the short time at command the
watches could only be tested in one position, a glance at the diagram
will show that in some degree at least the temperature adjustment and
the isochronal properties of the balance springs were also tested; and
I wish to call your attention to the fact that the whole of these
show in a more or less degree a marked response to the change in
temperature, some being over and others under corrected.

"This fact is important, because it adds another proof that the old
form of compensation balance--even when combined with chronometer
spring and escapement and all the refinements which the best modern
workman can add to it--fails to yield a complete correction for
temperature; and I much regret that the American Watch Company, who
claim to have overcome this fault by means of a balance involving a
new arrangement of the metals, did not send to be tested any of their
first-class watches containing this important improvement.

"Several of the rate curves, especially Nos. 4, 10, 13, 16, 21, and
24, respond to the change in the barometer in a way that shows the
isochronal properties of their balance springs are not quite perfect.
_Looking down the curves it becomes at once evident that watch No. 5,
which is No. 670068, second grade of the American Watch Company, is
remarkably free from these defects, and presents the best rate of
all the watches tested._ No. 9, which is No. 2526, Kullberg, is the
nearest approach to No. 5; indeed, the difference between its highest
and lowest rates is 0.1 sec. less than No. 5, but it has not such a
steady rate. The timekeeping of both these watches is remarkably good,
and shows that we have entered upon a new era in the manufacture of
pocket chronometers; _for these rates are better than the majority of
marine chronometers._

"_Among the cheaper watches tested, No. 6, which is No. 1221336, of
the American Watch Company, is worthy of notice; it is a watch of the
sixth grade, yet its performance has been better than that of many
very expensive and otherwise first-class watches among those tested;
such a watch speaks volumes in favor of the system under which it was
made, and is the best comment upon the accuracy of the machines that
produced it._

"There are several watches among those tested which have kept
wonderfully steady rates, but their comparative merit is shown in the
diagrams much better than it could be by any description. The daily
rate of each watch will be found in a table attached.

"The changes in Nos. 1, 2, 3, 17, and 19 were too great to plot.

"H. C. RUSSELL,

"_Government Astronomer._"

       *       *       *       *       *


CONCLUSION OF THE REPORT.

In consideration of the facts developed in this examination, and the
preponderance of elements of inherent and comparative merit adjudged
by the judges (each in independent judgment) being equal to nearly
70 per cent. more than the next highest exhibit, they have found it
exceedingly difficult to make such a classification in degree as will
