It was also stated that while gas in large chandeliers could be made
an effective means of ventilation, there was another objection to its
use in the fact that the soil of the city was everywhere impregnated
with it from leaky mains, thus causing poisonous exhalations and an
insufferable odor whenever the ground was opened. Attention was also
called to the evil effects of the system of tenement houses, which led
to an unfavorable comparison of the health and morality of New York
with those of cities like Philadelphia and Cleveland, that abound in
small homes.

Dr. Minor attributed disease to what Richardson calls
"ultra-microscopic molecular aggregates," which always exist in
the air, but take hold of us only when our vitality is reduced to a
certain point. It has been shown that decay is absolutely impossible
in vessels from which they are excluded. But for them the earth would
now be heaped with the undecomposed remains of animals and vegetables.
According to this view, the future efforts of sanitary science must be
simply in the direction of learning how to protect ourselves against
the "ultra-microscopic molecular aggregates."

C. F. K.

       *       *       *       *       *




FELLING TREES BY ELECTRICITY.


Some years ago a Doctor Robinson of this city obtained a patent
through the agency of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN for Felling Trees by
Electricity. Subsequently a description of the invention was published
in this paper, soon after which the newspapers in this country
and Europe teemed with the account of a gentleman in India having
contrived an apparatus for felling trees in the same manner. Since
these several years have elapsed we have heard nothing of the
gentleman from India till a few days ago our papers have taken up the
subject anew, and annexed is the account they give of the inventor's
progress in developing his discovery.

The electric fluid in the form of lightning oftentimes proves itself
a very efficient wood cutter, and it has occurred to some ingenious
gentleman in India that artificial electricity may be so applied and
controlled as to cut down trees a good deal faster than the clumsy
ax or that American notion the chain saw. The two ends of the copper
wires of a galvanic battery are connected with platinum wire, which of
course instantly becomes red hot, and while in that state it is gently
seesawed across the trunk of the trees to be felled. When arrangements
were made for the experiment, it turned out that the thickness of
the thickest platinum wire that could be got was only that of crochet
cotton. It was at once seen that such a wire would be consumed before
the tree was half severed from its trunk. However, the attempt was
made. The burning wire performed its task very well as long as it
lasted, but, as anticipated, the wire continually broke, and at
length there was no wire left. There can be little doubt that, with
a stronger battery and a thicker wire, the experiment would have been
entirely successful. As it was, the tree was sawn one fifth through.

       *       *       *       *       *




AN IMPROVED VISE.


The novel vise shown in the engraving was recently patented by Mr.
William Starkey, of Pittsburg, Pa.

[Illustration: STARKEY'S VISE.]

The fixed jaw is supported by two standards from the base piece, and
has a square boxing or tube for receiving the slide of the movable
jaw. This slide is hollow, and contains a rack which is engaged by a
pinion on the short vertical shaft, which is supported by the fixed
jaw. At the lower end of the vertical shaft there is a worm wheel,
that is engaged by a worm on the horizontal shaft on which is placed
the hand wheel. By turning the hand wheel the vertical shaft is
rotated and the movable jaw is drawn against the object to be clamped
by the vise.

       *       *       *       *       *




CULINARY USES FOR LEAVES.


A writer in the London _Iron Trade Exchange_, calling attention to a
neglected source of culinary flavors, says:

"With the exception of sweet and bitter herbs, grown chiefly for the
purpose, and parsley, which is neither bitter nor sweet, but the most
popular of all flavoring plants, comparatively few other leaves are
used. Perhaps I ought also to except the sweet bay, which is popular
in rice and other puddings, and certainly imparts one of the most
pleasant and exquisite flavors; but, on the other hand, what a waste
there is of the flavoring properties of peach, almond, and laurel
leaves, so richly charged with the essence of bitter almonds, so
much used in most kitchens! Of course such leaves must be used with
caution, but so must the spirit as well. An infusion of these could
readily be made, either green or dry, and a tea or table spoonful of
the flavoring liquid used. One of the most useful and harmless of all
leaves for flavoring is that of the common syringa. When cucumbers are
scarce, these are a perfect substitute in salads or anything in which
that flavor is desired. The taste is not only like that of cucumbers,
but identical--a curious instance of the correlation of flavors in
widely different families. Again, the young leaves of cucumbers have a
striking likeness in the way of flavor to that of the fruit. The
same may be affirmed of carrot tops, while in most gardens there is
a prodigious waste of celery flavor in the sacrifice of the external
leaves and their partially blanched footstalks. Scores of celery are
cut up into soup, when the outsides would flavor it equally well or
better. The young leaves of gooseberries added to bottled fruit give
a fresher flavor and a greener color to pies and tarts. The leaves of
the flowering currant give a sort of intermediate flavor between black
currants and red. Orange, citron, and lemon leaves impart a flavoring
equal to that of the fruit and rind combined, and somewhat different
from both. A few leaves added to pies, or boiled in the milk used to
bake with rice, or formed into crusts or paste impart an admirable and
almost inimitable bouquet. In short, leaves are not half so much used
for seasoning purposes as they might be."

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW SHUTTER FASTENER.


We give herewith an engraving of a new shutter fastener, recently
patented by Mr. P. F. Fernandez, of San Juan, Porto Rico, West Indies.
This fastener is designed for holding doors or window shutters in
position when open, to prevent them from closing or swinging in the
wind.

[Illustration: IMPROVED SHUTTER FASTENER.]

To the wall is secured a plate to which is pivoted the spring-acted
hook, A, and upon the shutter in the proper position for engaging the
hook, A, there is a rigid hook, B. A coil spring is attached to the
plate that supports the hook, A, and when the shutter is open is
engaged by a boss formed on the end of the hook, B. By this means the
hook, B, is pressed forward into close contact with hook, A, thereby
preventing all jarring and rattling.

The hook, A, is provided with an eye for receiving the cord, C, which
extends to the window casing and is within easy reach, so that when
it is desired to close the shutter the hook, A, may be readily
disengaged from the hook, B, by simply pulling the cord.

Further information may be obtained by addressing the inventor as
above.

       *       *       *       *       *




AN IMPROVED GARDEN SPRINKLER.


A novel garden sprinkler, which may be carried on the back, is shown
in the accompanying engraving. The cylindrical vessel has a removable
cover, and contains a perforated plunger which is operated by a hand
lever from without. The cylindrical vessel is provided with shoulder
straps, and it has two sprinkling nozzles connected with it by
flexible tubes.

[Illustration: HODEL & STAUBER'S GARDEN SPRINKLER.]

This sprinkler is especially designed for applying insect-destroying
poison to plants. The operator, as he goes through the field or
garden, takes one nozzle in each hand and distributes the liquid upon
the plants. From time to time the liquid will be agitated by moving
the perforated plunger.

This invention was recently patented by Adolf Hodel, of Jefferson, and
F. A. Stauber, of Chicago, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW FOOT POWER.


In our issue of November 9 we illustrated and described a sewing
machine having W. F. Lane's improved foot power applied. We give
herewith views of the foot power in detail, Fig. 1 being a side
elevation, and Figs. 2 and 3 sectional views. The device is designed
for application to any light machinery that can be propelled by
foot power. A is the shaft to which motion is to be imparted by the
treadles, B, the latter being pivoted to oscillate on the shaft,
H. Two ratchet wheels, C, are secured to the shaft, A, and are each
worked by pawls, D, which are pivoted to a carrier, E, which turns
loosely on the shaft. The pawls are in the form of an elbow lever, and
the movement of their tooth ends is limited by lugs or shoulders on
the carrier, E. The outer ends of the pawls are received between lugs
that project from the plate, F, which turns loosely on the shaft,
A, and has attached to it the rope pulley, G. When the plate, F, is
turned in one direction the pawls are raised and ride loosely over
the teeth, but when the plate turns in the other direction the pawls
engage the ratchet teeth and carry them and also the shaft, A. A
guide pulley, I, is pivoted below the shaft, A, with its axis at right
angles to the shaft.

The motion from the alternately-oscillated treadles, B, is transmitted
to the pulleys, G, by means of a rope (shown in dotted lines), both
ends of which are fastened by hooks to some fixed point. This rope
runs from one of the hooks down under a pulley pivoted in the toe
of one of the treadles, thence around one of the pulleys, G, thence
around the pulley, I, over the other pulley, G, and downward around
the pulley in the other treadle, and upward to the second fixed hook.
The depression of one of the treadles causes the shaft to rotate, and
also lifts the other treadle into position to be operated.

[Illustration: LANE'S FOOT POWER.]

For further information address Wm. F. Lane, Elgin, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW INVENTIONS.


Mr. Samuel Heaton, of Cedar Rapids, Iowa, has patented an improved
Iron Fence Post, which is particularly adapted for wire fences. It
is formed of a slotted iron bar, constituting the post proper, and a
triangular brace, which is so connected with said bar that it may be
easily adjusted at different angles, corresponding to the undulation
or unevenness of the ground surface where the post is used.

Mr. Thomas S. Alexander, of Meriden, Conn., has patented an improved
Drawer Pull, which is neat, strong, and durable, and is less expensive
than when made in the usual way.

An improved Earth Scraper has been patented by Mr. Benjamin Slusser,
of Sidney, Ohio. This is an improvement in that class of earth
scrapers which are arranged to revolve for the purpose of dumping the
load, and during the intervals, or while being filled, are locked in
rigid position.

An improvement in Wagon Bodies has been patented by Mr. James H.
Paschal, of Camden, Ark. This invention consists, essentially, in a
frame provided with spurs projecting therefrom for engagement with the
bales to prevent them from slipping, and the combination therewith of
removable extension side and end pieces, for enabling the wagon to be
used for other purposes when not employed for hauling cotton bales;
there is an extension of the frame forming a feed trough for the
horses employed to draw the vehicle.

An improved Scraper has been patented by Mr. George Eiteman, of Round
Grove, Ill. This is a double-ended scraper hung at its center on a rod
connected to the handle arms, whereby either end of the scraper may be
used. It has catches to prevent the scraper from revolving backward,
and spring actuated dogs on the handle frame to retain the scraper in
position and prevent it from turning over until released.

       *       *       *       *       *




AMATEUR MECHANICS.


For amusement, exercise, and profit we commend, to those who are
mechanically inclined, the practice of working with tools of the
smaller sort, either in wood or other of the softer materials, or in
metals, glass, or stone. This practice renders the hands dexterous,
the muscles strong, and the head clear, with the further advantage of
producing something for either ornament or use. Of course a bench with
a vise and a few wood working and iron working tools will be required;
but the most expensive as well as the most essential tool is a lathe.
With this tool, not only turning in wood, metal, ivory, rubber, etc.,
can be accomplished, but it may also be used for screw-thread cutting,
gear cutting, drilling metals, boring wood, spinning metals, milling,
sawing metal and wood, grinding, polishing, moulding, shaping, and
other purposes. A first class plain lathe of small size cannot be
purchased for less than $50 or $60, and one of inferior quality will
cost $20 to $30.

While the purchase of a lathe is recommended there may be many who
would prefer to make one. A lathe that will do admirably and which
may be easily made is shown in the accompanying engravings, Fig.
1 representing in perspective the lathe complete; Fig. 2 is a
perspective view of the lathe without the table; Fig. 3 is a vertical
longitudinal section of the lathe, showing the manner of securing the
head and tail stocks to the bars which form the bed or shears.

In making this lathe one pattern only will be required for the two
standards of the head stock, and the support of the ends of the bars.
The lower part of the tail stock is made in two parts, so that they
may be clamped tightly together on the shears by means of the bolt
that passes through both parts, and is provided with a nut having
a lever handle. The rest support is also made in two parts, clamped
together on the ways in a similar way.

The patterns may be easily sawed from 11/4 inch pine. The holes that
receive the round bars should be chambered to receive Babbitt metal,
used in making the fit around the bars forming the shears, around the
head and tail spindles, and around the shank of the tool rest. The
smallest diameter of the holes that receive the round bars should be a
little less than that of the bars, so that the several pieces that
are placed on the bars may be fitted to hold them in place while the
Babbitt metal is poured in.

The dimensions of the lathe are as follows:

Length of round bars forming shears, 24 inches; diameter of bars, 1
inch; distance from the upper side of upper bar to center of spindle,
3 inches; between bars, 3/4 inch; between standards that support the
live spindle, 31/2 inches; size of standard above shears, 3/4 x 11/4
