a part of the earth suffered short, sharp, destructive revolution
unheralded as an earthquake or volcanic eruptions." Thus stated, his
position does not seem to be radically different from that of
the broader Uniformitarians, except that he marks the periods of
accelerated physical change, and not those of comparative quiescence,
as the dominant ones in their influence on life-change. He takes
high and strong ground, too, in insisting that it is the business
of geology not simply to decipher and map out the changes which have
taken place in the configuration of the globe and in its climatic
conditions, but also to investigate and fix the rates of change. And
when the evolution of environment takes form as a distinct branch of
geology, he expects to witness a marked modification in the dominant
views of biologists. Its few broad laws will include "neither the
absolute uniformitarianism of Lyell and Hutton, Darwin and Haeckel,
nor the universal catastrophism of Cuvier and the majority of
teleogists." "Huxley alone among prominent evolutionists opens the
door for a union of the residue of truth in the two schools, fusing
them in his proposed evolutional geology."

So, on looking back over a trail of thirty thousand miles of
geological travel, Mr. King is impelled to say that Mr. Huxley's
far-sighted view perfectly satisfies his interpretation of the broad
facts of the American continent.

Of Mr. King's observations in regard to plasticity of physical
structure in connection with rapidly changing environment and the
struggle for existence, we propose to speak at another time.

       *       *       *       *       *




The great stone monuments of England, like Stonehenge, are supposed,
by Mr. James Fergusson, to be military trophies, erected in the time
of King Arthur on the battle fields by the victorious armies.

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW APPARATUS FOR STORING AND UTILIZING SOLAR HEAT.


The apparatus herewith illustrated is devised to collect solar heat or
other heat, store it up in a heat reservoir--a mass of iron or other
suitable material--confine it in the reservoir until needed, keep
it in such form that it can be transported from place to place, and
utilize it for industrial or other purposes.

[Illustration: APPARATUS FOR STORING AND UTILIZING SOLAR HEAT.]

A is a concave mirror for concentrating the solar rays upon the heat
reservoir, B, which is a mass of iron. C is the heat box for
confining the heat until needed, and also for serving as package for
transporting the heat reservoir when hot. G is the heat reservoir
chamber, in which the heat is communicated from the hot reservoir to
the air. Under certain circumstances the heat reservoir may be heated
in the heat reservoir chamber. H is a devaporizing chamber, for
extracting the moisture from the air by means of a deliquescent
substance or other material or treatment. A vertical stack or flue, I,
communicates with the heat reservoir chamber, for conveying the heated
air away for use.

The device for concentrating the solar rays may be either stationary
or movable, and, if movable, may be moved by hand, or automatically,
to follow the sun. The various chambers mentioned will have valves,
J, at the ends to regulate the passage of the air, and there will be a
door, K, at the side or bottom.

Patented through the Scientific American Patent Agency, March
20, 1877, by Messrs. John S. Hittell and Geo. W. Deitzler, of San
Francisco, Cal.

       *       *       *       *       *




PHOSPHORESCENT SWEATING.


While the subject of phosphorescence in marine animals was under
discussion at a society meeting in Florence, Professor Panceri cited
the case of a medical man, who, after eating fish, felt indisposed,
had nausea, and sweats that were luminous. This idiosyncrasy was laid
to the _pesce baudiera_, a Neapolitan fish. Dr. Borgiotti, another
member of the Academy, also narrated a case of phosphorescent sweating
in a patient with miliaria, a fact which has previously been noticed.

       *       *       *       *       *




UTILIZATION OF TIN SCRAP.


Messrs. Charles A. Catlin and George F. Wilson, of Providence, R.
I., have patented, May 8, 1877, a new process of utilizing tin scrap,
whereby they claim the tin is recovered, either as a valuable salt
of that metal or in the metallic form, and the iron or other metal is
left as a scrap at once available for reworking.

[Illustration: CALLIN AND WILSON'S PROCESS OF UTILIZING TIN SCRAP.]

In any suitable building, a crane, A, is erected and placed in the
sweep of that crane; in any convenient order are a boiler, D, two
tanks, B and C, an evaporating pan, F, and an additional tank, E.
From the crane is suspended a wire basket to contain the scrap to be
treated, so perforated as to admit of the ready entrance of the liquid
when submerged in, and its ready escape when withdrawn from, the
boiler, D, in which boiler is put a sufficient quantity of the
solution of caustic soda or potash to allow of a complete submersion
therein of the basket and its contents. The basket, G, is then filled
with the material to be treated, sprinkling in during the filling the
requisite quantity of common salt or other chloride and nitrate
of soda or other nitrate, using these dry, not in solution, either
previously mixed or shaken in together in the proportion of from three
to five pounds each to every hundred pounds of scrap, the requisite
quantity depending upon the thickness of the thin [tin?] plate to be
removed. The loaded basket, being elevated by the crane, A, is
then swung round, and, by lowering, submerged in the hot or boiling
solution of caustic soda or potash in the iron boiler, D, which may
hold in solution a further proportion of the chloride and nitrate
used, the heat of which solution is maintained by a fire beneath the
boiler, or in any other and ordinary way. In the ensuing reaction the
oxygen of the nitrate combines with the tin to form stannic acid, and
this, in turn, combining with the alkali present, forms a stannate
of that base, which, entering into solution, leaves the before-plated
metal tin-free, the chloride present assisting in the reaction. A
further and more complex reaction takes place, by which copious fumes
of ammonia are evolved, which may be utilized by proper appliances.
When the reaction is complete, the basket containing the now tin-freed
scrap is withdrawn from the boiler, and suspended above it long enough
to drain. It is then swung over the tank, C, containing water, in
which it is washed by submerging and withdrawing several times, and
in like manner the washing completed in the water of the tank, B. The
contents of the basket being now discharged, it is again filled with
fresh scrap in the manner already described, and the process repeated.
The loss by evaporation from the boiler, D, is supplied by the wash
water in the tank, C; this, in turn, being supplied by the wash water
in the tank, B, to which fresh water is supplied as required. When
the caustic solution is sufficiently charged with the tin salt, it
is allowed to deposit the impure crystals, which, being removed and
drained, are redissolved in water in the iron tank, E. This solution
in the iron tank, E, after filtration or decantation, is again
concentrated in the evaporating pan, F, the crystals of stannate being
removed from time to time, drained and dried; or the impure crystals
obtained in the boiler, D, may be mixed with fine charcoal or other
reducing agent, and subjected to the requisite heat for the reduction
of the tin to the metallic form.


       *       *       *       *       *




NEW ALLOY.


A very beautiful new alloy, intended to replace brass in various
ornamental uses, especially in window and door furniture, has been
invented by W. A. Hopkins, of Paris. The alloy is composed of copper,
tin, spelter, or zinc and lead, which metals are manipulated. A
crucible is placed in the furnace and fired to red heat, and into the
crucible thus heated the metals are placed in the proportions of--tin
1-1/8 (say) 1 oz., spelter or zinc 1/2 oz., lead 5/16 of an ounce. These
are the proportions he prefers to use, as he has found them to give
excellent and satisfactory results, but he does not intend to confine
himself rigidly to the precise proportions named, as they may,
perhaps, be slightly varied in some particulars without materially
detracting from the beautiful color of the alloy which it is
intended to produce. The molten metals are kept well stirred, and
any impurities therein should be removed. When thoroughly mixed,
this alloy, which is termed the first alloy, is poured off into ingot
moulds and left to cool. Copper, in the proportion of eight parts to
one of this first alloy, is then placed in the crucible and brought
to melting heat, when the tin or first alloy is added and intimately
mixed with the copper, for which purpose the molten mass must be well
stirred for several minutes; it is then poured into ingot moulds for
sale in the form of ingots, or it may be poured into pattern moulds so
as to produce the articles required. This is the mode of manipulation
which it is preferred to employ, as an opportunity is thus afforded of
removing any impurities from the first alloy before mixing it with the
copper; but all the metals may, if preferred, be mixed together in the
proportions given and melted at one operation. By this means an alloy
is obtained of great strength, and of a very beautiful appearance, and
which is particularly suitable for small work, such, for instance, as
window and door furniture and other house furniture which is usually
made in brass or other alloy of copper, though it is not intended to
confine its use to such articles.

       *       *       *       *       *




SEBASTIN--AN IMPROVED EXPLOSIVE.


In the manufacture of the explosive known as dynamite, an infusorial
earth is used, which is filled with or made to absorb nitroglycerin.
As compared with certain kinds of charcoal, however, the absorptive
and retentive power of infusorial earth in small changes of
temperature unfavorably affect the common dynamite, and cause a
separation of the nitrogylcerin from the infusorial earth. The
improvement we now refer to is the invention of G. Fahnehjelm, of
Stockholm, Sweden, and consists in the substitution of a highly
porous and absorptive species of wood charcoal, in place of the
earth heretofore employed. The author designates his production as
"sebastin," and gives a number of interesting particulars as follow:

In order to produce a charcoal having the required quantities, the
carbonization or coking must be done in such a manner as to completely
destroy the organic substances, and to produce as porous a charcoal as
possible. For this he selects by preference young trees or striplings
or branches of poplar, hazelwood, or alder tree, and he burns them in
an open fire. When the wood has been consumed he does not put out the
fire by means of water, but leaves it to go out of itself. In this
way he obtains a very inflammable and very porous charcoal, which can
absorb more than five, and approaching six times its weight of
nitroglycerin without any risk of the separation of the oil. The
charcoal is pulverized in a wooden mortar, but it should not be
reduced to too fine a powder, else it will not so completely absorb
the nitroglycerin. The charcoal produced in the ordinary way, or by
closed fire, is quite different as regards absorbing power. Charcoal
of fir trees may, however, be used, and may acquire nearly the same
qualities, that is, if charred a second time in a special oven.

By mixing the different kinds of charcoal, a material may be obtained
possessing the required absorbing qualities, and an explosive compound
may then be obtained of the required power without loss of the
necessary consistency--that is, without being too dry, which is not
desirable. The charcoal not only serves as the best absorbent for the
nitroglycerin, but it plays also an important part in the combustion.
The nitroglycerin in exploding decomposes into steam, carbonic acid,
nitrogen, and oxygen. In the explosion of dynamite with inert base the
oxygen goes away without being utilized, but in the explosion of this
new compound (the new sebastin as he calls it) a part of the absorbent
charcoal is burnt by means of the liberated oxygen. The quantity of
gas is thus augmented, and also the development of heat, whereby again
the tension of this gas is augmented. As, however, the quantity of
charcoal necessary for the complete absorption of the nitroglycerin
is in all cases much larger than that which can reduce the excess of
oxygen produced at the explosion into carbonic acid, he adds to the
compound a salt, which also by the combustion gives an excess amount
of oxygen which may contribute to burn the rest of the charcoal. For
this purpose he uses by preference nitrate of potassa, which may be
added without any risk, and which gives the explosive compound a very
much greater rapidity or vehemence, and consequent force of explosion.

The composition of the new sebastin depends upon the objects for which
it is to be used, and the effects intended to be produced. The
strongest compound, and even in this there is stated to be no risk of
the separation of the nitroglycerin, is composed of 78 parts by
weight of nitroglycerin, 14 of the wood charcoal, and 8 of nitrate of
potassa; and when less power is required the proportions are
varied, the second quality consisting of 68 per cent. by weight of
nitroglycerin, 20 of the charcoal, and 12 of nitrate of potassa.

To show the relative strength of the compounds, the inventor says: Let
the dynamic force of pure nitroglycerin be represented by the number
2,884,043.6, then the dynamic force of the sebastin No. 1, as
above, will be indicated by 2,416,575, and of the sebastin No. 2 by
1,933,079.4, while that of dynamite No. 1 (consisting of 75 per
cent. of nitroglycerin and 25 per cent. of infusorial earth) will be
represented by 674,694.

For the above qualities of sebastin the increased effect produced by
the greater rapidity of the explosion must be taken into account also.
The increase has not yet been measured, but is estimated at 10 per
cent. The sebastin may also be compounded in other proportions of the
constituent parts, but the object being to produce explosive compounds
of the greatest force which it is possible to employ without danger,
he merely mentions that the proportion by weight may vary from 50
to 80 per cent. of nitroglycerin, 15 to 35 per cent. of the prepared
charcoal, and 5 to 20 per cent. of the nitrate of potassa; the parts
being taken by weight, as above stated.

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW METHOD OF BOOKBINDING.


The annexed engravings represent a new system of binding books,
for which a number of important advantages are claimed. It obviates
stitching, allows of each leaf being firmly secured, and hence is
especially well suited for single-leaved books. It admits of plates
and maps being bound in their proper places instead of being pasted
in, and renders the book much stronger and more durable. The inventor
claims a saving of 40 to 75 per cent of the time required for
stitching, and of 50 per cent of the time needed in ordinary rebinding
work.

[Illustration: Bookbinding Fig. 1, 2, 3, 4]

The mode of operation is as follows: On receiving the sheets, the
binder folds them and places them in consecutive order, according to
the printer's signature. The front and bottom edges of the book are
then trimmed so as to obtain two straight sides; and the backs of the
sheets are cut off, transforming them into single leaves. Horizontal
lines are now marked with pencil across the back of the book for the
saw cuts; and a diagonal line, A, B, Fig. 2, is drawn to serve as a
guide in replacing the leaves in their proper places. A thin coat of
glue is next applied to the back; and when this is dry, the book is
divided into sections of from four to eight leaves (without counting
them) entirely disregarding the printer's signatures, but placing the
sheets in their original order. The binder places the first section
