mattered little to him where they sailed or whom they fought, so long as
they sailed and fought. He found the life good.

Battle and raid had thinned their crew; only some eighty spearmen
remained, scarcely enough to work the long galley. But Belit would not
take the time to make the long cruise southward to the island kingdoms
where she recruited her buccaneers. She was afire with eagerness for her
latest venture; so the _Tigress_ swung into the river mouth, the oarsmen
pulling strongly as she breasted the broad current.

They rounded the mysterious bend that shut out the sight of the sea, and
sunset found them forging steadily against the sluggish flow, avoiding
sandbars where strange reptiles coiled. Not even a crocodile did they
see, nor any four-legged beast or winged bird coming down to the water's
edge to drink. On through the blackness that preceded moonrise they
drove, between banks that were solid palisades of darkness, whence came
mysterious rustlings and stealthy footfalls, and the gleam of grim eyes.
And once an inhuman voice was lifted in awful mockery--the cry of an
ape, Belit said, adding that the souls of evil men were imprisoned in
these man-like animals as punishment for past crimes. But Conan doubted,
for once, in a gold-barred cage in an Hyrkanian city, he had seen an
abysmal sad-eyed beast which men told him was an ape, and there had been
about it naught of the demoniac malevolence which vibrated in the
shrieking laughter that echoed from the black jungle.

Then the moon rose, a splash of blood, ebony-barred, and the jungle
awoke in horrific bedlam to greet it. Roars and howls and yells set the
black warriors to trembling, but all this noise, Conan noted, came from
farther back in the jungle, as if the beasts no less than men shunned
the black waters of Zarkheba.

Rising above the black denseness of the trees and above the waving
fronds, the moon silvered the river, and their wake became a rippling
scintillation of phosphorescent bubbles that widened like a shining road
of bursting jewels. The oars dipped into the shining water and came up
sheathed in frosty silver. The plumes on the warrior's headpiece nodded
in the wind, and the gems on sword-hilts and harness sparkled frostily.

The cold light struck icy fire from the jewels in Belit's clustered
black locks as she stretched her lithe figure on a leopardskin thrown
on the deck. Supported on her elbows, her chin resting on her slim
hands, she gazed up into the face of Conan, who lounged beside her, his
black mane stirring in the faint breeze. Belit's eyes were dark jewels
burning in the moonlight.

'Mystery and terror are about us, Conan, and we glide into the realm of
horror and death,' she said. 'Are you afraid?'

A shrug of his mailed shoulders was his only answer.

'I am not afraid either,' she said meditatively. 'I was never afraid. I
have looked into the naked fangs of Death too often. Conan, do you fear
the gods?'

'I would not tread on their shadow,' answered the barbarian
conservatively. 'Some gods are strong to harm, others, to aid; at least
so say their priests. Mitra of the Hyborians must be a strong god,
because his people have builded their cities over the world. But even
the Hyborians fear Set. And Bel, god of thieves, is a good god. When I
was a thief in Zamora I learned of him.'

'What of your own gods? I have never heard you call on them.'

'Their chief is Crom. He dwells on a great mountain. What use to call on
him? Little he cares if men live or die. Better to be silent than to
call his attention to you; he will send you dooms, not fortune! He is
grim and loveless, but at birth he breathes power to strive and slay
into a man's soul. What else shall men ask of the gods?'

'But what of the worlds beyond the river of death?' she persisted.

'There is no hope here or hereafter in the cult of my people,' answered
Conan. 'In this world men struggle and suffer vainly, finding pleasure
only in the bright madness of battle; dying, their souls enter a gray
misty realm of clouds and icy winds, to wander cheerlessly throughout
eternity.'

Belit shuddered. 'Life, bad as it is, is better than such a destiny.
What do you believe, Conan?'

He shrugged his shoulders. 'I have known many gods. He who denies them
is as blind as he who trusts them too deeply. I seek not beyond death.
It may be the blackness averred by the Nemedian skeptics, or Crom's
realm of ice and cloud, or the snowy plains and vaulted halls of the
Nordheimer's Valhalla. I know not, nor do I care. Let me live deep while
I live; let me know the rich juices of red meat and stinging wine on my
palate, the hot embrace of white arms, the mad exultation of battle when
the blue blades flame and crimson, and I am content. Let teachers and
priests and philosophers brood over questions of reality and illusion. I
know this: if life is illusion, then I am no less an illusion, and being
thus, the illusion is real to me. I live, I burn with life, I love, I
slay, and am content.'

'But the gods are real,' she said, pursuing her own line of thought.
'And above all are the gods of the Shemites--Ishtar and Ashtoreth and
Derketo and Adonis. Bel, too, is Shemitish, for he was born in ancient
Shumir, long, long ago and went forth laughing, with curled beard and
impish wise eyes, to steal the gems of the kings of old times.

'There is life beyond death, I know, and I know this, too, Conan of
Cimmeria--' she rose lithely to her knees and caught him in a pantherish
embrace--'my love is stronger than any death! I have lain in your arms,
panting with the violence of our love; you have held and crushed and
conquered me, drawing my soul to your lips with the fierceness of your
bruising kisses. My heart is welded to your heart, my soul is part of
your soul! Were I still in death and you fighting for life, I would come
back from the abyss to aid you--aye, whether my spirit floated with the
purple sails on the crystal sea of paradise, or writhed in the molten
flames of hell! I am yours, and all the gods and all their eternities
shall not sever us!'

       *       *       *       *       *

A scream rang from the lookout in the bows. Thrusting Belit aside, Conan
bounded up, his sword a long silver glitter in the moonlight, his hair
bristling at what he saw. The black warrior dangled above the deck,
supported by what seemed a dark pliant tree trunk arching over the rail.
Then he realized that it was a gigantic serpent which had writhed its
glistening length up the side of the bow and gripped the luckless
warrior in its jaws. Its dripping scales shone leprously in the
moonlight as it reared its form high above the deck, while the stricken
man screamed and writhed like a mouse in the fangs of a python. Conan
rushed into the bows, and swinging his great sword, hewed nearly through
the giant trunk, which was thicker than a man's body. Blood drenched the
rails as the dying monster swayed far out, still gripping its victim,
and sank into the river, coil by coil, lashing the water to bloody foam,
in which man and reptile vanished together.

Thereafter Conan kept the lookout watch himself, but no other horror
came crawling up from the murky depths, and as dawn whitened over the
jungle, he sighted the black fangs of towers jutting up among the trees.
He called Belit, who slept on the deck, wrapped in his scarlet cloak;
and she sprang to his side, eyes blazing. Her lips were parted to call
orders to her warriors to take up bow and spears; then her lovely eyes
widened.

It was but the ghost of a city on which they looked when they cleared a
jutting jungle-clad point and swung in toward the in-curving shore.
Weeds and rank river grass grew between the stones of broken piers and
shattered paves that had once been streets and spacious plazas and broad
courts. From all sides except that toward the river, the jungle crept
in, masking fallen columns and crumbling mounds with poisonous green.
Here and there buckling towers reeled drunkenly against the morning sky,
and broken pillars jutted up among the decaying walls. In the center
space a marble pyramid was spired by a slim column, and on its pinnacle
sat or squatted something that Conan supposed to be an image until his
keen eyes detected life in it.

'It is a great bird,' said one of the warriors, standing in the bows.

'It is a monster bat,' insisted another.

'It is an ape,' said Belit.

Just then the creature spread broad wings and flapped off into the
jungle.

'A winged ape,' said old N'Yaga uneasily. 'Better we had cut our throats
than come to this place. It is haunted.'

Belit mocked at his superstitions and ordered the galley run inshore and
tied to the crumbling wharfs. She was the first to spring ashore,
closely followed by Conan, and after them trooped the ebon-skinned
