type of defense almost impregnable against direct attack.

Five hundred years later the Hyborian civilization was swept away. Its
fall was unique in that it was not brought about by internal decay, but
by the growing power of the barbarian nations and the Hyrkanians. The
Hyborian peoples were overthrown while their vigorous culture was in its
prime.

Yet it was Aquilonia's greed which brought about that overthrow, though
indirectly. Wishing to extend their empire, her kings made war on their
neighbors. Zingara, Argos and Ophir were annexed outright, with the
western cities of Shem, which had, with their more eastern kindred,
recently thrown off the yoke of Koth. Koth itself, with Corinthia and
the eastern Shemitish tribes, was forced to pay Aquilonia tribute and
lend aid in wars. An ancient feud had existed between Aquilonia and
Hyperborea, and the latter now marched to meet the armies of her western
rival. The plains of the Border Kingdom were the scene of a great and
savage battle, in which the northern hosts were utterly defeated, and
retreated into their snowy fastnesses, whither the victorious
Aquilonians did not pursue them. Nemedia, which had successfully
resisted the western kingdom for centuries, now drew Brythunia and
Zamora, and secretly, Koth, into an alliance which bade fair to crush
the rising empire. But before their armies could join battle, a new
enemy appeared in the east, as the Hyrkanians made their first real
thrust at the western world. Reinforced by adventurers from east of
Vilayet, the riders of Turan swept over Zamora, devastated eastern
Corinthia, and were met on the plains of Brythunia by the Aquilonians
who defeated them and hurled them flying eastward. But the back of the
alliance was broken, and Nemedia took the defensive in future wars,
aided occasionally by Brythunia and Hyperborea, and, secretly, as usual,
by Koth. This defeat of the Hyrkanians showed the nations the real power
of the western kingdom, whose splendid armies were augmented by
mercenaries, many of them recruited among the alien Zingarans, and the
barbaric Picts and Shemites. Zamora was reconquered from the Hyrkanians,
but the people discovered that they had merely exchanged an eastern
master for a western master. Aquilonian soldiers were quartered there,
not only to protect the ravaged country, but also to keep the people in
subjection. The Hyrkanians were not convinced; three more invasions
burst upon the Zamorian borders, and the Lands of Shem, and were hurled
back by the Aquilonians, though the Turanian armies grew larger as
hordes of steel-clad riders rode out of the east, skirting the southern
extremity of the inland sea.

But it was in the west that a power was growing destined to throw down
the kings of Aquilonia from their high places. In the north there was
incessant bickering along the Cimmerian borders between the black-haired
warriors and the Nordheimir; and the AEsir, between wars with the Vanir,
assailed Hyperborea and pushed back the frontier, destroying city after
city. The Cimmerians also fought the Picts and Bossonians impartially,
and several times raided into Aquilonia itself, but their wars were less
invasions than mere plundering forays.

But the Picts were growing amazingly in population and power. By a
strange twist of fate, it was largely due to the efforts of one man, and
he an alien, that they set their feet upon the ways that led to eventual
empire. This man was Arus, a Nemedian priest, a natural-born reformer.
What turned his mind toward the Picts is not certain, but this much is
history--he determined to go into the western wilderness and modify the
rude ways of the heathen by the introduction of the gentle worship of
Mitra. He was not daunted by the grisly tales of what had happened to
traders and explorers before him, and by some whim of fate he came among
the people he sought, alone and unarmed, and was not instantly speared.

The Picts had benefited by contact with Hyborian civilization, but they
had always fiercely resisted that contact. That is to say, they had
learned to work crudely in copper and tin, which were found scantily in
their country, and for which latter metal they raided into the mountains
of Zingara, or traded hides, whale's teeth, walrus tusks and such few
things as savages have to trade. They no longer lived in caves and
tree-shelters, but built tents of hides, and crude huts, copied from
those of the Bossonians. They still lived mainly by the chase, since
their wilds swarmed with game of all sorts, and the rivers and sea with
fish, but they had learned how to plant grain, which they did sketchily,
preferring to steal it from their neighbors the Bossonians and
Zingarans. They dwelt in clans which were generally at feud with each
other, and their simple customs were blood-thirsty and utterly
inexplicable to a civilized man, such as Arus of Nemedia. They had no
direct contact with the Hyborians, since the Bossonians acted as a
buffer between them. But Arus maintained that they were capable of
progress, and events proved the truth of his assertion--though scarcely
in the way he meant.

Arus was fortunate in being thrown in with a chief of more than usual
intelligence--Gorm by name. Gorm cannot be explained, any more than
Genghis Khan, Othman, Attila, or any of those individuals, who, born in
naked lands among untutored barbarians, yet possess the instinct for
conquest and empire-building. In a sort of bastard-Bossonian, the priest
made the chief understand his purpose, and though extremely puzzled,
Gorm gave him permission to remain among his tribe unbutchered--a case
unique in the history of the race. Having learned the language Arus set
himself to work to eliminate the more unpleasant phases of Pictish
life--such as human sacrifice, blood-feud, and the burning alive of
captives. He harangued Gorm at length, whom he found to be an
interested, if unresponsive listener. Imagination reconstructs the
scene--the black-haired chief, in his tiger-skins and necklace of human
teeth, squatting on the dirt floor of the wattle hut, listening intently
to the eloquence of the priest, who probably sat on a carven,
skin-covered block of mahogany provided in his honor--clad in the silken
robes of a Nemedian priest, gesturing with his slender white hands as he
expounded the eternal rights and justices which were the truths of
Mitra. Doubtless he pointed with repugnance at the rows of skulls which
adorned the walls of the hut and urged Gorm to forgive his enemies
instead of putting their bleached remnants to such use. Arus was the
highest product of an innately artistic race, refined by centuries of
civilization; Gorm had behind him a heritage of a hundred thousand years
of screaming savagery--the pad of the tiger was in his stealthy step,
the grip of the gorilla in his black-nailed hands, the fire that burns
in a leopard's eyes burned in his.

Arus was a practical man. He appealed to the savage's sense of material
gain; he pointed out the power and splendor of the Hyborian kingdoms, as
an example of the power of Mitra, whose teachings and works had lifted
them up to their high places. And he spoke of cities, and fertile
plains, marble walls and iron chariots, jeweled towers, and horsemen in
their glittering armor riding to battle. And Gorm, with the unerring
instinct of the barbarian, passed over his words regarding gods and
their teachings, and fixed on the material powers thus vividly
described. There in that mud-floored wattle hut, with the silk-robed
priest on the mahogany block, and the dark-skinned chief crouching in
his tiger-hides, was laid the foundations of empire.

As has been said, Arus was a practical man. He dwelt among the Picts and
found much that an intelligent man could do to aid humanity, even when
that humanity was cloaked in tiger-skins and wore necklaces of human
teeth. Like all priests of Mitra, he was instructed in many things. He
found that there were vast deposits of iron ore in the Pictish hills,
and he taught the natives to mine, smelt and work it into
