'She must be casting off all her old favorites,' muttered the rider.
'Who'd have ever thought it of Queen Taramis? I'd rather have had a
long, bloody war. It would have given us desert folk a chance to
plunder. As it is we've come this close to the walls and found only this
nag'--he glanced at a fine gelding led by one of the nomads--'and this
dying dog.'

Conan lifted his bloody head.

'If I could come down from this beam I'd make a dying dog out of you,
you Zaporoskan thief!' he rasped through blackened lips.

'Mitra, the knave knows me!' exclaimed the other. 'How, knave, do you
know me?'

'There's only one of your breed in these parts,' muttered Conan. 'You
are Olgerd Vladislav, the outlaw chief.'

'Aye! and once a hetman of the _kozaki_ of the Zaporoskan River, as you
have guessed. Would you like to live?'

'Only a fool would ask that question,' panted Conan.

'I am a hard man,' said Olgerd, 'and toughness is the only quality I
respect in a man. I shall judge if you are a man, or only a dog after
all, fit only to lie here and die.'

'If we cut him down we may be seen from the walls,' objected one of the
nomads.

Olgerd shook his head.

'The dusk is deep. Here, take this ax, Djebal, and cut down the cross at
the base.'

'If it falls forward it will crush him,' objected Djebal. 'I can cut it
so it will fall backward, but then the shock of the fall may crack his
skull and tear loose all his entrails.'

'If he's worthy to ride with me he'll survive it,' answered Olgerd
imperturbably. 'If not, then he doesn't deserve to live. Cut!'

The first impact of the battle-ax against the wood and its accompanying
vibrations sent lances of agony through Conan's swollen feet and hands.
Again and again the blade fell, and each stroke reverberated on his
bruised brain, setting his tortured nerves aquiver. But he set his teeth
and made no sound. The ax cut through, the cross reeled on its
splintered base and toppled backward. Conan made his whole body a solid
knot of iron-hard muscle, jammed his head back hard against the wood and
held it rigid there. The beam struck the ground heavily and rebounded
slightly. The impact tore his wounds and dazed him for an instant. He
fought the rushing tide of blackness, sick and dizzy, but realized that
the iron muscles that sheathed his vitals had saved him from permanent
injury.

And he had made no sound, though blood oozed from his nostrils and his
belly-muscles quivered with nausea. With a grunt of approval Djebal bent
over him with a pair of pincers used to draw horse-shoe nails, and
gripped the head of the spike in Conan's right hand, tearing the skin to
get a grip on the deeply embedded head. The pincers were small for that
work. Djebal sweated and tugged, swearing and wrestling with the
stubborn iron, working it back and forth--in swollen flesh as well as in
wood. Blood started, oozing over the Cimmerian's fingers. He lay so
still he might have been dead, except for the spasmodic rise and fall of
his great chest. The spike gave way, and Djebal held up the
blood-stained thing with a grunt of satisfaction, then flung it away and
bent over the other.

The process was repeated, and then Djebal turned his attention to
Conan's skewered feet. But the Cimmerian, struggling up to a sitting
posture, wrenched the pincers from his fingers and sent him staggering
backward with a violent shove. Conan's hands were swollen to almost
twice their normal size. His fingers felt like misshapen thumbs, and
closing his hands was an agony that brought blood streaming from under
his grinding teeth. But somehow, clutching the pincers clumsily with
both hands, he managed to wrench out first one spike and then the other.
They were not driven so deeply into the wood as the others had been.

He rose stiffly and stood upright on his swollen, lacerated feet,
swaying drunkenly, the icy sweat dripping from his face and body. Cramps
assailed him and he clamped his jaws against the desire to retch.

Olgerd, watching him impersonally, motioned him toward the stolen horse.
Conan stumbled toward it, and every step was a stabbing, throbbing hell
that flecked his lips with bloody foam. One misshapen, groping hand fell
clumsily on the saddle-bow, a bloody foot somehow found the stirrup.
Setting his teeth, he swung up, and he almost fainted in midair; but he
came down in the saddle--and as he did so, Olgerd struck the horse
sharply with his whip. The startled beast reared, and the man in the
saddle swayed and slumped like a sack of sand, almost unseated. Conan
had wrapped a rein about each hand, holding it in place with a clamping
thumb. Drunkenly he exerted the strength of his knotted biceps,
wrenching the horse down; it screamed, its jaw almost dislocated.

One of the Shemites lifted a water-flask questioningly.

Olgerd shook his head.

'Let him wait until we get to camp. It's only ten miles. If he's fit to
live in the desert he'll live that long without a drink.'

The group rode like swift ghosts toward the river; among them Conan
swayed like a drunken man in the saddle, bloodshot eyes glazed, foam
drying on his blackened lips.




3 A Letter to Nemedia


The savant Astreas, traveling in the East in his never-tiring search for
knowledge, wrote a letter to his friend and fellow-philosopher
Alcemides, in his native Nemedia, which constitutes the entire knowledge
of the Western nations concerning the events of that period in the East,
always a hazy, half-mythical region in the minds of the Western folk.

Astreas wrote, in part: 'You can scarcely conceive, my dear old friend,
of the conditions now existing in this tiny kingdom since Queen Taramis
admitted Constantius and his mercenaries, an event which I briefly
described in my last, hurried letter. Seven months have passed since
then, during which time it seems as though the devil himself had been
loosed in this unfortunate realm. Taramis seems to have gone quite mad;
whereas formerly she was famed for her virtue, justice and tranquillity,
she is now notorious for qualities precisely opposite to those just
enumerated. Her private life is a scandal--or perhaps "private" is not
the correct term, since the queen makes no attempt to conceal the
debauchery of her court. She constantly indulges in the most infamous
revelries, in which the unfortunate ladies of the court are forced to
join, young married women as well as virgins.

'She herself has not bothered to marry her paramour, Constantius, who
sits on the throne beside her and reigns as her royal consort, and his
officers follow his example, and do not hesitate to debauch any woman
they desire, regardless of her rank or station. The wretched kingdom
groans under exorbitant taxation, the farms are stripped to the bone,
and the merchants go in rags which are all that is left them by the
tax-gatherers. Nay, they are lucky if they escape with a whole skin.

'I sense your incredulity, good Alcemides; you will fear that I
exaggerate conditions in Khauran. Such conditions would be unthinkable
in any of the Western countries, admittedly. But you must realize the
vast difference that exists between West and East, especially this part
of the East. In the first place, Khauran is a kingdom of no great size,
one of the many principalities which at one time formed the eastern part
of the empire of Koth, and which later regained the independence which
was theirs at a still earlier age. This part of the world is made up of
these tiny realms, diminutive in comparison with the great kingdoms of
the West, or the great sultanates of the farther East, but important in
their control of the caravan routes, and in the wealth concentrated in
them.

'Khauran is the most southeasterly of these principalities, bordering on
the very deserts of eastern Shem. The city of Khauran is the only city
of any magnitude in the realm, and stands within sight of the river
which separates the grasslands from the sandy desert, like a watch-tower
to guard the fertile meadows behind it. The land is so rich that it
yields three and four crops a year, and the plains north and west of the
city are dotted with villages. To one accustomed to the great
plantations and stock-farms of the West, it is strange to see these tiny
fields and vineyards; yet wealth in grain and fruit pours from them as
from a horn of plenty. The villagers are agriculturists, nothing else.
Of a mixed, aboriginal race, they are unwarlike, unable to protect
themselves, and forbidden the possession of arms. Dependent wholly upon
the soldiers of the city for protection, they are helpless under the
present conditions. So the savage revolt of the rural sections, which
would be a certainty in any Western nation, is here impossible.

'They toil supinely under the iron hand of Constantius, and his
black-bearded Shemites ride incessantly through the fields, with whips
in their hands, like the slave-drivers of the black serfs who toil in
the plantations of southern Zingara.

'Nor do the people of the city fare any better. Their wealth is stripped
from them, their fairest daughters taken to glut the insatiable lust of
Constantius and his mercenaries. These men are utterly without mercy or
compassion, possessed of all the characteristics our armies learned to
abhor in our wars against the Shemitish allies of Argos--inhuman
cruelty, lust, and wild-beast ferocity. The people of the city are
Khauran's ruling caste, predominantly Hyborian, and valorous and
war-like. But the treachery of their queen delivered them into the hands
of their oppressors. The Shemites are the only armed force in Khauran,
and the most hellish punishment is inflicted on any Khaurani found
possessing weapons. A systematic persecution to destroy the young
Khaurani men able to bear arms has been savagely pursued. Many have
ruthlessly been slaughtered, others sold as slaves to the Turanians.
Thousands have fled the kingdom and either entered the service of other
rulers, or become outlaws, lurking in numerous bands along the borders.

'At present there is some possibility of invasion from the desert, which
is inhabited by tribes of Shemitish nomads. The mercenaries of
Constantius are men from the Shemitish cities of the west, Pelishtim,
Anakim, Akkharim, and are ardently hated by the Zuagirs and other
wandering tribes. As you know, good Alcemides, the countries of these
barbarians are divided into the western meadowlands which stretch to the
distant ocean, and in which rise the cities of the town-dwellers, and
the eastern deserts, where the lean nomads hold sway; there is incessant
warfare between the dwellers of the cities and the dwellers of the
desert.

'The Zuagirs have fought with and raided Khauran for centuries, without
success, but they resent its conquest by their western kin. It is
rumored that their natural antagonism is being fomented by the man who
was formerly the captain of the queen's guard, and who, somehow escaping
the hate of Constantius, who actually had him upon the cross, fled to
the nomads. He is called Conan, and is himself a barbarian, one of those
gloomy Cimmerians whose ferocity our soldiers have more than once
learned to their bitter cost. It is rumored that he has become the
right-hand man of Olgerd Vladislav, the _kozak_ adventurer who wandered
down from the northern steppes and made himself chief of a band of
Zuagirs. There are also rumors that this band has increased vastly in
the last few months, and that Olgerd, incited no doubt by this
Cimmerian, is even considering a raid on Khauran.

'It can not be anything more than a raid, as the Zuagirs are without
siege-machines, or the knowledge of investing a city, and it has been
proven repeatedly in the past that the nomads in their loose formation,
or rather lack of formation, are no match in hand-to-hand fighting for
the well-disciplined, fully-armed warriors of the Shemitish cities. The
natives of Khauran would perhaps welcome this conquest, since the nomads
could deal with them no more harshly than their present masters, and
even total extermination would be preferable to the suffering they have
to endure. But they are so cowed and helpless that they could give no
aid to the invaders.

