white body dancing across the glittering snow beyond his reach--ever
beyond his reach.

Yet he did not wonder at the necromantic strangeness of it all, not even
when two gigantic figures rose up to bar his way. The scales of their
mail were white with hoar-frost; their helmets and their axes were
sheathed in ice. Snow sprinkled their locks; in their beards were spikes
of icicles; their eyes were cold as the lights that streamed above them.

"Brothers!" cried the girl, dancing between them. "Look who follows! I
have brought you a man for the feasting! Take his heart that we may lay
it smoking on our father's board!"

The giants answered with roars like the grinding of ice-bergs on a
frozen shore, and heaved up their shining axes as the maddened Akbitanan
hurled himself upon them. A frosty blade flashed before his eyes,
blinding him with its brightness, and he gave back a terrible stroke
that sheared through his foe's thigh. With a groan the victim fell, and
at the instant Amra was dashed into the snow, his left shoulder numb
from the blow of the survivor, from which the warrior's mail had barely
saved his life. Amra saw the remaining giant looming above him like a
colossus carved of ice, etched against the glowing sky. The axe fell, to
sink through the snow and deep into the frozen earth as Amra hurled
himself aside and leaped to his feet. The giant roared and wrenched the
axe-head free, but even as he did so, Amra's sword sang down. The
giant's knees bent and he sank slowly into the snow which turned crimson
with the blood that gushed from his half-severed neck.

Amra wheeled, to see the girl standing a short distance away, staring in
wide-eyed horror, all mockery gone from her face. He cried out fiercely
and the blood-drops flew from his sword as his hand shook in the
intensity of his passion.

"Call the rest of your brothers!" he roared. "Call the dogs! I'll give
their hearts to the wolves!"

With a cry of fright she turned and fled. She did not laugh now, nor
mock him over her shoulder. She ran as for her life, and though he
strained every nerve and thew, until his temples were like to burst and
the snow swam red to his gaze, she drew away from him, dwindling in the
witch-fire of the skies, until she was a figure no bigger than a child,
then a dancing white flame on the snow, then a dim blur in the
distance. But grinding his teeth until the blood started from his gums,
he reeled on, and he saw the blur grow to a dancing white flame, and
then she was running less than a hundred paces ahead of him, and slowly
the space narrowed, foot by foot.

She was running with effort now, her golden locks blowing free; he heard
the quick panting of her breath, and saw a flash of fear in the look she
cast over her alabaster shoulder. The grim endurance of the warrior had
served him well. The speed ebbed from her flashing white legs; she
reeled in her gait. In his untamed soul flamed up the fires of hell she
had fanned so well. With an inhuman roar he closed in on her, just as
she wheeled with a haunting cry and flung out her arms to fend him off.

His sword fell into the snow as he crushed her to him. Her supple body
bent backward as she fought with desperate frenzy in his iron arms. Her
golden hair blew about his face, blinding him with its sheen; the feel
of her slender figure twisting in his mailed arms drove him to blinder
madness. His strong fingers sank deep into her smooth flesh, and that
flesh was cold as ice. It was as if he embraced not a woman of human
flesh and blood, but a woman of flaming ice. She writhed her golden head
aside, striving to avoid the savage kisses that bruised her red lips.

"You are cold as the snows," he mumbled dazedly. "I will warm you with
the fire in my own blood--"

With a desperate wrench she twisted from his arms, leaving her single
gossamer garment in his grasp. She sprang back and faced him, her golden
locks in wild disarray, her white bosom heaving, her beautiful eyes
blazing with terror. For an instant he stood frozen, awed by her
terrible beauty as she posed naked against the snows.

And in that instant she flung her arms toward the lights that glowed in
the skies above her and cried out in a voice that rang in Amra's ears
for ever after:
