very little regret, I flung a blanket-like canvas tarpaulin up and over
the ascending machine before it started using its helices to screw into
the ceiling. The cones bit into the tarpaulin, tangled, jammed, and the
machine--mercifully noiseless, now--crashed back onto the scale, and
lost a lot of symmetry and a couple of rivets.

"What's Plan C?" I said to Artie.

"_Quiet!_" he said, either because I'd interrupted his thinking or
because that was our next goal.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next four days were spent in the arduous and quite tricky business
of reaming acoustically spaced holes along the flanges. Artie's theory
was that if we simply ("simply" was his word, not mine) fixed it so
that the sound made by each flange (anything whirly with a hole or two
in it is bound to make a calculated noise) was of the proper number of
vibrations to intermesh with the compression/rarefaction phases of the
sounds made by the other flanges, a veritable sphere of silence would be
thereby created, since there'd be no room for any sound waves to pass
through the already crowded atmosphere about the machine.

"It'll make less noise than a mouse in sneakers drooling on a blotter!"
enthused Artie, when I had it rigged again, and ready to go.

"Still," I said uncertainly, "whether we _hear_ it or not, all that
soundwave-energy has to do _something_, Artie. If it turns ultrasonic,
we may suddenly find ourselves in a showerbath of free electrons and
even _worse_ subatomic particles from disrupted air molecules. Or the
lab might turn molten on us. Or--"

"Oh, turn it _on_, Burt!" said Artie. "That's just a chance we have to
take."

"Don't see why we _have_ to take it...." I groused, but I'm as curious
as the next man, so I turned it on. (I could have arranged to do it by
remote control, except for two pressing deterrents: One--At a remote
point of control, I wouldn't be able to watch what, if anything,
the machine did, and Two--Who knows where the _safe_ spot is where
soundwaves are concerned? With some sonic forces, you're safer the
_nearer_ you get to the source.) So, like I said, I turned it on.

Silence. Beautiful, blissful, silence. There before us twirled the rows
of shiny cones, lifting slowly into the air, and there was nothing
to hear at all. Beside me, Artie's lips moved, but I couldn't catch
a syllable. This time around, we'd looped a rope through a few metal
grommets in the base of the machine, and as it rose, Artie slipped the
trailing ends under his arms from behind, and proceeded to lash it
across his chest, to test the thing's lift-power. As he fumbled with the
knot, I shouted at him, "Use a firm hitch!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Nothing came out, but Artie wasn't a bad lip-reader. He scowled, and
his lips made a "_What?!_" motion, so I repeated my caution. Next thing
I knew, he was taking a poke at me, and I, to fend him off, ended up
wrestling on the floor with him, while the untended machine burred its
way into the ceiling, until the engine overheated and burned away the
electrical insulation on the wires, and the machine, plus a good two
feet square of lab-ceiling, once more descended to demolish the scale.

"--your language!" Artie was snarling, as sound returned.

"All I said was 'Use a firm hitch!'" I pleaded, trying to shove his
shins off my floor-pinned biceps.

Artie stared at me, then rocked off my prostrate body, convulsed in
a fit of laughter. "Say it silently in front of a mirror, sometime,"
he choked out. Before I had time to see what he was talking about,
I smelled smoke, above and beyond that engendered by the scorched
insulation.

I ran to the door, and opened it to observe the last glowing,
crackling timbers of the house, the theatre, and the heliport vanish
into hot orange sparks, in the grip of a dandy ring of fire that--in
a seventy-yard path--had burned up everything in a sixty-five to
hundred-thirty-five yard radius of the lab.

"I told you those soundwaves had to do something," I said. "Ready to
give up?"

But Artie was already staring at the debris around the scale and making
swift notes on a memo pad....

       *       *       *       *       *

"It looks awfully damned complex--" I hedged, eight days later,
looking at the repaired, refurbished, and amended gadget on the table.
"Remember, Artie, the more parts to an invention, the more things can go
wrong with it. In geometric progression...."

"Unh-uh," he shook his head. "Not the more parts, Burt. The more
_moving_ parts. All we've done is added a parabolic sound-reflector, to
force all the waves the cones make down through a tube in the middle of
the machine. And we've insulated the tube to keep extraneous vibration
from shattering it with super-induced metal fatigue."

"Yeah," I said, "but about that _insulation_, Artie--"

"You got a _better_ idea?" he snapped. "We tried rubber; it charred
and flaked away. We tried plastics; they bubbled, melted, extruded,
or burned. We tried metal and mineral honeycombs; they distorted,
incandesced, fused or vaporized. Ceramic materials shattered. Fabrics
tore, or petrified and cracked. All the regular things failed us. So
what's wrong with trying something new?"

"Nothing, Artie, nothing. But--_Cornflakes_?"

"Well, we sogged 'em down good with water, right? And they've still got
enough interstices between the particles to act as sound-baffles, right?
And by the time they get good and hot and dry, they'll cook onto the
metal, right? (Ask anyone who ever tried to clean a pot after scorching
cereal just how hard they'll stick!) And even when most of them flake
away, the random distribution of char will circumvent any chance the
soundwaves have of setting up the regular pulse-beat necessary to
fatigue the metal in the tube, okay?"

"Yeah, sure, Artie, it's okay, but--_Cornflakes_?"

"I take it your objections are less scientific than they are esthetic?"
he inquired.

"Well, something like that," I admitted. "I mean, aw--For pete's sake,
Artie! The patent office'll laugh at us. They'll start referring us to
the copyright people, as inventors of cookbooks!"

"Maybe not," he said philosophically. "The thing _still_ may not _work_,
you know."

"Well, _there's_ one bright spot, anyhow!" I agreed, fiddling with the
starting switch. "So okay, I'm game if you are."

"Let 'er rip," he pontificated, and I flicked the switch.
