centipede Moran had killed earlier. It still moved. The leg was many
times the size of the ant. Moran moved toward it. It made a louder
buzzing sound, threatening him.

Moran cut it apart with a slashing sweep of the flame that a
finger-touch sent leaping from his torch. The thing presumably died, but
it continued to writhe senselessly.

"I killed this one," said Moran savagely, "because I remembered
something from my childhood. When one ant finds something to eat and
can't carry it all away, it brings back its friends to get the rest.
The big thing I killed would be such an item. How'd you like to have a
horde of these things about us? Come on!"

Through his helmet-phone he heard Harper breathing harshly. He led the
way once more toward the wreck.

       *       *       *       *       *

Black beetles swarmed about when he entered the cut in the mould-yeast
soil. They popped out of tunnels as if in astonishment that what had
been subterranean passages suddenly opened to the air. Harper stepped on
one, and it did not crush. It struggled frantically and he almost fell.
He gasped. Two of the creatures crawled swiftly up the legs of Moran's
suit, and he knocked them savagely away. He found himself grinding his
teeth in invincible revulsion.

They reached the end of the cut he'd made in the fungus-stuff. Metal
showed past burned-away soil. Moran growled;

"You keep watch. I'll finish the cut."

The flame leaped out. Dense clouds of smoke and steam poured out and up.
With the intolerably bright light of the torch overwhelming the
perpetual grayness under the clouds and playing upon curling vapors, the
two space-suited men looked like figures in some sort of inferno.

Carol's voice came anxiously into Moran's helmet-phone;

"_Are you all right?_"

"So far, both of us," said Moran sourly. "I've just uncovered the crack
of an airlock door."

He swept the flame around again. A mass of undercut fungus toppled
toward him. He burned it and went on. He swept the flame more widely.
There was carbonized matter from the previously burned stuff on the
metal, but he cleared all the metal. Carol's voice again;

"_There's something flying.... It's huge! It's a wasp!
It's--monstrous!_"

Moran growled;

"Harper, we're in a sort of trench. If it hovers, you'll burn it as it
comes down. Cut through its waist. It won't crawl toward us along the
trench. It'd have to back toward us to use its sting."

He burned and burned, white light glaring upon a mass of steam and smoke
which curled upward and looked as if lightning-flashes played within it.

Carol's voice;

"_It--went on past.... It was as big as a cow!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

Moran wrenched at the port-door. It partly revolved. He pulled. It fell
outward. The wreck was not standing upright on its fins. It lay on its
side. The lock inside the toppled-out port was choked with a horrible
mass of thread-like fungi. Moran swept the flame in. The fungus
shriveled and was not. He opened the inner lock-door. There was pure
blackness within. He held the torch for light.

For an instant everything was confusion, because the wreck was lying on
its side instead of standing in a normal position. Then he saw a sheet
of metal, propped up to be seen instantly by anyone entering the wrecked
space-vessel.

Letters burned into the metal gave a date a century and a half old.
Straggly torch-writing said baldly;

     "_This ship the Malabar crashed here on Tethys II a week ago. We
     cannot repair. We are going on to Candida III in the boats. We are
     carrying what bessendium we can with us. We resign salvage rights
     in this ship to its finders, but we have more bessendium with us.
     We will give that to our rescuers._

     "_Jos. White, Captain._"

Moran made a peculiar, sardonic sound like a bark.

"Calling the _Nadine_!" he said in mirthless amusement. "This planet is
Tethys Two. Do you read me? Tethys II! Look it up!"

A pause. Then Carol's voice, relieved;

"_Tethys is in the Directory! That's good!_" There was the sound of
murmurings in the control-room behind her. "_Yes!... Oh,--wonderful!
It's not far off the course we should have followed! We won't be
suspiciously late at Loris! Wonderful!_"

"I share your joy," said Moran sarcastically. "More information! The
ship's name was the _Malabar_. She carried bessendium among her cargo.
Her crew went on to Candida III a hundred and fifty years ago, leaving a
promise to pay in more bessendium whoever should rescue them. More
bessendium! Which suggests that some bessendium was left behind."

Silence. The bald memorandum left behind the vanished crew was, of
course, pure tragedy. A ship's lifeboat could travel four light-years,
or possibly even six. But there were limits. A castaway crew had left
this world on a desperate journey to another in the hope that life there
would be tolerable. If they arrived, they waited for some other ship to
cross the illimitable emptiness and discover either the beacon here or
one they'd set up on the other world. The likelihood was small, at best.
It had worked out zero. If the lifeboats made Candida III, their crews
stayed there because they could go no farther. They'd died there,
because if they'd been found this ship would have been visited and its
cargo salvaged.

       *       *       *       *       *

Moran went inside. He climbed through the compartments of the toppled
craft, using his torch for light. He found where the cargo-hold had been
opened from the living part of the ship. He saw the cargo. There were
small, obviously heavy boxes in one part of the hold. Some had been
broken open. He found scraps of purple bessendium ore dropped while
being carried to the lifeboats. A century and a half ago it had not
seemed worth while to pick them up, though bessendium was the most
precious material in the galaxy. It couldn't be synthesized. It had to
be made by some natural process not yet understood, but involving
long-continued pressures of megatons to the square inch with
temperatures in the millions of degrees. It was purple. It was
crystalline. Fractions of it in blocks of other metals made the
fuel-blocks that carried liners winging through the void. But here were
pounds of it dropped carelessly....

Moran gathered a double handful. He slipped it in a pocket of his
space-suit. He went clambering back to the lock.

He heard the roaring of a flame-torch. He found Harper playing it
squeamishly on the wriggling fragments of another yard-long ant. It had
explored the trench burned out of the fungus soil and down to the rock.
Harper'd killed it as it neared him.

"That's three of them I've killed," said Harper in a dogged voice.
"There seem to be more."

"Did you hear my news?" asked Moran sardonically.

"Yes," said Harper. "How'll we get back to the _Nadine_?"

"Oh, we'll fight our way through," said Moran, as sardonically as
before. "We'll practice splendid heroism, giving battle to ants who
think we're other ants trying to rob them of some fragments of an
over-sized dead centipede. A splendid cause to fight for, Harper!"

He felt an almost overpowering sense of irony. The quantity of
bessendium he'd seen was riches incalculable. The mere pocketfull of
crystals in his pocket would make any man wealthy if he could get to a
settled planet and sell them. And there was much, much more back in the
cargo-hold of the wreck. He'd seen it.

But his own situation was unchanged. Bessendium could be hidden
somehow,--perhaps between the inner and outer hulls of the _Nadine_. But
it was not possible to land the _Nadine_ at any space-port with an extra
man aboard her. In a sense, Moran might be one of the richest men in the
galaxy in his salvagers' right to the treasure in the wrecked
_Malabar's_ hold. But he could not use that treasure to buy his way to
a landing on a colonized world.

Carol's voice; she was frightened.

"_Something's coming! It's--terribly big! It's coming out of the mist!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

Moran pushed past Harper in the trench that ended at the wreck's
lock-door. He moved on until he could see over the edge of that trench
as it shallowed. Now there were not less than forty of the giant ants
about the remnants of the monstrous centipede Moran had killed. They
moved about in great agitation. There was squabbling. Angry, whining
stridulations filled the air beneath the louder and more gruesome sounds
from fartheraway places. It appeared that scouts and foragers from two
different ant-cities had come upon the treasure of dead--if
twitching--meat of Moran's providing. They differed about where the
noisesome booty should be taken. Some ants pulled angrily against each
other, whining shrilly. He saw individual ants running frantically away
in two different directions. They would be couriers, carrying news of
what amounted to a frontier incident in the city-state civilization of
the ants.

Then Moran saw the giant thing of which Carol spoke. It was truly huge,
and it had a gross, rounded body, and a ridiculously small thorax, and
its head was tiny and utterly mild in expression. It walked with an
enormous, dainty deliberation, placing small spiked feet at the end of
fifteen-foot legs very delicately in place as it moved. Its eyes were
multiple and huge, and its forelegs though used so deftly for walking
had a horrifying set of murderous, needle-sharp saw-teeth along their
edges.

It looked at the squabbling ants with its gigantic eyes that somehow
appeared like dark glasses worn by a monstrosity. It moved primly,
precisely toward them. Two small black creatures tugged at a hairy
section of a giant centipede's leg. The great pale-green creature--a
mantis; a praying mantis twenty feet tall in its giraffe-like walking
position--the great creature loomed over them, looking down as through
sunglasses. A foreleg moved like lightning. An ant weighing nearly as
much as a man stridulated shrilly, terribly, as it was borne aloft. The
mantis closed its arm-like forelegs upon it, holding it as if piously
and benignly contemplating it. Then it ate it, very much as a man might
eat an apple, without regard to the convulsive writhings of its victim.

       *       *       *       *       *

It moved on toward the denser fracas among the ants. Suddenly it raised
its ghastly saw-toothed forelegs in an extraordinary gesture. It was the
mantis's spectral attitude, which seemed a pose of holding out its arms
in benediction. But its eyes remained blind-seeming and
enigmatic,--again like dark glasses.

Then it struck. Daintily, it dined upon an ant. Upon another. Upon
another and another and another.

From one direction parties of agitated and hurrying black objects
appeared at the edge of the mist. They were ants of a special
caste,--warrior-ants with huge mandibles designed for fighting in
defense of their city and its social system and its claim to fragments
of dead centipedes. From another direction other parties of no less
truculent warriors moved with the swiftness and celerity of a striking
task-force. All the air was filled with the deep-bass notes of something
huge, booming beyond visibility, and the noises as of sticks trailed
against picket fences, and hootings which were produced by the rubbing
of serrated leg-joints against chitinous diaphragms. But now a new
tumult arose.

From forty disputatious _formicidae_, whining angrily at each other over
the stinking remains of the monster Moran had killed, the number of ants
involved in the quarrel became hundreds. But more and more arrived. The
special caste of warriors bred for warfare was not numerous enough to
take care of the provocative behavior of foreign foragers. There was a
general mobilization in both unseen ant-city states. They became nations
in arms. Their populations rushed to the scene of conflict. The burrows
and dormitories and eating-chambers of the underground nations were
swept clean of occupants. Only the nurseries retained a skeleton staff
of nurses--the nurseries and the excavated palace occupied by the
ant-queen and her staff of servants and administrators. All the
resources of two populous ant-nations were flung into the fray.

       *       *       *       *       *

From a space of a hundred yards or less, containing mere dozens of
belligerent squabblers, the dirty-white ground of the fungus-plain
became occupied by hundreds of snapping, biting combatants. They
covered--they fought over--the half of an acre. There were contending
battalions fighting as masses in the center, while wings of fighting
creatures to right and left were less solidly arranged. But
reinforcements poured out of the mist from two directions, and momently
the situation changed. Presently the battle covered an acre. Groups of
fresh fighters arriving from the city to the right uttered shrill
stridulations and charged upon the flank of their enemies.
Simultaneously, reinforcements from the city to the left flung
themselves into the fighting-line near the center.

Formations broke up. The battle disintegrated into an indefinite number
of lesser combats; troops or regiments fighting together often moved
ahead with an appearance of invincibility, but suddenly they broke and
broke again until there was only a complete confusion of unorganized
single combats in which the fighters rolled over and over, struggling
ferociously with mandible and claw to destroy each other. Presently the
