                         _Opus Majus, Part 4, Distinctia Prima,
                         cap. 1._


=311.= Just as it will never be successfully challenged that the
French language, progressively developing and growing more
perfect day by day, has the better claim to serve as a developed
court and world language, so no one will venture to estimate
lightly the debt which the world owes to mathematicians, in
that they treat in their own language matters of the utmost
importance, and govern, determine and decide whatever is subject,
using the word in the highest sense, to number and measurement.

                                                        --GOETHE.

                         _Sprueche in Prosa, Natur, III, 868._


=312.= Do not imagine that mathematics is hard and crabbed, and
repulsive to common sense. It is merely the etherealization of
common sense.--THOMSON, W. (LORD KELVIN).

                         _Thompson, S. P.: Life of Lord Kelvin
                         (London, 1910), p. 1139._


=313.= The advancement and perfection of mathematics are
intimately connected with the prosperity of the State.--NAPOLEON I.

                         _Correspondance de Napoleon, t. 24
                         (1868), p. 112._


=314.= The love of mathematics is daily on the increase, not only
with us but in the army. The result of this was unmistakably
apparent in our last campaigns. Bonaparte himself has a
mathematical head, and though all who study this science may not
become geometricians like Laplace or Lagrange, or heroes like
Bonaparte, there is yet left an influence upon the mind which
enables them to accomplish more than they could possibly have
achieved without this training.--LALANDE.

                         _Quoted in Bruhns' Alexander von
                         Humboldt (1872), Bd. 1, p. 232._


=315.= In Pure Mathematics, where all the various truths are
necessarily connected with each other, (being all necessarily
connected with those hypotheses which are the principles of the
science), an arrangement is beautiful in proportion as the
principles are few; and what we admire perhaps chiefly in the
science, is the astonishing variety of consequences which may be
demonstrably deduced from so small a number of premises.

                                                 --STEWART, DUGALD.

                         _Philosophy of the Human Mind, Part 3,
                         chap. 1, sect. 3; Collected Works
                         [Hamilton] (Edinburgh, 1854), Vol. 4._


=316.= It is curious to observe how differently these great men
[Plato and Bacon] estimated the value of every kind of knowledge.
Take Arithmetic for example. Plato, after speaking slightly of
the convenience of being able to reckon and compute in the
ordinary transactions of life, passes to what he considers as a
far more important advantage. The study of the properties of
numbers, he tells us, habituates the mind to the contemplation of
pure truth, and raises us above the material universe. He would
have his disciples apply themselves to this study, not that they
may be able to buy or sell, not that they may qualify themselves
to be shop-keepers or travelling merchants, but that they may
learn to withdraw their minds from the ever-shifting spectacle of
this visible and tangible world, and to fix them on the immutable
essences of things.

Bacon, on the other hand, valued this branch of knowledge only on
account of its uses with reference to that visible and tangible
world which Plato so much despised. He speaks with scorn of the
mystical arithmetic of the later Platonists, and laments the
propensity of mankind to employ, on mere matters of curiosity,
powers the whole exertion of which is required for purposes of
solid advantage. He advises arithmeticians to leave these
trifles, and employ themselves in framing convenient expressions
which may be of use in physical researches.--MACAULAY.

                         _Lord Bacon: Edinburgh Review, July,
                         1837. Critical and Miscellaneous Essays
                         (New York, 1879), Vol. 1, p. 397._


=317.= _Ath._ There still remain three studies suitable for
freemen. Calculation in arithmetic is one of them; the measurement
of length, surface, and depth is the second; and the third has to
do with the revolutions of the stars in reference to one another
... there is in them something that is necessary and cannot be set
aside, ... if I am not mistaken, [something of] divine necessity;
for as to the human necessities of which men often speak when they
talk in this manner, nothing can be more ridiculous than such an
application of the words.

_Cle._ And what necessities of knowledge are there, Stranger,
which are divine and not human?

_Ath._ I conceive them to be those of which he who has no use nor
any knowledge at all cannot be a god, or demi-god, or hero to
mankind, or able to take any serious thought or charge of them.

                                                           --PLATO.

                         _Republic, Bk. 7. Jowett's Dialogues of
                         Plato (New York, 1897), Vol. 4, p. 334._


=318.= Those who assert that the mathematical sciences make no
affirmation about what is fair or good make a false assertion;
for they do speak of these and frame demonstrations of them in
the most eminent sense of the word. For if they do not actually
employ these names, they do not exhibit even the results and the
reasons of these, and therefore can be hardly said to make any
assertion about them. Of what is fair, however, the most
important species are order and symmetry, and that which is
definite, which the mathematical sciences make manifest in a most
eminent degree. And since, at least, these appear to be the
causes of many things--now, I mean, for example, order, and that
which is a definite thing, it is evident that they would assert,
also, the existence of a cause of this description, and its
subsistence after the same manner as that which is fair subsists
in.--ARISTOTLE.

                         _Metaphysics [MacMahon] Bk. 12, chap.
                         3._


=319.= Many arts there are which beautify the mind of man; of all
other none do more garnish and beautify it than those arts which
are called mathematical.--BILLINGSLEY, H.

                         _The Elements of Geometrie of the most
                         ancient Philosopher Euclide of Megara
                         (London, 1570), Note to the Reader._


=320.= As the sun eclipses the stars by his brilliancy, so the
man of knowledge will eclipse the fame of others in assemblies of
the people if he proposes algebraic problems, and still more if
he solves them.--BRAHMAGUPTA.

                         _Quoted in Cajori's History of
                         Mathematics (New York, 1897), p. 92._


=321.= So highly did the ancients esteem the power of figures and
numbers, that Democritus ascribed to the figures of atoms the
first principles of the variety of things; and Pythagoras
asserted that the nature of things consisted of numbers.

                                                     --BACON, LORD.

                         _De Augmentis, Bk. 3; Advancement of
                         Learning, Bk. 2._


=322.= There has not been any science so much esteemed and
honored as this of mathematics, nor with so much industry and
vigilance become the care of great men, and labored in by the
potentates of the world, viz. emperors, kings, princes, etc.

                                              --FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN.

                         _On the Usefulness of Mathematics, Works
                         (Boston, 1840), Vol. 2, p. 28._


=323.= Whatever may have been imputed to some other studies under
the notion of insignificancy and loss of time, yet these
[mathematics], I believe, never caused repentance in any, except
it was for their remissness in the prosecution of them.

                                              --FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN.

                         _On the Usefulness of Mathematics, Works
                         (Boston, 1840), Vol. 2, p. 69._


=324.= What science can there be more noble, more excellent, more
useful for men, more admirably high and demonstrative, than this
of the mathematics?--FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN.

                         _On the Usefulness of Mathematics, Works
                         (Boston, 1840), Vol. 2, p. 69._


=325.= The great truths with which it [mathematics] deals, are
clothed with austere grandeur, far above all purposes of
immediate convenience or profit. It is in them that our limited
understandings approach nearest to the conception of that
absolute and infinite, towards which in most other things they
aspire in vain. In the pure mathematics we contemplate absolute
truths, which existed in the divine mind before the morning stars
sang together, and which will continue to exist there, when the
last of their radiant host shall have fallen from heaven. They
existed not merely in metaphysical possibility, but in the actual
contemplation of the supreme reason. The pen of inspiration,
ranging all nature and life for imagery to set forth the
Creator's power and wisdom, finds them best symbolized in the
skill of the surveyor. "He meted out heaven as with a span;" and
an ancient sage, neither falsely nor irreverently, ventured to
say, that "God is a geometer."--EVERETT, EDWARD.

                         _Orations and Speeches (Boston, 1870),
                         Vol. 3, p. 514._


=326.= There is no science which teaches the harmonies of nature
more clearly than mathematics, ....--CARUS, PAUL.

                         _Andrews: Magic Squares and Cubes
                         (Chicago, 1908), Introduction._


=327.= For it being the nature of the mind of man (to the extreme
prejudice of knowledge) to delight in the spacious liberty of
generalities, as in a champion region, and not in the enclosures
of particularity; the Mathematics were the goodliest fields to
satisfy that appetite.--BACON, LORD.

                         _De Augmentis, Bk. 3; Advancement of
                         Learning, Bk. 2._


=328.= I would have my son mind and understand business, read
little history, study the mathematics and cosmography; these are
good, with subordination to the things of God.... These fit for
public services for which man is born.--CROMWELL, OLIVER.

                         _Letters and Speeches of Oliver Cromwell
                         (New York, 1899), Vol. 1, p. 371._


=329.= Mathematics is the life supreme. The life of the gods is
mathematics. All divine messengers are mathematicians. Pure
mathematics is religion. Its attainment requires a theophany.

                                                         --NOVALIS.

                         _Schriften (Berlin, 1901), Bd. 2, p.
                         223._


=330.= The Mathematics which effectually exercises, not vainly
deludes or vexatiously torments studious Minds with obscure
Subtilties, perplexed Difficulties, or contentious Disquisitions;
which overcomes without Opposition, triumphs without Pomp,
compels without Force, and rules absolutely without Loss of
Liberty; which does not privately overreach a weak Faith, but
openly assaults an armed Reason, obtains a total Victory, and
puts on inevitable Chains; whose Words are so many Oracles, and
Works as many Miracles; which blabs out nothing rashly, nor
designs anything from the Purpose, but plainly demonstrates and
readily performs all Things within its Verge; which obtrudes no
false Shadow of Science, but the very Science itself, the Mind
firmly adheres to it, as soon as possessed of it, and can never
after desert it of its own Accord, or be deprived of it by any
Force of others: Lastly the Mathematics, which depend upon
Principles clear to the Mind, and agreeable to Experience; which
draws certain Conclusions, instructs by profitable Rules, unfolds
pleasant Questions; and produces wonderful Effects; which is the
fruitful Parent of, I had almost said all, Arts, the unshaken
Foundation of Sciences, and the plentiful Fountain of Advantage
to human Affairs.--BARROW, ISAAC.

                         _Oration before the University of
                         Cambridge on being elected Lucasian
                         Professor of Mathematics, Mathematical
                         Lectures (London, 1734), p. 28._


=331.= Doubtless the reasoning faculty, the mind, is the leading
and characteristic attribute of the human race. By the exercise
of this, man arrives at the properties of the natural bodies.
This is science, properly and emphatically so called. It is the
science of pure mathematics; and in the high branches of this
science lies the truly sublime of human acquisition. If any
attainment deserves that epithet, it is the knowledge, which,
from the mensuration of the minutest dust of the balance,
proceeds on the rising scale of material bodies, everywhere
weighing, everywhere measuring, everywhere detecting and
explaining the laws of force and motion, penetrating into the
secret principles which hold the universe of God together, and
balancing worlds against worlds, and system against system. When
we seek to accompany those who pursue studies at once so high, so
vast, and so exact; when we arrive at the discoveries of Newton,
which pour in day on the works of God, as if a second _fiat_ had
gone forth from his own mouth; when, further, we attempt to
follow those who set out where Newton paused, making his goal
their starting-place, and, proceeding with demonstration upon
demonstration, and discovery upon discovery, bring new worlds and
new systems of worlds within the limits of the known universe,
failing to learn all only because all is infinite; however we may
say of man, in admiration of his physical structure, that "in
form and moving he is express and admirable," it is here, and
here without irreverence, we may exclaim, "In apprehension how
like a god!" The study of the pure mathematics will of course not
be extensively pursued in an institution, which, like this
[Boston Mechanics' Institute], has a direct practical tendency
and aim. But it is still to be remembered, that pure mathematics
lie at the foundation of mechanical philosophy, and that it is
ignorance only which can speak or think of that sublime science
as useless research or barren speculation.--WEBSTER, DANIEL.

                         _Works (Boston, 1872), Vol. 1, p. 180._


=332.= The school of Plato has advanced the interests of the race
as much through geometry as through philosophy. The modern
engineer, the navigator, the astronomer, built on the truths
which those early Greeks discovered in their purely speculative
investigations. And if the poetry, statesmanship, oratory, and
philosophy of our day owe much to Plato's divine Dialogues, our
commerce, our manufactures, and our science are equally indebted
to his Conic Sections. Later instances may be abundantly quoted,
to show that the labors of the mathematician have outlasted those
of the statesman, and wrought mightier changes in the condition
of the world. Not that we would rank the geometer above the
patriot, but we claim that he is worthy of equal honor.

                                                    --HILL, THOMAS.

                         _Imagination in Mathematics; North
                         American Review, Vol. 85, p. 228._


=333.= The discoveries of Newton have done more for England and
for the race, than has been done by whole dynasties of British
monarchs; and we doubt not that in the great mathematical birth
of 1853, the Quaternions of Hamilton, there is as much real
promise of benefit to mankind as in any event of Victoria's
reign.--HILL, THOMAS.

                         _Imagination in Mathematics; North
                         American Review, Vol. 85, p. 228._


=334.= Geometrical and Mechanical phenomena are the most general,
the most simple, the most abstract of all,--the most irreducible
to others. It follows that the study of them is an indispensable
preliminary to that of all others. Therefore must Mathematics
hold the first place in the hierarchy of the sciences, and be the
point of departure of all Education, whether general or
special.--COMTE, A.

                         _Positive Philosophy [Martineau],
                         Introduction, chap. 2._




  CHAPTER IV

  THE VALUE OF MATHEMATICS


=401.= Mathematics because of its nature and structure is
peculiarly fitted for high school instruction [Gymnasiallehrfach].
Especially the higher mathematics, even if presented only in its
elements, combines within itself all those qualities which are
demanded of a secondary subject. It engages, it fructifies, it
quickens, compels attention, is as circumspect as inventive,
induces courage and self-confidence as well as modesty and
submission to truth. It yields the essence and kernel of all
things, is brief in form and overflows with its wealth of content.
It discloses the depth and breadth of the law and spiritual
element behind the surface of phenomena; it impels from point to
point and carries within itself the incentive toward progress; it
stimulates the artistic perception, good taste in judgment and
execution, as well as the scientific comprehension of things.
Mathematics, therefore, above all other subjects, makes the
student lust after knowledge, fills him, as it were, with a
longing to fathom the cause of things and to employ his own powers
independently; it collects his mental forces and concentrates them
on a single point and thus awakens the spirit of individual
inquiry, self-confidence and the joy of doing; it fascinates
because of the view-points which it offers and creates certainty
and assurance, owing to the universal validity of its methods.
Thus, both what he receives and what he himself contributes toward
the proper conception and solution of a problem, combine to mature
the student and to make him skillful, to lead him away from the
surface of things and to exercise him in the perception of their
essence. A student thus prepared thirsts after knowledge and is
ready for the university and its sciences. Thus it appears, that
higher mathematics is the best guide to philosophy and to the
philosophic conception of the world (considered as a self-contained
whole) and of one's own being.--DILLMANN, E.

                         _Die Mathematik die Fackeltraegerin einer
                         neuen Zeit (Stuttgart, 1889), p. 40._


=402.= These Disciplines [mathematics] serve to inure and
corroborate the Mind to a constant Diligence in Study; to undergo
the Trouble of an attentive Meditation, and cheerfully contend
with such Difficulties as lie in the Way. They wholly deliver us
from a credulous Simplicity, most strongly fortify us against
the Vanity of Scepticism, effectually restrain from a rash
Presumption, most easily incline us to a due Assent, perfectly
subject us to the Government of right Reason, and inspire us with
Resolution to wrestle against the unjust Tyranny of false
Prejudices. If the Fancy be unstable and fluctuating, it is to be
poised by this Ballast, and steadied by this Anchor, if the Wit
be blunt it is sharpened upon this Whetstone; if luxuriant it is
pared by this Knife; if headstrong it is restrained by this
Bridle; and if dull it is roused by this Spur. The Steps are
guided by no Lamp more clearly through the dark Mazes of Nature,
by no Thread more surely through the intricate Labyrinths of
Philosophy, nor lastly is the Bottom of Truth sounded more
happily by any other Line. I will not mention how plentiful a
Stock of Knowledge the Mind is furnished from these, with what
wholesome Food it is nourished, and what sincere Pleasure it
enjoys. But if I speak farther, I shall neither be the only
Person, nor the first, who affirms it; that while the Mind is
abstracted and elevated from sensible Matter, distinctly views
pure Forms, conceives the Beauty of Ideas, and investigates the
Harmony of Proportions; the Manners themselves are sensibly
corrected and improved, the Affections composed and rectified,
the Fancy calmed and settled, and the Understanding raised and
excited to more divine Contemplation. All which I might defend by
Authority, and confirm by the Suffrages of the greatest
Philosophers.--BARROW, ISAAC.

                         _Prefatory Oration: Mathematical
                         Lectures (London, 1734), p. 31._


=403.= No school subject so readily furnishes tasks whose purpose
can be made so clear, so immediate and so appealing to the sober
second-thought of the immature learner as the right sort of
elementary school mathematics.--MYERS, GEORGE.

                         _Arithmetic in Public School Education
                         (Chicago, 1911), p. 8._


=404.= Mathematics is a type of thought which seems ingrained in
the human mind, which manifests itself to some extent with even
the primitive races, and which is developed to a high degree with
the growth of civilization.... A type of thought, a body of
results, so essentially characteristic of the human mind, so
little influenced by environment, so uniformly present in every
civilization, is one of which no well-informed mind today can be
ignorant.--YOUNG, J. W. A.

                         _The Teaching of Mathematics (London,
                         1907), p. 14._


=405.= Probably among all the pursuits of the University,
mathematics pre-eminently demand self-denial, patience, and
perseverance from youth, precisely at that period when they have
liberty to act for themselves, and when on account of obvious
temptations, habits of restraint and application are peculiarly
valuable.--TODHUNTER, ISAAC.

                         _The Conflict of Studies and other
                         Essays (London, 1873), p. 12._


=406.= Mathematics renders its best service through the immediate
furthering of rigorous thought and the spirit of invention.

                                                    --HERBART J. F.

                         _Mathematischer Lehrplan fuer
                         Realschulen: Werke [Kehrbach]
                         (Langensalza, 1890), Bd. 5, p. 170._


=407.= It seems to me that the older subjects, classics and
mathematics, are strongly to be recommended on the ground of the
accuracy with which we can compare the relative performance of
the students. In fact the definiteness of these subjects is
obvious, and is commonly admitted. There is however another
advantage, which I think belongs in general to these subjects,
that the examinations can be brought to bear on what is really
most valuable in these subjects.--TODHUNTER, ISAAC.

                         _Conflict of Studies and other Essays
                         (London, 1873), pp. 6, 7._


=408.= It is better to teach the child arithmetic and Latin
grammar than rhetoric and moral philosophy, because they require
exactitude of performance it is made certain that the lesson is
mastered, and that power of performance is worth more than
knowledge.--EMERSON, R. W.

                         _Lecture on Education._


=409.= Besides accustoming the student to demand complete proof,
and to know when he has not obtained it, mathematical studies are
of immense benefit to his education by habituating him to
precision. It is one of the peculiar excellencies of mathematical
discipline, that the mathematician is never satisfied with
_a peu pres._ He requires the exact truth. Hardly any of the
non-mathematical sciences, except chemistry, has this advantage.
One of the commonest modes of loose thought, and sources of error
both in opinion and in practice, is to overlook the importance of
quantities. Mathematicians and chemists are taught by the whole
course of their studies, that the most fundamental difference of
quality depends on some very slight difference in proportional
quantity; and that from the qualities of the influencing
elements, without careful attention to their quantities, false
expectation would constantly be formed as to the very nature and
essential character of the result produced.--MILL, J. S.

                         _An Examination of Sir William
                         Hamilton's Philosophy (London, 1878), p.
                         611._


=410.= In mathematics I can report no deficience, except it be
that men do not sufficiently understand the excellent use of the
Pure Mathematics, in that they do remedy and cure many defects in
the wit and faculties intellectual. For if the wit be too dull,
they sharpen it; if too wandering, they fix it; if too inherent
in the senses, they abstract it. So that as tennis is a game of
no use in itself, but of great use in respect it maketh a quick
eye and a body ready to put itself into all positions; so in the
Mathematics, that use which is collateral and intervenient is no
less worthy than that which is principal and intended.--BACON, LORD.

                         _De Augmentis, Bk. 3; Advancement of
                         Learning, Bk. 2._


=411.= If a man's wit be wandering, let him study mathematics;
for in demonstrations, if his wit be called away never so little,
he must begin again.--BACON, LORD.

                         _Essays: On Studies._


=412.= If one be bird-witted, that is easily distracted and
unable to keep his attention as long as he should, mathematics
provides a remedy; for in them if the mind be caught away but a
moment, the demonstration has to be commenced anew.--BACON, LORD.

                         _De Augmentis, Bk. 6; Advancement of
                         Learning, Bk. 2._


=413.= The metaphysical philosopher from his point of view
recognizes mathematics as an instrument of education, which
strengthens the power of attention, develops the sense of order
and the faculty of construction, and enables the mind to grasp
under the simple formulae the quantitative differences of
physical phenomena.--JOWETT, B.

                         _Dialogues of Plato (New York, 1897),
                         Vol. 2, p. 78._


=414.= Nor do I know any study which can compete with mathematics
in general in furnishing matter for severe and continued thought.
Metaphysical problems may be even more difficult; but then they
are far less definite, and, as they rarely lead to any precise
conclusion, we miss the power of checking our own operations, and
of discovering whether we are thinking and reasoning or merely
fancying and dreaming.--TODHUNTER, ISAAC.

                         _Conflict of Studies (London, 1873), p.
                         13._


=415.= Another great and special excellence of mathematics is
that it demands earnest voluntary exertion. It is simply
impossible for a person to become a good mathematician by the
happy accident of having been sent to a good school; this may
give him a preparation and a start, but by his own individual
efforts alone can he reach an eminent position.--TODHUNTER, ISAAC.

                         _Conflict of Studies (London, 1873), p.
                         2._


=416.= The faculty of resolution is possibly much invigorated by
mathematical study, and especially by that highest branch of it
which, unjustly, merely on account of its retrograde operations,
has been called, as if par excellence, analysis.--POE, E. A.

                         _The Murders in Rue Morgue._


=417.= He who gives a portion of his time and talent to the
investigation of mathematical truth will come to all other
questions with a decided advantage over his opponents. He will be
in argument what the ancient Romans were in the field: to them
the day of battle was a day of comparative recreation, because
they were ever accustomed to exercise with arms much heavier than
they fought; and reviews differed from a real battle in two
respects: they encountered more fatigue, but the victory was
bloodless.--COLTON, C. C.

                         _Lacon (New York, 1866)._


=418.= Mathematics is the study which forms the foundation of the
course [West Point Military Academy]. This is necessary, both to
impart to the mind that combined strength and versatility, the
peculiar vigor and rapidity of comparison necessary for military
action, and to pave the way for progress in the higher military
sciences.

                         _Congressional Committee on Military
                         Affairs, 1834; U. S. Bureau of
                         Education, Bulletin 1912, No. 2, p. 10._


=419.= Mathematics, among all school subjects, is especially
adapted to further clearness, definite brevity and precision in
expression, although it offers no exercise in flights of
rhetoric. This is due in the first place to the logical rigour
with which it develops thought, avoiding every departure from the
shortest, most direct way, never allowing empty phrases to enter.
Other subjects excel in the development of expression in other
respects: translation from foreign languages into the mother
tongue gives exercise in finding the proper word for the given
foreign word and gives knowledge of laws of syntax, the study of
poetry and prose furnish fit patterns for connected presentation
and elegant form of expression, composition is to exercise the
pupil in a like presentation of his own or borrowed thoughts and
their development, the natural sciences teach description of
natural objects, apparatus and processes, as well as the
statement of laws on the grounds of immediate sense-perception.
But all these aids for exercise in the use of the mother tongue,
each in its way valuable and indispensable, do not guarantee, in
the same manner as mathematical training, the exclusion of words
whose concepts, if not entirely wanting, are not sufficiently
clear. They do not furnish in the same measure that which the
mathematician demands particularly as regards precision of
expression.--REIDT, F.

                         _Anleitung zum mathematischen Unterricht
                         in hoeheren Schulen (Berlin, 1906), p.
                         17._


=420.= One rarely hears of the mathematical recitation as a
preparation for public speaking. Yet mathematics shares with
these studies [foreign languages, drawing and natural science]
their advantages, and has another in a higher degree than either
of them.

Most readers will agree that a prime requisite for healthful
experience in public speaking is that the attention of the
speaker and hearers alike be drawn wholly away from the speaker
and concentrated upon the thought. In perhaps no other classroom
is this so easy as in the mathematical, where the close
reasoning, the rigorous demonstration, the tracing of necessary
conclusions from given hypotheses, commands and secures the
entire mental power of the student who is explaining, and of his
classmates. In what other circumstances do students feel so
instinctively that manner counts for so little and mind for so
much? In what other circumstances, therefore, is a simple,
unaffected, easy, graceful manner so naturally and so healthfully
cultivated? Mannerisms that are mere affectation or the result of
bad literary habit recede to the background and finally
disappear, while those peculiarities that are the expression of
personality and are inseparable from its activity continually
develop, where the student frequently presents, to an audience of
his intellectual peers, a connected train of reasoning....

One would almost wish that our institutions of the science and
art of public speaking would put over their doors the motto that
Plato had over the entrance to his school of philosophy: "Let no
one who is unacquainted with geometry enter here."--WHITE, W. F.

                         _A Scrap-book of Elementary Mathematics
                         (Chicago, 1908), p. 210._


=421.= The training which mathematics gives in working with
symbols is an excellent preparation for other sciences; ... the
world's work requires constant mastery of symbols.--YOUNG, J. W. A.

                         _The Teaching of Mathematics (New York,
                         1907), p. 42._


=422.= One striking peculiarity of mathematics is its unlimited
power of evolving examples and problems. A student may read a
book of Euclid, or a few chapters of Algebra, and within that
limited range of knowledge it is possible to set him exercises as
real and as interesting as the propositions themselves which he
has studied; deductions which might have pleased the Greek
geometers, and algebraic propositions which Pascal and Fermat
would not have disdained to investigate.--TODHUNTER, ISAAC.

                         _Private Study of Mathematics: Conflict
                         of Studies and other Essays (London,
                         1873), p. 82._


=423.= Would you have a man reason well, you must use him to it
betimes; exercise his mind in observing the connection between
ideas, and following them in train. Nothing does this better than
mathematics, which therefore, I think should be taught to all who
have the time and opportunity, not so much to make them
mathematicians, as to make them reasonable creatures; for though
we all call ourselves so, because we are born to it if we please,
yet we may truly say that nature gives us but the seeds of it,
and we are carried no farther than industry and application have
carried us.--LOCKE, JOHN.

                         _Conduct of the Understanding, Sect. 6._
