building. They led him through a stately hall, in whose carven columns
and ornate furniture the opulence of kings was manifest; and thence he
came into a great audience-room, with a throne of gold and ebony set
on a high dais, all of which was illumed by no other light than the
glimmering of decay. And the throne was tenanted, not by any human
lord or sultan, but a grey, prodigious creature, of height and bulk
exceeding those of man, and having in all its over-swollen form the
exact similitude of a charnel-worm. And the worm was alone, and except
for the worm and Sir John and those beings who had brought him
thither, the great chamber was empty as a mausoleum of old days, whose
occupants were long since consumed by corruption.

Then, standing there with a horror upon him such as no man had ever
envisaged, Sir John became aware that the worm was scrutinizing him
severely, with little eyes deep-folded in the obscene bloating of its
face, and then, with a dreadful and solemn voice, it addressed him,
saying:

"I am king of Antchar, by virtue of having conquered and devoured the
mortal ruler thereof, as well as all those who were his subjects. Know
then that this land is mine and that the intrusion of the living is
unlawful and not readily to be condoned. The rashness and folly thou
hast shown in thus coming here is verily most egregious; since thou
wert warned by the peoples of Abchaz, and warned anew by the jackal
and the viper which thou didst meet on the road into Antchar. Thy
temerity hath earned a condign punishment. And before I suffer thee to
go hence, I decree that thou shalt lie for a term among the dead, and
dwell as they dwell, in a dark sepulcher, and learn the manner of
their abiding and the things which none should behold with living
eyes. Yea, still alive, it shall be thine to descend and remain in the
very midst of death and putrefaction, for such length of time as
seemeth meet to correct thy folly and punish thy presumption."

Sir John was one of the worthiest knights in Christendom, and his
valor was beyond controversy. But when he heard the speech of the
throned worm, and the judgement that it passed upon him, his fear
became so excessive that once again he was nigh to swooning. And,
still in this state, he was taken hence by those who had brought him
to the audience-room. And somewhere in the outer darkness, in a place
of tombs and graves and cenotaphs beyond the dim town, he was flung
into a deep sepulcher of stone, and the brazen door of the sepulcher
was closed upon him.

Lying there through the seasonless midnight, Sir John was companioned
only by an unseen cadaver and by those ministrants of decay who were
not yet wholly done with their appointed task. Himself as one half
dead, in the sore extremity of his horror and loathing, he could not
tell if it were day or night in Antchar; and in all the term of
endless hours that he lay there, he heard no sound, other than the
beating of his own heart, which soon became insufferably loud, and
oppressed him like the noise and tumult of a great throng.

Appalled by the clamor of his heart, and affrighted by the thing which
lay in perpetual silence beside him, and whelmed by the awesomeness
and dire necromancy of all that had befallen him, Sir John was prone
to despair, and scant was his hope of returning from that imprisonment
amid the dead, or of standing once more under the sun as a living man.
It was his to learn the voidness of death, to share the abomination of
desolation, and to comprehend the unutterable mysteries of corruption;
and to do all this not as one who is a mere insensible cadaver, but
with soul and body still inseparate. His flesh crept, and his spirit
cringed within him, as he felt the crawling of worms that went avidly
to the dwindling corpse or came away in glutted slowness. And it
seemed to Sir John at that time (and at all times thereafter) that the
condition of his sojourn in the tomb was verily to be accounted a
worse thing than death.

At last, when many hours or days had gone over him, leaving the tomb's
darkness unchanged by the entrance of any beam or the departure of any
shadow, Sir John was aware of a sullen clangor, and knew that the
brazen door had been opened. And now, for the first time, by the
dimness of twilight that had entered the tomb, he saw in all its
piteousness and repulsion the thing with which he had abode so long.
In the sickness that fell upon him at this sight, he was haled forth
from the sepulcher by those who had thrust him therein: and, fainting
once more with the terror of their touch, and shrinking from their
gigantic shadowy stature and cerements whose black folds revealed no
human visage or form, he was led through Antchar along the road
whereby he had come into that dolorous realm.

His guides were silent as before; and the gloom which lay upon the
land was even as when he had entered it, and was like the umbrage of
some eternal occultation. But at length, in the very place where he
had been taken captive, he was left to retrace his own way and to fare
alone through the land of ruinous gardens toward the defile of the
crumbling rocks.

Weak though he was from his confinement, and all bemazed with the
things which had befallen him, he followed the road till the darkness
lightened once more and he came forth from its penumbral shadow
beneath a pale sun. And somewhere in the waste he met his charger,
wandering through the sunken fields that were covered up by the sand;
and he mounted the charger and rode hastily away from Antchar through
the pass of the strange boulders with mocking forms and faces. And
after a time he came once more to the northern road by which
travellers commonly went to Georgia; and here he was rejoined by the
two Armenians, who had waited on the confines of Antchar, praying for
his secure deliverance.

Long afterwards, when he had returned from his wayfaring in the East
and among the peoples of remote isles, he told of the kingdom of
Abchaz in the book that related his travels; and also he wrote therein
concerning the province of Hanyson. But he made no mention of Antchar,
that kingdom of darkness and decay ruled by the throned worm.




HOW TO COLLECT FANTASY FICTION

by Julius Schwartz

Part Two


The next task is more difficult: the question of back numbers of the
current magazines. Some back issues are almost impossible to secure.
However, be sure to try the magazine publishers. If this fails, scour
the second-hand book and magazine stores. If they haven't the issues,
leave a standing order with them. (They're eager for business and
they'll make an honest attempt to secure the desired issues for you.)
Scan the discussions columns. Readers often offer to sell or trade
back numbers. Then try the large second-hand magazine dealers, such as
Carl Swanson, Washburn, North Dakota and the Smith Book Co., Box 661,
Lawrence, Massachusetts.

As a last resort advertise.

That takes care of all magazines that are now being published. Now we
have to contend with real difficulties. We're going to trail down
fantasy stories that were published in magazines no longer sold at
newsstands! Chief among these defunct magazines is Astounding Stories,
Strange Tales, and Wonder Stories Quarterly. (More details are needed
with these out-of-print magazines, so it'll be given whenever definite
information is known concerning them.) This periodical (Astounding
Stories), a science fiction magazine, first appeared on the newsstands
with its January, 1930 issue and was discontinued but a short time
ago, in March 1933. Its companion magazine, Strange Tales, published
weird, fantastic fiction. Dates: September, 1931 to January, 1933.
Wonder Stories Quarterly, science fiction, ran from Fall, 1929 to
Winter, 1933, publishing only inter-planetary tales in the last two
years.

(Next month Mr. Schwartz describes the less known fantasy magazines.)

                     *      *      *      *      *

Subscribe now and insure yourself of a monthly copy. Only a limited
number are printed.




INFORMATION


(This department will answer any question about fantasy fiction. There
is no charge, and you may use it freely.)

1. When did Miracle, Science and Fantasy Stories come out, how long
was it issued and what was the selling price?--Con Pankevich, Jr.

Miracle, Science and Fantasy Stories appeared in 1931. There were only
two bi-monthly issues, April-May which was on sale April 5th, and
June-July, which came out on May 15. Both issues had been printed
before the first one was on sale. It sold for 20 cents per copy.

2. How many Amazing Stories Annuals were there, and for what
years?--Con Pankevich, Jr.

The 1927 Amazing Stories Annual was the only one published.

