procurable and would do for him any favor that lay in the power of man
if he would leave undespoiled the new-made grave of Amina. And the
ghoul was somewhat mollified, and he said:

"If thou wilt indeed perform for me a certain service, I shall do as
thou askest." And I replied:

"There is no service, whatsoever its nature, that I will not do for
thee in this connection, and I pray thee to name thy desire."

Then the ghoul said: "It is this, that thou shalt bring to me each
night, for eight successive nights, the body of one whom thou hast
slain with thine own hand. Do this, and I shall neither devour nor dig
the body that lies interred hereunder."

Now was I seized by utter horror and despair, since I had bound myself
in all honor to grant the ghoul his hideous requirement. And I begged
him to change the terms of the stipulation, saying to him:

"Is it needful to thee, O eater of corpses, that the bodies should be
those of people whom I myself have slain?"

And the ghoul said: "Yea, for all others would be the natural
provender of myself or of my kin in any event. I adjure thee by the
promise thou hast given to meet me here tomorrow night, when darkness
has wholly fallen or as soon thereafter as thou art able, bringing the
first of the eight bodies."

So saying, he strode off among the cypresses, and began to dig in
another newly made grave at a little distance from that of Amina.

I left the graveyard in even direr anguish than when I had come
thinking, of that which I must do in fulfilment of my sworn promise,
to preserve the body of Amina from the demon. I know not how I
survived the ensuing day, torn as I was between sorrow for the dead
and my horror of the coming night with its repugnant duty.

When darkness had descended, I went forth by stealth to a lonely road
near the cemetery; and waiting there amid the low-grown branches of
the trees, I slew the first passer with a sword and carried his body
to the spot appointed by the ghoul. And each night thereafter, for six
more nights, I returned to the same vicinity and repeated this deed,
slaying always the very first who came, whether man or woman, or
merchant or beggar or grave-digger. And the ghoul awaited me on each
occasion, and would begin to devour his provender in my presence, with
small thanks and scant ceremony. Seven persons did I slay in all, till
only one was wanting to complete the agreed number; and the person
whom I slew yester-night was a woman, even as the witnesses have
testified. All this I did with utmost repugnance and regret, and
sustained only by the remembrance of my plighted word and the fate
which would befall the corpse of Amina if I should break the bond.

This, O Cadi, is all my story. Alas! for these lamentable crimes have
availed me not, and I have failed in wholly keeping my bargain with
the demon, who will doubtless this night consume the body of Amina in
lien of the one corpse that is still lacking. I resign myself to thy
judgement, O Ahmed ben Becar, and I beseech thee for no other mercy
than that of death, wherewith to terminate my double grief and my
twofold remorse.


When Noureddin Hassan had ended his narrative, the amazement of all
who had heard him was verily multiplied, since no man could remember
hearing a stranger tale. And the Cadi pondered for a long time and
then gave judgment, saying:

"I must needs marvel at thy story, but the crimes thou hast committed
are none the less heinous, and Iblis himself would stand aghast before
them. However, some allowance must be made for the fact that thou
hadst given thy word to the ghoul and wast bound as it were in honor
to fulfill his demand, no matter how horrible its nature. And
allowance must likewise be made for thy connubial grief which caused
thee to forfend thy wife's body from the demon. Yet I cannot adjudge
thee guiltless, though I know not the punishment which is merited in a
case so utterly without parallel. Therefore, I set thee free, with
this injunction, that thou shalt make atonement for thy crimes in the
fashion that seemeth best to thee, and shalt render justice to thyself
and to others in such degree as thou art able."

"I thank thee for this mercy," replied Noureddin Hassan; and he then
withdrew from the court amid the wonderment of all who were present.
There was much debate when he had gone, and many were prone to
question the wisdom of the Cadi's decision. Some there were who
maintained that Noureddin should have been sentenced to death without
delay for his abominable actions though others argued for the sanctity
of his oath to the ghoul, and would have exculpated him altogether or
in part. And tales were told and instances were cited regarding the
habits of ghouls and the strange plight of men who had surprised such
demons in their nocturnal delvings. And again the discussion returned
to Noureddin, and the judgment of the Cadi was once more upheld or
assailed with divers arguments. But amid all this, Ahmed Ben Becar was
silent, saying only:

"Wait, for this man will render justice to himself and to all other
concerned, as far as the rendering thereof is possible."

So indeed it happened, for on the morning of the next day another body
was found in the cemetery near Bussorah lying half-devoured on the
grave of Noureddin Hassan's wife, Amina. And the body was that of
Noureddin, self-slain, who in this manner had not only fulfilled the
injunction of the Cadi but had also kept his bargain with the ghoul by
providing the required number of corpses.




WE'LL BET YOU DIDN'T KNOW

by Mortimer Weisinger


That Penn State Froth, the official comic magazine for Penn
University, recently burlesqued Amazing Stories.

That Charles Willard Diffin composes his stuff on a dictaphone.

That the A. in A. Hyatt Verrill's name stands for Alpheus.

That Jack Williamson is the only writer who ever copped a cover for
each part of a serial.

That it's ironic that the letters in Verne's name, rearranged, spell
'never.'

That P. S. Miller is a descendant of Alexander Hamilton.

That Wonder Stories is the only s-f mag on file in the New York Public
Library.

That the reason the first eleven issues of Amazing Stories were
printed on heavy paper was because the publishers wanted to give the
fans "a big package for their money."

That, with the exception of his first story, Hamilton has never had a
story refused by Weird Tales. And even the first was accepted after
rewriting.

That William Briggs MacHarg and Edwin Balmer (the creators of Luther
Trant) are brothers-in-law.

That Wonder Stories paid over seven cents a word for Charles Tanner's
