unknowable inner sense or ability evocable only by the god. Everyone
there had heard--sensed--him address the Lord Armsmaster and the Lady
Priestess by name.

Other gods had appeared personally in the past ... or had they,
really? Nobody had ever seen any of them except their own
priests ... the priests who performed the sacrifices and who fattened
on the fractions.... Llosir, now, wanted neither sacrifices nor
fractions; and, powerful although he was, had appeared to and had
spoken to everyone alike, of however high or low degree, throughout the
whole huge amphitheater.

_Everyone!_ Not to the priestess only; not only to those of the
Old Blood; not only to citizens or natives of Lomarr; but to
_everyone_--down to mercenaries, chance visitors, and such!

Long live Lord Llosir, our new and plenipotent god!

       *       *       *       *       *

King Phagon and Tedric were standing at a table in the throne-room of
the palace-castle, studying a map. It was crudely drawn and sketchy,
this map, and full of blank areas and gross errors; but this was not an
age of fine cartography.

"Tark, first, is still my thought, sire," Tedric insisted, stubbornly.
"'Tis closer, our lines shorter, a victory there would hearten all our
people. Too, 'twould be unexpected. Lomarr has never attacked Tark,
whereas your royal sire and his sire before him each tried to loose
Sarlon's grip and, in failing, but increased the already heavy payments
of tribute. Too, in case of something short of victory, hast only the
one pass and the Great Gorge of the Lotar to hold 'gainst reprisal.
'Tis true such course would leave the Marches unheld, but no more so
than they have been for four years or more."

"Nay. _Think_, man!" Phagon snorted, testily. "'Twould fail. Four
parts of our army are of Tark--thinkst not their first act would be
to turn against us and make common cause with their brethren? Too, we
lack strength, they outnumber us two to one. Nay. Sarlon first. Then,
perhaps, Tark; but not before then."

"But Sarlon outnumbers us too, sire, especially if you count those
barbarian devils of the Devossian steppes. Since Taggad of Sarlon lets
them cross his lands to raid the Marches--for a fraction of the loot,
no doubt--'tis certain they'll help him against us. Also, sire, your
father and your grandfather both died under Sarlonian axes."

"True, but neither of them was a strategist. I am; I have studied this
matter for many years. They did the obvious; I shall not. Nor shall
Sarlon pay tribute merely; Sarlon must and shall become a province of
my kingdom!"

So argument raged, until Phagon got up onto his royal high horse and
declared it his royal will that the thing was to be done his way and no
other. Whereupon, of course, Tedric submitted with the best grace he
could muster and set about the task of helping get the army ready to
roll toward the Marches, some three and a half hundreds of miles to the
north.

Tedric fumed. Tedric fretted. Tedric swore sulphurously in Lomarrian,
Tarkian, Sarlonian, Devossian, and all the other languages he knew. All
his noise and fury were, however, of very little avail in speeding up
what was an intrinsically slow process.

Between times of cursing and urging and driving, Tedric was wont to
prowl the castle and its environs. So doing, one day, he came upon King
Phagon and the Lady Rhoann practicing at archery. Lifting his arm in
salute to his sovereign and bowing his head politely to the lady, he
made to pass on.

"Hola, Tedric!" Rhoann called. "Wouldst speed a flight with us?"

Tedric glanced at the target. Rhoann was beating her father
unmercifully--her purple-shafted arrows were all in or near the gold,
while his golden ones were scattered far and wide--and she had been
twitting him unmercifully about his poor marksmanship. Phagon was
in no merry mood; this was very evidently no competition for any
outsider--least of all Lomarr's top-ranking armsmaster--to enter.

"Crave pardon, my lady, but other matters press...."

"Your evasions are so transparent, my lord; why not tell the truth?"
Rhoann did not exactly sneer at the man's obvious embarrassment, but
it was very clear that she, too, was in a vicious temper. "Mindst not
beating _me_ but never the _Throne_? And any armsmaster who threwest
not arrows by hand at this range to beat both of us should be stripped
of badge?"

Tedric, quite fatuously, leaped at the bait. "Wouldst permit, sire?"

"_No!_" the king roared. "By my head, by the Throne, by Llosir's liver
and heart and brain and guts--NO! 'Twould cost the head of any save you
to insult me so--shoot, sir, and shoot your best!" extending his own
bow and a full quiver of arrows.

Tedric did not want to use the royal weapon, but at the girl's quick,
imperative gesture he smothered his incipient protest and accepted it.

"One sighting shot, sire?" he asked, and drew the heavy bow. Nothing
whatever could have forced him to put an arrow nearer the gold than
the farthest of the king's; to avoid doing so--without transparently
missing the target completely--would take skill, since one golden arrow
stood a bare three inches from the edge of the target.

His first arrow grazed the edge of the butt and was an inch low; his
second plunged into the padding exactly half way between the king's
wildest arrow and the target's rim. Then, so rapidly that it seemed
as though there must be at least two arrows in the air at once, arrow
crashed on arrow; wood snapping as iron head struck feathered shaft.
At end, the rent in the fabric through which all those arrows had torn
their way could have been covered by half of one of Rhoann's hands.

"I lose, sire," Tedric said, stiffly, returning bow and empty quiver.
"My score is zero."

Phagon, knowing himself in the wrong but unable to bring himself to
apologize, did what he considered the next-best thing. "I used to shoot
like that," he complained. "Knowst how lost I my skill, Tedric? 'Tis
not my age, surely?"

"'Tis not my place to say, sire." Then, with more loyalty than
sense--"And I split to the teeth any who dare so insult the Throne."

"What!" the monarch roared. "By my...."

"Hold, father!" Rhoann snapped. "A king you--act it!"

Hard blue eyes glared steadily into unyielding eyes of green. Neither
the thoroughly angry king nor the equally angry princess would give an
inch. She broke the short, bitter silence.

"Say naught, Tedric--he is much too fain to boil in oil or flay alive
any who tell him unpleasantnesses, however true. But _me_, father,
you boil not, nor flay, nor seek to punish otherwise, or I split this
kingdom asunder like a melon. 'Tis time--yea, long past time--that
_someone_ told you the unadorned truth. Hence, my rascally but
well-loved parent, here 'tis. Hast lolled too long on too many too soft
cushions, hast emptied too many pots and tankards and flagons, hast
bedded too many wenches, to be of much use in armor or with any style
of weapon in the passes of the High Umpasseurs."

The flabbergasted and rapidly-deflating king tried to think of some
answer to this devastating blast, but couldn't. He appealed to Tedric.
"Wouldst have said such? Surely not!"

"Not I, sire!" Tedric assured him, quite truthfully. "And even if true,
'tis a thing to remedy itself. Before we reach the Marches wilt regain
arm and eye."

"Perhaps," the girl put in, her tone still distinctly on the acid side.
"If he matches you, Tedric, in lolling and wining and wenching, yes.
Otherwise, no. How much wine do _you_ drink, each day?"

"One cup, usually--sometimes--at supper."

"On the march? Think carefully, friend."

"Nay--I meant in town. In the field, none, of course."

"Seest, father?"

"What thinkst me, vixen, a spineless cuddlepet? From this minute 'til
return here I match your paragon youngblade loll for loll, cup for cup,
wench for wench. Is it what you've been niggling at me to say?"

"Aye, father and king, exactly--for as you say, you do." She hugged him
so fervently as almost to lift him off the ground, kissed him twice,
and hurried away.

"A thing I would like to talk to you about, sire," Tedric said quickly,
