
Watching him I saw first that toe of his stop swinging. Something
important, I thought to myself. But then I began to sit up tense. In
the first place, Ross hadn't touched his keys; in the second place he
leaned forward in his chair and _dropped his leg to the floor_.

Now that may sound silly that I mention his leg dropping to the floor,
but to a person that knew Ross as well as I did that _is_ something. I
had never seen it happen before.

I sat up stiff as a board. He had just reached up his two hands to the
phones and was pressing them closer to his ears like the message was
faint.

Now I knew something big was up and I jumped from my chair.

"What's got into you, Norm?" I said, getting in front of him.

But he didn't seem to hear me or know I was there. He only pressed the
earphones tighter. When I looked at his face, I was shocked. Only once
before had I ever seen that rapt expression--when he got the call from
London two years before at the end of that three-month war telling how
the whole city had been gassed and bombed, leaving not one soul alive.

I looked at the clock. It was a minute past the time for his regular
call.

I shook his shoulder. "Listen here, Norm," I yelled. "You've got to get
that call or--"

"Listen to this, Bob," he cut in, handing me the phones.

I put them about my ears. All I heard was a faint voice. I pressed the
phones close as Ross had done. Then I distinguished it.

In strangely muffled tones, the voice came in, full of sharp hissing
sounds and hard consonants. I could understand not a word.

I tore off the phones. "You fool!" I cried. "What's the idea
of listening to some foreign station? Look!"--I pointed to the
clock--"You're over a minute late on your regular call!"

Ross pointed to the wave-length dial. "See?" he said. "I've got it on
the right wave. Eighteen point seven five meters."

I stared a moment in bewilderment. Sure enough, it was where it should
be.

"Sure you want eighteen point seven five? Better check," I cried in a
small panic, thinking of what Hegstrom would say.

Ross gave me a withering glance which said without words, "Sure I want
it? Did I ever lose my memory.

"Well, I can't fuss around here," I said with a hasty glance at the
clock. "My call is due in about ten seconds."

Before I took my call I cried to my friend. "Probably something wrong
with the dial control. You better try and find your call on some other
number."

Then I snapped my button. The carrier wave was already coming in. I had
caught my call just in time.

"Call-call-call--xxw2-zz5" I spluttered.

Next minute I was busily typing the routine news from Persia. With
everything going along smoothly, I turned my eyes in Ross's direction.
A good operator can do anything with his eyes while taking routine
news; he can even use half his brain to think about other things.

I saw Ross playing with the dial and felt relieved that he was taking
my suggestion that something had gone wrong with the works so that
the dial was in error. Hegstrom would be awful sore when he got the
complaint that Ross had failed to get his call. But then I would be
witness that it wasn't his fault at all--that some foreign station had
come in on that wave-length and spoiled the regular call. Only it was
funny--it came to me then--that the regular call hadn't registered
at all; I hadn't heard a background of English in the few seconds I
listened to the foreigner. Maybe something had happened to the station
in China!

I turned my eyes back to my favorite spot--a dull paint spot on the
panel--because I was getting some technical stuff and needed to
concentrate.

When I next looked at Ross about two minutes later, I heaved a mighty
sigh of relief. He was picking at the keys, taking his call. Only
one thing bothered me: his leg was still on the floor. "Oh, well," I
thought to myself, "that upset him so much that he's a bit off center,"
and with this philosophy, I went on with my call in a much more
peaceful frame of mind.

I finished my call in about fifteen minutes and then I had a breathing
spell of four. I looked at Ross. He still had that leg of his down
on the floor and worse yet, his elbows were not resting on the arms
of the chair; they were in the air and he was sitting up in his chair
stiff as a knife. But he was peacefully typing out his call so after
all everything was all right. I did notice one other thing then but
not until later did it become significant: his face, as much of its
expression as I could get from a side view, had a look of--I know
now what it was although then I couldn't get it--amazement; stark,
bewildered amazement.

Restless as I could be while waiting for my next call, I walked to a
position just behind Ross to see what it was that had so excited him
that his foot was on the floor and his elbows in the air.

I bent down close to see what he had typewritten and then blinked my
eyes. The stuff he was taking down was not English any way you looked
at it. It was a mess of consonants and s's that sent chills up my spine.

"Listen here," I shouted when I got my wits back, "listen, Ross! What
in Heaven's name are you doing? What in thunder is that stuff?"

But Ross kept right on typing as if his life depended on it. Only in
one way did he show that he had heard me. He tossed his head sharply
once in an unmistakable gesture for me to let him alone.

From this point on my blood pressure rose and my heart pounded--my
heart has been pounding ever since then even when I forget for a moment
about all this.

I automatically looked at the clock and saw that my next call was due.
I calmed down somewhat as I pecked down the routine news. But I felt
a growing fear in my heart as time and again I looked over to my
friend to see him typing like a robot, his foot on the floor, elbows
in the air. Then my friend, my only real pal, was going crazy--how
that thought tortured me. I knew perfectly well that he didn't know
any other language than English. Why in the wide world should he be
clacking down something he didn't understand?

It was just three thirty that suddenly Ross ripped the head-phones off
and dropped them to the floor. He stood a moment looking at the paper
in his hand and I noticed then that his skin was deadly white.

I couldn't stand it anymore. I jerked off my own phones and ran to him.
Call or no call, I couldn't stand by while my pal was in danger of
losing his mind or something else as bad.

"Norm!" I cried, "for God's sake! Tell me what it is! What--"

But I didn't finish. With an explosion of curses, Ross crumpled the
paper in his hand and began to walk up and down the room. He was so
unconscious of everything else that he bumped squarely into me, reeled
