
"I heard you," Morrow rasped.

"Don't forget it." Then Sumter strode away.

Morrow grinned shakily. He was certainly getting what he deserved!

       *       *       *       *       *

At home, an idea was rapidly taking on form and dimension in his mind.
He set up his drafting board, collected his inks, and worked doggedly
through the night, etching out diagrams that showed--theoretically, at
least--how his idea would work.

At midnight, he would show up at Switzer's Cafe to walk Gwyn home.

The nights were cool and pleasant, with deep shadows along the
tree-lined streets and the street lights filtering through the
treetops, dappling the silent fronts of the houses. They strolled
along, slowly, their arms around each other, Gwyn's body pressed close
to his.

"I like a small town," Gwyn murmured softly, one night. "'Specially at
night--so peaceful, so cozy."

"I like the dark," Morrow said.

"Why?"

"I don't know. It changes things. It's a different world."

She looked up at him, wonderingly. "I think of a small town. You think
of a different world. Why is that, Bill?"

"You're tired, maybe." He grinned down at her. "You've been on your
feet eight hours."

"That makes me think of a small town?"

"Contentment," he said. "Small towns are contented."

"And a different world--that's exciting, isn't it?"

"Sometimes it's dangerous."

"I see." She was quiet for a while. Then, "I never asked you where you
were from, did I?"

"No."

"Small town? Or city." The latter held conviction.

He chuckled. "You're not even warm! Casa Verde, Arizona. A cluster
of shacks in the middle of a desert, with sand-stone cliffs rising
like mountains of the moon everywhere you looked, and black buzzards
circling in a hot, brassy sky--"

She shuddered. "It sounds terrible."

"--And beautiful." He murmured it, gently. "We left when I was six
years old. No schools there."

"Then--you're _from_ a different world, is that it?"

"You might say that."

"Strange. We're two utterly different people, aren't we, Bill?" She was
gazing up at him, studying his features, watching the dappled light and
shadows play over them.

Morrow sensed that he was on perilous ground. He said nothing.

"You aren't happy here, are you, Bill?" she spoke almost in a whisper.
"You never will be!"

"Most men I've met are--searching for something," he replied hesitantly.

"But they don't devote all their time to it," she protested. "They at
least manage to live fairly normal lives and raise families--"

"Do two utterly different people--" He broke off, leaving the question
unspoken. _But we're down to brass tacks, now_, he mused. _We just
don't feel the same way about things!_

Why was that?

"Look," he said, almost gruffly. "I think of a different world--let's
stick to that point, for now. You think of a small town. But then, why
do you read science-fiction?"

She frowned in puzzlement. "What do you mean?"

"Well, isn't that a 'different world?'"

"But it's _fiction_. I don't think of reality--"

He smiled gravely. "You don't think there are horrible monsters lurking
in the corners, or little people in the wallpaper, or strange eyes
floating around watching you--"

"If I did, I'd be in a booby-hatch!"

"Or you might be a research engineer!" He chuckled softly. "Ignorance
is bliss, Gwyn. And how much do you know about reality? What do you
know of the mysteries within the atom, or the strange way the Universe
seems to be expanding as if it had exploded and the stars, including
our sun, were still hurtling outward from the blast?"

"Sounds like a good way to go crazy!" She looked up, intently. "I've
never heard you talk like this."

"Well, you aren't quite so ignorant," he amended teasingly. "You
realize inwardly that your 'small town' isn't quite so contented as
it seems--that beneath the surface, there's unrest. So maybe you read
science-fiction because it deals with spectacular forms of unrest--men
risking their lives in space travel or on other planets, changes and
developments that cause revolutions or wars--and you find solace
in that. The little unrest in your 'small town' no longer seems so
bothersome."

"Mr. Morrow," she spoke icily. "I do _not_ enjoy having you pick my
mind apart!"

_Then why must you criticize me?_ he thought. But he didn't say it
aloud....

       *       *       *       *       *

Sunday afternoon, they went swimming. There was a secluded strip of
beach where Morrow spread a blanket out on the sand, and after they
had swum and splashed and dived to near-exhaustion, they sprawled
themselves out on the blanket and let the warm sun dry their skin. Gwyn
lay on her stomach and removed her halter, then rolled her trunks into
a narrow band around her thighs. Morrow watched with mingled interest
and affection. Gwyn scowled at him, then pretended to ignore him.

When his skin began to sting through the sun-tan oil, Morrow suggested
they move into the shade of the trees. Gwyn struggled back into her
halter and sat up. They dragged the blanket back into the shade and sat
down again. Morrow put his arms around her, and they talked for a while.

When Gwyn came out of the bushes wearing her shorts and blouse, she
grinned and wrinkled her nose at him. "This has been wonderful, Bill. I
almost wish we could be like this forever!" She let him kiss her, then.

They rode back to town on his little motor-bike and had cokes and
hamburgers at a lunch-stand.

The second week passed without significance. The other engineers at the
labs treated him coolly, now. They'd be glad when he left. At home,
his diagrams were finished. He went over them again, checking them
thoroughly.

Friday, a telegram reached him at the labs.

    STOCKTON, CALIFORNIA
    AUGUST 20 1960

    BILL MORROW
    WESTERTON, NEW JERSEY

    HIRED PLANE AND FLEW RECON. PERFECT SITE LOCATED NEVADA. LEASED
    ABANDONED SAWMILL IN SIERRA NEVADAS NEAR HERE. WIRE E-T-A TO L.A.
    INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT. MEET YOU THERE.

    D.P. SMITH

Saturday, he spent most of the day settling his affairs and packing for
the trip.

The plan had begun. Whether it worked or not, he was going through with
it.

The gravity-control mechanism would not be turned loose on the world to
increase the tensions and fears already much too prevalent to the point
where mankind would plunge into atomic war.

But the gravity-control mechanism wouldn't be abandoned, either. They'd
develop it, secretly. They'd have it ready when the world situation
changed--for the better, Morrow hoped--and it could be given to the
world. Then, mankind would benefit from it.

That was his whole purpose--that his discovery should benefit mankind,
rather than pave the way to the destruction of civilization. Morrow
considered it a purpose worthy of all the sacrifices he had to make.
His job, his career--perhaps later, if the plan worked, he could regain
them.

But he had to try.

       *       *       *       *       *

The battered, worn truck came whining out of the rutted dirt road,
clashed its gears, and rumbled into the wide sawmill yard. On the
left, a little mountain stream laughed merrily over the rocks and then
widened out, ahead, and trickled sluggishly across a brakish pond. On
the right, at the foot of the tall pine trees, were the crumbling ruins
of sheds and outbuildings, piles of rotted wood.

The truck halted before the main sawmill building across the yard. The
mill was weather-stained and decrepit-looking, with the boards fallen
off one wall and the roof sagging on one corner, but it was still
standing.

Morrow and Smith climbed down from the cab of the mud-splattered truck
and stood gazing around them. "Looks like she's been abandoned for
quite a while," Morrow remarked noncommittally.

"She has," Smitty agreed. "But it'll serve our purposes, I think. This
main building is large enough to be our hanger-workshop with a minimum
of repairs. The timbers have tightened up until they're like iron, else
the whole building would've collapsed long ago."

Morrow nodded. "Long as the timbers are sturdy, we can patch up the
holes with canvas tarpaulin if we have to."

Smitty hooked his thumb toward the stream. "I got a lab analysis of
the water--it's drinkable. But we'll have to spread some oil on that
pond to kill the mosquitoes. We don't have any neighbors to worry about
within ten miles of here; Yosemite National Park's due south of here
about fifteen miles."

"What about fire towers?"

"Forest rangers? The nearest is over on a mountainside twenty miles
away. He's not going to see anything at night unless it's a fire."
Smitty grinned reflectively. "I figure this can serve as our temporary
base until we get the ship built and flight-tested. Then we travel due
east across some of the worst desert and mountain country you'll ever
see, to the site I've picked for our permanent base. It's in a deep,
crooked canyon over on the other side of the Kawich Range, in Nevada."

"Not near any atomic project area, is it?"

"Uh-uh. Not near anything else, either. It's not near any airway
routes, and private pilots shun that area because there aren't any
fields or meadows available for emergency forced-landings."

"Sounds good!" Morrow complimented him. "Where do we camp, here?"

"I've knocked together a small cabin back in the woods. Grab your stuff
out of the truck and come on--I'll fix us some chow!"

Morrow climbed into the rear of the truck and slid his luggage back
to the tailgate. Smitty took a couple of suitcases, Morrow the third
and his equipment case, and they strode off on a narrow trail winding
through the trees.

"Now what was it you've been working on?" Smitty asked as he led the
way.

"I've been working, on?" Morrow echoed blankly, his mind filled with
sensations of clear, cool mountain breeze and the smell of tall pines
and the eternal silence of the woodland.

"Yeah!" Smitty prompted. "When we were having dinner, back in L.A.,
remember, we were talking about the event of anyone catching us at
this, that we'd be finished if they did? You said you'd been working on
something that would protect us from discovery."

"Oh, that!" Morrow grinned. "I merely figured out a means of
camouflage."

"Camouflage?"

"It's still just in its theoretical stage, but I think it'll work. I'll
show you my diagrams."

"Show me while we're eating."

       *       *       *       *       *

The little shack nestled under the pines was cozy and weather-proof,
built out of rough lumber and fitted out with hand-made furniture. The
air was filled with the aroma of fried bacon, coffee, and wood smoke.
They sat at the small, wooden table and ate out of tin plates, washing
it down with tin cups of coffee, and Morrow spread his diagrams between
them and explained his idea to Smitty.

"--So it's all designed around that propulsion unit," he said. "The
gravity-control ring establishes a focus of 'false gravity' inside the
tail-pipe so that air is sucked in through the scoops on the ship's
hull. The air 'falls' into that focus of 'false gravity' and goes on
past it to shoot out the tail-pipe at an estimated sixty-mile-an-hour
gale."

"Couldn't we do just as well with a large electric fan?" Smitty asked,
half-jokingly.

"This propulsion unit will cost only a fraction of the price of a large
air-conditioning fan and motor," Morrow pointed out.

Smitty grinned at the diagrams. "Okay, but you've certainly sketched in
a fancy-looking ship, there! Aero-dynamically, I'm afraid it wouldn't
be too practical--"

"I know," Morrow admitted. "But we'll have to work that out and still
keep this fancy-looking ship."

"How come?"

"Because that's the whole idea, Smitty! Think a minute. Suppose we've
built our ship and are flight-testing it. So there's always the
possibility that someone will see it--"

"--And call the cops!"

"Right. Normally, that would bring on an investigation and we'd be
finished."

"I hope they serve good food at Leavenworth!"

"Stop interrupting, will you? Now, the idea is this: suppose whoever
sees us _thinks_ they're seeing a ship _from outer space_?"

Smitty's grin faded. He stared at Morrow for a moment, then picked up
his cup and took a healthy swig of coffee. "I see what you mean," he
said, replacing his cup carefully on the table. "They think they're
seeing a rocket ship from Mars, or something like that. So they go to
the cops and start yelling about it. And that's happened so often--"

"We won't have to worry about any thorough investigation," Morrow
concluded, smiling. "They might check the area in which our ship was
sighted--"

"Which isn't likely to be around here!"

"--But that's all. Even if it is around here, they aren't going to ask
us too many questions so long as we don't have two heads, blue skin,
and arms like an octopus!"

Smitty chuckled mirthfully. "You'd better keep out of sight, then!"

"Cut the quips!" Morrow growled mockingly. "I think the idea will work.
We'll just have to design the ship so it looks weird enough to excite
the imagination. It may have some aerodynamic faults, but it's worth
the trouble."

"We can't make it _too_ fancy," Smitty warned. "It's still gotta fly!"

"We don't want it too fancy--just so it _looks_ like a spaceship!
First thing we'll have to do, though, is check the costs of plastic
construction materials for aircraft." Morrow gulped the last of his
meal down with a swallow of coffee, stacked his cup, plate, and
utensils, and set them aside. "We don't want to go too deep into our
capital to build this ship," he said wryly. "The lease on this property
has already soaked us two thousand."

"What'll the shop machinery come to?" Smitty asked pensively.

"Around a thousand, I think."

"Then I think we can build the ship for around--well, anywhere from one
to three thousand dollars. At the most, that'll be just over half our
capital down the drain." He frowned. "What'll the rest of it be for?
Operating expenses?"

"Mostly that. There are a few other ideas I'd like to try out,
though--experiments with these mechanisms. But remember that we're
dedicated to this thing until the world situation changes and we can
turn it loose without any risk. That may not come for years!"

"I've thought about it," Smitty retorted, grinning. "There's a deer run
over near our Kawich mountain hide-out, and other game is plentiful.
Our meat supply for the next hundred years costs no more than the price
of a couple of hunting rifles."

Morrow shook his head. "That might be fine, Smitty. Maybe we could
plant a vegetable garden, too, and live off the land. But I don't think
we should subject ourselves to the life of a hermit. We've got to keep
our perspective with this thing, and not get anti-social about it."

"A hermit's life would get kinda boring, anyway," Smitty conceded. "But
I can always go back to crop-dusting and make a few dollars now and
then. What'll you do, though? Can you get a job?"

"I know electronics!" Morrow smiled grimly. "I suppose I could open up
a little radio repair shop somewhere."

"You? A radio repair shop? The first real genius this country's had
for--" Smitty broke off, staring at him.

Morrow stared back, scowling. "Genius?" he echoed. "What in hell ever
gave you _that_ idea?"

Smitty grinned faintly as he lighted a cigarette. "Guess I'm just
carried away by your two heads," he said, spewing smoke.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a full month's work just to purchase the shop machinery, the
building materials to patch up the old sawmill, the materials for
the ship's construction, and to truck it out and install it in the
building. They worked from daylight 'till dark, then retired to their
shack and spent most of the night going over the blue-prints for the
ship. Gradually, it took shape and form on paper.

Masses of cloud were banked against the surrounding mountains, covering
the sky with a solid, gray mass that shook loose a thin drizzle of
rain, just enough to dampen the ground, the morning they conducted the
first weight-test.

They used the gravity-control mechanism--they called it a _gravitor_
by then--which Morrow had built in Westerton. The test was conducted
outside, with a sling suspended under the gravitor to support a pile of
sandbags, with a rope hanging from its bottom to a small hand-winch on
the ground.

