
Thus it was an armored knight, leaning negligently upon a fifteen-pound
forging hammer, who waited outside the shop's door and watched his
eleven visitors approach.

The banner was that of a priest of the third rank. Good--they weren't
worried enough about him yet, then, to send a big one. And only ten
mercenaries--small, short, bandy-legged men of Tark--good enough
fighters for their weight, but they didn't weigh much. This wouldn't be
too bad.

The group came up to within a few paces and stopped.

"Art in armor, smith?" the discomfited priest demanded. "Why?"

"Why not? 'Tis my habit to greet guests in apparel of their own
choosing."

There was a brief silence, then:

"To what do I owe the honor of this visit, priest?" he asked, only half
sarcastically. "I paid, as I have always paid, the fraction due."

"True. 'Tis not about a fraction I come. It is noised that a strange
god appeared to you, spoke to you, instructed you in your art; that you
are making an image of him."

"I made no secret of any of these things. I hide nothing from the great
god or his minions, nor ever have. I have nothing to hide."

"Perhaps. Such conduct is very unseemly--decidedly ungodlike. He should
not have appeared to you, but to one of us, and in the temple."

"It is un-Sarpedionlike, certainly--all that Sarpedion has ever done
for me is let me alone, and I have paid heavily for that."

"What bargain did you make with this Llosir? What was the price?"

"No bargain was made. I thought it strange, but who am I, an ordinary
man, to try to understand the actions or the reasonings of a god? There
will be a price, I suppose. Whatever it is, I will pay it gladly."

"You will pay, rest assured; not to this Llosir, but to great
Sarpedion. I command you to destroy that image forthwith."

"You do? Why? Since when has it been against the law to have a personal
god? Most families of Lomarr have them."

"Not like yours. Sarpedion does not permit your Llosir to exist."

"Sarpedion has nothing to say about it. Llosir already exists. Is the
great god so weak, so afraid, so unable to defend himself against a
one-man stranger that he...."

"Take care, smith--silence! That is rankest blasphemy!"

"Perhaps; but I have blasphemed before and Sarpedion hasn't killed me
yet. Nor will he, methinks; at least until his priests have collected
his fraction of the finest iron ever forged and which I only can make."

"Oh, yes, the new iron. Tell me exactly how it is made."

"You know better than to ask that question, priest. That secret will be
known only to me and my god."

"We have equipment and tools designed specifically for getting
information out of such as you. Seize him, men, and smash that image!"

"HOLD!" Tedric roared, in such a voice that not a man moved. "If
anybody takes one forward step, priest, or makes one move toward spear
or arrow, your brains will spatter the walls across the street. Can
your copper helmet stop this hammer? Can your girl-muscled, fat-bellied
priest's body move fast enough to dodge my blow? And most or all
of those runty little slavelings behind you," waving his left arm
contemptuously at the group, "will also die before they cut me down.
And if I die now, of what worth is Sarpedion's fraction of a metal that
will never be made? Think well, priest!"

Sarpedion's agent studied the truculent, glaring ironmaster for a
long two minutes. Then, deciding that the proposed victim could not
be taken alive, he led his crew back the way they had come, trailing
fiery threats. And Tedric, going back into his shop, was thoroughly
aware that those threats were not idle. So far, he hadn't taken too
much risk, but the next visit would be different--very different. He
was exceedingly glad that none of his men knew that the pots they
were firing so fiercely were in fact filled only with coke and willow
charcoal; that armor and sword and shield and axe and hammer were at
that moment getting their final heat treatment in a bath of oil, but
little hotter than boiling water, in the sanctum to which he retired,
always alone, to perform the incantations which his men--and hence the
priests of Sarpedion--believed as necessary as any other part of the
metallurgical process.

That evening he selected a smooth, fine-grained stone and whetted the
already almost perfect cutting edge of his new sword; an edge which in
cross-section was rather more like an extremely sharp cold-chisel than
a hollow-ground razor. He fitted the two-hand grip meticulously with
worked and tempered rawhide, thrilling again and again as each touch of
an educated and talented finger-tip told him over and over that here
was some thing brand new in metal--a real god-metal.

A piece of flat wrought iron, about three-sixteenths by five inches and
about a foot long, already lay on a smooth and heavy hardwood block. He
tapped it sharply with the sword's edge. The blade rang like a bell;
the iron showed a bright new scar; that was all. Then a moderately
heavy two-handed blow, about as hard as he had ever dared swing an iron
sword. Still no damage. Then, heart in mouth, he gave the god-metal
its final test; struck with everything he had, from heels and toes to
finger-tips. He had never struck such a blow before, except possibly
with a war-axe or a sledge. There was a ringing clang, two sundered
slabs of iron flew to opposite ends of the room, the atrocious blade
went on, half an inch deep into solid oak. He wrenched the weapon free
and stared at the unmarred edge. UNMARRED! For an instant Tedric felt
as though he were about to collapse; but sheerest joy does not disable.

There was nothing left to do except make the links, hinge-pins, and so
on for his armor, which did not take long. Hence, when the minions of
Sarpedion next appeared, armored this time in the heaviest and best
iron they had and all set to overwhelm him by sheer weight of numbers,
he was completely ready. Nor was there palaver or parley. The attackers
opened the door, saw the smith, and rushed.

But Tedric, although in plain sight, had chosen the battleground with
care. He was in a corner. At his back a solid-walled stairway ran up to
the second floor. On his right the wall was solid for twenty feet. On
his left, beyond the stairwell, the wall was equally solid for twice as
far. They would have to come after him, and as he retreated, they would
be fighting their way up, and not more than two at a time.

This first swing, horizontal and neck-high, was fully as fierce-driven
as the one that had cloven the test-piece and almost ruined his
testing-block. The god-metal blade scarcely slowed as it went through
armor and flesh and bone. In fact, the helmet and the head within it
