Wilkerson blew foam from his lips. "They won't!" he said.

"What?" Molock gasped. "Do you mean those dirty dogs are going to leave
us here to be murdered by a bunch of six-eyed apes?"

"Cooper was mad as hell because we had crash landed. He wanted to know
what the hell I meant by damaging company property. From the way he
sounded, the cost of the repairs was coming out of his lunch money."

"I'll kill that Cooper!" Molock screamed. "Doesn't he know our lives
are in danger?"

"He seemed to think that maintaining peaceful relations with the
Venusians was more important than our necks," Wilkerson explained. "He
said that if Shad Brisbee wanted to knife us for landing on his dancing
ground, it was all right with Trans-Space and with him."

"But Rita is here!" Molock raged. "Doesn't he see he's risking the
life of a woman?"

"He said that Trans-Space doesn't discriminate between its employees
because of sex," Wilkerson answered. "Open me another can of beer,
somebody. I feel faint."

"Let me at that radio!" Molock screamed. "I want to talk to that
Cooper."

He slammed out of the galley. While he was gone we drank beer
vigorously. When he returned his face was ash-colored. "What did Cooper
say?" Wilkerson asked.

"He said that good publicity was more important than our necks, that if
we are going to bring colonists here, we have to be able to prove to
them how peaceful Venus is."

"Um," Wilkerson said. "What else did the good man say?"

"He fired me!" Molock sounded as if he was strangling. "He told me to
come in and get my pay. When I asked him how I was to get there, he
said I was to walk."

"Um," Wilkerson said. "Well, go right ahead and start walking. You
bluffed Shad Brisbee once. You can do it again."

"You're as bad as Cooper!" Molock screamed. "Shad Brisbee would murder
me if he caught me outside this ship. I'm not a damned Venusian, I'm
fair game to him."

"Nah, he wouldn't hurt you," Wilkerson said, "Hell, he's just an
ignorant native. All he's got are knives and clubs and spears and bows
and arrows--just a native. He's easy to bluff. Hell, you're a human
being. He probably looks on you as a sort of a god. At least some
of the literature I saw one of the trained seals pounding out in the
publicity department said the natives regarded humans as minor gods who
can do no wrong."

_Whaaam!_ An arrow smashed against the plastite hull window bounced
off. One point was definitely to our advantage. No weapon possessed by
the Venusians could get through the steel hull or the plastite view
ports of the ship. We were as safe as sardines in a can--unless the
Venusians found a can opener.

We sat in the galley and morosely drank beer and considered how best to
draw our wills.

"Hey, look!" Molock gasped, painting toward the plastite window.

At first glance it seemed to me that the whole Venusian race had put in
its appearance. There were hundreds of Venusians, thousands of them,
coming from all directions. Shad Brisbee had called in his pals from
miles around and they were all heading our way.

Wilkerson's face went white. "This looks like the end, boys," he said.

"Nah!" Molock answered. "They'll never get through the hull. I'll
figure out something."

"You had better get your slide rule into action. Uh! What was that?"

_That_ was the ship lurching as if it was about to turn over. From the
ports, we could see what was happening. Venusians were on both sides of
the ship. Those on one side were pushing while those on the other side
were pulling. When the ship settled back, the ones on the second side
pushed like hell, setting up a rhythmic rocking motion that was rapidly
threatening to turn the ship over.

"You could turn over a mountain like this!" Wilkerson whispered, as the
ship lurched. "My God! They're going to try to roll the whole damned
ship into the swamp."

On one side of Shad Brisbee's dancing ground was jungle. On the other
side was a deep pool of muddy water. Staring at it, Wilkerson seemed to
talk out of a trance. "Drowned, like rats in a trap, in my own ship!"
He took a deep breath, turned to Molock. "Go out and bluff Shad Brisbee
now!"

Molock also took a deep breath and rose to his feet. "I'll just go do
that," he said, moving toward the lock.

All of us were too stunned to try to stop him.

When he opened the outer door of the lock, the noise that came in was
like the howling of a forest full of baboons. But the rocking of the
ship stopped as soon as he appeared. I don't know why the Venusians
didn't kill him before he had a chance to open his mouth, but probably
they were too surprised at his appearance to take immediate action.

"I want to talk to Shad Brisbee!" he yelled at the top of his voice.

Shad appeared in the throng. He looked more than seven feet tall and I
would have sworn he had more than six eyes. The throng grew so quiet
