At a sign from the Grandmaster, the guildfolk spread in a single
circle. The Grandmaster took his position at the center of the circle
with the Candidate, the Candidate's master, the kingsman, and the
godsman.

The Bowman strain in Bump-arch was conspicuous, as he stood beside
the others. It was marked by his height and by the unmistakable way
the bones of his face shaped themselves. A romantic girl could look
at him and think of a noble primitive and fall in love, Snubnose
reflected. A family-proud dame could look at him and think of the
public slaves--Bowmen captured in battle--sweating and stinking in the
building gangs.

"What do I think?" Snubnose asked himself. He shrugged. "Bump-arch is
my friend."

He turned to say something to his sister, and he saw that she had left
him. While the circle had been forming, she had moved a quarter way
around. Now her eyes were fixed on her lover.

Snubnose felt vaguely hurt. He said to himself, childishly, "They're up
to something, and they're treating me like a little boy again."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Time," said the Grandmaster.

And what was time? Snubnose, the grown-up physicist, asked himself that
question.

In his physics it was the denominator of velocity; squared, the
denominator of acceleration. In old texts--incomplete, variously
translated, little understood--it was called a dimension when
multiplied by an imaginary number. But imaginary numbers had no place
in physics. So it had been decided in 1480 DRC, at the historic
conference of scientists, kingsmen, and godsmen. Imaginary numbers,
with some other concepts, had been declared metaphysics and had been
turned over to the godsmen. Just as neuroses, because of their
traditional origin in sexual impulses, had been taken away from the
psychologists and assigned to the kingsmen.

Snubnose remembered how Crookback had catechized the pair of them,
Bump-arch and him, on the Principles. How did that one go? "Science
appertains only to matter itself; not to the mysteries of matter or the
desires of matter. The mysteries of matter belong to the gods, and the
desires of matter belong to the king."

Or something like that.

He hadn't been quick with his lessons, like Bump-arch. His friend had
scoffed at the Principles when alone with him, but had learned them
by heart after a couple of offhand readings. Snubnose would sweat and
sweat and think he had them, but when the time came to recite, the
words would fly out the window into the fresh-smelling air.

Old Crookback had got so disgusted with him once that he had put him on
bread and water. And then Bump-arch had sneaked out over the city wall
and had caught a rabbit in a homemade trap and had talked one of the
women of the settled Bowmen into cooking it for them. Gods, that had
tasted good at midnight....

The circle of scientists was getting noisy. Snubnose's nearest
neighbors were loudly rehashing the latest Private Law marriage.
Snubnose wondered suddenly, why didn't the demonstration start? The
Grandmaster had said, "Time." Was there trouble?

In the center of the Field, while Bump-arch stood apart, the
dignitaries were carrying on one of those exasperating public wrangles,
obvious but inaudible. The godsman was doing most of the talking,
waving a plump arm. The Grandmaster looked unhappy, the kingsman looked
important, and Crookback looked polite.

The godsman was so excited he absent-mindedly scratched his bare
buttock. He caught himself and blushed--a total affair for a
godsman--and during his embarrassment, Crookback began to talk. The
godsman kept shaking his head and interrupting, but Crookback went on
talking, and finally the godsman seemed to give a reluctant consent.

The Grandmaster raised his hand high, with the fingers spread, and a
girl apprentice burst from the door of the Ready Hall. She ran across
the Field, and two scientists smilingly moved aside to let her through.
She stood panting before the Grandmaster. He handed her the symbolic
messenger's key and spoke to her briefly--briefly for the Grandmaster.

She was off on the run.

Snubnose didn't know what was happening, but it looked as if the
godsman had made some kind of a concession. He was sure that must be
for the good and felt relieved--until the Grandmaster, leaning on his
copper staff, addressed the guildfolk.

The Grandmaster began: "The holy one submitted an objection concerning
a possible violation of the Principles and proposed to forbid the
demonstration by the Candidate."

If that stood, Bump-arch would probably be tried for sacrilege in
Godsmen's Castle. Yet the godsman had seemed to give ground....

"Needless to say, both the distinguished master of the Candidate and
I myself, speaking individually for ourselves, and, in my own case
especially, speaking for the Guild of Scientists as a body, assured the
holy one of our reverent adherence to the Principles, and--"

He was interrupted by the angry voice of the godsman.

"Get on!"

The guildfolk buzzed. As often as they might have liked to tell their
Grandmaster to get on, this was an insult to the Guild. But they were
quickly silent, for it was an insult they would have to swallow, at
least in public.

The Grandmaster swallowed it too, visibly gulping, and he said mildly,
"The holy one has generously agreed to submit the issue to the High
