"I know."

"I can't say exactly why it is, but we do seem to be able to hit the
public taste better than you Writers." He reached over and patted one
of the plastic cases, as though it had been an affectionate dog.

"Do your machines do nothing but write new material?" asked Carre, as
he strolled on.

"That depends on the demand. Sometimes we have a call for some
out-of-print item, or some work which is so hard to get hold of that
we simply have the machines re-do it. After Number Twelve, here,
produced the entire English translation of 'War and Peace' without
a single semantic error, we were not afraid to trust them with
anything. As a matter of fact, we've got Number Eight re-writing some
nineteenth-century items that have not been available for years--things
that were destroyed or banned during the Atomic Wars, but which the
present government finds acceptable. Would you like to see?"

Carre stood in front of Number Eight in fascination as the metal arms
hammered out the words and lines. After a moment, he frowned. "I seem
to remember this! I must have read it in my early boyhood. It seems so
long ago. Joan of Arc! But I don't remember its happening just this
way."

"Just goes to show you can't trust your memory, Carre. You know the
machines are perfectly logical, and they can't make a mistake."

"No, of course not. Odd, though." He brushed his hand over a forehead
grown wet.

The knife flashed down, cut the paper, and the page fell into its
basket. Hartridge picked it up.

"Would you like this sheet, as a memento? Number Eight can easily re-do
it."

"Thank you."

"And is there anything else I can show you? I don't mind admitting I'm
very proud of my machines."

"Well," said Carre, "perhaps you might let me have some of your current
manuscripts, just for tonight? I can make a comparative study, for
Ludwig, and return them sometime tomorrow."

"Nothing easier." He assembled a bundle of stapled sheets and put them
in a box, and then rang for the guards, to show him out.

"Take care of yourself, Carre. See you tomorrow."

       *       *       *       *       *

Herbert sat, that evening, in his book-lined room, reading manuscripts.
He looked more and more puzzled, and ill at ease. He got up, after a
time, to pace the room, and on a sudden impulse he left the apartment
and hurried up the street.

It had grown dark outside, and he hurried. He could not stand the
thought of the Airway, so he walked. He had covered nearly half a mile
when, at the corner ahead, two Street-taxis approached each other at
right angles. The drivers glared at each other. Neither slowed to
let the other pass; they crashed, and began to burn. Carre hurried
on, trying not to hear the screams of the people or the siren of the
approaching ambulance. No wonder, he thought, that they need Ludwig in
the Bureau of Public Safety; people were behaving so irrationally!

He climbed the steps of the City Library, and advanced to the desk.

"I should like to see files of the magazines published by Adult
Fiction, Earth, if you please."

"But which magazine, sir? They publish hundreds."

"Well, as a start, let me see those which publish light fiction."

For two hours he sat in the Scholar's Room, skimming the pages of the
magazines--_Sagebrush Westerns_, _Romance and Marriage_, _Pinkerton's
Own_, _Harper's_, and a dozen others. He read with concentration,
and made few notes. On his way home he stopped at a news-machine and
selected an armful of the current issues to take home with him. He read
in his room until nearly dawn, and when he did lie down he could not
sleep, or rest.

"I don't believe it," he whispered to himself. "It can't be true." And,
half an hour later, "How did it happen?"

       *       *       *       *       *

At nine next morning he was sitting in the reception room of the Bureau
of Public Entertainment, with brief-case on his knees, waiting for
Ludwig. It was nearly noon before Ludwig himself arrived, and summoned
his visitor.

He sat at his desk, his white hair rumpled, and nervously fingered his
watch chain as Carre took the chair opposite.

"Sorry to keep you waiting, Herbert. The Commissioners over in Safety
have a bad situation to handle, and I've been trying to advise them.
I'll be glad when this writing business is straightened out, and I can
