
"Junior," said his parent solemnly, "now that you are about to grow
down, it behooves you to know certain facts."

Mater blushed a delicate lavender and turned away on her side of the
rock.

"Very soon now," said Pater, "you will begin feeling an irresistible
urge ... to sink to the bottom, to take root there in some sheltered
location which will be your lifetime site. Perhaps you even have an
understanding already with some ... ah ... charming young polyp of the
opposite gender, whom you would invite to share your homesite. Or, if
not, you should take all the more pains to make that site as attractive
as possible, in order that such a one may decide to grace it with--"

"Uh-huh," said Junior understandingly. "That's what the fellows mean
when they say any of 'em'll fall for a few high-class rocks."

Pater marshaled his thoughts again. "Well, quite apart from such
material considerations as selecting the right rocks, there are
certain ... ah ... matters we do not ordinarily discuss."

Mater blushed a more pronounced lavender. The three maiden aunts,
rooted to their boulder within easy earshot of Pater's carrying voice,
put up a respectable pretense of searching one another for nonexistent
water-fleas.

"No doubt," said Pater, "in the course of your harum-scarum
adventurings as a normal polyp among polyps, you've noticed the ways
in which the lower orders reproduce themselves; the activities of the
fishes, the crustacea, the marine worms will not have escaped your
attention."

"Uh-huh," said Junior, treading water.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You will have observed that among these there takes place a good
deal of ... ah ... maneuvering for position. But among intelligent,
firmly rooted beings like ourselves, matters are, of course, on a less
crude and direct plane. What among lesser creatures is a question of
tactics belongs, for us, to the realm of strategy." Pater's tone
grew confiding. "Now, Junior, once you're settled you'll realize the
importance of being easy in your mind about your offspring's parentage.
Remember, a niche in brine saves trying. Nothing like choosing your
location well in the first place. Study the currents around your
prospective site--particularly their direction and force at such
crucial times as flood-tide. Try to make sure you and your future mate
won't be too close down-current from anybody else's site, since in a
case like that accidents can happen. You understand, Junior?"

"Uh-huh," acknowledged Junior. "That's what the fellows mean when they
say don't let anybody get the drop on you."

"Well!" said Pater in flat disapproval.

"But it all seems sort of silly," said Junior stubbornly. "_I'd_ rather
just keep moving around, and not have to do all that figuring. And the
ocean's full of things I haven't seen yet. I don't _want_ to grow down!"

Mater paled with shock. Pater gave his spawn a scalding, scandalized
look. "You'll learn! You can't beat Biology," he said thickly,
creditably keeping his voice down. "Junior, you may go!"

Junior bobbled off, and Pater admonished Mater sternly, "We must have
patience, my dear! All children pass through these larval stages...."

"Yes, dear," sighed Mater.

       *       *       *       *       *

At long last, Junior seemed to have resigned himself to making the best
of it.

With considerable exertions, hampered by his increasing
bottom-heaviness, he was fetching loads of stones, seaweed and other
debris to a spot downslope, and there laboring over what promised to
be a fairly ambitious cairn. Judging by what they could see of it,
