"There--by the ship! A horrible creature!" exclaimed Mark.

Shouting to Washington to keep the light steady in the direction of the
dock, Mr. Henderson ran toward the moored _Mermaid_. Jack, Andy, Bill
and Tom, with Mark in the rear followed him.

"Nothing here," said the scientist, after a careful search about. "Are
you sure you saw something, Mark?"

"Positively," replied the lad with a shudder. He described the vision of
the darkness.

"I guess it was a big otter, or maybe an enormous turtle," the professor
said.




                               CHAPTER V

                          ATTACKED BY A WHALE


But Mark was certain it was nothing like that, though a careful search
failed to reveal anything or any person near the ship. It was too dark
to examine for footprints, and even Mark, after taking a look all about,
felt he might have been deceived by shadows. Still he was a little
nervous, and could hardly sleep for imagining what the thing he saw
could have been.

The next day every one was so busy that no one, not even Mark, recalled
the little excitement of the night before. Shortly after noon, final
preparations having been made, they all got aboard the _Mermaid_ and
started off.

It was a bright sunshiny day, and the craft, speeding away from the
island where it had been constructed, over the dancing blue waves, must
have presented a strange sight had there been any spectators. For surely
no such ship had ever before sailed those waters.

However, there was no other vessel in sight, and the island, as far as
the professor and his friends knew, had never been inhabited.

"We will not try for any great speed," Mr. Henderson remarked as he,
with Mark and Jack, stood in the conning tower managing the _Mermaid_.
"We don't want to strain any joints at the start or heat any engine
bearings. There will be time enough for speed later."

"Yes, and we may need it more when we get into the centre of the earth
than we do now," observed Mark.

"Why so?" asked Jack.

"No telling what we may run up against underneath the ground," went on
Mark. "We may have to fight strange animals and stranger beings.
Besides, the atmosphere and water there can't be the same as up here; do
you think so, Professor?"

For a few minutes the scientist was silent. He seemed to be thinking
deeply.

"I will tell you what I believe," he said at length. "I have never
spoken of it before, but now that we are fairly started and may
eventually have a chance to prove my theory, I will say that I think the
centre of this earth on which we live is hollow. Inside of it, forming a
core, so to speak, I believe there is another earth, similar to ours in
some respects which revolves inside this larger sphere."

They were well out to sea now, as they could observe when they emerged
on the little deck. Above their heads was the aluminum gas holder, which
served as a sort of protection from the sun that was quite warm. The
_Mermaid_ rode with an easy motion, being submerged just enough to make
her steady, yet not deep enough to encounter much resistance from the
water. In fact it could not have been arranged better for speed or
comfort.

"I think we will sail well to the eastward before making our course
south," Mr. Henderson said. "I do not care to meet too many ships, as
those aboard will be very curious and I do not want too much news of
this venture to get out. We will take an unfrequented route and avoid
delays by being hailed by every passing vessel whose captain will wonder
what queer craft he had met with."

The boys enjoyed the sail, for the weather could not have been better.
Even old Andy, who seldom said much, seemed delighted with the prospect
of having strange adventures. He had his rifle with him, and, indeed, he
seldom went anywhere that he did not carry it.

"For there's no telling when you may see something you want to shoot or
that ought to be shot," he used to say, "and it's always the man without
a gun who needs it most. So I'm taking no chances."

They sailed all that afternoon without meeting with a craft of any kind.
Straight to the east they went, and when night began to settle down
Washington got supper. It was decided to run slowly after dark until all
hands were more familiar with the ship.

Morning found the _Mermaid_ about a hundred miles from the island where
she had been launched. The night had been uneventful, except that Mark
told Jack he heard some strange noise near his bunk several times. He
was nearest the storeroom where spare parts, and the curious cylinder
the professor had brought aboard, were kept.

"I guess it was rats," said Jack. "They are always in ships."

"Old wooden ships, yes," admitted Mark. "But I'll bet there's not a rat
aboard the _Mermaid_."

"Then you were dreaming," said Jack, as if that settled it.

Mark did not speak further of the noise, but he did considerable
thinking. However, the next night there was no further disturbance.

The fourth day out, when everything had passed off well, the engines
doing their best, the professor decided to speed them up a bit, since he
was satisfied they had "found" themselves as mechanics term it.

"We'll see how fast we can go through the water," said Mr. Henderson,
"and then I think we can safely turn our course south. We are well
beyond the ordinary lines of travel now."

Having oiled the bearings well, and seen that everything was in place
and properly adjusted, the professor and the boys took their places in
the conning tower, while Washington, Tom and Bill remained in the engine
room. Andy stayed on deck with his gun.

"I might see a big fish, and we could vary our bill of fare," he said
with a laugh.

"Here we go!" exclaimed the professor as he shifted the levers and
turned some wheels and valves. "Now we'll see how fast we can travel."

As he spoke the _Mermaid_ responded to the added impulse of the
compressed air and shot through the water at a terrific speed. The
sudden increase in momentum almost threw the boys from their feet, and
they would have fallen had they not grasped some projecting levers.

"I guess that will do," said the scientist. "I think we have speed
enough for almost any emergency. I'll let her run at this rate for a
while, and then we'll slack up."

Looking ahead, the boys could see the green waters parting in front of
the bow of the _Mermaid_, as if to make room for her. Two huge waves
were thrown upon either side.

Suddenly, dead ahead, there loomed up a big black object.

"Look out you'll hit the rock!" cried Mark to the professor, who was
steering.

With a turn of his wrist Mr. Henderson moved the wheel which controlled
the tube. It was deflected and sent the boat to larboard.

At that instant from the rock two small fountains of water rose in the
air, falling back in a shower of spray through which the sun gleamed.

"That's not a rock! It's a big whale!" cried Jack. "And we're going to
hit him!"

The professor had miscalculated the speed of the craft, or else had not
thrown her far enough to larboard, for, a second later, the _Mermaid_
was almost upon the big leviathan.

With a desperate twirling of the steering wheel the professor veered the
craft as far as possible. But all he could do did not suffice, for the
craft hit the whale a glancing blow on the side, and the ship careened
as if she would turn turtle.

At the same time there rang out from upon deck the sound of a rifle
shot. Old Andy had taken a chance at the enormous creature of the deep.

"Hurrah!" the boys heard him shout. "I give him one plumb in the eye! A
fine shot! And we hit him besides with the boat. I guess he's a goner!"

"I'm afraid not," muttered the professor. "That was a bad blow we struck
him, but I think it will only ruffle his temper. We'll have to look
sharp now, boys."

By this time the ship had rushed past the whale, but the boys, looking
through a window in the rear of the tower could see the huge body. Now
the fountains of water which the whale spouted were tinged with red.

"He's bleeding!" exclaimed the professor. "I guess Andy hit him in a
vital spot."

"But not vital enough!" cried Mark. "See! He's coming after us!"

And so it proved. The whale, angered, and, probably half crazed by the
pain of the bullet and the blow, was coursing after the ship, coming on
with the speed of an express train. Straight at the _Mermaid_ he lunged
his huge bulk.

"We must escape him!" cried Mr. Henderson. "If he hits us he'll send us
to the bottom!"

He had made ready to slow up the _Mermaid_ to see if it had sustained
any damage from the impact with the whale, but when he saw the monster
coming after the boat he knew the only safety lay in flight.

"Let us go up into the air and so escape him!" cried Jack, with sudden
inspiration.

For an instant neither Mark nor the professor grasped what Jack meant.
Then, with an exclamation, the professor pulled forward the lever that
generated the gas and set working the gravity neutralizer, which would
enable the ship to rise.

Faster through the water went the _Mermaid_, and faster after her came
the whale. Above the hum of the engines was heard the hiss of the
powerful gas. The ship trembled more violently.

"We are rising!" exclaimed the professor, as he looked at a gage.

The boys could feel the craft lifting from the waves which clung to her
as if they hated to lose her. The boys knew the gas was beginning to
operate.

"If it is not too late!" whispered Mark, half to himself.

For the monster of the seas was coming on, lashing the water to foam
with his terrible flukes, and sending aloft a bloody spray. His speed
was awful.

Now he was but ten feet away from the fleeing craft--now but eight--now
five! Ten seconds more and the big head, like the blunt stern of a
battle ship, forced forward by the tons of blubber, flesh, bone and fat
behind it would strike the _Mermaid_ and crush it like an egg shell.

Now if ever was the need for the _Flying Mermaid_ to prove herself
worthy of the name. Now, if ever, was the time for her to leave the
watery element and take to the lighter one.

And she did. With a last tremble, as if to free herself from the hold of
the waves, the gallant craft soared up into the air, leaving the water,
which dripped from her keel like a fountain's spray, and shooting aloft
like a bird, escaped her terrible enemy which passed under her, so close
that the lower part of the _Flying Mermaid_ scraped the whale's back.

"Saved!" exclaimed the professor.

[Illustration: THE LOWER PART OF THE FLYING MERMAID SCRAPED THE WHALE'S
BACK.]




                               CHAPTER VI

                              THE CYCLONE


It was only in the nick of time, for a second later and the big mammal
of the ocean would have struck the ship and split it from stem to stern.

Higher and higher into the air mounted the _Flying Mermaid_, while in
the water below, the whale, incensed by missing his prey, was lashing
the waves to foam.

"Well, that was a narrow squeak; as close as I ever care to come to it!"
exclaimed Andy as he let go of the steel rail to which he was clinging
and entered the conning tower. "I had no idea of hitting the big fish."

"I guess he would have taken after us whether you had fired at him or
not," said Mr. Henderson. "He was probably looking for trouble, and took
the first thing that came in his way, which happened to be us. Some
whales are like that, so I have read; big bull creatures, exiled from
the school to which they once belonged, they get like mad creatures and
know neither friend nor foe. Something like rogue elephants, I imagine."

Now, having thus unexpectedly risen into the air, the professor decided
to continue travel in that style for a while at least. It would require
less force to propel the ship, and the going would be more comfortable,
since in the upper regions the _Mermaid_ rode on an even keel, while in
the water there was more or less rolling, due to the action of the
waves.

Once recovered from their fright caused by the whale, and having lost
sight of the enormous creature, for they were now far above the ocean,
the adventurers began to think of something to eat.

Washington lost little time in preparing a meal, and it was eaten with a
relish. The electric cooking stove worked to perfection, for the colored
man had learned how to use that aboard the _Porpoise_ and _Monarch_, and
could be depended on to turn out appetizing dishes.

"What do you say to traveling through the air at night?" asked Mr.
Henderson, as he arose from the table.

"Suits me," replied Mark. "There's less danger than in the water, I
think."

Bill, Tom and Washington arranged to stand the night watch, and, when
the professor had examined the engines and given orders about keeping
the ship on her course through the air, he retired to his bunk. Jack and
Mark soon followed.

It must have been about midnight when Mark was awakened by a movement
that seemed to come from the storeroom next to where his sleeping place
was located. At first he thought he had been dreaming, but, as he found
he was wide awake, he knew it was no imagination that had affected him.

"I certainly heard something," he said to himself. "It sounded just as
it did the other night. I wonder if I ought to investigate."

He thought over the matter carefully as he sat upright in his bunk in
the darkness. True the noise might be a natural one, due to the
vibration of the engine, or to some echo from the machinery. As Mark
listened he heard it again.

This time he realized it was the slow movement of some heavy body. He
felt a cold shiver run over him and his hair evinced an uncomfortable
tendency to stand upright. But he conquered his feelings and resolved to
keep cool and see if he could discover what had awakened him.

He got up and moved softly about the little room that contained his
bunk. He could hear better now, and knew it was no echo or vibration
that had come to his ears.

Once again he heard the strange sound. It was exactly the same as
before; as if some big creature was pulling itself over the floor.

"Maybe it's a snake; a water snake!" thought Mark. "It may have crawled
aboard when we did not notice it."

Then he remembered that the ship had not been open in any way that would
enable a serpent to come on it, since it had been started on its ocean
trip. Before that, he was sure no snake had entered the _Flying
Mermaid_. Still it sounded more like a snake than anything else.

"I'm going to make a search," decided the boy.

He took a small portable electric light, run by a storage battery, and,
slipping on a pair of shoes and a bath robe, he left his stateroom.

He had decided that the noise came from the storage compartment and so
made for that. The door he knew was not locked, since he had seen Mr.
Henderson go in late that afternoon, and the professor had used no key.

Moving softly, Mark left his room and soon found himself in a corridor,
on either side of which were located the sleeping quarters of the
others. He did not want to awaken them, and, perhaps, be laughed at for
his curiosity.

To get to the storeroom Mark had to go first from the corridor into the
dining room. He soon reached the door that guarded what he thought might
be a strange secret. Trying the knob softly he found it giving under his
fingers.

