the cotyledons of the four were only slightly raised.

Ricinus Borboniensis (Euphorbiaceae).--Seeds were purchased under the above
name--probably a variety of the common castor-oil plant. As soon as an
arched hypocotyl had risen clear above the ground, a filament was attached
to the upper leg bearing the cotyledons which were still buried beneath the
surface, and the movement of the bead was traced on a horizontal glass
during a period of 34 h. The lines traced were strongly zigzag, and as the
bead twice returned nearly parallel to its former course in two different
directions, there could be no doubt that the arched hypocotyl
circumnutated. At the close of the 34 h. the upper part began to rise and
straighten itself, dragging the cotyledons out of the ground, so that the
movements of the bead could no longer be traced on the glass.

Quercus (American sp.) (Cupuliferae).--Acorns of an American oak which had
germinated at Kew were planted in a pot in the greenhouse. This
transplantation checked their growth; but after a time one grew to a height
of five inches, measured to the tips of the small partially unfolded leaves
on the summit, and now looked vigorous. It consisted of six very thin
internodes of unequal lengths. Considering these circumstances and the
nature of the plant, we hardly expected that it would circumnutate; but the
annexed figure (Fig. 40) shows that it did so in a conspicuous manner,
changing its course many times and travelling in all directions during the
48 h. of observation. The figure seems to represent 5 or 6 irregular ovals
or ellipses. The actual amount of movement from side to side (excluding one
great bend to the left) was about .2 of an inch; but this was difficult to
estimate, as owing to the rapid growth of the stem, the attached filament
was much further from the mark beneath at the close than at the
commencement of the observations. It deserves notice that the pot was
placed in a north-east room within a deep box, the top of which was not at
first covered up, so that the inside facing
[page 54]
the windows was a little more illuminated than the opposite side; and
during the first morning the stem travelled to a greater distance in this
direction (to the left in the figure) than it did afterwards when the box
was completely protected from light.

Fig. 40. Quercus (American sp.): circumnutation of young stem, traced on
horizontal glass, from 12.50 P.M. Feb. 22nd to 12.50 P.M. 24th. Movement of
bead greatly magnified at first, but slightly towards the close of the
observations--about 10 times on an average.

Quercus robur.--Observations were made only on the movements of the
radicles from germinating acorns, which were allowed to grow downwards in
the manner previously described, over plates of smoked glass, inclined at
angles between 65o and 69o to the horizon. In four cases the tracks left
were almost straight, but the tips had pressed sometimes with more and
sometimes with less force on the glass, as shown by the varying thickness
of the tracks and by little bridges of soot left across them. In the fifth
case the track was slightly serpentine, that is, the tip had moved a little
from side to side. In the sixth case (Fig. 41, A) it was plainly
serpentine, and the tip had pressed almost equably on the glass in its
whole course. In the seventh case (B) the tip had moved both laterally and
had pressed
[page 55]
alternately with unequal force on the glass; so that it had moved a little
in two planes at right angles to one another. In the eighth and last case
(C) it had moved very little laterally, but had alternately left the glass
and come into contact with it again. There can be no doubt that in the last
four cases the radicle of the oak circumnutated whilst growing downwards.

Fig. 41. Quercus robur: tracks left on inclined smoked glass-plates by tips
of radicles in growing downwards. Plates A and C inclined at 65o and plate
B at 68o to the horizon.

Corylus avellana (Corylaceae).--The epicotyl breaks through the ground in
an arched form; but in the specimen which was first examined, the apex had
become decayed, and the epicotyl grew to some distance through the soil, in
a tortuous, almost horizontal direction, like a root. In consequence of
this injury it had emitted near the hypogean cotyledons two secondary
shoots, and it was remarkable that both of these were arched, like the
normal epicotyl in ordinary cases. The soil was removed from around one of
these arched secondary shoots, and a glass filament was affixed to the
basal leg. The whole was kept damp beneath a metal-box with a glass lid,
and was thus illuminated only from above. Owing apparently to the lateral
pressure of the earth being removed, the terminal and bowed-down part of
the shoot began at once to move upwards, so that after 24 h. it formed a
right angle with the lower part. This lower part, to which the filament was
attached, also straightened itself, and moved a little backwards from the
upper part. Consequently a long line was traced on the horizontal glass;
and
[page 56]
this was in parts straight and in parts decidedly zigzag, indicating
circumnutation.

On the following day the other secondary shoot was observed; it was a
little more advanced in age, for the upper part, instead of depending
vertically downwards, stood at an angle of 45o above the horizon. The tip
of the shoot projected obliquely .4 of an inch above the ground, but by the
close of our observations, which lasted 47 h., it had grown, chiefly
towards its base, to a height of .85 of an inch. The filament was fixed
transversely to the basal and almost upright half of the shoot, close
beneath the lowest scale-like appendage. The circumnutating course pursued
is shown in the accompanying figure (Fig. 42). The actual distance
traversed from side to side was about .04 of an inch.

Fig. 42. Corylus avellana: circumnutation of a young shoot emitted from the
epicotyl, the apex of which had been injured, traced on a horizontal glass,
from 9 A.M. Feb. 2nd to 8 A.M. 4th. Movement of bead magnified about 27
times.

Pinus pinaster (Coniferae).--A young hypocotyl, with the tips of the
cotyledons still enclosed within the seed-coats, was at first only .35 of
an inch in height; but the upper part grew so rapidly that at the end of
our observations it was .6 in height,

Fig. 43. Pinus pinaster: circumnutation of hypocotyl, with filament fixed
across its summit, traced on horizontal glass, from 10 A.M. March 21st to 9
A.M. 23rd. Seedling kept in darkness. Movement of bead magnified about 35
times.
[page 57]

and by this time the filament was attached some way down the little stem.
From some unknown cause, the hypocotyl moved far towards the left, but
there could be no doubt (Fig. 43) that it circumnutated. Another hypocotyl
was similarly observed, and it likewise moved in a strongly zigzag line to
the same side. This lateral movement was not caused by the attachment of
the glass filaments, nor by the action of light; for no light was allowed
to enter when each observation was made, except from vertically above.

The hypocotyl of a seedling was secured to a little stick; it bore nine in
appearance distinct cotyledons, arranged in a circle. The movements of two
nearly opposite ones were observed. The tip of one was painted white, with
a mark placed below, and the figure described (Fig. 44, A) shows that it
made an irregular

Fig. 44. Pinus pinaster: circumnutation of two opposite cotyledons, traced
on horizontal glass in darkness, from 8.45 A.M. to 8.35 P.M. Nov. 25th.
Movement of tip in A magnified about 22 times, here reduced to one-half of
original scale.

circle in the course of about 8 h. during the night it travelled to a
considerable distance in the direction indicated by the broken line. A
glass filament was attached longitudinally to the other cotyledon, and this
nearly completed (Fig, 44, B) an irregular circular figure in about 12
hours. During the night it also moved to a considerable distance, in the
direction indicated by the broken line. The cotyledons therefore
circumnutate independently of the movement of the hypocotyl. Although they
moved much during the night, they did not approach each other so as to
stand more vertically than during the day.
[page 58]

Cycas pectinata (Cycadeae).--The large seeds of this plant in germinating
first protrude a single leaf, which breaks through the ground with the
petiole bowed into an arch and with the leaflets involuted. A leaf in this
condition, which at the close of our observations was 2 ½ inches in height,
had its movements traced in a warm greenhouse by means of a glass filament
bearing paper triangles attached across its tip. The tracing (Fig. 45)
shows how large, complex, and rapid were the circum-

Fig. 45. Cycas pectinata: circumnutation of young leaf whilst emerging from
the ground, feebly illuminated from above, traced on vertical glass, from 5
P.M. May 28th to 11 A.M. 31st. Movement magnified 7 times, here reduced to
two-thirds of original scale.

nutating movements. The extreme distance from side to side which it passed
over amounted to between .6 and .7 of an inch.

Canna Warscewiczii (Cannaceae).--A seedling with the plumule projecting one
inch above the ground was observed, but not under fair conditions, as it
was brought out of the hot-house and kept in a room not sufficiently warm.
Nevertheless the tracing (Fig. 46) shows that it made two or three
incomplete irregular circles or ellipses in the course of 48 hours. The
plumule is straight; and this was the first instance observed
[page 59]
by us of the part that first breaks through the ground not being arched.

Fig. 46. Canna Warscewiczii: circumnutation of plumule with filament
affixed obliquely to outer sheath-like leaf, traced in darkness on
horizontal glass from 8.45 A.M. Nov. 9th to 8.10 A.M. 11th. Movement of
bead magnified 6 times.

Allium cepa (Liliaceae).--The narrow green leaf, which protrudes from the
seed of the common onion as a cotyledon,* breaks through the ground in the
form of an arch, in the same manner as the hypocotyl or epicotyl of a
dicotyledonous plant. Long after the arch has risen above the surface the
apex remains within the seed-coats, evidently absorbing the still abundant
contents. The summit or crown of the arch, when it first protrudes from the
seed and is still buried beneath the ground, is simply rounded; but before
it reaches the surface it is developed into a conical protuberance of a
white colour (owing to the absence of chlorophyll), whilst the adjoining
parts are green, with the epidermis apparently rather thicker and tougher
than elsewhere. We may therefore conclude that this conical protuberance is
a special adaptation for breaking through the ground,** and answers the
same end as the knife-like white crest on the summit of the straight
cotyledon of the Gramineae.

* This is the expression used by Sachs in his 'Text-book of Botany.'

** Haberlandt has briefly described ('Die
Schutzeinrichtungen...Keimpflanze,' 1877, p. 77) this curious structure and
the purpose which it subserves. He states that good figures of the
cotyledon of the onion have been given by Tittmann and by Sachs in his
'Experimental Physiologie,' p. 93.
[page 60]

After a time the apex is drawn out of the empty seed-coats, and rises up,
forming a right angle, or more commonly a still larger angle with the lower
part, and occasionally the whole becomes nearly straight. The conical
protuberance, which originally formed the crown of the arch, is now seated
on one side, and appears like a joint or knee, which from acquiring
chlorophyll becomes green, and increases in size. In rarely or never
becoming perfectly straight, these cotyledons differ remarkably from the
ultimate condition of the arched hypocotyls or epicotyls of dicotyledons.
It is, also, a singular circumstance that the attenuated extremity of the
upper bent portion invariably withers and dies.

A filament, 1.7 inch in length, was affixed nearly upright beneath the knee
to the basal and vertical portion of a cotyledon; and its movements were
traced during 14 h. in the usual manner. The tracing here given (Fig. 47)
indicates circumnutation. The movement of the upper part above the knee of
the same cotyledon, which projected at about an angle of 45o above the
horizon, was observed at the same time. A filament was not affixed to it,
but a mark was placed beneath the apex, which was almost white from
beginning to wither, and its movements were thus traced. The figure
described resembled pretty closely that above given; and this shows that
the chief seat of movement is in the lower or basal part of the cotyledon.

Fig. 47. Allium cepa: circumnutation of basal half of arched cotyledon,
traced in darkness on horizontal glass, from 8.15 A.M. to 10 P.M. Oct.
31st. Movement of bead magnified about 17 times.

Asparagus officinalis (Asparageae).--The tip of a straight plumule or
cotyledon (for we do not know which it should be called) was found at a
depth of .1 inch beneath the surface, and the earth was then removed all
round to the dept of .3 inch. a glass filament was affixed obliquely to it,
and the movement of the bead, magnified 17 times, was traced in darkness.
During the first 1 h. 15 m. the plumule moved to the right, and during the
next two hours it returned in a roughly parallel but strongly zigzag
course. From some unknown cause it had grown up through the soil in an
inclined direction, and now through apogeotropism it moved during nearly 24
h. in
[page 61]
the same general direction, but in a slightly zigzag manner, until it
became upright. On the following morning it changed its course completely.
There can therefore hardly be a doubt that the plumule circumnutates,
whilst buried beneath the ground, as much as the pressure of the
surrounding earth will permit. The surface of the soil in the pot was now
covered with a thin layer of very fine argillaceous sand, which was kept
damp; and after the tapering seedlings had grown a few tenths of an inch in
height, each was found surrounded by a little open space or circular crack;
and this could be accounted for only by their having circumnutated and thus
pushed away the sand on all sides; for there was no vestige of a crack in
any other part.

In order to prove that there was circumnutation, the move-

Fig. 48. Asparagus officinalis: circumnutation of plumules with tips
whitened and marks placed beneath, traced on a horizontal glass. A, young
plumule; movement traced from 8.30 A.M. Nov. 30th to 7.15 A.M. next
morning; magnified about 35 times. B, older plumule; movement traced from
10.15 A.M. to 8.10 P.M. Nov. 29th; magnified 9 times, but here reduced to
one-half of original scale.

ments of five seedlings, varying in height from .3 inch to 2 inches, were
traced. They were placed within a box and illuminated from above; but in
all five cases the longer axes of the figures described were directed to
nearly the same point; so that more light seemed to have come through the
glass roof of the greenhouse on one side than on any other. All five
tracings resembled each other to a certain extent, and it will suffice to
give two of them. In A (Fig. 48) the seedling was only .45 of an
[page 62]
inch in height, and consisted of a single internode bearing a bud on its
summit. The apex described between 8.30 A.M. and 10.20 P.M. (i.e. during
nearly 14 hours) a figure which would probably have consisted of 3 ½
ellipses, had not the stem been drawn to one side until 1 P.M., after which
hour it moved backwards. On the following morning it was not far distant
from the point whence it had first started. The actual amount of movement
of the apex from side to side was very small, viz. about 1/18th of an inch.
The seedling of which the movements are shown in Fig. 48, B, was 1 3/4 inch
in height, and consisted of three internodes besides the bud on the summit.
The figure, which was described during 10 h., apparently represents two
irregular and unequal ellipses or circles. The actual amount of movement of
the apex, in the line not influenced by the light, was .11 of an inch, and
in that thus influenced .37 of an inch. With a seedling 2 inches in height
it was obvious, even without the aid of any tracing, that the uppermost
part of the stem bent successively to all points of the compass, like the
stem of a twining plant. A little increase in the power of circumnutating
and in the flexibility of the stem, would convert the common asparagus into
a twining plant, as has occurred with one species in this genus, namely, A.
scandens.

Phalaris Canariensis (Gramineae).--With the Gramineae the part which first
rises above the ground has been called by some authors the pileole; and
various views have been expressed on its homological nature. It is
considered by some great authorities to be a cotyledon, which term we will
use without venturing to express any opinion on the subject.* It consists
in the present case of a slightly flattened reddish sheath, terminating
upwards in a sharp white edge; it encloses a true green leaf, which
protrudes from the sheath through a slit-like orifice, close beneath and at
right angles to the sharp edge on the summit. The sheath is not arched when
it breaks through the ground.

The movements of three rather old seedlings, about 1 ½ inch in height,
shortly before the protrusion of the leaves, were first traced. They were
illuminated exclusively from above; for, as will hereafter be shown, they
are excessively sensitive to the
* We are indebted to the Rev. G. Henslow for an abstract of the views which
have been held on this subject, together with references.
[page 63]

action of light; and if any enters even temporarily on one side, they
merely bend to this side in slightly zigzag lines. Of the three tracings
one alone (Fig. 49) is here given. Had the observations been more frequent
during the 12 h. two oval figures would have been described with their
longer axes at right angles to one another. The actual amount of movement
of the apex from side to side was about .3 of an inch. The figures
described by the other two seedlings resembled to a certain extent the one
here given.

Fig. 49. Phalaris Canariensis: circumnutation of a cotyledon, with a mark
placed below the apex, traced on a horizontal glass, from 8.35 A.M. Nov.
26th to 8.45 A.M. 27th. Movement of apex magnified 7 times, here reduced to
one-half scale.

A seedling which had just broken through the ground and projected only
1/20th of an inch above the surface, was next observed in the same manner
as before. It was necessary to clear away the earth all round the seedling
to a little depth in order to place a mark beneath the apex. The figure
(Fig. 50) shows that the apex moved to one side, but changed its course ten
times in the course of the ten hours of observation; so that there can be
no doubt about its circumnutation. The cause of the general movement in one
direction could hardly be attributed to the entrance of lateral light, as
this was carefully guarded against; and we suppose it was in some manner
connected with the removal of the earth round the little seedling.

Fig. 50. Phalaris Canariensis: circumnutation of a very young cotyledon,
with a mark placed below the apex, traced on a horizontal glass, from 11.37
A.M. to 9.30 P.M. Dec. 13th. Movement of apex greatly magnified, here
reduced to one-fourth of original scale.

Lastly, the soil in the same pot was searched with the aid of a lens, and
the white knife-like apex of a seedling was found on an exact level with
that of the surrounding surface. The soil was removed all round the apex to
the depth of a quarter of an inch, the seed itself remaining covered. The
pot, protected from lateral light, was placed under the micro-
[page 64]
scope with a micrometer eye-piece, so arranged that each division equalled
1/500th of an inch. After an interval of 30 m. the apex was observed, and
it was seen to cross a little obliquely two divisions of the micrometer in
9 m. 15 s.; and after a few minutes it crossed the same space in 8 m. 50s.
The seedling was again observed after an interval of three-quarters of an
hour, and now the apex crossed rather obliquely two divisions in 10 m. We
may therefore conclude that it was travelling at about the rate of 1/50th
of an inch in 45 minutes. We may also conclude from these and the previous
observations, that the seedlings of Phalaris in breaking through the
surface of the soil circumnutate as much as the surrounding pressure will
permit. This fact accounts (as in the case before given of the asparagus)
for a circular, narrow, open space or crack being distinctly visible round
several seedlings which had risen through very fine argillaceous sand, kept
uniformly damp.

Fig. 51. Zea mays: circumnutation of cotyledon, traced on horizontal glass,
from 8.30 A.M. Feb. 4th to 8 A.M. 6th. Movement of bead magnified on an
average about 25 times.

Zea mays (Gramineae).--A glass filament was fixed obliquely to the summit
of a cotyledon, rising .2 of an inch above the ground; but by the third
morning it had grown to exactly thrice this height, so that the distance of
the bead from the mark below was greatly increased, consequently the
tracing (Fig. 51) was much more magnified on the first than on the second
day. The upper part of the cotyledon changed its course by at least as much
as a rectangle six times on each of the two days. The plant was illuminated
by an obscure light from vertically above. This was a necessary precaution,
as on the previous day we had traced the movements of cotyledons placed in
a deep box, the inner side of which was feebly illuminated on one side from
a distant north-east window, and at each observation by a wax taper held
for a minute or two on the same side; and the result was that the
cotyledons travelled all day long to this side, though making in their
course some conspicuous flexures, from which fact alone we might have
[page 65]
concluded that they were circumnutating; but we thought it advisable to
make the tracing above given.

Radicles.--Glass filaments were fixed to two short radicles, placed so as
to stand almost upright, and whilst bending downwards through geotropism
their courses were strongly zigzag; from this latter circumstance
circumnutation might have been inferred, had not their tips become slightly
withered after the first 24 h., though they were watered and the air kept
very damp. Nine radicles were next arranged in the manner formerly
described, so that in growing downwards they left tracks on smoked
glass-plates, inclined at various angles between 45o and 80o beneath the
horizon. Almost every one of these tracks offered evidence in their greater
or less breadth in different parts, or in little bridges of soot being
left, that the apex had come alternately into more and less close contact
with the glass. In the accompanying figure (Fig. 52) we have an accurate
copy of one such track. In two instances alone (and in these the plates
were highly inclined) there was some evidence of slight lateral movement.
We presume therefore that the friction of the apex on the smoked surface,
little as this could have been, sufficed to check the movement from side to
side of these delicate radicles.

Fig. 52. Zea mays: track left on inclined smoked glass-plate by tip of
radicle in growing downwards.

Avena sativa (Gramineae).--A cotyledon, 1 ½ inch in height, was placed in
front of a north-east window, and the movement of the apex was traced on a
horizontal glass during two days. It moved towards the light in a slightly
zigzag line from 9 to 11.30 A.M. on October 15th; it then moved a little
backwards and zigzagged much until 5 P.M., after which hour, and curing the
night, it continued to move towards the window. On the following morning
the same movement was continued in a nearly straight line until 12.40 P.M.,
when the sky remained until 2.35 extraordinarily dark from thunder-clouds.
During this interval of 1 h. 55 m., whilst the light was obscure, it was
interesting to observe how circumnutation overcame heliotropism, for the
apex, instead of continuing to move towards the window in a slightly zigzag
line, reversed its course four times, making two small narrow ellipses. A
diagram of this case will be given in the chapter on Heliotropism.
[page 66]

A filament was next fixed to a cotyledon only 1/4 of an inch in height,
which was illuminated exclusively from above, and as it was kept in a warm
greenhouse, it grew rapidly; and now there could be no doubt about its
circumnutation, for it described a figure of 8 as well as two small
ellipses in 5 ½ hours.

Nephrodium molle (Filices).--A seedling fern of this species came up by
chance in a flowerpot near its parent. The frond, as yet only slightly
lobed, was only .16 of an inch in length and .2 in breadth, and was
supported on a rachis as fine as a hair and .23 of an inch in height. A
very thin glass filament, which projected for a length of .36 of an inch,
was fixed to the end of the frond. The movement was so highly magnified
that the figure (Fig. 53) cannot be fully trusted; but the frond was
constantly moving in a complex manner, and the bead greatly changed its
course eighteen times in the 12 hours of observation. Within half an hour
it often returned in a line almost parallel to its former course. The
greatest amount of movement occurred between 4 and 6 P.M. The
circumnutation of this plant is interesting, because the species in the
genus Lygodium are well known to circumnutate conspicuously and to twine
round any neighbouring object.

Fig. 53. Nephrodium molle: circumnutation of very young frond, traced in
darkness on horizontal glass, from 9 A.M. to 9 P.M. Oct. 30th. Movement of
bead magnified 48 times.

Selaginella Kraussii (?) (Lycopodiaceae).--A very young plant, only .4 of
an inch in height, had sprung up in a pot in the hot-house. An extremely
fine glass filament was fixed to the end of the frond-like stem, and the
movement of the bead traced on a horizontal glass. It changed its course
several times, as shown in Fig. 54, whilst observed during 13 h. 15 m., and
returned at night to a point not far distant from that whence it had
started in the morning. There can be no doubt that this little plant
circumnutated.

Fig. 54. Selaginella Kraussii (?): circumnutation of young plant, kept in
darkness, traced from 8.45 A.M. to 10 P.M. Oct. 31st.
[page 67]



CHAPTER II.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS ON THE MOVEMENTS AND GROWTH OF SEEDLING PLANTS.

Generality of the circumnutating movement--Radicles, their circumnutation
of service--Manner in which they penetrate the ground--Manner in which
hypocotyls and other organs break through the ground by being arched--
Singular manner of germination in Megarrhiza, etc.--Abortion of cotyledons-
-Circumnutation of hypocotyls and epicotyls whilst still buried and arched-
-Their power of straightening themselves--Bursting of the seed-coats--
Inherited effect of the arching process in hypogean hypocotyls--
Circumnutation of hypocotyls and epicotyls when erect--Circumnutation of
cotyledons--Pulvini or joints of cotyledons, duration of their activity,
rudimentary in Oxalis corniculata, their development--Sensitiveness of
cotyledons to light and consequent disturbance of their periodic movements-
-Sensitiveness of cotyledons to contact.

THE circumnutating movements of the several parts or organs of a
considerable number of seedling plants have been described in the last
chapter. A list is here appended of the Families, Cohorts, Sub-classes,
etc., to which they belong, arranged and numbered according to the
classification adopted by Hooker.* Any one who will consider this list will
see that the young plants selected for observation, fairly represent the
whole vegetable series excepting the lowest cryptogams, and the movements
of some of the latter when mature will hereafter be described. As all the
seedlings which were observed, including Conifers, Cycads and Ferns, which
belong to the most ancient

* As given in the 'General System of Botany,' by Le Maout and Decaisne,
1873.
[page 68]

types amongst plants, were continually circumnutating, we may infer that
this kind of movement is common to every seedling species.

SUB-KINGDOM I.--Phaenogamous Plants.

Class I.--DICOTYLEDONS.

Sub-class I.--Angiosperms.
Family.                           Cohort.
14.   Cruciferae.  II. PARIETALES.
26.   Caryophylleae.  IV. CARYOPHYLLALES.
36.   Malvaceae.  VI  MALVALES.
41.   Oxalideae.  VII.  GERANIALES.
49.   Tropaeoleae.  DITTO
52.   Aurantiaceae.  DITTO
70.   Hippocastaneae.  X.  SAPINDALES.
75.   Leguminosae.  XI.  ROSALES.
106.  Cucurbitaceae.  XII.  PASSIFLORALES.
109.  Cacteae.  XIV.  FICOIDALES.
122.  Compositae.  XVII.  ASTRALES.
135.  Primulaceae.  XX.  PRIMULALES.
145.  Asclepiadeae.  XXII.  GENTIANALES.
151.  Convolvulaceae.  XXIII.  POLEMONIALES.
154.  Boragineae.  DITTO
156.  Nolaneae.  DITTO
157.  Solaneae.  XXIV.  SOLANALES.
181.  Chenopodieae.  XXVII.  CHENOPODIALES.
202.  Euphorbiaceae.  XXXII.  EUPHORBIALES.
211.  Cupuliferae.  XXXVI.  QUERNALES.
212.  Corylaceae.  DITTO

Sub-class II.--Gymnosperms.
223.  Coniferae.
224.  Cycadeae.

Class II.--MONOCOTYLEDONS.
2.    Cannaceae.  II.  AMOMALES.
34.   Liliaceae.  XI.  LILIALES.
41.   Asparageae.  DITTO
55.   Gramineae.  XV.  GLUMALES.

SUB-KINGDOM II.--Cryptogamic Plants.

1.    Filices. I.   FILICALES.
6.    Lycopodiaceae.  DITTO
[page 69]

Radicles.--In all the germinating seeds observed by us, the first change is
the protrusion of the radicle, which immediately bends downwards and
endeavours to penetrate the ground. In order to effect this, it is almost
necessary that the seed should be pressed down so as to offer some
resistance, unless indeed the soil is extremely loose; for otherwise the
seed is lifted up, instead of the radicle penetrating the surface. But
seeds often get covered by earth thrown up by burrowing quadrupeds or
scratching birds, by the castings of earth-worms, by heaps of excrement,
the decaying branches of trees, etc., and will thus be pressed down; and
they must often fall into cracks when the ground is dry, or into holes.
Even with seeds lying on the bare surface, the first developed root-hairs,
by becoming attached to stones or other objects on the surface, are able to
hold down the upper part of the radicle, whilst the tip penetrates the
ground. Sachs has shown* how well and closely root-hairs adapt themselves
by growth to the most irregular particles in the soil, and become firmly
attached to them. This attachment seems to be effected by the softening or
liquefaction of the outer surface of the wall of the hair and its
subsequent consolidation, as will be on some future occasion more fully
described. This intimate union plays an important part, according to Sachs,
in the absorption of water and of the inorganic matter dissolved in it. The
mechanical aid afforded by the root-hairs in penetrating the ground is
probably only a secondary service.

The tip of the radicle, as soon as it protrudes from the seed-coats, begins
to circumnutate, and the whole

* 'Physiologie Végétale,' 1868, pp. 199, 205.
[page 70]

growing part continues to do so, probably for as long as growth continues.
This movement of the radicle has been described in Brassica, Aesculus,
Phaseolus, Vicia, Cucurbita, Quercus and Zea. The probability of its
occurrence was inferred by Sachs,* from radicles placed vertically upwards
being acted on by geotropism (which we likewise found to be the case), for
if they had remained absolutely perpendicular, the attraction of gravity
could not have caused them to bend to any one side. Circumnutation was
observed in the above specified cases, either by means of extremely fine
filaments of glass affixed to the radicles in the manner previously
described, or by their being allowed to grow downwards over inclined smoked
glass-plates, on which they left their tracks. In the latter cases the
serpentine course (see Figs. 19, 21, 27, 41) showed unequivocally that the
apex had continually moved from side to side. This lateral movement was
small in extent, being in the case of Phaseolus at most about 1 mm. from a
medial line to both sides. But there was also movement in a vertical plane
at right angles to the inclined glass-plates. This was shown by the tracks
often being alternately a little broader and narrower, due to the radicles
having alternately pressed with greater and less force on the plates.
Occasionally little bridges of soot were left across the tracks, showing
that the apex had at these spots been lifted up. This latter fact was
especially apt to occur
* 'Ueber das Wachsthum der Wurzeln: Arbeiten des bot. Instituts in
Würzburg,' Heft iii. 1873, p. 460. This memoir, besides its intrinsic and
great interest, deserves to be studied as a model of careful investigation,
and we shall have occasion to refer to it repeatedly. Dr. Frank had
previously remarked ('Beiträge zur Pflanzenphysiologie, 1868, p. 81) on the
fact of radicles placed vertically upwards being acted on by geotropism,
and he explained it by the supposition that their growth was not equal on
all sides.

[page 71]
when the radicle instead of travelling straight down the glass made a
semicircular bend; but Fig. 52 shows that this may occur when the track is
rectilinear. The apex by thus rising, was in one instance able to surmount
a bristle cemented across an inclined glass-plate; but slips of wood only
1/40 of an inch in thickness always caused the radicles to bend
rectangularly to one side, so that the apex did not rise to this small
height in opposition to geotropism.

In those cases in which radicles with attached filaments were placed so as
to stand up almost vertically, they curved downwards through the action of
geotropism, circumnutating at the same time, and their courses were
consequently zigzag. Sometimes, however, they made great circular sweeps,
the lines being likewise zigzag.

Radicles closely surrounded by earth, even when this is thoroughly soaked
and softened, may perhaps be quite prevented from circumnutating. Yet we
should remember that the circumnutating sheath-like cotyledons of Phalaris,
the hypocotyls of Solanum, and the epicotyls of Asparagus formed round
themselves little circular cracks or furrows in a superficial layer of damp
argillaceous sand. They were also able, as well as the hypocotyls of
Brassica, to form straight furrows in damp sand, whilst circumnutating and
bending towards a lateral light. In a future chapter it will be shown that
the rocking or circumnutating movement of the flower-heads of Trifolium
subterraneum aids them in burying themselves. It is therefore probable that
the circumnutation of the tip of the radicle aids it slightly in
penetrating the ground; and it may be observed in several of the previously
given diagrams, that the movement is more strongly pronounced in radicles
when they first
[page 72]
protrude from the seed than at a rather later period; but whether this is
an accidental or an adaptive coincidence we do not pretend to decide.
Nevertheless, when young radicles of Phaseolus multiflorus were fixed
vertically close over damp sand, in the expectation that as soon as they
reached it they would form circular furrows, this did not occur,--a fact
which may be accounted for, as we believe, by the furrow being filled up as
soon as formed by the rapid increase of thickness in the apex of the
radicle. Whether or not a radicle, when surrounded by softened earth, is
aided in forming a passage for itself by circumnutating, this movement can
hardly fail to be of high importance, by guiding the radicle along a line
of least resistance, as will be seen in the next chapter when we treat of
the sensibility of the tip to contact. If, however, a radicle in its
downward growth breaks obliquely into any crevice, or a hole left by a
decayed root, or one made by the larva of an insect, and more especially by
worms, the circumnutating movement of the tip will materially aid it in
following such open passage; and we have observed that roots commonly run
down the old burrows of worms.*

 When a radicle is placed in a horizontal or inclined position, the
terminal growing part, as is well known, bends down towards the centre of
the earth; and Sachs* has shown that whilst thus bending, the growth of the
lower surface is greatly retarded, whilst that

* See, also, Prof. Hensen's statements ('Zeitschrift für Wissen, Zool.,' B.
xxviii. p. 354, 1877) to the same effect. He goes so far as to believe that
roots are able to penetrate the ground to a great depth only by means of
the burrows made by worms.

* 'Arbeiten des bot. Inst. Würzburg,' vol. i. 1873, p. 461. See also p. 397
for the length of the growing part, and p. 451 on the force of geotropism.
[page 73]

of the upper surface continues at the normal rate, or may be even somewhat
increased. He has further shown by attaching a thread, running over a
pulley, to a horizontal radicle of large size, namely that of the common
bean, that it was able to pull up a weight of only one gramme, or 15.4
grains. We may therefore conclude that geotropism does not give a radicle
force sufficient to penetrate the ground, but merely tells it (if such an
expression may be used) which course to pursue. Before we knew of Sachs'
more precise observations we covered a flat surface of damp sand with the
