
Dave took the bulky letter and opened its envelope.  He glanced
hastily but intelligently over its contents.  They were just what he
imagined they would be, contracts for eight biplanes ready to sign,
and details and plans as to the machines.

"Have you a Kewaukee directory here?" he asked.

The clerk pushed a bulky volume across the marble slab of the
counter, with the words:

"Anybody special you are looking up?"

"Why, yes," replied Dave, "the County Fair Amusement Co."

"Oh, you mean Col. Lyon's proposition," observed the clerk at once.
"He runs county fair attractions all over the country."

"It must be the same," said Dave.

"I know Col. Lyon very well," proceeded the clerk.  "He comes in
here very often."

"Where is his office?" inquired Dave.

"I don't think he has any regular office," responded the clerk.
"Two or three times a week he calls for mail at the Central
Amusement Exchange.  He travels a good deal--has side attractions
with most of the big shows."

"But he lives in Kewaukee?"

"Not exactly.  He has a very fine place called Fernwood, out on the
North Boulevard."

Dave thought things over for a minute or two.  Then he asked:

"How can I reach Fernwood?"

"You don't mean before daylight?"

"Why, yes," responded Dave, "the sooner the better."

"I think any of the taxi men out at the curb know the location,"
said the clerk.

"Thank you," replied Dave, "and for all your great kindness about
that letter."

He and Hiram went out to the street.  There were three or four
taxicabs lined up at the curb, their drivers napping in the seats.
Dave approached one of them.

"Do you know where Fernwood is?" he inquired of the chauffeur.

"You mean Col. Lyon's place?"

"Yes."

"Was there only last night.  I took the Colonel home."

"Then he's there," spoke Dave to Hiram.  "All right, take us to
Fernwood."

"You won't find anybody stirring at this hour of the morning,"
suggested the chauffeur.

"Then we'll Wait till the Colonel gets up," said Dave.

In less than half an hour the auto came to a halt before one of a
score or more of fine houses lining the most exclusive section of
the country boulevard.

Dave got out of the machine and Hiram followed him.  They passed
through the gates of a large garden.  In its center was a mansion
with wide porches.  No light showed anywhere about the place.

"You're not going to wake anybody up at this outlandish hour?"
asked Hiram.

"Well, perhaps not," answered Dave.

"Why didn't you wait and see this Col. Lyon in the city at his
office?"

"Because there is no certainty that he will be at his office today.
Then, too, that Star fellow may be on hand there to grab the
contract.  I want to head him off."

By this time they had reached the steps of the front porch.

"See here, Hiram," observed Dave, lowering his voice, "we'll sit
down here for a spell.  It's about five o'clock, and by six someone
will be stirring about."

"Say," said Hiram, staring across the shadowed porch, "the front
door there is open."

"Why, so it is," replied Dave, peering towards it.

"That's strange, isn't it?"

"Oh, no--neglected, or left open for ventilation."

Both boys relapsed into silence.  Hiram rested his face on his hands
and his knees, inclined to doze.

Dave was framing up in his mind how he would approach Col. Lyon.  He
was deeply immersed in thought, when a sound behind him caused him
to start and look behind him.

Somebody with a great bundle done up in a sheet had just passed
through the open doorway out upon the porch.

The bundle was so big that its bearer had both hands clasped about
it, and its top came above his eyes.

Before Dave could speak a warning, the man carrying the package
crossed the porch and stumbled against Hiram, whom he did not see.

"Thunder! what's this?" shouted Hiram, knocked from his position and
rolling down the steps.

The man with the bundle echoed the try with one of alarm, as he
missed his footing and plunged forward.

"The mischief!" exclaimed Dave, starting at the bundle over which
the man tumbled, bursting it open.

There was an immense clatter.  Even in the imperfect light of the
early morning, the young aviator made out a great heap of clothing,
silverware and jewelry, rattling down the steps of the porch.





CHAPTER V

A TEN THOUSAND DOLLAR ORDER


"What's happened?" cried Hiram, rolling over and over on the gravel
walk to which he had tumbled.

"Stop that man!" shouted Dave.

In a flash the young aviator took in the meaning of the situation.
The fugitive, for such he now was, made a quick move the instant he
gained his feet.  Not waiting to see who had obstructed his
progress, and probably deciding that it was the police, he bounded
in among some bushes.

Dave, running after him, made out his form dimly, swiftly scaling a
rear brick wall.

"Why, what is all this?" demanded Hiram, staring at the litter on
the steps.

"That man was a thief," explained Dave.

"It looks that way, doesn't it?  Hello!"

Both boys stepped back and stared upwards.  Over the porch was a
second railed-in veranda.  A night-robed figure had crossed it from
some bed chamber fronting upon it.

"Hey, you down there!  What's all this racket?" challenged this
newcomer on the scene.

"Are you Colonel Lyon?" inquired Dave.

"That's me."

"Then you had better come down and see what's going on."

"Why so?"

"Your house has been burglarized."

"Gracious I you don't say so.  Where is the thief?"

"He has escaped."

"Hm.  Down in a minute," mumbled the man, retiring from view.

It was several minutes before the owner of the mansion put in a
second appearance.  He came cautiously out on the porch, clutching a
great heavy cane.  He looked the boys over suspiciously.

"I don't understand this," he began.

"Neither did we, Mister," returned Hiram, "till the thief came
bolting out through that front door.  He fell all over me and
dropped his bundle.  There's what was in it."

Hiram pointed to the scattered plunder.  For the first time the
colonel caught sight of the scattered stuff.  He gasped, and stared,
and fidgeted.  Then he hastened back across the porch and into the
vestibule.

Clang!  clang!  Clang! rang out a great alarm gong, and almost
immediately two men servants of the place came rushing out
half-dressed upon the porch.

In a very much excited way the colonel incoherently told of the
burglary.  He ordered the men to gather up the scattered plunder.
Then he turned his attention to Dave and Hiram.

"Now, tell me about the whole thing," he spoke.

"There isn't much to tell, Colonel Lyon," replied Dave.  "We were
sitting here waiting--"

"Waiting?" repeated the showman sharply.

"Yes, sir."

"What for?"

"To see you."

"Eh?" projected the Colonel, with a stare.

"That's right, Mister," declared Hiram.  "You see, it's pretty
early, and we didn't want to wake you up."

"Yes, but what brought you here so early?"

"Business," answered Dave.

"Business--with me?"

"Yes, sir.  We came in an automobile from the city, so as to be sure
to find you early enough.  We had just settled down here to wait and
rest, when that burglar came out."

"Why, then, you've saved my losing all that valuable stuff!"
exclaimed the showman.  "I should say so," added the speaker with
force, as he moved over and glanced at the heaps his servants were
massing together, upon the lower step.  "Watches, rings, silverware,
my fur winter coat, and hello--my whole collection of rare coins!
Hump! the man must have had the run of the house for hours. Here,
you two, come inside.  You've done me a big service."

Hiram chuckled, nudging Dave in a knowing way.

"What luck!" he whispered.  "Dave, you're all right now."

The owner of the place led his young guests through the vestibule
into a hallway, and pointed to a large reception room.

"You wait till I get dressed," he directed.  "Sit down, and make
yourself comfortable."

As he spoke the showman turned on a perfect blaze of electric light.
Dave and Hiram took off their helmets, and made themselves look as
little like stormy night aviators as was possible under the
circumstances.

It was nearly ten minutes before their host reappeared.  He was
fully dressed now, and presented the appearance of a keen, active
business man.

"Think there's any use trying to catch that burglar?" was his first
question.

"I don't think so at all," replied Dave.

"All right, then.  Carry that truck into the library," the showman
ordered his two men, who had gathered it up in a rug taken from the
vestibule.  "You'll take turns guarding the house, nights after
this.  Now then, young men, who are you?"

The showman put the question as he plumped down in an armchair
besides his two guests.

"We're airship boys," explained Hiram hastily, but proudly.

"Oh!" commented Colonel Lyon slowly, looking the pair over from head
to foot.

"That is, Dave is an airman," corrected Hiram.  "He's Dave
Dashaway."

"Why, I've heard of you.  At the Dayton meet, weren't you?
Honorable mention, or was it a prize?"

"Both," shot out Hiram promptly.

"That's very good," said the colonel.  "I'm pretty well up in the
aero field myself.  I run that line at county fairs."

"Yes, sir, I know that," said Dave, "and that is why I came to see
you."

"That's so--you said it was business, but I must say you are early
birds," smiled the showman.

"We had to be," again spoke Hiram.

"How was that?"

"Why," said Dave, "I thought it was very necessary that I should see
you first thing this morning.  I acted on a wire from my employers,
the Interstate Aeroplane Co."

"Your employers?" repeated the colonel, a fresh token of interest in
his eyes.

"Yes, sir, I have been exhibiting their Baby Racer at the meets."

"Ah, I understand now."

"I am going to take up hydroplane work at Columbus, now.  Last night
late I received a telegram from the Interstate people.  It led to
getting to Kewaukee and seeing you.  There were no trains."

"Roads too bad for an automobile," put in Hiram.

"And we came in the Baby Racer," concluded Dave.

"What's that?" exclaimed the showman.

"You came all the way from Columbus in a biplane?"

"Yes, sir," nodded Dave.
