Then she looked at Paul. Her smile was no longer the smile of an angel,
but of a woman. The light of her violet eyes burned like delicious flame
to the marrow of his bones.

She was so near him that he could have touched her. Her beauty overcame
his senses. Forgetting all else, in an agony of love, he was about to
clasp her in his arms, but she drew back with a gentle gesture of denial.

Then a sudden and indescribable wavering passed over her face, like the
passing of the wind over a field of rye, and slowly, as if reluctantly
obeying an unseen attraction, she retreated, still facing them, across
the room, and disappeared within the cabinet.

Instantly Alta touched the piano, playing the same slow, heavy chords as
before. But this time she played but a few moments, and when she ceased,
Mrs. Legrand's voice was heard faintly calling her. She glided between
the chairs in the door-way and entered the cabinet, drawing a _portiere_
across its door behind her.

As she did so, Dr. Hull touched the stopcock in the wall by his side,
turning on the gas in both parlours, and proceeded to unlock and open the
hall-door.

"It was the most successful seance I have ever witnessed," he said. "The
conditions must have been unusually favourable. How were you pleased,
Miss Ludington?"

The abrupt transition from the shadows of the between-world to the glare
of gas-light, from the communion of spirits to the brisk business-like
tones of Dr. Hull, was quite too much for the poor lady, and with a
piteous gesture, she buried her face in her hands. Alta now came out of
the cabinet, and said that her mother would like them to examine it once
more.

Miss Ludington took no notice of the request, but Paul, who had continued
to sit staring into vacancy, as if for him the seance were still going
on, sprang up at Alta's invitation and accepted it with alacrity. The
eagerness with which he peered into the corner of the cabinet, and the
disappointment which his face showed when he perceived no trace of any
person there save Mrs. Legrand and Alta, might naturally have suggested
to them that he suspected fraud; but the fact was very different. His
conduct was merely the result of a confused hope that he might gain
another glimpse of Ida by following her to the place within which she had
vanished.

When Paul looked into the cabinet, Mrs. Legrand was lying upon the
lounge, and Alta was administering smelling salts to her. As he turned
away disappointed, the medium rose, and leaning on her daughter, returned
to the front parlour. She looked completely overcome. Her face was
deathly pale, and the dark rings around her eyes were larger and darker
than ever. She leaned back in her chair, which had a special rest for her
head, and closed her eyes.

As neither Dr. Hull nor Alta showed any surprise at her condition, it was
apparently the ordinary result of a seance.

To her faint inquiry whether the materialization had been satisfactory to
Miss Ludington, the latter replied that it had been all, and more than
all, she had dared dream of. Dr. Hull, in a very enthusiastic manner,
went on to describe the manifestation more particularly. He declared that
the present evening a new world of spirit-life had been revealed, and a
new era in spiritualism had opened.

"I have been devoted to the study of spiritualism for thirty years," he
exclaimed; "but I have never been present at so wonderful a seance as
this. I grow dizzy when I think of the field of speculation which it
opens up. The spirits of our past selves--? And yet why not, why not?
Like all great discoveries it seems most simple when once brought to
light. It accounts, no doubt, for the throng of unknown spirits of which
mediums are so often conscious, and for the many materializations and
communications which no one recognizes."

Meanwhile the wretched appearance of the medium aroused Miss Ludington's
sympathies, in spite of the distracted condition of her mind.

"Is Mrs. Legrand always prostrated in this manner after a seance?" she
asked.

Dr. Hull answered for the medium. "Not generally quite so much so," he
said; "the strain on her vitality is always very trying, but it is
especially so when a new spirit materializes, as to-night. Out of her
being, somehow, and just how, I know no better than you, is woven the
veil of seeming flesh, yes, and even the clothing which the spirit
assumes in order to appear. The fact that Mrs. Legrand suffers from heart
disease makes seances not only more exhausting for her than for other
mediums, but really dangerous. I have told her, as a physician, and other
physicians have told her, that she is liable at any time to die in a
trance."

Paul now spoke for the first time since the conclusion of the seance.
"What do you fancy would be the effect on the spirit if a medium should
die during a materialization, as you have supposed?" he inquired.

"That can only be a matter of theory," replied Dr. Hull; "the accident
has never happened."

"But it might happen."

"Yes, it might happen."

"Is not the spirit as much dependent on the medium for dematerializing
and resuming the spirit-form, as for materializing?" asked Paul.

"I see what you mean," said Dr. Hull. "You think that in case the medium
should die during a materialization, the spirit might be left in a
materialized state. How does it strike you, Mrs. Legrand?"

"I don't know," replied that lady, with her eyes closed. "Spirits require
our aid as much to lay aside their bodies as to assume them. If the
medium died meantime, I should think that the spirit might find some
trouble in dematerializing."

"Is it not possible," said Paul, "that it might be unable to
dematerialize at all? Would not the medium's death close against it the
only door by which it could return to the spirit-world, shutting it out
in this life with us henceforth? More than that: would not the already
materialized spirit be in a position to succeed to the physical life
which the medium relinquished? Already possessed of a part of the
medium's vitality, would not the remainder naturally flow to it when
given up in death, and thus complete its materialization?"

"And give it an earthly body like ours?" exclaimed Miss Ludington.

"Yes, like ours," replied Paul. "I suppose it would simply take up its
former life on earth where it had been left off, ceasing to possess a
spirit's powers, and knowing only what and whom it knew at the point when
its first life on earth had ceased."

"After what I have seen to-night, nothing will ever seem impossible to me
again," said Miss Ludington.

"As Miss Ludington suggests," observed Dr. Hull, "in spiritualism one
soon ceases to consider whether a thing be wonderful or not, but only if
it be true. And so as to this matter. Now, if the death of a medium
should be absolutely instantaneous, the spirit might, indeed, be unable
to dematerialize, and might even succeed to the medium's earth life, as
you suggest. The trouble with the theory--and it seems to me a fatal
one--is, that death is almost never, if indeed it is ever, absolutely
instantaneous but only comparatively so; and it seems to me that the
least possible interval of time would be sufficient to enable the spirit
to dematerialize. Consequently, it strikes me, that while the result you
suppose is theoretically possible, it could, practically, never occur.
Still, the subject is one of mere conjecture at most, and one opinion is,
perhaps, as good as another."

"I think you are probably right," said Paul; "it was only a fancy I had."

"Why does Mrs. Legrand persist in giving seances if she is not in a fit
condition?" said Miss Ludington.

"Well," replied Dr. Hull, "you see we spiritualists do not regard death
as so serious a matter as do many others. Our mediums, especially, who
stand with one hand clasped by spirits and the other by mortals, are
almost indifferent which way they are drawn; besides, you see, she is
recognized as the most fully developed medium in the United States
to-day, and many spirits, which cannot materialize through other mediums,
are dependent upon her; she feels that she has a duty to discharge
towards the spirit-world, at whatever risk to herself. I doubt if
to-night's seance, for example, would have been successful with any other
medium."

Immediately after this conversation Miss Ludington and Paul took their
departure. Dr. Hull went, out with them to the carriage, and was obliged
to remind them of the little matter of Mrs. Legrand's fee, which they had
entirely forgotten.




CHAPTER VII.



Now, before she ever had heard of Mrs. Legrand, Miss Ludington had fully
believed that her former self had an immortal existence, apart and
distinct from her present self, and Paul, to whom she was indebted for
this belief, held it even more firmly than she.

But there is a great difference between the strongest form of faith and
the absolute assurance of sight. The effect of the vision which they had
witnessed in Mrs. Legrand's parlours was almost as startling as if they
had not expected to see it.

Very little was said in the carriage going home, but, as they were
crossing the ferry, Miss Ludington exclaimed, in an awestruck voice,

"O Paul! was it not strange!"

"Strange? Strange?" he echoed, in strong, exultant tones. "How oddly you
use the word, aunty! You might well say how strange, if we mortals were
isolated here on this little island of time, with no communication with
the mainland of eternity; but how can you call it strange when you find
out that we are not isolated? Surely it is not strange, but supremely
reasonable, right, and natural."

"I suppose it is so," said Miss Ludington, "but if I had let you go alone
to-night, and stayed at home, I could never have fully believed you when
you told me what you had seen any more than I shall ever expect any one
to believe me. Think, Paul, if I had not gone, if I had not seen her, if
she had not given me that look! I knew, of course, if she appeared that I
should recognize her, but I did not dare to be sure that she would
recognize me. I remember her, but she never saw me on earth."

"It was as a spirit that she knew you, and that is the way she knew me,
and knew that I loved her," said Paul, with a sudden huskiness in his
voice.

"Surely that makes it clear," said Miss Ludington, "that the spirits of
our past selves love us who follow them, as we, in looking back, yearn
after them, and not merely await us at the end, but are permitted to
watch over us as we complete the journey which they began. I am sure that
if people knew this they would never feel lonely or forlorn again."

It was a relief to Paul when they reached home and he could be alone.

In an ecstasy of happiness that was like a delicious pain, he sat till
morning in his unlighted chamber, gazing into the darkness with a set
smile, motionless, and breathing only by deep, infrequent inhalations.
What were the joys of mortal love to the transports that were his? What
were the smoky fires of earthly passion to his pure, keen flame, almost
too strong for a heart of flesh to bear?

As he strove to realize what it was to be beloved by an immortal, the
veil between time and eternity was melted by the hot breath of his
passion, and the confines of the natural and the supernatural were
confounded.

As the east grew light he began to feel the weariness of the intense
mental strain which had led up to, and culminated in, the transcendent
experience of the previous evening. A tranquil happiness succeeded his
exalted mood, and, lying down, he slept soundly till noon, when he went
downstairs to find Miss Ludington anxiously waiting for him to reassure
her that her recollection of the last night was not altogether a dream,
as she had half convinced herself since waking.

Paul had to go into Brooklyn to do some business for Miss Ludington that
day, but the men he dealt with seemed to him shadows.

After finishing with them he went over to New York, and presently found
himself on East Tenth Street. He had not intended to go there. His feet
had borne him involuntarily to the spot. He could not resist the
temptation of drawing near to the place where she had been only a few
hours before. He walked to and fro before Mrs. Legrand's house for an
hour, and then stood a long time on the opposite side, looking at the
closed windows of the front parlour, quite unconscious that he had become
an object of curiosity to numerous persons in adjoining houses, and of
marked suspicion to the policeman at the corner.

Finally he crossed the street, mounted the steps, and rang the bell. The
door was opened, after a considerable interval, by Alta, the elfish
little girl. Paul asked for Mrs. Legrand. Alta said that her mother was
ill to-day, and not able to see any one. Paul then asked for Dr. Hull. He
was not in.

"I wanted to arrange for another seance," he said.

"Will you write, or will you call to-morrow?" asked Alta, in a
business-like manner.

Paul said he would call. Then he hesitated.

"Excuse me," he said, "but may I ask you if there is any one now in the
parlour where we were last night?"

"No one is there," replied the little girl.

"Could you let me just go in and see where she was?" asked Paul, humbly.
"I would not keep you a moment."

Alta, in her character of door-keeper to this house of mystery, was,
doubtless, in the habit of seeing queer people, bent on queer errands.
She merely asked him to step within the hall, saying that she would speak
to her mother. Presently she returned with the desired permission, and,
producing a key, unlocked the parlour door, and ushered Paul in.

It was late in the afternoon, and the heavy curtains and blinds left the
rooms almost dark. There was barely light enough to see that all was just
as it had been the night before. The sounds of the street penetrated the
closed apartments but faintly. With the step of one on holy ground, Paul
advanced to the spot where he had been seated when the vision appeared to
him the night before.

Aided by the darkness, the silence, and by the identity of the
surroundings, the memory of that vision returned to him as he stood there
with a vividness which, in the overwrought condition of his nerves, it
was impossible for him to distinguish from reality. Once more a radiant
figure glided noiselessly from the cabinet, which was darkly outlined in
the corner of the room, and stood before him. Once more her eyes burned
on his, until, forgetting all but her beauty, he put forth his arms to
clasp her. A startled exclamation from Alta banished the vision, and he
perceived that he was smiling upon the empty air.

He went away from the house ecstatically happy. He believed that he had
really seen her. He had no doubt that, aided by the mediumship of love,
she had actually appeared to him a second time in a form only a little
less material than the night before.

Of this experience he did not tell Miss Ludington. This interview, which
Ida had granted to him alone, he kept as a precious secret.

The next day, as he had promised, Paul called at Mrs. Legrand's and saw
Dr. Hull. That gentleman was unable to promise him anything definite
about a seance, on account of Mrs. Legrand's continued illness.

"Is she seriously sick?" asked Paul, with a new terror.

"I think not," said Dr. Hull; "but her trouble is of the heart, the
result of the nervous crises which a trance medium is necessarily subject
to, and a disease of the heart may at any time take an unexpected turn."

"Has she the best advice?" asked Paul. "Excuse me; but if she has not,
and if her pecuniary means do not enable her to afford it, I beg you will
let me secure it for her."

Dr. Hull thanked him, but said that he was a physician himself, and that,
on account of his acquaintance with her constitutional peculiarities,
Mrs. Legrand considered him, and he considered himself, better able to
treat her than any strange physician. "You seem to be very much
interested in her case," added the doctor, with a slight intonation of
surprise.

"Can you wonder?" replied Paul. "Is she not door-keeper between this
world and the world of spirits where my love is? Don't think me brutal if
I confess to you that what I think of most is that her death might close
that door."

"I do not think you brutal," replied Dr. Hull; "what you feel is very
natural."

"Is it not strange--is it not hard to bear," cried Paul, giving way to
his feelings, "that the key of the gate between the world of spirits and
of men should be intrusted to a weak and sickly woman?"

"It is hard to bear, no doubt," replied Dr. Hull; "but it is not strange.
It is in accordance with the laws by which this world has always been
conducted. From the beginning has not the power of calling spirits out of
the unknown into this earth life been intrusted to weak and sickly women?
What the world loosely calls spiritualism is no isolated phenomenon or
set of phenomena. The universe is spiritual. Much as we claim for our
mediums, the mediumship of motherhood is far more marvellous. Our mediums
can enable spirits already alive, and able by their own wills to
cooperate, to pass before our eyes for a moment. To hold them longer in
our view exceeds their power. But these other women, these mothers, call
souls out of nothingness, and clothe them with bodies, so that they
speak, walk, work, love, and hate, some forty, some fifty, some seventy
years."

"You are right," said Paul bowing his head. "It is not strange though it
is hard to bear."

The effect of the seance at Mrs. Legrand's upon Miss Ludington had been
far less disturbing than upon Paul. To her it had been a lofty spiritual
consolation, setting the seal of absolute assurance upon a faith that had
been before too great, too strange, too beautiful for her to fully
realize.

When Paul brought word that Mrs. Legrand was sick and might die, and that
if she died that first vision of Ida might also prove the last to be
vouchsafed them on earth, although she was deeply grieved, yet the
thought did not seem so intolerable to her as to him. She had, indeed,
hoped that from time to time she should see Ida again; still, her life
was mostly past, and it was chiefly upon the communion they would enjoy
in heaven, not momentary and imperfect as here, but perennial and
complete, that her heart was set.

Very different was it with Paul. He was young; heaven was very far off,
and the way thither, unless cheered by occasional visitations of his
radiant mistress, seemed inexpressibly long and dreary. The nature of his
sentiment for Ida had changed since he had seen her clothed in a living
form, from the worship of a sweet but dim ideal to the passion which a
living woman inspires. He thought of her no more as a spirit, lofty and
serene, but as a beautiful maiden with the love-light in her eyes.

He was not able to find his former inspiration in the picture above the
fireplace. Its still enchantment was gone. The set smile, that had ever
before seemed so sweet, palled upon him. The eyes, that had always been
so tender, now lacked expression. The lips that the boy had climbed up to
kiss, how had the artist failed to intimate their exquisite curves! The
whole picture had suffered a subtle deterioration, and looked hard,
wooden, lifeless, and almost, unlike. The living woman had eclipsed the
portrait. Fortunate it is for the fame of painters that their originals
do not oftener return to earth.

If Mrs. Legrand had been his own mother Paul could not have been more
assiduous in his calls and inquiries as to her condition, nor could his
relief have been greater when, a few days later, Dr. Hull told him that
the case had taken a favourable turn, and according to her previous
experience with such attacks, she would probably be as well as usual by
the following day. Dr. Hull said that she had heard of Paul's frequent
inquiries for her, and while she did not flatter herself that his
interest in her was wholly on her own account, she was, nevertheless, so
far grateful that she would give him the first seance which she was able
to hold, and that would be, if she continued to improve, on the following
evening.




CHAPTER VIII.



If Miss Ludington's desire for another glimpse of Ida had lacked the
passionate intensity of Paul's, she had, notwithstanding, longed for it
very ardently, and when at nine o'clock the next night the carriage drew
up before Mrs. Legrand's door, she was in a transport of sweet
anticipation.

As for Paul he had dressed himself with extreme care for the occasion,
and looked to his best advantage. He had said to himself, "Shall I not
show her as much observance as I would pay to a living woman?" And who
can say--for very odd, sometimes, are the inarticulate processes of the
mind--that there was not at the bottom of his thoughts something of the
universal lover's willingness to let his mistress see him at his best?

They found the front parlour occupied as before by Mrs. Legrand and Dr.
Hull, when Alta showed them in. The medium was, as previously, the
picture of ill-health, and if she did not look noticeably worse than
before her sickness, it was merely because she had looked as badly as
possible then. In response to inquiries about her health she admitted
that she did not really feel equal to resuming her seances quite so soon,
and but for disliking to disappoint them would have postponed this
evening's appointment. Dr. Hull had, indeed, urged her to do so.

"You must not think of giving a seance if there is any risk of injury to
your health," said Miss Ludington, though not without being sensible of a
pang of disappointment. "We could not think of letting you do that, could
we, Paul?"

Paul's reply to this humane suggestion was not so prompt as it should
have been. In his heart he felt at that moment that he was as bad as a
murderer. He knew that he was willing this woman should risk not only her
health, but even her life, rather than that he should fail to see Ida. He
was striving to repress this feeling, so far at least as to say that he
would not insist upon going on with the seance, when Mrs. Legrand, with a
glance through her half-shut eyelids, intimating that she perfectly
understood his thoughts, said, in a tone which put an end to the
discussion, "Excuse me, but I shall certainly give the seance. I am much
obliged for your interest in me; but I am rather notional about keeping
my promises, and it is a peculiarity in which my friends have to indulge
in. I daresay I shall be none the worse for the exertion."

"Doctor," she added, "will you allow our friends to inspect the cabinet?"

"That is quite needless," said Paul.

"Our friends are often willing to waive an inspection," replied Dr. Hull.
"We are grateful for the confidence shown, but, in justice to ourselves,
as well as for their own more absolute assurance, we always insist upon
it. Otherwise, suspicions of fraud not entertained, perhaps, at the time,
might afterwards occur to the mind, or be suggested by others, to which
they would have no conclusive answer."

Upon this Miss Ludington and Paul permitted themselves to be conducted
upon the same tour of inspection that they had made the former evening.
They found everything precisely as it had been on that occasion. There
was no possibility of concealing any person in the cabinet or the back
parlour, and no apparent or conceivable means by which any person could
reach those apartments, except through the front parlour.

On their return to the latter apartment the proceedings followed the
order observed at the previous seance. Mrs. Legrand rose from her chair
and walked feebly through the back parlour into the cabinet. Dr. Hull
then locked and braced a chair against the door opening into the hall,
giving the key to Paul. Then, having arranged the three chairs as before,
across the double door between the parlours, he seated Miss Ludington and
Paul, and, having turned the gas down, took the third chair.

All being ready, Alta, who was at the piano, struck the opening chords of
the same soft, low music that she had played at the previous seance.

It seemed to Miss Ludington that she played much longer than before, and
she began to think that either there was to be some failure in the
seance, or that something had happened to Mrs. Legrand.

Perhaps she was dead. This horrible thought, added to the strain of
expectancy, affected her nerves so that in another moment she must have
screamed out, when, as before, she felt a faint, cool air fan her
forehead, and a few seconds later Ida appeared at the door of the cabinet
and glided into the room.

She was dressed as at her former appearance, in white, with her shoulders
bare, and the wealth of her golden hair falling to her waist behind.

From the moment that she emerged from the shadows of the cabinet Paul's
eyes were glued to her face with an intensity quite beyond any ordinary
terms of description.

Fancy having not over a minute in which to photograph upon the mind a
form the recollection of which is to furnish the consolation of a
