contains horn and native silver. On the same fork are the Iron King and
Andy Johnson, both recently discovered and promising properties, and
there is a valuable mine now in litigation on the south fork of the
Perche, with scores of prospects over the entire district. Now that one
or two sensational strikes have attracted attention, and capital is
developing paying mines, the future of the Perche District seems
assured.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SOY BEAN.


The _British Medical Journal_ says that Prof. E. Kinch, writing in the
_Agricultural Students' Gazette_, says that the Soy bean approaches more
nearly to animal food than any other known vegetable production, being
singularly rich in fat and in albuminoids. It is largely used as
an article of food in China and Japan. Efforts have been made to
acclimatize it in various parts of the continent of Europe, and fair
success has been achieved in Italy and France; many foods are made from
it and its straw is a useful fodder.

       *       *       *       *       *




ON A NEW ARC ELECTRIC LAMP.

[Footnote: Paper read at the British Association, Southampton. Revised
by the Author.--_Nature_.]

By W.H. PREECE.


Electric lamps on the arc principle are almost as numerous as the trees
in the forest, and it is somewhat fresh to come upon something that is
novel. In these lamps the carbons are consumed as the current flows, and
it is the variation in their consumption which occasions the flickering
and irregularity of the light that is so irritating to the eyes. Special
mechanical contrivances or regulators have to be used to compensate for
this destruction of the carbons, as in the Siemens and Brush type, or
else refractory materials have to be combined with the carbons, as in
the Jablochkoff candle and in the lamp Soleil. The steadiness of the
light depends upon the regularity with which the carbons are moved
toward each other as they are consumed, so as to maintain the electric
resistance between them a constant quantity. Each lamp must have a
certain elasticity of regulation of its own, to prevent irregularities
from the variable material of carbon used, and from variations in the
current itself and in the machinery.

In all electric lamps, except the Brockie, the regulator is in the lamp
itself. In the Brockie system the regulation is automatic, and is made
at certain rapid intervals by the motor engine. This causes a periodic
blinking that is detrimental to this lamp for internal illumination.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. FIG. 2.]

M. Abdank, the inventor of the system which I have the pleasure of
bringing before the Section, separates his regulator from his lamp.
The regulator may be fixed anywhere, within easy inspection and
manipulation, and away from any disturbing influence in the lamp. The
lamp can be fixed in any inaccessible place.

_The Lamp_ (Figs. 1, 2, and 3.)--The bottom or negative carbon is fixed,
but the top or positive carbon is movable, in a vertical line. It is
screwed at the point, C, to a brass rod, T (Fig. 2), which moves freely
inside the tubular iron core of an electromagnet, K. This rod is
clutched and lifted by the soft iron armature, A B, when a current
passes through the coil, M M. The mass of the iron in the armature is
distributed so that the greater portion is at one end, B, much nearer
the pole than the other end. Hence this portion is attracted first, the
armature assumes an inclined position, maintained by a brass button, t,
which prevents any adhesion between the armature and the core of the
electromagnet. The electric connection between the carbon and the coil
of the electromagnet is maintained by the flexible wire, S.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

The electromagnet, A (Fig. 1), is fixed to a long and heavy rack, C,
which falls by its own weight and by the weight of the electromagnet and
the carbon fixed to it. The length of the rack is equal to the length of
the two carbons. The fall of the rack is controlled by a friction break,
B (Fig. 3), which acts upon the last of a train of three wheels put
in motion by the above weight. The break, B, is fixed at one end of
a lever, B A, the other end carrying a soft iron armature, F,
easily adjusted by three screws. This armature is attracted by the
electromagnet, E E (whose resistance is 1,200 ohms), whenever a current
circulates through it. The length of the play is regulated by the screw,
V. The spring, L, applies tension to the break.

_The Regulator_.--This consists of a balance and a cut-off.

_The Balance_ (Figs. 4 and 5) is made with two solenoids. S and S',
whose relative resistances is adjustable. S conveys the main current,
and is wound with thick wire having practically no resistance, and S'
is traversed by a shunt current, and is wound with fine wire having a
resistance of 600 ohms. In the axes of these two coils a small and light
iron tube (2 mm. diameter and 60 mm. length) freely moves in a vertical
line between two guides. When magnetized it has one pole in the middle
and the other at each end. The upward motion is controlled by the
spring, N T. The spring rests upon the screw, H, with which it makes
contact by platinum electrodes. This contact is broken whenever the
little iron rod strikes the spring, N T.

The positive lead from the dynamo is attached to the terminal, B, then
passes through the coil, S, to the terminal, B', whence it proceeds to
the lamp. The negative lead is attached to terminal, A, passing directly
to the other terminal, A', and thence to the lamp.

[Illustration: FIG. 4]

The shunt which passes through the fine coil, S', commences at the
point, P. The other end is fixed to the screw, H, whence it has two
paths, the one offering no resistance through the spring, T N, to the
upper negative terminal, A'; the other through the terminal, J, to the
electromagnet of the break, M, and thence to the negative terminal of
the lamp, L'.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

_The Cut-off_.--The last part of the apparatus (Fig. 4) to be described
is the cut-off, which is used when there are several lamps in series. It
is brought into play by the switch, C D, which can be placed at E or D.
When it is at E, the negative terminal, A, is in communication with
the positive terminal, B, through the resistance, R, which equals the
resistance of the lamp, which is, therefore, out of circuit. When it is
at D the cut-off acts automatically to do the same thing when required.
This is done by a solenoid, V, which has two coils, the one of thick
wire offering no resistance, and the other of 2,000 ohms resistance. The
fine wire connects the terminals, A' and B. The solenoid has a movable
soft iron core suspended by the spring, U. It has a cross-piece of iron
which can dip into two mercury cups, G and K, when the core is sucked
into the solenoid. When this is the case, which happens when any
accident occurs to the lamp, the terminal, A, is placed in connection
with the terminal, B, through the thick wire of V and the resistance, R,
in the same way as it was done by the switch, C D.

_Electrical Arrangement_.--The mode in which several lamps are connected
up in series is shown by Fig. 6. M is the dynamo machine. The + lead is
connected to B1 of the balance it then passes to the lamp, L, returning
to the balance, and then proceeds to each other lamp, returning finally
to the negative pole of the machine. When the current enters the balance
it passes through the coil, S, magnetizing the iron core and drawing
it downward (Fig. 4). It then passes to the lamp, L L', through the
carbons, then returns to the balance, and proceeds back to the negative
terminal of the machine. A small portion of the current is shunted off
at the point, P, passing through the coil, S', through the contact
spring, T N, to the terminal, A', and drawing the iron core in
opposition to S. The carbons are in contact, but in passing through
the lamp the current magnetizes the electromagnet, M (Fig. 2), which
attracts the armature, A B, that bites and lifts up the rod, T, with the
upper carbon, a definite and fixed distance that is easily regulated
by the screws, Y Y. The arc then is formed, and will continue to burn
steadily as long as the current remains constant. But the moment the
current falls, due to the increased resistance of the arc, a greater
proportion passes through the shunt, S' (Fig. 4), increasing its
magnetic moment on the iron core, while that of S is diminishing. The
result is that a moment arrives when equilibrium is destroyed, the iron
rod strikes smartly and sharply upon the spring, N T. Contact between T
and H is broken, and the current passes through the electromagnet of the
break in the lamp. The break is released for an instant, the carbons
approach each other. But the same rupture of contact introduces in the
shunt a new resistance of considerable magnitude (viz., 1,200 ohms),
that of the electromagnets of the break. Then the strength of the shunt
current diminishes considerably, and the solenoid, S, recovers briskly
its drawing power upon the rod, and contact is restored. The carbons
approach during these periods only about 0.01 to 0.02 millimeter.
If this is not sufficient to restore equilibrium it is repeated
continually, until equilibrium is obtained. The result is that the
carbon is continually falling by a motion invisible to the eye, but
sufficient to provide for the consumption of the carbons.

[Illustration: FIG. 6]

The contact between N T and H is never completely broken, the sparks are
very feeble, and the contacts do not oxidize. The resistances inserted
are so considerable that heating cannot occur, while the portion of the
current abstracted for the control is so small that it may be neglected.

The balance acts precisely like the key of a Morse machine, and the
break precisely like the sounder-receiver so well known in telegraphy.
It emits the same kind of sounds, and acts automatically like a skilled
and faithful telegraphist.

This regulation, by very small and short successive steps, offers
several advantages: (1) it is imperceptible to the eye; (2) it does not
affect the main current; (3) any sudden instantaneous variation of the
main current does not allow a too near approach of the carbon points.
Let, now, an accident occur; for instance, a carbon is broken. At once
the automatic cut-off acts, the current passes through the resistance,
R, instead of passing through the lamp. The current through the fine
coil is suddenly increased, the rod is drawn in, contact is made at G
and K, and the current is sent through the coil, R. As soon as contact
is again made by the carbons, the current in the coil, S, is increased,
that of the thick wire in V diminished, and the antagonistic spring,
U, breaks the contact at G and K. The rupture of the light is almost
invisible, because the relighting is so brisk and sharp.

I have seen this lamp in action, and its constant steadiness leaves
nothing to be desired.

       *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS FOR OBTAINING PURE WATER FOR PHOTOGRAPHIC USE.


Our readers are well aware that water as found naturally is never
absolutely free from dissolved impurities; and in ordinary cases it
contains solid impurities derived both from the inorganic and organic
kingdoms, together with gaseous substances; these latter being generally
derived from the atmosphere.

By far the purest water which occurs in nature is rain-water, and if
this be collected in a secluded district, and after the air has been
well washed by previous rain, its purity is remarkable; the extraneous
matter consisting of little else than a trace of carbonic acid and other
gases dissolved from the air. In fact, such water is far purer than any
distilled water to be obtained in commerce. The case is very different
when the rain-water is collected in a town or densely populated
district, more especially if the water has been allowed to flow over
dirty roofs. The black and foully-smelling liquid popularly known as
soft water is so rich in carbonaceous and organic constituents as to be
of very limited use to the photographer; but by taking the precaution of
fitting up a simple automatic shunt for diverting the stream until the
roofs have been thoroughly washed, it becomes possible to insure a good
supply of clean and serviceable soft water, even in London. Several
forms of shunt have been devised, some of these being so complex as
to offer every prospect of speedy disorganization; but a simple and
efficient apparatus is figured in _Engineering_ by a correspondent who
signs himself "Millwright," and as we have thoroughly proved the value
of an apparatus which is practically identical, we reproduce the
substance of his communication.

A gentleman of Newcastle, a retired banker, having tried various filters
to purify the rain-water collected on the roof of his house, at length
had the idea to allow no water to run into the cistern until the roof
had been well washed. After first putting up a hard-worked valve, the
arrangement as sketched below has been hit upon. Now Newcastle is a very
smoky place, and yet my friend gets water as pure as gin, and almost
absolutely free from any smack of soot.

[Illustration]

The sketch explains itself. The weight, W, and the angle of the lever,
L, are such, that when the valve, V, is once opened it goes full open. A
small hole in the can C, acts like a cataract, and brings matters to a
normal state very soon after the rain ceases.

The proper action of the apparatus can only be insured by a careful
adjustment of the weight, W, the angle through which the valve opens,
and the magnitude of the vessel, C. It is an advantage to make
the vessel, C, somewhat broader in proportion to its height than
represented, and to provide it with a movable strainer placed about half
way down. This tends to protect the cataract hole, and any accumulation
of leaves and dirt can be removed once in six months or so. Clean soft
water is valuable to the photographer in very many cases. Iron developer
(wet plate) free from chlorides will ordinarily remain effective on the
plate much longer than when chlorides are present, and the pyrogallic
solution for dry-plate work will keep good for along time if made with
soft water, while the lime which is present in hard water causes the
pyrogallic acid to oxidize with considerable rapidity. Negatives that
have been developed with oxalate developer often become covered with a
very unsightly veil of calcium oxalate when rinsed with hard water, and
something of a similar character occasionally occurs in the case of
silver prints which are transferred directly from the exposure frame to
impure water.

To the carbon printer clean rain-water is of considerable value, as he
can develop much more rapidly with soft water than with hard water;
or, what comes to the same thing, he can dissolve away his superfluous
gelatine at a lower temperature than would otherwise be necessary.

The cleanest rain-water which can ordinarily be collected in a town is
not sufficiently pure to be used with advantage in the preparation of
the nitrate bath, it being advisable to use the purest distilled water
for this purpose; and in many cases it is well to carefully distill
water for the bath in a glass apparatus of the kind figured below.

[Illustration]

A, thin glass flask serving as a retort. The tube, T, is fitted
air-tight to the flask by a cork, C.

B, receiver into which the tube, T, fits quite loosely.

D, water vessel intended to keep the spiral of lamp wick, which is shown
as surrounding T, in a moist condition. This wick acts as a siphon, and
water is gradually drawn over into the lower receptacle, E.

L, spirit lamp, which may, in many cases, be advantageously replaced by
a Bunsen burner.

A small metal still, provided with a tin condensing worm, is, however, a
more generally serviceable arrangement, and if ordinary precautions are
taken to make sure that the worm tube is clean, the resulting distilled
water will be nearly as pure as that distilled in glass vessels.

Such a still as that figured below can be heated conveniently over an
ordinary kitchen fire, and should find a place among the appliances
of every photographer. Distilled water should always be used in the
preparation of emulsion, as the impurities of ordinary water may often
introduce disturbing conditions.--_Photographic News_.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *




BLACK PHOSPHORUS.

By P. THENARD.


The author refers to the customary view that black phosphorus is
merely a mixture of the ordinary phosphorus with traces of a metallic
phosphide, and contends that this explanation is not in all cases
admissible. A specimen of black or rather dark gray phosphorus, which
the author submitted to the Academy, became white if melted and remained
white if suddenly cooled, but if allowed to enter into a state of
superfusion it became again black on contact with either white or black
phosphorus. A portion of the black specimen being dissolved in carbon
disulphide there remained undissolved merely a trace of a very pale
yellow matter which seemed to be amorphous phosphorus.--_Comptes
Rendus_.

       *       *       *       *       *




COMPOSITION OF STEEP WATER.


According to M. C. Leeuw, water in which malt has been steeped has the
following composition:

    Organic matter.        0.56 per cent.
    Mineral matter.        0.52    "
                           ----
    Total dry matter.      1.08    "
                           ----
    Nitrogen.             0.033    "

The mineral matter consists of--

    Potash.               0.193    "
    Phosphoric acid.      0.031    "
    Lime.                 0.012    "
    Soda.                 0.047    "
    Magnesia.             0.016    "
    Sulphuric acid.       0.007    "
    Oxide of iron.        traces.
    Chlorine and silica.  0.212    "

       *       *       *       *       *




SCHREIBER'S APPARATUS FOR REVIVIFYING BONE-BLACK.


We give opposite illustrations of Schreiber's apparatus for revivifying
bone-black or animal charcoal. The object of revivification is to render
the black fit to be used again after it has lost its decolorizing
properties through service--that is to say, to free its pores from the
absorbed salts and insoluble compounds that have formed therein
during the operation of sugar refining. There are two methods
employed--fermentation and washing. At present the tendency is to
abandon the former in order to proceed with as small a stock of black as
possible, and to adopt the method of washing with water and acid in a
rotary washer.

Figs. 1 and 2 represent a plan and elevation of a bone-black room,
containing light filters, A, arranged in a circle around wells, B. These
latter have the form of a prism with trapezoidal base, whose small sides
end at the same point, d, and the large ones at the filter. The funnel,
E, of the washer, F, is placed in the space left by the small ends of
the wells, so that the black may be taken from these latter and thrown
directly into the washer. The washer is arranged so that the black may
flow out near the steam fitter, G, beneath the floor. The discharge of
this filter is toward the side of the elevator, H, which takes in the
wet black below, and carries it up and pours it into the drier situated
at the upper part of the furnace. This elevator, Figs. 3 and 4, is
formed of two vertical wooden uprights, A, ten centimeters in thickness,
to which are fixed two round-iron bars the same as guides. The lift,
properly so-called, consists of an iron frame, C, provided at the four
angles with rollers, D, and supporting a swinging bucket, E, which, on
its arrival at the upper part of the furnace, allows the black to fall
to an inclined plane that leads it to the upper part of the drier. The
left is raised and lowered by means of a pitch-chain, F, fixed to the
middle of the frame, C, and passing over two pulleys, G, at the upper
part of the frame and descending to the mechanism that actuates it.
This latter comprises a nut, I, acting directly on the chain; a toothed
wheel, K, and a pinion, J, gearing with the latter and keyed upon the
shaft of the pulleys, L and M. The diameter of the toothed wheel, K, is
0.295 of a meter, and it makes 53.4 revolutions per minute. The diameter
of the pinion is 0.197 of a meter, and it makes 80 revolutions per
minute. The pulleys, M and L, are 0.31 of a meter in diameter, and
make 80 revolutions per minute. Motion is transmitted to them by other
pulleys, N, keyed upon a shaft placed at the lower part, which receives
its motion from the engine of the establishment through the intermedium
of the pulley, O. The diameter of the latter is 0.385 of a meter, and
that of N is 0.58. They each make 43 revolutions per minute.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--ELEVATION OF BONE-BLACK REVIVIFYING PLANT
(SCHREIBER'S SYSTEM.)

FIG. 2.--PLAN VIEW.

FIG. 3.--LATERAL VIEW OF ELEVATOR.

FIG. 4.--FRONT VIEW OF ELEVATOR.

FIG. 5.--CONTINUOUS FURNACE FOR REVIVIFYING BONE-BLACK.]

The elevator is set in motion by the simple maneuver of the gearing
lever, P, and when this has been done all the other motions are effected
automatically.

_The Animal Black Furnace_.--This consists of a masonry casing of
rectangular form, in which are arranged on each side of the same
fire-place two rows of cast-iron retorts, D, of undulating form, each
composed of three parts, set one within the other. These retorts, which
serve for the revivification of the black, are incased in superposed
blocks of refractory clay, P, Q, S, designed to regularize the
transmission of heat and to prevent burning. These pieces are kept in
their respective places by crosspieces, R. The space between the retorts
occupied by the fire-place, Y, is covered with a cylindrical dome, O, of
refractory tiles, forming a fire-chamber with the inner surface of the
blocks, P, Q, and S. The front of the surface consists of a cast-iron
plate, containing the doors to the fire-place and ash pan, and a larger
one to allow of entrance to the interior to make repairs.

One of the principal disadvantages of furnaces for revivifying animal
charcoal has been that they possessed no automatic drier for drying the
black on its exit from the washer. It was for the purpose of remedying
this that Mr. Schreiber was led to invent the automatic system of drying
shown at the upper part of the furnace, and which is formed of two
pipes, B, of undulating form, like the retorts, with openings throughout
their length for the escape of steam. Between these pipes there is a
closed space into which enters the waste heat and products of combustion
from the furnace. These latter afterward escape through the chimney at
the upper part.

In order that the black may be put in bags on issuing from the furnace,
it must be cooled as much as possible. For this purpose there are
arranged on each side of the furnace two pieces of cast iron tubes, F,
of rectangular section, forming a prolongation of the retorts and making
with them an angle of about 45 degrees. The extremities of these tubes
terminate in hollow rotary cylinders, G, which permit of regulating the
flow of the black into a car, J (Fig. 1), running on rails.

From what precedes, it will be readily understood how a furnace is run
on this plan.

The bone-black in the hopper, A, descends into the drier, B, enters the
retorts, D, and, after revivification, passes into the cooling pipes, F,
from whence it issues cold and ready to be bagged. A coke fire having
been built in the fire-place, Y, the flames spread throughout the fire
chamber, direct themselves toward the bottom, divide into two parts to
the right and left, and heat the back of the retorts in passing. Then
