Perhaps the most strikingly beautiful member of the tribe is the Painted
Trillium (_T. undulatum_ or _T. erythrocarpum_). At the summit of the
slender stem, rising perhaps only eight inches, or maybe twice as high,
this charming flower spreads its long, wavy-edged, waxy-white petals
veined and striped with deep pink or wine color. The large ovate leaves,
long-tapering to a point, are rounded at the base into short petioles.
The rounded, three-angled, bright red, shining berry is seated in the
persistent calyx. With the same range as the nodding trillium's, the
Painted Wake-Robin comes into bloom nearly a month later--in May and
June--when all the birds are not only wide awake, but have finished
courting, and are busily engaged in the most serious business of life.


Purple Trillium, Ill-scented Wake-Robin, or Birth-root

_Trillium erectum_

_Flowers_--Solitary, dark, dull purple, or purplish red; rarely
greenish, white, or pinkish; on erect or slightly inclined footstalk.
Calyx of 3 spreading sepals, 1 to 1-1/2 in. long, or about length of 3
pointed, oval petals; stamens, 6; anthers longer than filaments; pistil
spreading into 3 short, recurved stigmas. _Stem:_ Stout, 8 to 16 in.
high, from tuber-like rootstock. _Leaves:_ In a whorl of 3; broadly
ovate, abruptly pointed, netted-veined. _Fruit:_ A 6-angled, ovate,
reddish berry.

_Preferred Habitat--Rich_, moist woods.

_Flowering Season_--April-June.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia westward to Manitoba, southward to North
Carolina and Missouri.

Some weeks after the jubilant, alert robins have returned from the
South, the Purple Trillium unfurls its unattractive, carrion-scented
flower. In the variable colors found in different regions, one can
almost trace its evolution from green, white, and red to purple, which,
we are told, is the course all flowers must follow to attain to blue.
The white and pink forms, however attractive to the eye, are never more
agreeable to the nose than the reddish-purple ones. Bees and
butterflies, with delicate appreciation of color and fragrance, let the
blossom alone, since it secretes no nectar; and one would naturally
infer either that it can fertilize itself without insect aid--a theory
which closer study of its organs goes far to disprove--or that the
carrion-scent, so repellent to us, is in itself an attraction to certain
insects needful for cross-pollination. Which are they? Beetles have been
observed crawling over the flower, but without effecting any methodical
result. One inclines to accept Mr. Clarence M. Weed's theory of special
adaptation to the common green flesh-flies (_Lucilia carnicina_), which
would naturally be attracted to a flower resembling in color and odor a
raw beefsteak of uncertain age. These little creatures, seen in every
butcher shop throughout the summer, the flower furnishes with a free
lunch of pollen in consideration of the transportation of a few grains
to another blossom. Absence of the usual floral attractions gives the
carrion flies a practical monopoly of the pollen food, which no doubt
tastes as it smells.

The Sessile-flowered Wake-Robin (_T. sessile_), whose dark purple,
purplish-red, or greenish blossom, narrower of sepal and petals than the
preceding, is seated in a whorl of three egg-shaped, sometimes blotched,
leaves, possesses a rather pleasant odor; nevertheless, it seems to have
no great attraction for insects. The stigmas, which are very large,
almost touch the anthers surrounding them; therefore the beetles which
one frequently sees crawling over them to feed on the pollen so jar
them, no doubt, as to self-fertilize the flower; but it is scarcely
probable these slow crawlers often transfer the grains from one blossom
to another. A degraded flower like this has little need of color and
perfume, one would suppose; yet it may be even now slowly perfecting its
way toward an ideal of which we see a part only complete. In deep, rich,
moist woods and thickets the sessile trillium blooms in April or May,
from Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Minnesota southward nearly to the Gulf.


Carrion-flower

_Smilax herbacea_

_Flowers_--Carrion-scented, yellowish-green, 15 to 80 small, 6-parted
ones clustered in an umbel on a long peduncle. _Stem:_ Smooth, unarmed,
climbing with the help of tendril-like appendages from the base of
leafstalks. _Leaves:_ Egg-shaped, heart-shaped, or rounded, pointed
tipped, parallel-nerved, petioled. _Fruit:_ Bluish-black berries.

_Preferred Habitat_--Moist soil, thickets, woods, roadside fences.

_Flowering Season_--April-June.

_Distribution_--Northern Canada to the Gulf states, westward to
Nebraska.

"It would be safe to say," says John Burroughs, "that there is a species
of smilax with an unsavory name, that the bee does not visit,
_herbacea_. The production of this plant is a curious freak of
nature.... It would be a cruel joke to offer it to any person not
acquainted with it, to smell. It is like the vent of a charnel-house."
(Thoreau compared its odor to that of a dead rat in a wall!) "It is
first cousin to the trilliums, among the prettiest of our native wild
flowers," continues Burroughs, "and the same bad blood crops out in the
Purple Trillium or Birth-root."

Strange that so close an observer as Burroughs or Thoreau should not
have credited the carrion-flower with being something more intelligent
than a mere repellent freak! Like the Purple Trillium, it has
deliberately adapted itself to please its benefactors, the little green
flesh-flies so commonly seen about untidy butcher shops in summer.




AMARYLLIS FAMILY _(Amaryllidaceae)_


Yellow Star-grass

_Hypoxis hirsuta (H. erecta)_

_Flowers_--Bright yellow within, greenish and hairy outside, about 1/2
in. across, 6-parted; the perianth divisions spreading, narrowly oblong;
a few flowers at the summit of a rough, hairy scape 2 to 6 in. high.
_Leaves:_ All from an egg-shaped corm; mostly longer than scapes,
slender, grass-like, more or less hairy.

_Preferred Habitat_--Dry, open woods, prairies, grassy waste
places, fields.

_Flowering Season_--May-October.

_Distribution_--From Maine far westward, and south to the Gulf of
Mexico.

Usually only one of these little blossoms in a cluster on each plant
opens at a time; but that one peers upward so brightly from among the
grass it cannot well be overlooked. Sitting in a meadow sprinkled over
with these yellow stars, we see coming to them many small bees--chiefly
Halictus--to gather pollen for their unhatched babies' bread. Of course
they do not carry all the pollen to their tunnelled nurseries; some must
often be rubbed off on the sticky pistil tip in the centre of other
stars. The stamens radiate, that self-fertilization need not take place
except as a last extremity. Visitors failing, the little flower closes,
bringing its pollen-laden anthers in contact with its own stigma.





IRIS FAMILY _(Iridaceae)_


Larger Blue Flag; Blue Iris; Fleur-de-lis; Flower-de-luce

_Iris versicolor_

_Flowers_--Several, 2 to 3 in. long, violet-blue variegated with yellow,
green, or white, and purple veined. Six divisions of the perianth: 3
outer ones spreading, recurved; 1 of them bearded, much longer and wider
than the 3 erect inner divisions; all united into a short tube. Three
stamens under 3 overhanging petal-like divisions of the style, notched
at end; under each notch is a thin plate, smooth on one side, rough and
moist (stigma) on side turned away from anther. _Stem:_ 2 to 3 ft. high,
stout, straight, almost circular, sometimes branching above. _Leaves:_
Erect, sword-shaped, shorter than stem, somewhat hoary, from 1/2 to 1
in. wide, folded, and in a compact flat cluster at base; bracts usually
longer than stem of flower. _Fruit:_ Oblong capsule, not prominently
3-lobed, and with 2 rows of round, flat seeds closely packed in each
cell. _Rootstock:_ Creeping, horizontal, fleshy.

_Preferred Habitat_--Marshes, wet meadows.

_Flowering Season_--May-July.

_Distribution_--Newfoundland and Manitoba to Arkansas and Florida.

This gorgeous flower is thought by scientists to be all that it is for
the bees' benefit, which, of course, is its own also. Abundant moisture,
from which to manufacture nectar--a prime necessity with most
irises--certainly is for our blue flag. The large, showy blossom cannot
but attract the passing bee, whose favorite color (according to Sir John
Lubbock) it waves. The bee alights on the convenient, spreading
platform, and, guided by the dark veining and golden lines leading to
the nectar, sips the delectable fluid shortly to be changed to honey.
Now, as he raises his head and withdraws it from the nectary, he must
rub it against the pollen-laden anther above, and some of the pollen
necessarily falls on the visitor. As the sticky side of the plate
(stigma), just under the petal-like division of the style, faces away
from the anther, which is below it in any case, the flower is
marvellously guarded against fertilization from its own pollen. The bee,
flying off to another iris, must first brush past the projecting lip of
the overarching style, and leave on the stigmatic outer surface of the
plate some of the pollen brought from the first flower, before reaching
the nectary. Thus cross-fertilization is effected; and Darwin has shown
how necessary this is to insure the most vigorous and beautiful
offspring. Without this wonderful adaptation of the flower to the
requirements of its insect friends, and of the insect to the needs of
the flower, both must perish; the former from hunger, the latter because
unable to perpetuate its race. And yet man has greedily appropriated all
the beauties of the floral kingdom as designed for his sole delight!

"The fleur-de-lys, which is the flower of chivalry," says Ruskin, "has a
sword for its leaf and a lily for its heart." When that young and pious
Crusader, Louis VII, adopted it for the emblem of his house, spelling
was scarcely an exact science, and the _fleur-de-Louis_ soon became
corrupted into its present form. Doubtless the royal flower was the
white iris, and as _li_ is the Celtic for white, there is room for
another theory as to the origin of the name. It is our far more regal
looking, but truly democratic blossom, jostling its fellows in the
marshes, that is indeed "born in the purple."

The name iris, meaning a deified rainbow, which was given this
group of plants by the ancients, shows a fine appreciation of their
superb coloring, their ethereal texture, and the evanescent beauty
of the blossom.


Blackberry Lily

_Belamcanda chinensis_ (_Pardanthus chinensis_)

_Flowers_--Deep orange color, speckled irregularly with crimson and
purple within _(Pardos_ = leopard; _anthos_ = flower); borne in
terminal, forked clusters. Perianth of 6 oblong, petal-like, spreading
divisions; 6 stamens with linear anthers; style thickest above, with 3
branches. _Stem:_ 1-1/2 to 4 ft. tall, leafy. _Leaves:_ Like the iris;
erect, folded blades, 8 to 10 in. long. _Fruit:_ Resembling a
blackberry; an erect mass of round, black, fleshy seeds, at first
concealed in a fig-shaped capsule, whose 3 valves curve backward, and
finally drop off.

_Preferred Habitat_--Roadsides and hills.

_Flowering Season_--June-July.

_Distribution_--Connecticut to Georgia, westward to Indiana and
Missouri.

How many beautiful foreign flowers, commonly grown in our gardens here,
might soon become naturalized Americans were we only generous enough to
lift a few plants, scatter a few seeds over our fences into the fields
and roadsides--to raise the bars of their prison, as it were, and let
them free! Many have run away, to be sure. Once across the wide
Atlantic, or wider Pacific, their passage paid (not sneaking in among
the ballast like the more fortunate weeds), some are doomed to stay in
prim, rigidly cultivated flower beds forever; others, only until a
chance to bolt for freedom presents itself, and away they go. Lucky are
they if every flower they produce is not picked before a single seed
can be set.

This Blackberry Lily of gorgeous hue originally came from China.
Escaping from gardens here and there, it was first reported as a wild
flower at East Rock, Connecticut; other groups of vagabonds were met
marching along the roadsides on Long Island; near Suffern, New York;
then farther southward and westward, until it has already attained a
very respectable range. Every plant has some good device for sending its
offspring away from home to found new colonies, if man would but let it
alone. Better still, give the eager travellers a lift!


Pointed Blue-eyed Grass; Eye-bright; Blue Star

_Sisyrinchium angustifolium_

_Flowers_--From blue to purple, with a yellow centre; a Western
variety, white; usually several buds at the end of the stem, between 2
erect unequal bracts; about 1/2 in. across; perianth of 6 spreading
divisions, each pointed with a bristle from a notch; stamens 3, the
filaments united to above the middle; pistil 1, its tip 3-cleft.
_Stem:_ 3 to 14 in. tall, pale hoary green, flat, rigid, 2-edged.
_Leaves:_ Grass-like, pale, rigid, mostly from base. _Fruit:_ 3-celled
capsule, nearly globose.

_Preferred Habitat_--Moist fields and meadows.

_Flowering Season_--May-August.

_Distribution_--Newfoundland to British Columbia, from eastern slope of
Rocky Mountains to Atlantic, south to Virginia and Kansas.

Only for a day, and that must be a bright one, will this "little sister
of the stately blue flag" open its eyes, to close them in indignation on
being picked; nor will any coaxing but the sunshine's induce it to open
them again in water, immediately after. The dainty flower, growing in
dense tufts, makes up in numbers what it lacks in size and lasting
power, flecking our meadows with purplish ultramarine blue on a sunny
June morning. Later in the day, apparently there are no blossoms there,
for all are tightly closed, never to bloom again. New buds will unfold
to tinge the field on the morrow.

Usually three buds nod from between a pair of bracts, the lower one of
which may be twice the length of the upper one; but only one flower
opens at a time. Slight variations in this plant have been considered
sufficient to differentiate several species formerly included by Gray
and other American botanists under the name of _S. Bermudiana_.




ORCHIS FAMILY _(Orchidaceae)_


Large Yellow Lady's Slipper; Whippoorwill's Shoe; Yellow Moccasin
Flower

_Cypripedium pubescens (C. hirsutum)_

_Flower_--Solitary, large, showy, borne at the top of a leafy stem 1 to
2 ft. high. Sepals 3, 2 of them united, greenish or yellowish, striped
with purple or dull red, very long, narrow; 2 petals, brown, narrower,
twisting; the third an inflated sac, open at the top, 1 to 2 in. long,
pale yellow, purple lined; white hairs within; sterile stamen
triangular; stigma thick. _Leaves:_ Oval or elliptic, pointed, 3 to 5
in. long, parallel-nerved, sheathing.

_Preferred Habitat_--Moist or boggy woods and thickets; hilly ground.

_Flowering Season_--May-July.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia to Alabama, westward to Minnesota and
Nebraska.

Swinging outward from a leaf-clasped stem, this orchid attracts us by
its flaunted beauty and decorative form from tip to root, not less than
the aesthetic little bees for which its adornment and mechanism are so
marvellously adapted. Doubtless the heavy, oily odor is an additional
attraction to them.

These common orchids, which are not at all difficult to naturalize in a
well-drained, shady spot in the garden, should be lifted with a good
ball of earth and plenty of leaf-mould immediately after flowering.

The similar Small Yellow Lady's Slipper _(C. parviflorum)_, a delicately
fragrant orchid about half the size of its big sister, has a brighter
yellow pouch, and occasionally its sepals and petals are purplish. As
they usually grow in the same localities, and have the same blooming
season, opportunities for comparison are not lacking. This fairer,
sweeter, little orchid roams westward as far as the State of Washington.


