was designed by Thomas Simon, the greatest of all English engravers, and
it remains to be seen whether this handsome coin will be generally
popular. The reverse of the florin will for the future bear the same
design.

During the past year her majesty was pleased to signify her pleasure
that a portrait medallion, by Mr. J.E. Boehm, R.A., modeled from life,
should be substituted for the effigy which the coins have hitherto
borne. In the new effigy, her majesty appears crowned and veiled, with
the ribbon and star of the garter and the Victoria and Albert order. The
legend "Victoria Dei Gratia Britanniarum Regina, Fidei Defensor" is
variously arranged on the different coins, according to the exigencies
of the design.

The opportunity has at the same time been taken, with her majesty's
approval, for making certain alterations in the designs for the reverses
of some of the coins by abandoning those which did not appear to possess
sufficient artistic merit to warrant their retention. The reverse of the
sovereign will still bear the design of St. George and the Dragon, by
Pistrucci, first adopted for the sovereigns of George IV., and the
reverses of the half-sovereign and threepence remain unchanged, except
that the crown has been assimilated to that used for the new effigy. The
St. George and the Dragon design will be resumed for the five-pound
piece, the double sovereign, and the crown, this design having been
adopted for these pieces when originally struck. The half-crown will
bear the same reverse as that coin bore when first issued, a design of
considerable merit, by Merlin. During the last half century public taste
appears to have been satisfied, both in this country and abroad, with
some such insignificant design as a wreath surrounding words or figures
indicating the value of the coin; and the shilling and sixpence have,
during the present reign, been examples of this treatment. They will in
future, like the half-crown, bear the royal arms, crowned, and
surrounded by the garter.

The queen was further pleased to command that the fiftieth anniversary
of her majesty's accession should be commemorated by the issue of a
medal. The effigy for this medal, which is also from a medallion by Mr.
Boehm, has a somewhat more ornate veil than that on the coin; and on the
bust, in addition to the Victoria and Albert order, is shown the badge
of the imperial order of the crown of India. The reverse is a beautiful
work by Sir Frederic Leighton, President of the Royal Academy, of which
the following is a description: "In the center a figure representing the
British empire sits enthroned, resting one hand on the sword of justice,
and holding in the other the symbol of victorious rule. A lion is seen
on each side of the throne. At the feet of the seated figure lies
Mercury, the God of Commerce, the mainstay of our imperial strength,
holding up in one hand a cup heaped with gold. Opposite to him sits the
Genius of Electricity and Steam. Below, again, five shields, banded
together, bear the names of the five parts of the globe, Europe, Asia,
Africa, America, and Australasia, over which the empire extends. On each
side of the figure of Empire stand the personified elements of its
greatness--on the right (of the spectator), Industry and Agriculture; on
the left, Science, Letters, and Art. Above, the occasion of the
celebration commemorated is expressed by two winged figures representing
the year 1887 (the advancing figure) and the year 1837 (with averted
head), holding each a wreath. Where these wreaths interlock, the letters
V.R.I. appear, and, over all, the words 'In Commemoration.'"

The issue of both the new coins and the medal began on June 21, the day
appointed for the celebration of her majesty's jubilee.--_Illustrated
London News_.

[Illustration: THE NEW BRITISH COINAGE AND JUBILEE MEDAL.

1. Half Crown. 2 and 3. Double Florin, reverse and obverse. 4. Double
Sovereign. 5. Shilling. 6. Sixpence. 7 and 8. Jubilee Medal.]

       *       *       *       *       *




BRICKS AND BRICKWORK.

[Footnote: A recent lecture delivered at Carpenters' Hall, London Wall,
E.C.--_Building News_.]

By Professor T. ROGER SMITH, F.R.I.B.A.


Timber, stone, earth, are the three materials most used by the builder
in all parts of the world. Where timber is very plentiful, as in Norway
or Switzerland, it is freely used, even though other materials are
obtainable, and seems to be preferred, notwithstanding the risk of fire
which attends its use. Where timber is scarce, and stone can be had,
houses are built of stone. Where there is no timber and no stone, they
are built of earth--sometimes in its natural state, sometimes made into
bricks and sun-dried, but more often made into bricks and burned.

London is one of the places that occupies a spot which has long ceased
to yield timber, and yields no stone, so we fall back on earth--burnt
into the form of bricks. Brick was employed in remote antiquity. The
Egyptians, who were great and skillful builders, used it sometimes; and
as we know from the book of Exodus, they employed the forced labor of
the captives or tributaries whom they had in their power in the hard
task of brick making; and some of their brick-built granaries and stores
have been recently discovered near the site of the battle of
Tel-el-Kebir.

The Assyrians and Babylonians made almost exclusive use of brickwork in
erecting the vast piles of buildings the shapeless ruins of which mark
the site of ancient Nineveh and of the cities of the valley of the
Euphrates. Their bricks, it is believed, were entirely sun-dried, not
burnt to fuse or vitrify them as ours are, and they have consequently
crumbled into mere mounds. The Assyrians also used fine clay tablets,
baked in the fire--in fact, a kind of terra cotta--for the purpose of
records, covering these tablets with beautifully executed inscriptions,
made with a pointed instrument while the clay was soft, and rendered
permanent by burning. We don't know much about Greek brickwork; but it
is probable that very little brick, if any, was made or used in any part
of Greece, as stone, marble, and timber abound there; but the Romans
made bricks everywhere, and used them constantly. They were fond of
mixing two or more materials together, as for example building walls in
concrete and inserting brickwork at intervals in horizontal layers to
act as courses of bond. They also erected buildings of which the walls
were wholly of brick. They turned arches of wide span in brickwork; and
they frequently laid in their walls at regular distances apart courses
of brick on edge and courses of sloping bricks, to which antiquaries
have given the name of herring-bone work.

The Roman bricks are interesting as records, for it was customary to
employ the soldiers on brick making, and to stamp the bricks with names
and dates; and thus the Roman bricks found in this country give us some
information as to the military commanders and legions occupying
different parts of England at different periods. Flue bricks, for the
passage of smoke under floors and in other situations, are sometimes
found. The Roman brick was often flat and large--in fact, more like our
common paving tiles, known as foot tiles, only of larger size than like
the bricks that we use. They vary, however, in size, shape, and
thickness. Not a few of them are triangular in shape, and these are
mostly employed as a sort of facing to concrete work, the point of the
triangle being embedded in the concrete and the broad base appearing
outside. After the Roman time, brick making seems to have almost ceased
in England for many centuries.

It is true we find remains of a certain number of massive brick
buildings erected not long after the Norman conquest; but on examination
it turns out that these were put up at places where there had been a
Roman town, and were built of Roman bricks obtained by pulling down
previous buildings. The oldest parts of St. Albans Abbey and portions of
the old Norman buildings at Colchester are examples of this sort.
Apparently, timber was used in this country almost exclusively for
humble buildings down to the 16th century. This is not surprising,
considering how well wooded England was; but stone served during the
same period for important buildings almost to the exclusion of brick.
This is more remarkable, as we find stone churches and the ruins of
stone castles in not a few spots remote from stone quarries, and to
which the stone must have been laboriously conveyed at a time when roads
were very bad and wheel carts were scarce.

About the time of the Tudors, say the reign of Queen Elizabeth, the
making of bricks was resumed in England, and many dwelling houses and
some few churches were built of good brickwork in that and succeeding
reigns. We find in such buildings as Hampton Court Palace, St. James'
Palace, and Chelsea Hospital examples of the use of brickwork in
important buildings near London at later dates. The fire of London, in
1666, gave a sudden check to the use of timber in house building in the
metropolis. Previous to that date the majority of houses had been of a
sort the most ornamental examples of which were copied in "Old London"
at the Colonial Exhibition. The rebuilding after the fire was largely in
brick; and in the suburbs, in the latter part of the 17th and the 18th
centuries, many dignified square brick mansions, with bold, overhanging
eaves and high roofs and carved ornaments, entered through a pair of
florid wrought iron high gates, were built, some few of which still
linger in Hampstead and other suburbs. The war time at the beginning of
this century was a trying time for builders, with its high prices and
heavy taxes, and some of the good-looking brick buildings of that day
turn out to have been very badly built when they are pulled about for
alterations. With the rapid, wonderful increase in population and wealth
in this metropolis during the last 50 years a vast consumption of bricks
has taken place, and a year or two back it was reported by the
commissioners of police that the extensions of London equaled in a year
70 miles of new house property, practically all of brick. Brick were
heavily taxed in the war time which I have referred to, and the tax was
levied before burning.

There was a maximum size for the raw brick, which it was supposed served
to keep bricks uniform, and the expectation was entertained that when
the duty came off, many fancy sizes of bricks would be used. This has
not, however, turned out to be the case. The duty has been taken off for
years; but the differences in the size of bricks in England are little
more than what is due to the different rate of shrinkage of brick earth
under burning. It must not, however, be supposed that they have always,
and in all countries, been of about the same dimensions.

The size and proportions of bricks have varied extremely in different
countries and in the same country at different periods. Some bricks of
unusual shapes have also been employed from time to time. Other
countries besides England possess districts which from various
circumstances have been more or less densely built on, but do not yield
much stone or timber; and, accordingly, brickwork is to be met with in
many localities. Holland and Belgium, for example, are countries of this
sort; and the old connection between Holland and England led to the
introduction among us, in the reign of William III., of the Dutch style
of building, which has been in our own day revived under the rather
incorrect title of Queen Anne architecture. Another great brick district
exists on the plains of Lombardy and the northern part of Italy
generally, and beautiful brickwork, often with enrichments in marble, is
to be found in such cities as Milan, Pavia, Cremona, and Bologna.

Many cities and towns in Northern Germany are also brick built, and
furnish good examples of the successful treatment of the material. In
some of these German buildings, indeed, very difficult pieces of
construction, such as we are in the habit of thinking can only be
executed in stone, are successfully attempted in brick. For example,
they execute large tracery windows in this material. Great brick gables,
often with the stepped outline known as crows' feet, are an excellent
architectural feature of these German brick-built towns. In parts of
France, also, ornamental brickwork was from time to time made use of,
but not extensively. It is not necessary to go very minutely into the
manufacture of bricks; but perhaps I ought to say a word or two on the
subject. Good brick earth is not simple clay, but a compound substance;
and what is essential is that it should burn hard or, in other words,
partly vitrify under the action of heat. The brick earth is usually dug
up in the autumn, left for the frosts of winter to break it up, and
worked up in the early spring.

The moulding is to a very large extent done by hand, sometimes in a wet
mould, sometimes in a dry sanded mould, and the bricks are first
air-dried, often under some slight shelter, as the rain or frost damages
them when fresh made; and then, when this process has made them solid
enough to handle, they are burned, and sorted into qualities. The
ordinary or stock brick of London and the neighborhood presents a
peculiarity the origin of which is not known, and which is not met with,
so far as I know, in other parts. Very fine coal or cinders is mixed
with the brick earth, and when the bricks are fired these minute
particles of fuel scattered through the material all of them burn, and
serve to bake the heart of the brick. Stock bricks are burnt in a clamp
made of the raw bricks themselves with layers of fuel, and erected on
earth slightly scooped out near the middle, so that as the bricks shrink
they drop together, and do not fall over sideways.

Most other varieties of bricks are kiln burnt. A very large number of
inventions for making bricks by machinery have been patented. If you
have occasion to look through the specifications of these patents, you
will find four or five main ideas appearing and reappearing, and only
here and there an invention which is to some extent different from the
others. A great majority of these inventions include machinery for
preparing the clay or brick earth, so that it may be dug up and filled
into a receptacle and worked up, screened from pebbles, and made fit for
use in a short time, so as not to have to wait a whole winter. This is
done in some sort of pug mill. A pug mill is a machine consisting of a
large cylinder with a central shaft passing through it from top to
bottom. Knives or blades are arranged spirally on the shaft, and other
blades project into the interior of the cylinder from the walls of it.
The material, after being screened, is fed into this at the top, and
properly moistened. The shaft is caused to rotate, and the blades divide
and subdivide the material, forcing it always downward, so that it at
last escapes at the bottom of the pug mill in a continuous stream of
moist, well worked up clay, issuing with some force. In one type of
machine this clay stream is forced through a square orifice, from which
it comes out of the section of a brick, and by a knife or wire or some
other means it is cut into lengths.

In another type of machine there is a large revolving drum working on a
horizontal axis, with open moulds all round its edge. The clay enters
these moulds, and there is an arrangement of plungers by which it is
first compressed within the mould and then forced out on to an endless
band or some other contrivance that receives it. A third type of machine
has the moulds in the flat top of a revolving table, which, as it turns,
carries each mould in succession first to a part where it is filled from
the pug mill, next to where its contents are compressed, and lastly to
where they are pushed out for removal. However made, the brick, when
moulded, dried, and burnt, and ready for market, belongs to some one
sort, and is distinguished from other sorts by its size, color, quality,
and peculiarities.

The sorts of brick that are to be met with in the London market are very
varied. To enumerate them all would make a tedious list; to describe
them all would be equally tedious. I will endeavor, however, to give
some idea of the most conspicuous of them. We will begin with that
family of bricks of which the London stock brick is the type. It has
been said these are clamp burnt, and almost all the internal
brickwork--and not a little of the external--of the metropolis is of
stock brickwork. A good London stock brick is an excellent brick for
general purposes, but cannot be called beautiful.

Considering the vast quantity of brickwork done in the metropolis, it is
a matter for congratulation that such sound materials as good stock
bricks, stone lime, and Thames sand are so easily procurable, and can be
had at a price that puts them within the reach of all respectable
builders. When a clamp has been burnt its contents are found to have
been unequally fired, and are part of them underburnt, part well burnt,
part overburnt. They are sorted accordingly into shuffs, grizzles,
stocks of two or three qualities, shippers, and burrs. Several sorts of
malm stocks, which are superior in color and texture, are made, and are
used for facing bricks and for cutting; and what are called paviors,
which are dark and strong bricks, are also made. The London stock is
erroneously, but usually, described as gray. It is really of a pie crust
yellow of various tones. Sometimes it is the same color when cut, but
the hardest stocks are of a dark, dirty purple or brown, or sometimes
nearly black inside. A stock brick is rarely quite square or quite true;
its surface is often disfigured by black specks and small pits, and a
stack of them often looks uninviting; yet a skillful bricklayer, by
throwing out the worst, by placing those of bad colors or much out of
shape in the heart of the wall, and by bringing to the front the best
end or side of those bricks which form part of the face, can always make
the bricks in his work look far better than in the stack. Another
important group is the group of Suffolk and Norfolk bricks, red and
white. These are very largely employed as facing bricks and for arches
and cut mouldings.

Moulded bricks are also to a large extent made of the same material.
These bricks are brought to London in large quantities. They have a
sanded face, are mostly square, true, and of uniform color, but they are
usually porous, soft, and absorbent. Still, they are in great demand as
facing bricks, and the moulded bricks enable the architect to produce
many architectural effects at a moderate outlay. These fields furnish
many sorts of bricks, which are called rubbers, and which are employed
(as malm stocks also are) for arches of the more elaborate sort, where
each brick is cut to its shape and rubbed true, and for mouldings, and
even sometimes for carving.

Mouldings that are formed by cutting the bricks can be got more
perfectly true than when moulded bricks are used; but the expense is
greater, and when it is done the material is less durable, for the
softer sorts of brick are naturally used for cutting, and the moulded
face is less sound than the original burnt face of any brick. Red bricks
are to some extent made in fields within easy reach of London; but the
best come from some distance. Red Suffolk bricks have been alluded to.
There is a considerable importation of red Fareham bricks, brought all
the way from the vicinity of Portsmouth; these are good both in quality
and color. Good red bricks are also now made at Ascot, and are being
used to a considerable extent in the metropolis. A strawberry-colored
brick from Luton has been extensively used at Hampstead. It is hard, and
of a color which contrasts well with stone, but not very pleasing used
alone. Glazed bricks of all colors are obtainable. They are usually very
hard and square, and the use of them where an impervious glazed face is
required, as, for example, in a good stable, is better than the
employment of glazed tiles, in the employment of which there is always a
possibility of part of the lining becoming loose or falling off. There
is a difficulty in obtaining a large quantity (of some colors, at least)
exactly uniform in tint. Bricks with a very hard face, but not glazed,
are obtainable. What is called a washing brick is now made in various
colors, adapted for the lining of interiors, and there are hard bricks
of a very pale straw color, known as Beart's patent bricks, made, I
believe, of gault clay, which were some years ago bought up by the Great
Northern Railway in large numbers. These bricks have the peculiarity of
being pierced with holes about 1/2 in. in diameter, passing quite through
the brick, and they are extremely hard, partly because these holes
permit the hot air and smoke in the kiln to approach very near to the
interior of the brick. I am of opinion that the glazed or dull qualities
of hard bricks might with great advantage be often introduced into
London streets. What we want is something that will wash. The rough
surface of stocks or Suffolk facing bricks catches the black in the
London atmosphere and gradually gets dark and dull. A perfectly hard
face is washed clean by every shower. A good many years ago I built a
warehouse with stock bricks, and formed the arches, strings, etc., of
bricks with a very hard face, and, as I expected, the effect of time has
been to make these features stand out far better than when they were
fresh; in fact, the only question is whether they have not now become
too conspicuous. To return to the bricks in the London market: we have
firebricks made of fireclay, and almost vitrified and capable of
standing intense heat. These are used for lining furnaces, ovens, flues,
etc.

Then we have almost, if not quite, as refractory a material in
Staffordshire blue bricks, used--in various forms--for paving channels,
jambs of archways, etc. There are also small bricks called clinkers,
chiefly used for stable paving. Dutch clinkers, formerly imported
largely from Holland, were small, rough bricks, laid on edge, and
affording a good foothold for the horse. Adamantine clinkers, made of
gault clay, are much used; they must have chamfered edges, otherwise
they make too smooth a floor for a stable. Many other varieties are
obtainable in London, and are more or less used, but these are the most
prominent. In many parts of England special varieties of brick are to be
found, and every here and there one falls upon a good brickmaker who is
able to produce good moulded or embossed or ornamental bricks, such as
those which have been supplied to me years ago by Mr. Gunton, and more
recently by Mr. Brown, both of Norwich, or by Mr. Cooper, of Maidenhead.

It is of importance to those whose business it is to look after or
engage in building operations, that they should early learn what to look
out for in each material. Of course, a man only becomes a judge of
bricks, or timber, or stone by experience; but he is far better able to
take the benefit of experience when it comes to him if he knows from the
first to what points to direct attention. Wherefore I make no apology
for trying to put before you the points of a good brick, and in doing so
I shall partly quote from a memorandum published now a good many years
ago by the Manchester Society of Architects.

A good brick is uniform in size; standard, 9 by 41/2 by 21/2 in.; weight
about 7 lb. each = 110 lb. per foot cube; is rectangular, true faced,
but only one end and one side need be smooth; has no print sinking on
either face, but a hollow on one or both beds. When saturated with
water, a brick should not absorb more than 20 per cent, of its own
weight of water, should absorb it reluctantly, and part with it freely
at ordinary temperatures. It should be uniformly burnt, should be sound,
free from cracks, flaws, stones, lumps of any kind, but especially lumps
of lime, should be of a good color for its sort (whether red, yellow, or
white), should have a metallic clang when two bricks are struck
together; when broken should be sound right through, should be tough and
pasty in texture, not granular, and should require repeated blows to
break it, rather than one hard blow (such bricks will withstand cartage
and handling best). So much for bricks. To make brickwork, however,
another ingredient is required--namely, mortar or cement.

All mortars and, in fact, all the cementing materials used (except
bituminous ones) in bricklaying have lime as their base, and depend upon
the setting quality of quicklime, which has to be mixed with sand or
some suitable substitute for it, to make mortars. Limes and cements are
far too wide a subject to be dealt with as part of an evening's lecture
on another topic, and no doubt they will hereafter form the subject of a
lecture or lectures. To-night I propose only to remind you that there
are such substances as these, and that they possess certain qualities
and are obtainable and available for the bricklayer's purposes, without
attempting an investigation into the chemistry of cements, or their
manufacture, etc. Ordinarily, brickwork may be divided into brickwork in
mortar and in cement; but there are many qualities of mortar and several
sorts of cement. Mortar made with what are called fat or rich
limes--that is to say, nearly pure lime, such as is got by calcining
marble or pure chalk--sets slowly, with difficulty, and is rarely
tenacious. Burnt clay or brick reduced to powder improves the setting of
such lime, especially if the two materials be calcined together; so will
an admixture of cement. Mortar made with what is known as slightly
hydraulic lime, that is to say, lime containing a small proportion of
clay, such as the gray stone lime of Dorking, Merstham, and that
neighborhood, sets well, and is tenacious and strong. Mortar made with
hydraulic lime, that is to say, lime with a considerable admixture of
clay, such as the lias lime, sets under water or in contact with wet
earth. It is best to use this lime ground to powder, and not to mix so
much sand with it as is used with stone lime. A sort of mortar called
selenitic mortar, the invention of the late General Scott, has been made
use of in many of the buildings of the School Board for London, and was
first employed on a large scale in the erection of the Albert Hall. The
peculiarity consists in the addition of a small dose of plaster of Paris
(sulphate of lime) very carefully introduced and intimately mixed. The
result is that the mortar so made sets rapidly, and is very hard.

It is claimed that a larger proportion of sand can be used with
selenitic lime than with ordinary, thus counterbalancing the extra
expense occasioned by royalty under the patent and special care in
mixing. When a limestone contains 20 to 40 per cent, of clay, it becomes
what is called a cement, and its behavior is different from that of
