To find the center of curvature at D, assume the crank pin A to have a
velocity A_a_. Then, since the rod is at that instant turning about the
farther end A', we will have D_d_ for the motion of D. The instantaneous
axis of the connecting rod is found by drawing perpendiculars to the
directions of the simultaneous motions of its two ends, and it therefore
falls at A', in the present position. But the perpendicular to the motion
of the crank pin is the line of the crank itself, and consequently is
revolving about O with an angular velocity represented by AO_a_. The
motion of A' is in the direction A'B', but its velocity at the instant is
zero. Hence, drawing a vertical line at A', limited by the prolongation
of _a_O, we have A'_a_' for the motion of the instantaneous axis.
Therefore, by drawing _a_'_d_, cutting the normal at _x_, we determine
D_x_, the radius of curvature.

Placing the crank in the opposite position OB, we find by a construction
precisely similar to the above, the radius of curvature E_z_ at the other
extremity of the axis of the curve. It will at once be seen that E_z_ is
less than D_x_, and that since the normal at P is vertical and infinite,
the evolute of DPE will consist of two branches _x_N, _z_M, to which the
vertical normal PL is a common asymptote. These two branches will not be
similar, nor is the curve itself symmetrical with respect to PL or to any
transverse line; all of which peculiarities characterize it as something
quite different from the ellipse.

[Illustration: FIG. 23.]

[Illustration: FIG. 24.]

[Illustration: FIG. 25.]

Moreover, in Fig. 22, the locus of the instantaneous axis of the trammel
bar (of which the part EH corresponds to the connecting rod, when a crank
OH is added to the elliptograph there discussed) was found to be a
circle. But in the present case this locus is very different. Beginning
at A', the instantaneous axis moves downward and to the right, as the
crank travels from A in the direction of the arrow, until it becomes
vertical, when the axis will be found upon C'R, at an infinite distance
below AB', the locus for this quarter of the revolution being a curve
A'G, to which C'R is an asymptote. After the crank pin passes C, the axis
will be found above AB' and to the right of C'R, moving in a curve HB',
which is the locus for the second quadrant. Since the path of P is
symmetrical with respect to DE, the completion of the revolution will
result in the formation of two other curves, continuous and symmetrical
with those above described, the whole appearing as in Fig. 24, the
vertical line through C' being a common asymptote.

In order to find the radius of curvature at any point on the generated
curve, it is necessary to find not only the location of the instantaneous
axis, but its motion. This is done as shown in Fig. 25. P being the given
point, CD is the corresponding position of the connecting rod, OC that of
the crank. Draw through D a perpendicular to OD, produce OC to cut it in
E, the instantaneous axis. Assume C A perpendicular to OC, as the motion
of the crank. Then the point E in OC produced will have the motion EF
perpendicular to OE, of a magnitude determined by producing OA to cut
this perpendicular in F. But since the _intersection_ E of the crank
produced is to be with a vertical line through the other end of the rod,
the instantaneous axis has a motion which, so far as it depends upon the
movement of C only, is in the direction DE. Therefore EF is a component,
whose resultant EG is found by drawing FG perpendicular to EF. Now D is
moving to the left with a velocity which may be determined either by
drawing through A a perpendicular to CD, and through C a horizontal line
to cut this perpendicular in H, or by making the angle DEI equal to the
angle CEA, giving on DO the distance DI, equal to CH. Make EK = DI or
CH, complete the rectangle KEGL, and its diagonal ES is, finally, the
motion of the instantaneous axis.

EP is the normal, and the actual motion of P is PM, perpendicular to EP,
the angle PEM being made equal to CEA. Find now the component EN of the
motion ES, which is perpendicular to EP. Draw NM and produce it to cut EP
produced in R the center of curvature at P.

This point evidently lies upon the branch _z_M of the evolute in Fig. 23.
The process of finding one upon the other branch _x_N is shown in the
lower part of the diagram, Fig. 25. The operations being exactly like
those above described, will be readily traced by the reader without
further explanation.

       *       *       *       *       *




AUTOMATIC COMMUTATOR FOR INCANDESCENT LAMPS.


Incandescent electric lighting, already pushed to such a degree of
perfection in the details of construction and installation, continually
finds new exigencies that have to be satisfied. As it is more and more
firmly established, it has to provide for all the comforts of existence
by simple solutions of problems of the smaller class.

Take for example this case: Suppose a room, such as an office, lighted by
a single lamp. The filament breaks; the room becomes dark. The bell push
is not always within reach of the arm, and it is by haphazard that one
has to wander around in the dark. This is certainly an unpleasant
situation. The comfort we seek for in our houses is far from being
provided.

M. Clerc, the well known inventor of the sun lamp, has tried to overcome
troubles of this sort, and has attained a simple, elegant, and at the
same time cheap solution. The cut shows the arrangement. The apparatus is
connected at the points, BB', with the lighting circuit. The current
entering by the terminal, B', passes through the coils of a bobbin, S,
before reaching the points of attachment, a and b, of the lamp, L, the
normally working one. Thence the circuit runs to B. Within the coil, S,
is a small hollow cylinder, T, of thin sheet iron, which is raised
parallel with the axis of the bobbin during the passage of the current
through the latter. At its base the cylinder is prolonged into two little
rods, h and h', which plunge into two mercury cups, G and G'. The cut
shows that one of the cups, G', is connected to the terminal, B', and the
other, G, to the terminal, a', of the other lamp, L'. An inspection of
the cut shows just what ensues when an accident happens to the first lamp
while burning. The first circuit being broken at ab, the magnetizing
action of the current in the bobbin ceases, the cylinder, T, descends,
and the rods, h and h', dip into the mercury. It follows that the
current, always starting from the terminal, B', will by means of the
cups, G and G', pass through the lamp, L', to go by the original return
wire to B.

[Illustration]

The substitution of the lamp, L, for L' is almost instantaneous. It can
scarcely be perceived. It goes without saying that such an arrangement of
automatic commutation is applicable to lamps with two or more filaments
of which only one is to be lighted at a time. The apparatus costs little,
and can be made as ornamental as desired. No exaggeration is indulged in
if we pronounce it simple and ingenious. It may be used in a great
variety of eases. The diameter of the wire is 55/100 (22 mm.), its length
eighteen meters (60 feet), its resistance one ohm; 3/4 ampere is needed to
work it, and less than a watt is absorbed by it.--_Electricite_.

       *       *       *       *       *




DEFINITIONS AND DESIGNATIONS IN ELECTROTECHNICS.


We may discourse for some time to come upon the uniformity of electric
language, for universal agreement is far from being established. An
important step toward the unity of this language was taken in 1881 by the
congress of Paris, which rendered the use of the C.G.S. system definitive
and universal. This labor was completed in 1884 by the meeting of a new
congress at Paris, at which a definition of the C.G.S. and practical
units was distinctly decided upon. That the unit of light defined by the
congress has not rapidly come into favor is due to the fact that its
practical realization is not within everybody's reach.

The work of unification should not come to a standstill on so good a
road. How many times in scientific works or in practical applications do
we find the same physical magnitude designated by different names, or
even the use of the same expression to designate entirely different
things!

The result is an increase of difficulties and confusions, not only for
persons not thoroughly initiated into these notions, but also for adepts,
even, in this new branch of the engineer's art. The effects of such
confusion make themselves still further felt in the reading of foreign
publications. Thus, for example, in Germany that part of a dynamo
electric machine that is called in France the _induit_ (armature) is
sometimes styled _anker_, and more rarely _armatur_. The _north pole_ of
a freely suspended magnetized needle is the one that points toward the
geographical north of the earth. In France, and by some English authors,
this pole is called the _south_ one. Among electricians of the same
country, what by one is called _electro-motive force_ is by another
styled _difference of potential_, by a third _tension_, and even
_difference of tension_.

Our confrere Ruhlmann, of the _Elektrotechnische Zeitschrift_, gives a
still more remarkable example yet of such confusion. The word
_polarization_, borrowed from optics, where it has an unequivocal sense,
serves likewise to designate the development of the counter
electro-motive force of galvanic elements, and also that essentially
different condition of badly conducting substances that is brought about
by the simultaneous influence of quantities of opposite electricity.

In Germany, the word _induction_, coupled with the word _wire_, for
example, according to the formation of compound words in that language,
may also have a double meaning, and it is by the sense alone of the
phrase that we learn whether we have to do with an induced wire or an
inducting one. The examples might be multiplied.

At its session of November 5, 1884, the International Society of
Electricians, upon a motion of Mr. Hospitalier, who had made a
communication upon this question, appointed a committee to study it and
report upon it. The English Society of Electricians likewise took the
subject into consideration, and one of its most active and distinguished
members, Mr. Jamieson, presented the result of his labors at the May
session of the society in 1885.

A discussion arose in which the committee of the International Society of
Electricians was invited to take part. The committee was represented by
its secretary, Mr. Hospitalier, who expressed himself in about these
words: "The committee on electric notations presided over by Mr. Blauvelt
has finished a part of its task, that relative to abbreviations,
notations, and symbols. It will soon take up the second part, which
relates to definitions and agreements." He broadly outlined the
committee's ideas as follows:

In all physical magnitudes that are made use of, we have: (1) the
physical magnitude itself, aside from the units that serve to measure it;
(2) the C.G.S. unit that serves to measure such grandeur (granted the
adoption of the C.G.S. system); (3) practical units, which, in general,
have a special name for each kind of magnitude, and are a decimal
multiple or sub-multiple of the C.G.S. unit, except for time and angles;
(4) finally, decimal multiples and sub-multiples of these practical
units, that are in current use.

The committee likewise decided always to adopt a large capital to
designate the physical magnitude; a small capital to designate the C.G.S.
unit, when it has a special name; a "lower case" letter for the
abbreviation of each practical unit; and prefixes, always the same, for
the decimal multiples and sub-multiples of the practical units.

Thus, for example, work would be indicated by the letter W (initial of
the word); the C.G.S. unit is the _erg_, which would be written without
abbreviation, on account of its being short; and the practical units
would be the kilogrammeter (_kgm_), the grammeter (_gm_), etc. The
multiples would be the _meg-erg_, the tonne-meter (_t-m_), etc.

Mr. Jamieson's propositions have been in great part approved. Some
criticisms, however, were made during the course of the discussion, and
it is for this reason that the scheme still remains open to improvements.
The proposed symbols are as follows:


A.--PRACTICAL ELECTRIC UNITS.

Total resistance of a circuit.                      R
Internal resistance of a source of current.         r_{1}
Resistance of the separate parts of a current.      _r__{1}, _r__{2}, etc.
Specific resistance.                                [rho]
1 ohm.                                              [omega]
1 megohm.                                           [Omega]
Intensity of a current.                             C
Magnitude of 1 ampere.                              A
1 milliampere.                                      [alpha]
Electro-motive force.                               E
Magnitude of 1 volt.                                _v_
Capacity.                                           K
Constant of specific induction.                     [sigma]
1 farad.                                            [Phi]
1 microfarad.                                       [phi]
Quantity of electricity.                            Q
1 coulomb.                                          C
Electric work (volt coulomb).                       _v_C
Electric effect (volt ampere, watt in one second).  W
Horse power.                                        HP

B.--MAGNETISM.

Pole of magnet pointing toward the north.           N
The opposite pole.                                  S
Force of a pole, quantity of magnetism.             _m_
Distance of the poles of a magnet.                  _l_
Magnetic moment.                                    M = _m.l_
Intensity of magnetization.                         J
Intensity of the horizontal component of terrestrial
magnetism.                                          H

C.--ELECTRIC MEASUREMENTS.

Galvanometer and its resistance.                    G
Resistance of the shunt of a galvanometer.          _s_
Battery and its internal resistance.                B

For dynamo machines, the following designations
are proposed:

The machine itself.                                 D
Positive terminal.                                  +T
Negative terminal.                                  -T
Magnet forming the field.                           FM
Current indicator (amperemeter).                    AM
Tension indicator (voltameter).                     MV
Electro-magnet.                                     EM
Luminous intensity of a lamp, in candles.           _c.p_.
Resistance of the armature.                         R_{a}
Resistance of the magnet forming the field.         R_{m}
Resistance of the external circuit.                 R_{o}
Intensity in the armature.                          C_{a}
Intensity in the coils of the magnet.               C_{m}
Intensity in the external circuit.                  C_{e}
Coefficient of self-induction.                      L_{s}
Coefficient of mutual induction.                    L_{m}


A primary battery would be represented as in Fig. 1, and a battery of
accumulators as in Fig. 2.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

In order to designate incandescent lamps, circles would be used, and
stars for arc lamps. A system of incandescent lamps arranged in multiple
arc would be represented as in Fig. 3.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

Fig. 4 and the formula

R = B + Gs/(G + s) + r

would serve for the total resistance, R, of an electric circuit, upon
giving the letters the significations adopted.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

Such is, in brief, the present state of the question. The scientific
bodies that have taken hold of it have not as yet furnished a fully
co-ordinated work on the subject. Let us hope, however, that we shall not
have to wait long. The question is of as much interest to scientific men
as to practical ones.

A collection of identical symbols would have the advantage of permitting
us to abridge explanations in regard to the signification of terms used
in mathematical formulas. A simple examination of a formula would suffice
to teach us its contents without the aid of tiresome explanatory matter.

But in order that the language shall be precise, it will be necessary for
the words always to represent precise ideas that are universally
accepted, and for their sense not to depend upon the manner of
understanding the idea according to their arrangement in the phrase.

Nothing can be more desirable than that the societies of electricians of
all countries shall continue the study of these questions with the desire
of coming to a common understanding through a mutual sacrifice of certain
preferences and habitudes.--_E. Dieudonne, in La Lumiere Electrique_.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED MICROSCOPICAL SETTLING TUBE.

By F. VANDERPOEL, of Newark, New Jersey.


In the February number of this _Journal_ the writer described a new
settling tube for urinary deposits which possessed several advantages
over the old method with conical test-glass and pipette. For several
reasons, however, the article was not illustrated, and it is for the
purpose of elucidation by means of illustration, as well as to bring
before the readers of the _Journal_ two new and improved forms of the
tube, that space in these columns is again sought. The first two of the
figures, 1 and 2, represent the tube as originally devised; 1 denoting
the tube with movable cap secured to it by means of a rubber band, and 2
the tube with a ground glass cap and stop cock. The first departure from
these forms is shown at 3, and consists of a conical tube, as before, but
provided with a perforated stopper, the side opening in which
communicates with a side tube. The perforation in the stopper, which is
easily made by a glass blower, thus allows the overflow, when the stopper
is inserted into the full tube, to pass into the side tube. The stopper
is then turned so as to cut off the urine in the latter from that in the
large tube, and the latter is thus made tight. After allowing it to
remain at rest long enough to permit subsidence of all that will settle,
the stopper is gently turned and a drop taken off the lower end upon a
slide, to be examined at leisure with the microscope. The cap, ground and
fitted upon the lower end, is put there as a precautionary measure, as
will be seen farther on.

[Illustration: VANDERPOEL'S SETTLING TUBES.]

The tube shown at 4 is, we think, an improvement upon all of the
foregoing, for upon it there is no side tube to break off, and everything
is comprised in a small space. As will be seen by referring to the
figure, there is a slight enlargement in the ground portion of the
stopper end of the tube, this protuberance coming down about one-half the
length of the stopper, which is solid and ground to fit perfectly. The
lower half, however, is provided with a small longitudinal slit or
groove, the lower end of which communicates with the interior of the
tube, while the upper end just reaches the enlargement in the side of the
latter. Thus in one position of the stopper there is a communication
between the tube and the outer air, while in all other positions the tube
is quite shut. In all these tubes care must be taken to fill them
_completely_ with the urine, and to allow no bubbles of air to remain
therein.

The first of these settling tubes was made without the ground cap on the
lower end, the latter being inserted into a small test tube for safety.
At the suggestion of Mr. J.L. Smith the test tube was made a part of the
apparatus by fitting it (by grinding) upon the conical end, and in its
present form it serves to protect the latter from dust and to prevent
evaporation of the urine (or other liquid), and consequent deposition of
salts, if, for any reason, the user should allow the tube to remain
suspended for several days.

These tubes will be found very useful for collecting and concentrating
into a small bulk the sediment contained in any liquid, whether it be
composed of urinary deposits, diatoms in process of being cleaned, or any
thing of like nature; and, as the parts are all of glass, the strongest
acids may be used, excepting, of course, hydrofluoric acid, without harm
to the tubes.--_American Microscopical Journal_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 594, page 9491.]




CLIMATE IN ITS RELATION TO HEALTH. By G.V. POORE, M.D.

[Footnote: Three lectures before the Society of Arts, London. From the
Journal of the Society.]

LECTURE III. DISEASES CAUSED BY FLOATING MATTER IN THE AIR.


The information which modern methods of research have given us with
regard to the floating matter in the air is of an importance which cannot
be overestimated.

That the air is full of organic particles capable of life and growth is
now a matter of absolute certainty. It has long been a matter of
speculation, but there is a great difference between a fact and a
speculation. An eminent historian has recently deprecated the distinction
which is conventionally drawn between science and knowledge, but,
nevertheless, such a distinction is useful, and will continue to be
drawn. A man's head may be filled with various things. His inclination
may lead him, for example, to study archaic myths in the various dialects
which first gave them birth; he may have a fancy for committing to memory
the writings of authors on astrology, or the speculations of ancient
philosophers, from Aristotle and Lucretius downward. Such a one may have
a just claim to be considered a man of learning, and far be it from me to
despise the branches of knowledge toward which his mind has a natural
bent. But in so far as his knowledge is a knowledge of fancies rather
than facts, it has no claim to be called science.

Fancies, however beautiful, cannot form a solid basis for action or
conduct, whereas a scientific fact does. It is all very well to suppose
that such and such things may be, but mere possibilities, or even
probabilities, do not breed a living faith. They often foster schism, and
give rise to disunited or opposed action on the part of those who think
that such and such things may not be.

When, however, a fancy or a speculation becomes a fact which is capable
of demonstration, its universal acceptance is only a matter of time, and
the man who neglects such facts in regulating his actions or conduct is
rightly regarded as insane all the world over.

The influence of micro-organisms on disease is emerging more and more,
