splendid bridge still stands perfect, so that one can walk through the
channel along which the water flowed, and it might be again used for its
original purpose. There was, however, one city which, from the fact that
a great part of it was situated upon a hill, was more difficult to supply
with water than any of the rest, and which, at the same time, from its
size, its great importance, and the fact that it was the favorite summer
residence of several of the Roman emperors, and notably of Claudius, who
was born there, and who had a palace on the top of the hill, must of
necessity be supplied with plenty of water, and that too from a
considerable height. I refer to Ludgunum (now Lyons), then the capital of
Southern Gaul. This city was built by Lucius Munatius Plaucus, by order
of the Senate in A.U.C. 711. Augustus went there in A.U.C. 738, and
afterward lived there from 741 to 744. It was he who raised it to a very
high rank among Roman cities. It had its forum near the top of the hill
now called Fourvieres (probably a corruption of Forum Vetus), an imperial
place on the summit of the same hill, public baths, an amphitheater, a
circus, and temples.

In order to supply this city with water, standing as it did on the side
of a hill at the junction of two great rivers (now Rhone and Saone), it
was necessary to search for a source at a sufficient height, and this
Plaucus found in the hills of Mont d'Or, near Lyons, where a plentiful
supply of water was found at a sufficient height, viz., that of nearly
2,000 ft. above the sea. From this point an aqueduct, sometimes called
from its source the aqueduct of Mont d'Or, and sometimes the aqueduct of
Ecully, from the name of a large plain which it crossed, was constructed,
or rather two subterranean aqueducts were made and joined together into
one, which crossed the plain of Ecully, in a straight line still
underground; but the ground around Lyons was not like the Campagna, near
Rome, and it was necessary to cross the broad and deep valley now called
La Grange, Blanche. This, however, did not daunt the Roman engineers;
making the aqueduct end in a reservoir on one side of the valley, they
carried the water down into the valley, probably by means of lead pipes,
in the manner which will be described more at length further on, across
the stream at the bottom of the valley by means of an aqueduct bridge 650
ft. long, 75 ft. high, and 281/2 ft. broad, and up the other side into
another reservoir, from which the aqueduct was continued along the top of
a long series of arches to the reservoir in the city, after a course of
about ten miles.

In the time of Augustus, however, it was found that the water brought by
this aqueduct was not sufficient, especially in summer; and as there was
a large Roman camp which also required to be supplied with water,
situated at a short distance from the city, it was determined to
construct a second aqueduct. For this purpose the springs at the head of
a small river, called now the Brevenne, were tapped, and conveyed by
means of an underground aqueduct (known as the aqueduct of the Brevenne)
which wound round the heads of the valleys, and after a course of about
thirty miles is believed by some to have arrived at the city, but by
others to have stopped at the Roman camp, and to have been constructed
exclusively for its supply.

I have here a diagram, after Flacheron, showing a section of this
aqueduct, and this will give a very good general idea of the section of a
Roman aqueduct where constructed underground. It will be seen that the
specus or channel is 60 centimeters (or nearly 2 ft.) wide, and 1m. 57c.
(or a little over 5 ft.) high, and that it is lined with a layer of 3 c.
(or nearly 11/4 in.) of cement. It is constructed of quadrangular blocks of
stone cemented together, and has an arched stone roof. It will be noticed
also that the angles at the lower part of the channel are filled up with
cement; it appears also that this aqueduct crossed a small valley by
means of inverted siphons. But neither of these aqueducts came from a
source sufficiently high to supply the imperial palace on the top of
Fourvieres.

Their sources are, in fact, according to Flacheron, at a height of nearly
50 ft. below the summit of Fourvieres, and it was, therefore, considered
necessary by the emperor Claudius to construct a third aqueduct. The
sources of the stream now called the Gier, at the foot of Mont Pila,
about a mile and a half above St. Chamond, were chosen for this purpose,
and from this point to the summit of Fourvieres was constructed by far
the most remarkable aqueduct of ancient times, an engineering work which,
as will be seen from the following description, partly taken from
Montfalcon's history of Lyons, partly from Flacheron's account of this
aqueduct, and partly from my own observations on the spot, reflects the
greatest possible credit on the Roman engineers, and shows that they were
not, as has been frequently supposed by those who have only examined
aqueducts at Rome, by any means ignorant of the elementary principles of
hydraulics.

To tap the sources of a river at a point over 50 miles from the city, and
to bring the water across a most irregular country, crossing ten or
twelve valleys, one being over 300 ft. deep, and about two-thirds of a
mile in width, was no easy task; but that it was performed the remains of
the aqueduct at various parts of its course show clearly enough. It
commences, as I have said, about a mile and a half from the present St.
Chamond, a town on the river Gier, about 16 miles from St. Etienne. Here
a dam appears to have been constructed across the bed of the river,
forming a lake from which the water entered the channel of the aqueduct,
which passed along underground until it came to a small stream which it
crossed by a bridge, long since destroyed.

After this it again became subterraneous for a time, and then crossed
another stream on a bridge of nine arches, the ruins of some of the
columns of which are still to be seen; and from these ruins it would
appear that the bridge had, at some time or another, been destroyed,
probably by the stream running under it having become torrential, and
subsequently rebuilt; again it became concealed underground, to reappear
in crossing a small valley and another small stream, when it was again
concealed by the ground, and in one or two places channels were even cut
for it through the solid rock, after which it reappeared on the surface
at a point where now stands the village of Terre-Noire, and where it was
necessary that it should somehow or another cross a broad and deep
valley. It ended in a stone reservoir, from which eight lead pipes
descending into the valley were carried across the stream at the bottom
on an aqueduct bridge, about 25 ft. wide, and supported by twelve or
thirteen arches, and then mounted the other side of the valley into
another reservoir, of which scarcely any remains are now seen, from which
the aqueduct started again, disappearing almost immediately under the
surface of the ground, to appear again from time to time crossing similar
valleys and streams upon bridges, the remains of some of which may still
be seen, until it reached Soucieu, on the edge of the valley of the
Garonne, where are still seen the remains of a splendid bridge, the
thirteenth on its course, nearly 1,600 ft. long, and attaining a height
of 56 ft. at its highest point above the ground. The object of this
bridge was to convey the channel of the aqueduct at a sufficient height
into a reservoir on the edge of the valley.

The remains of this bridge leave no doubt that it was purposely destroyed
by barbarians; some of the arches near the end of it remain, while the
rest have been thrown down, some on one side and some on the other; but
happily the arches next to the reservoir, at the end of the bridge and on
the edge of the valley, remain, and the reservoir itself is still in part
intact, supported on a huge mass of masonry. Four holes are to be seen in
that part of the front of the reservoir which is left, being the holes
from which the lead pipes descended into the valley. There must have been
nine of these pipes in all. These holes are elliptical in shape, being 12
in. high by 91/2 in. wide, and the interior of the reservoir is still seen
to be covered with cement. The walls of the reservoir were about 2 ft. 7
in. thick, and were strengthened by ties of iron; it had an arched stone
roof in which there was an opening for access. From this the nine lead
pipes descended the side of the valley supported on a construction of
masonry, crossed the river by an aqueduct bridge, and ascended into
another reservoir on the other side, entering the reservoir at its upper
part just below the spring of the arches of the roof. From this reservoir
the aqueduct passed to the next on the edge of the large and deep valley
of Bonnan, being underground twice and having three bridges on its
course, the last of which, the sixteenth on the course of the aqueduct,
ends in a reservoir on the edge of the valley. Only one of the openings
by which the siphons, of which there were probably ten, started from the
reservoir is now left. The bridge across the valley below had thirty
arches, and was about 880 ft. long by 24 ft. wide.

A number of the arches still remain standing, and, the pillars of the
arches were constructed of transverse arches themselves. The work
consisted of concrete, formed with Roman cement so hard that it turns the
points of pickaxes when employed against it, with layers of tiles at
regular intervals. The surface of the concrete is covered with small
cubical blocks of stone placed so that their diagonals are horizontal and
vertical, and forming what is known as _opus reticulatum_. After crossing
the bridge the pipes were carried up the other side of the valley into a
reservoir, of which little remains, and then the aqueduct was continued
to the next valley, passing over three bridges in its course. This
valley, that of St. Irenee, is much smaller than either of the others,
but nevertheless it was deep enough to necessitate the construction of
inverted siphons, of which there were eight. Leaving the reservoir on the
other side of this valley, the aqueduct was carried on a long bridge (the
twentieth on its course) which crossed the plateau on the top of
Fourvieres and opened into a large reservoir, the remains of which are
still to be seen on the top of that hill.

From this reservoir, which was 77 ft. long and 51 ft. wide, pipes of lead
conveyed the water to the imperial palace and to the other buildings near
the top of the hill. Some of these lead pipes were found in a vineyard
near the top of Fourvieres at the beginning of the eighteenth century,
and were described by Colonia in his history of Lyons. They are made of
thick sheet lead rolled round so as to form a tube, with the edges of the
sheet turned upward, and applied to one another in such a way as to leave
a small space, which was probably filled with some kind of cement. These
pipes, of which it is said that twenty or thirty, each from 15 ft. to 20
ft. long, were found, were marked with the initial letters TI. CL. CAES.
(Tiberius Claudius Caesar), and afford positive evidence that the work was
carried out under the emperor Claudius. Lead pipes, constructed in a
similar manner, have also been found at Bath, in this country, in
connection with the Roman baths. The great difference between this
aqueduct and those near Rome arises from the fact that, instead of being
carried across a nearly flat country, it was carried across one
intersected with deep ravines, and that it was therefore necessary to
have recourse to the system of inverted siphons. There can be no doubt
that the inverted siphons were made of lead, although no remains of them
have been found; for we know that the Romans used lead largely, and, as
we have seen, pieces of the lead distribution pipes have been found. It
is possible, and even likely, that strong cords of hemp were wound round
the pipes forming the siphons, as is related by Delorme in describing a
similar Roman aqueduct siphon near Constantinople; Delorme also
describes, in the aqueduct last mentioned, a pipe for the escape of air
from the lowest part of the siphon carried up against a tower, which was
higher than the aqueduct, and it is certain that there must have been
some such contrivance on the siphons of the aqueduct constructed at
Lyons.

Flacheron supposes that they consisted of small pipes carried from the
lowest part of the siphons up along the side of the valley and above the
reservoirs, or, in some instances, of taps fixed at the lowest part of
the siphons. The Romans have been blamed for not using inverted siphons
in the aqueducts at Rome, and it has been said that this is a sufficient
proof that they did not understand the simplest principles of hydraulics,
but the remains of the aqueducts at Lyons negative this assumption
altogether. The Romans were not so foolish as to construct underground
siphons, many miles long, for the supply of Rome; but where it was
necessary to construct them for the purpose of crossing deep valleys,
they did so. The same emperor Claudius who built the aqueduct at Rome
known by his name built the aqueduct of Mont Pila, at Lyons, and it is
quite clear, therefore, that his engineers were practically well
acquainted with the principles of hydraulics. It is thus seen that the
ancient Romans spared no pains to obtain a supply of pure water for their
cities, and I think it is high time that we followed their example, and
went to the trouble and expense of obtaining drinking water from
unimpeachable sources, instead of, as is too often the case, taking
water which we know perfectly well has been polluted, and then attempting
to purify it for domestic purposes.

       *       *       *       *       *




STEAM ENGINE ECONOMY.

By Chief Engineer JOHN LOWE, U.S. Navy.


The purpose of this article is to point out an easy method whereby any
intelligent engineer can determine the point at which it is most
economical to cut off the admission of steam into his cylinder.

In the attack upon such a problem, it is useful to employ all the senses
which can be brought to bear upon it; for this purpose, diagrams will be
used, in order that the sense of sight may assist the brain in forming
its conclusions.

[Illustration: STEAM ENGINE ECONOMY.--BY JOHN LOWE, CHIEF ENGINEER
U.S.N.]

Fig. XABCX is an ideal indicator card, taken from a cylinder, imagined to
be 600 feet long, in which the piston, making one stroke per minute, has
therefore a piston speed of 600 feet per minute. Divide this card into
any convenient number of ordinates, distant _dx_ feet from each other,
writing upon each the absolute pressure measured upon it from the zero
line XX.

By way of example, let the diameter of the cylinder be 29.59 inches, and
let the back pressure from all causes be 7 pounds uniformly throughout.
It will be represented by the line b_{1}, b_{2}, etc. This quantity
subtracted from the pressures p_{1}, p_{2}, etc., leaves the remainder
(p-b) upon each ordinate, which remainder represents the net pressures
which at that point may be applied to produce external power.

If, now, A is the area of the piston, then the external power (d W)
produced between each ordinate is:

To any convenient scale, upon each ordinate, set off the appropriate
power as calculated by this equation (1).

        A(p-b)dx
dW = --------------. (1.)
         33,000

There will result the curve _w, w, w_, determining the power which at any
point in the diagram is to be regarded as a gain, to be carried to the
credit side of the account.

It is evident that, so long as the gains from expansion exceed the losses
from expansion, it is profitable to proceed with expansion, but that
expansion should cease at that point at which gains and losses just
balance each other.


TO CALCULATE THE LOSSES.

The requisite data are furnished by the experiments conducted some years
since by President D.M. Greene, of Troy College, for the Bureau of Steam
Engineering, U.S. Navy.

According to these experiments, the heat which is lost per hour by
radiation through a metallic plate of ordinary thickness, exposed to dry
air upon one side and to the source of heat upon the other, for one
degree difference in temperature, is as follows:

             Condition.                    Heat units.

Naked...................................... 2.9330672
Covered with hair felt, 0.25 inch thick.... 1.0540710
     "           "      0.50     "     .... 0.5728647
     "           "      0.75     "     .... 0.4124625
     "           "      1.00     "     .... 0.3070554
     "           "      1.25     "     .... 0.2746387
     "           "      1.50     "     .... 0.2507097

If now t' = temperature of steam at the ordinate,
       t  = temperature of the surrounding atmosphere,
       dS = surface of the cylinder included between each ordinate,
       k  = that figure from the table satisfying the conditions,
then the power loss (dR) per minute will be:

        k    (t'-t)dS
dR = ( -- ) ----------.  (2)
       60     33,000


To the same scale as the power gains, upon each ordinate, set off the
appropriate power loss, as calculated by this equation (2).

There will result the curve r, r, r, which determines the power which at
any point in the diagram is to be regarded as a loss, to be carried to
the debit side of the account. This curve of losses intersects the curve
of gains at a point (it is evident) where each equals the other.

Therefore this is the point at which expansion should cease, and this
absolute pressure is the economic terminal pressure, which determines the
number of expansions profitable under the given conditions.

In the foregoing example are taken k = 0.3070554, t' = 331.169, t = 60,
while the back pressure was taken at 7 pounds.

By way of further illustration, first let the back pressure be changed
from 7 to 5.

By equation 1 there will result a new curve of gains, W, W, W, a portion
only being plotted.

Second, let t' = 331.169 as before.
            t  = 150 instead of 60.
            k  = 0.2507097 instead of 0.3070554.

There will result the second curve of losses, R, R, R, intersecting the
second curve of gains at the point F, the new economic point for our new
conditions.

These two examples fully illustrate the whole subject, furnishing an easy
and, when carefully made, a very exact calculation and result.

The following are a few of the general conclusions to be drawn:

1. That radiation is a tangible and measurable cause, sufficient to
account for all losses heretofore ascribed to an intangible,
immeasurable, and wholly imaginary cause, viz., "internal evaporation and
re-evaporation."

2. In order to prevent the high initial temperatures now used becoming a
source of loss, it is necessary to prevent the quantity dS (t'-t)
becoming great, by making dS as small as possible. In other words, we
must compound our engines. Thus for the first time is pointed out the
true reason why compound engines are economical heat engines.

3. The foregoing reasoning being correct, it follows that steam jackets
are a delusion.

4. In order to attain economy, we must have high initial temperatures,
small high pressure cylinders, low back pressures from whatsoever cause,
high piston speeds, short rather than long strokes, to avoid the cooling
effects of a long piston rod; but especially must we have scrupulous and
perfect protection from radiation, especially about the cylinder heads,
now oftentimes left bare.

       *       *       *       *       *




ELECTRICITY IN WARFARE.

[Footnote: From a recent lecture before the Franklin Institute,
Philadelphia.]

By Lieut. B.A. FISKE, U.S.N.


Lieutenant Fiske began by paying a tribute to the remarkable pioneer
efforts of Colonel Samuel Colt, who more than forty years ago blew up
several old vessels, including the gunboat Boxer and the Volta, by the
use of electricity. Congress voted Colt $17,000 for continuing his
experiments, which at that day seemed almost magical; and he then blew up
a vessel in motion at a distance of five miles. Lieut. Fiske next
referred briefly to the electrical torpedoes employed in the Crimean war
and our civil war.

At the present day, an electrical torpedo may be described as consisting
of a strong, water-tight vessel of iron or steel, which contains a large
amount of some explosive, usually gun-cotton, and a device for detonating
this explosive by electricity. The old mechanical mine used in our civil
war did not know a friendly ship from a hostile one, and would sink
either with absolute impartiality. But the electrical submarine mine,
being exploded only when a current of electricity is sent through it from
ship or shore, makes no such mistake, and becomes harmless when detached
from the battery. The condition of the mine at any time can also be told
by sending a very minute current through it, though miles away and buried
deep beneath the sea.

When a current of electricity goes through a wire, it heats it; and if
the current be made strong enough, and a white hot wire thus comes in
contact with powder or fulminate of mercury in a torpedo, an explosion
will result. But it is important to know exactly when to explode the
torpedo, especially during the night or in a fog; and hence torpedoes are
often made automatic by what is called a circuit closer. This is a device
which automatically bridges over the distance between two points which
were separated, thus allowing the current to pass between them. In
submarine torpedoes it is usual to employ a small weight, which, when the
torpedo is struck, is thrown by the force of the blow across two contact
points, one of which points is in connection with the fuse and the other
in connection with the battery, so that the current immediately runs over
the bridge thus offered, and through the fuse. In practice, these two
contact points are connected by a wire, even when the torpedo is not in
the state of being struck; but the wire is of such great resistance that
the current is too weak to heat the wire in the fuse. Yet when the weight
above mentioned is thrown across the two contact points, the current runs
across the bridge, instead of through the resistance wire, and is then
