Eastern Company is at Porthcurno, Cornwall, and through it pass most
of the messages for Spain, Portugal, Egypt, India, China, Japan, and
Australia.

The third largest cable company is the Anglo-American Telegraph
Company, with thirteen cables, of a total length of 10,196 miles.

The British government has one hundred and three cables around our
shores, of a total length of 1,489 miles. If we include India and the
colonies, the British empire owns altogether two hundred and sixteen
cables of a total length of 3,811 miles.

The longest government cable in British waters is that from Sinclair
Bay, Wick, to Sandwick Bay, Shetland, of the length of 122 miles, and
laid in 1885. The shortest being four cables across the Gloucester and
Sharpness Canal, at the latter place, and each less than 300 ft. in
length.

Of government cables the greatest number is owned by Norway, with two
hundred and thirty-six, averaging, however, less than a mile each in
length.

The greatest mileage is owned by the government of France with 3,269
miles, of the total length of fifty-one cables.

The next being British India with 1,714 miles, and eighty-nine cables;
and Germany third with 1,570 miles and forty-three cables.

Britain being fourth with ninety miles less. The oldest cable still
in use is the one that was first laid, that namely from Dover to
Calais. It dates from 1851.

The two next oldest cables in use being those respectively from
Ramsgate to Ostend, and St. Petersburg to Cronstadt, and both laid
down in 1853.

Several unsuccessful attempts were made to connect England and Ireland
by means of a cable between Holyhead and Howth; but communication
between the two countries was finally effected in 1853, when a cable
was successfully laid between Portpatrick and Donaghadee (31).

As showing one of the dangers to which cables laid in comparatively
shallow waters are exposed, we may relate the curious accident that
befell the Portpatrick cable in 1873. During a severe storm in that
year the Port Glasgow ship Marseilles capsized in the vicinity of
Portpatrick, the anchor fell out and caught on to the telegraph cable,
which, however, gave way. The ship was afterward captured and towed
into Rothesay Bay, in an inverted position, by a Greenock tug, when
part of the cable was found entangled about the anchor.

The smallest private companies are the Indo-European Telegraph
Company, with two cables in the Crimea, of a total length of fourteen
and a half miles; and the River Plate Telegraph Company, with one
cable from Montevideo to Buenos Ayres, thirty-two miles long.

The smallest government telegraph organization is that of New
Caledonia, with its one solitary cable one mile long.

We will now proceed to give a few particulars regarding the companies
having cables from Europe to America.

The most important company is the Anglo-American Telegraph Company,
whose history is inseparably connected with that of the trials and
struggles of the pioneers of cable laying.

Its history begins in 1851 when Tebets, an American, and Gisborne, an
English engineer, formed the Electric Telegraph Company of
Newfoundland, and laid down twelve miles of cable between Cape Breton
and Nova Scotia. This company was shortly afterward dissolved, and its
property transferred to the Telegraphic Company of New York,
Newfoundland and London, founded by Cyrus W. Field, and who in 1854
obtained an extension of the monopoly from the government to lay
cables.

A cable, eighty-five miles long, was laid between Cape Breton and
Newfoundland (22).

Field then came to England and floated an English company, which
amalgamated with the American one under the title of the Atlantic
Telegraph Company.

The story of the laying of the Atlantic cables of 1857 and 1865, their
success and failures, has often been told, so we need not go into any
details. It may be noted, however, that communication was first
established between Valentia and Newfoundland on August 5. 1858, but
the cable ceased to transmit signals on September 1, following.

During that period, ninety-seven messages had been sent from Valentia,
and two hundred and sixty-nine from Newfoundland. At the present time,
the ten Atlantic cables now convey about ten thousand messages daily
between the two continents. The losses attending the laying of the
1865 cable resulted in the financial ruin of the Atlantic company and
its amalgamation with the Anglo-American. In 1866 the Great Eastern
successfully laid the first cable for the new company, and with the
assistance of other vessels succeeded in picking up the broken end of
the 1865 cable and completing its connection with Newfoundland.

[Illustration: MAP SHOWING MAIN CABLES FROM EUROPE AND THEIR
CONNECTIONS WITH CANADA AND THE UNITED STATES.

Reference to places--A, Heart's Content; B, Placentia; C, St. Peter
Miquelon; D, North Sydney, Cape Breton Island; E, Louisbourg; F Canso,
Nova Scotia; G, Halifax; H, Bird Rock; I, Madeline Isles; J,
Anticosti; K, Charlotte Town, Prince Edward's Island; LLL, Banks of
Newfoundland.]

The three cables of this company presently in use and connecting
Valentia in Ireland with Heart's Content in Newfoundland, were laid in
1873, 1874, and 1880; and (1) are respectively 1886, 1846, and 1890
nautical miles in length. This company also owns the longest cable in
the world, that namely from Brest in France to St. Pierre Miquelon,
one of a small group of islands off the south coast of Newfoundland
and which, strange to say, still belongs to France (6).

The length of this cable is 2,685 nautical miles, or 3,092 statute
miles. It was laid in 1869. There are seven cables of a total length
of 1773 miles, connecting Heart's Content, Placentia Bay and St.
Pierre, with North Sydney, Nova Scotia, and Duxbury, near Boston,
belonging to the American company. Communication is maintained with
Germany and the rest of the Continent by means of a cable from
Valentia to Emden 846 miles long (7); and a cable from Brest to
Salcombe, Devon, connects the St. Pierre and Brest cable with the
London office of the company (10).[1]

[Footnote 1: Cables not fully described in the text, Map B. Eight
cables at the Anglo-American Company: 7, Heart's Content to Placentia,
two cables; 8, Placentia to St. Pierre; 9, St. Pierre to North Sydney;
10, Placentia to North Sydney, two cables; 11, St. Pierre to Duxbury;
18, Charlotte's Town to Nova Scotia; 19, Government Cable, North
Sydney to Bird Rock, Madeline Isles, and Anticosti; 21, Halifax and
Bermuda Cable Company's proposed cable to Bermuda.]

The station of the Direct United States Cable Company is situated at
Ballinskelligs Bay, Ireland (2). Its cable was laid in 1874-5, and is
2,565 miles in length. The terminal point on the other side of the
Atlantic is at Halifax, Nova Scotia, from whence the cable is
continued to Rye Beach, New Hampshire, a distance of 536 miles, and
thence by a land line of 500 miles to New York (17).

The Commercial Cable Company's station in Ireland is at Waterville, a
short distance from Ballinskelligs (3). It owns two cables laid in
1885; the northern cable being 2,350, and the southern 2,388 miles
long. They terminate in America at Canso, Nova Scotia. From Canso a
cable is laid to Rockfort, about thirty miles south of Boston, Mass.,
a distance of 518 miles (16), and another is laid to New York, 840
miles in length (15). This company has direct communication with the
Continent by means of a cable from Waterville to Havre of 510 miles
(9), and with England by a cable to Weston-super-Mare, near Bristol,
of 328 miles (8).

The Western Union Telegraph Company (the lessees of the lines of the
American Telegraph and Cable Company) has two cables from Sennen Cove,
Land's End, to Canso, Nova Scotia (4). The cable of 1881 is 2,531 and
that of 1882 is 2,576 miles in length. Two cables were laid November,
1889, between Canso and New York (14).

The Compagnie Francaise du Telegraphe de Paris a New York has a cable
from Brest to St. Pierre Miquelon of 2,242 miles in length (5), from
thence a cable is laid to Louisbourg, Cape Breton (12), and another
to Cape Cod (13). It has also a cable from Brest to Porcella Cove,
Cornwall (11).

Those ten cables owned by the six companies named, of the total milage
of 22,959, not counting connections, represent the entire direct
communication between the continents of Europe and North America.

A new company, not included in the preceding statistics, proposes to
lay a cable from Westport, Ireland, to some point in the Straits of
Belle Isle on the Labrador coast (Map A32, Map B20).

The station of the Eastern Telegraph Company is at Porthcurno Cove,
Penzance, from whence it has two cables to Lisbon, one laid in 1880,
850 miles long, the other laid in 1887, 892 miles long (12), and one
cable to Vigo, Spain, laid in 1873, 622 miles long (13). From Lisbon
the cable is continued to Gibraltar and the East, whither we need not
follow it, our intention being to confine ourselves entirely to a
brief account of those cables communicating directly with Europe and
America. As already stated, this company has altogether seventy
cables, of a total length of nearly 22,000 miles.

The Direct Spanish Telegraph Company has a cable, laid in 1884, from
Kennach Cove, Cornwall, to Bilbao, Spain, 486 miles in length (14).

Coming now to shorter cables connecting Britain with the Continent, we
have those of the Great Northern Telegraph Company, namely, Peterhead
to Ekersund, Norway, 267 miles (15). Newbiggin, near Newcastle, to
Arendal, Norway, 424 miles, and thence to Marstrand, Sweden, 98 miles.

Two cables from the same place in England to Denmark (Hirstals and
Sondervig) of 420 and 337 miles respectively (17 and 18).

The great Northern Company has altogether twenty-two cables, of a
total length of 6,110 miles. The line from Newcastle, is worked direct
to Nylstud, in Russia--a distance of 890 miles--by means of a "relay"
or "repeater," at Gothenburg. The relay is the apparatus at which the
Newcastle current terminates, but in ending there it itself starts a
fresh current on to Russia.

The other continental connections belong to the government, and are as
follows: two cables to Germany, Lowestoft to Norderney, 232 miles, and
to Emden, 226 miles (19 and 20).

Two cables to Holland: Lowestoft to Zandvoort, laid in 1858 (21), and
from Benacre, Kessingland, to Zandvoort (22).

Two cables to Belgium: Ramsgate to Ostend (23), and Dover to Furness
(24).

Four cables to France: Dover to Calais, laid in 1851 (25), and to
Boulogne (26), laid in 1859; Beachy Head to Dieppe (27), and to Havre
(28).

There is a cable from the Dorset coast to Alderney and Guernsey, and
from the Devon coast to Guernsey, Jersey, and Coutances, France (29
and 30).

A word now as to the instruments used for the transmission of
messages. Those for cables are of two kinds, the mirror galvanometer
and the siphon recorder, both the product of Sir Wm. Thomson's great
inventive genius.

When the Calais-Dover and other short cables were first worked, it was
found that the ordinary needle instrument in use on land lines was not
sufficiently sensitive to be affected trustworthily by the ordinary
current it was possible to send through a cable. Either the current
must be increased in strength or the instruments used must be more
sensitive. The latter alternative was chosen, and the mirror
galvanometer was the result.

The principle on which this instrument works may be briefly described
thus: the transmitted current of electricity causes the deflection of
a small magnet, to which is attached a mirror about three-eighths of
an inch in diameter, a beam of light is reflected from a properly
arranged lamp, by the mirror, on to a paper scale. The dots and dashes
of the Morse code are indicated by the motions of the spot of light to
the right and left respectively of the center of the scale.

The mirror galvanometer is now almost entirely superseded by the
siphon recorder. This is a somewhat complicated apparatus, with the
details of which we need not trouble our readers. Suffice it for us to
explain that a suspended coil is made to communicate its motions, by
means of fine silk fibers, to a very fine glass siphon, one end of
which dips into an insulated metallic vessel containing ink, while the
other extremity rests, when no current is passing, just over the
center of a paper ribbon. When the instrument is in use the ink is
driven out of the siphon in small drops by means of an electrical
arrangement, and the ribbon underneath is at the same time caused to
pass underneath its point by means of clockwork.

If a current be now sent through the line, the siphon will move above
or below the central line, thus giving a permanent record of the
message, which the mirror instrument does not. The waves written by
the siphon above the central line corresponding to the dots of the
Morse code, and the waves underneath corresponding to the dashes.

The cost of the transmission of a cablegram varies from one shilling
per word, the rate to New York and east of the Mississippi, to ten
shillings and seven pence per word, the rate to New Zealand. In order
to minimize that cost as much as possible, the use of codes, whereby
one word is made to do duty for a lengthy phrase, is much resorted to.
Of course those code messages form a series of words having no
apparent relation to each other, but occasionally queer sentences
result from the chance grouping of the code words. Thus a certain tea
firm was once astonished to receive from its agent abroad the
startling code message--"Unboiled babies detested"!

Suppose we now follow the adventures of a few cablegrams in their
travels over the world.

A message to India from London by the cable route requires to be
transmitted eight times at the following places: Porthcurno
(Cornwall), Lisbon, Gibraltar, Malta, Alexandria, Suez, Aden, Bombay.

A message to Australia has thirteen stoppages; the route taken beyond
Bombay being via Madras, Penang, Singapore, Banjoewangie and Port
Darwin (North Australia); or from Banjoewangie to Roebuck Bay (Western
Australia).

To India by the Indo-European land lines, messages go through Emden,
Warsaw, Odessa, Kertch, Tiflis, Teheran, Bushire (Persian Gulf), Jask
and Kurrachee, but only stop twice between London and Teheran--namely,
at Emden and Odessa.

Messages from London to New York are transmitted only twice--at the
Irish or Cornwall stations, and at the stations in Canada. Owing to
the great competition for the American traffic, the service between
London, Liverpool, and Glasgow and New York is said to be much
superior to that between any two towns in Britain. The cables are
extensively used by stock brokers, and it is a common occurrence for
one to send a message and receive a reply within five minutes.

During breakages in cables messages have sometimes to take very
circuitous routes. For instance, during the two days, three years ago,
that a tremendous storm committed such havoc among the telegraph wires
around London, cutting off all communication with the lines connected
with the Channel cables at Dover, Lowestoft, etc., it was of common
occurrence for London merchants to communicate with Paris through New
York. The cablegram leaving London going north to Holyhead and
Ireland, across the Atlantic to New York and back _via_ St. Pierre to
Brest and thence on to Paris, a total distance of about seven thousand
miles.

Three years ago, when the great blizzard cut off all communication
between New York and Boston, messages were accepted in New York, sent
to this country, and thence back to Boston.

Some time ago the cables between Madeira and St. Vincent were out of
order, cutting off communication by the direct route to Brazil, and a
message to reach Rio Janeiro had to pass through Ireland, Canada,
United States, to Galveston, thence to Vera Cruz, Guatemala,
Nicaragua, Panama, Ecuador, Peru, Chili; from Valparaiso across the
Andes, through the Argentine Republic to Buenos Ayres, and thence by
East Coast cables to Rio Janeiro, the message having traversed a
distance of about twelve thousand miles and having passed through
twenty-four cables and some very long land lines, instead of passing,
had it been possible to have sent it by the direct route, over one
short land line and six cables, in all under six thousand miles.

Perhaps some of our readers may remember having read in the newspapers
of the result of last year's Derby having been sent from Epsom to New
York in fifteen seconds, and may be interested to know how it was
done. A wire was laid from near the winning post on the race course to
the cable company's office in London, and an operator was at the
instrument ready to signal the two or three letters previously
arranged upon for each horse immediately the winner had passed the
post. When the race began, the cable company suspended work on all the
lines from London to New York and kept operators at the Irish and Nova
Scotian stations ready to transmit the letters representing the
winning horse immediately, and without having the message written out
in the usual way. When the race was finished, the operator at Epsom at
once sent the letters representing the winner, and before he had
finished the third letter, the operator in London had started the
first one to Ireland. The clerk in Ireland immediately on bearing the
first signal from London passed it on to Nova Scotia, from whence it
was again passed on to New York. The result being that the name of the
winner was actually known in New York before the horses had pulled up
after passing the judge. It seems almost incredible that such
information could be transmitted such a great distance in fifteen
seconds, but when we get behind the scenes and see exactly how it is
accomplished, and see how the labor and time of signaling can be
economized, we can easily realize the fact.

The humors of telegraphic mistakes have often been described; we will
conclude by giving only one example. A St. Louis merchant had gone to
New York on business, and while there received a telegram from the
family doctor, which ran: "Your wife has had a child, if we can keep
her from having another to-night, all will be well." As the little
stranger had not been expected, further inquiry was made and elicited
the fact that his wife had simply had a "chill"! This important
difference having been caused simply by the omission of a single dot.

   -.-. .... .. .-.. .-..
      c    h  i    l    l = chill
   -.-. .... .. .-..  -..
      c    h  i    l    d = child

--_Hardwicke's Science-Gossip_.

       *       *       *       *       *




ELECTRICITY IN TRANSITU--FROM PLENUM TO VACUUM.[1]

[Footnote 1: Presidential address before the Institute of Electrical
Engineers, London; continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 792, page 12656.]

By Prof. WILLIAM CROOKES, F.R.S.


If an idle pole, C, C, Fig. 12 (P=0.0001 millimeter or 0.13 M),
protected all but the point by a thick coating of glass, is brought
into the center of the molecular stream in front of the negative pole,
A, and the whole of the inside and outside of the tube walls are
coated with metal, D, D, and "earthed" so as to carry away the
positive electricity as rapidly as possible, then it is seen that the
molecules leaving the negative pole and striking upon the idle pole,
C, on their journey along the tube carry a negative charge and
communicate negative electricity to the idle pole.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.--PRESSURE = 0.0001 MM. = 0.13 M.]

This tube is of interest, since it is the one in which I was first
able to perceive how, in my earlier results, I always obtained a
positive charge from an idle pole placed in the direct stream from the
negative pole. Having got so far, it was easy to devise a form of
apparatus that completely verified the theory, and at the same time
threw considerably more light upon the subject. Fig. 13, a, b, c, is
such a tube, and in this model I have endeavored to show the
electrical state of it at a high vacuum by marking a number of + and -
signs. The exhaustion has been carried to 0.0001 millimeter, or 0.13
M, and you see that in the neighborhood of the positive pole, and
extending almost to the negative, the tube is strongly electrified
with positive electricity, the negative atoms shooting out from the
negative pole in a rapidly diminishing cone. If an idle pole is placed
in the position shown at Fig. 13, a, the impacts of positive and
negative molecules are about equal, and no decided current will pass
from it, through the galvanometer, to earth. This is the _neutral_
point. But if we imagine the idle pole to be as at Fig. 13, b, then
the positively electrified molecules greatly preponderate over the
negative molecules, and positive electricity is shown. If the idle
pole is now shifted, as shown at Fig. 13, c, the negative molecules
preponderate, and the pole will give negative electricity.

[Illustration: FIG. 13 A.--PRESSURE = 0.0001 MM. = 0.13 M.]

[Illustration: FIG. 13 B.--PRESSURE = 0.0001 MM. = 0.13 M.]

[Illustration: FIG. 13 C.--PRESSURE = 0.0001 MM. = 0.13 M.]

As the exhaustion proceeds, the positive charge in the tube increases
and the neutral point approaches closer to the negative pole, and at a
point just short of non-conduction so greatly does the positive
electrification preponderate that it is almost impossible to get
negative electricity from the idle pole, unless it actually touches
the negative pole. This tube is before you, and I will now proceed to
show the change in direction of current by moving the idle pole.

I have not succeeded in getting the "Edison" current incandescent
lamps to change in direction at even the highest degree of exhaustion
which my pump will produce. The subject requires further
investigation, and like other residual phenomena these discrepancies
promise a rich harvest of future discoveries to the experimental
philosopher, just as the waste products of the chemist have often
proved the source of new and valuable bodies.


PROPERTIES OF RADIANT MATTER.

One of the most characteristic attributes of radiant matter--whence
its name--is that it moves in approximately straight lines and in a
direction almost normal to the surface of the electrode. If we keep
the induction current passing continuously through a vacuum tube in
the same direction, we can imagine two ways in which the action
proceeds: either the supply of gaseous molecules at the surface of the
negative pole must run short and the phenomena come to an end, or the
molecules must find some means of getting back. I will show you an
experiment which reveals the molecules in the very act of returning.
Here is a tube (Fig. 14) exhausted to a pressure of 0.001 millimeter
or 1.3 M. In the middle of the tube is a thin glass diaphragm, C,
pierced with two holes, D and E. At one part of the tube a concave
pole, A', is focused on the upper hole, D, in the diaphragm. Behind
the upper hole and in front of the lower one are movable vanes, F and
G, capable of rotation by the slightest current of gas through the
holes.

