a a_, may all be normal to a true plane, and yet errors of depression, as
at _e_, or elevation, as at _b_, exist between them, so that the
instrument must be used over every available part of the surface if it is
to be tested rigorously. As to how exact this method is I cannot say from
actual experience, as in my work I have had recourse to other methods that
I shall describe. I have already quoted you the words of Prof. Harkness.
Dr. Hastings, whose practical as well as theoretical knowledge is of the
most critical character, tells me that he considers it quite easy to
measure to 1/80000 of an inch with the ordinary form of instrument. Here
is a very fine spherometer that Dr. Hastings works with from time to time,
and which he calls his standard spherometer. It is delicately made, its
screw being 50 to the inch, or more exactly 0.01998 inch, or within
2/100000 of being 1/50 of an inch pitch. The principal screw has a point
which is itself an independent screw, that was put in to investigate the
errors of the main screw, but it was found that the error of this screw
was not as much as the 0.00001 of an inch. The head is divided into two
hundred parts, and by estimation can be read to 1/100000 of an inch. Its
constants are known, and it may be understood that it would not do to
handle it very roughly. I could dwell here longer on this fascinating
subject, but must haste. I may add that if this spherometer is placed on a
plate of glass and exact contact obtained, and then removed, and the hand
held over the plate without touching it, the difference in the temperature
of the glass and that of the hand would be sufficient to distort the
surface enough to be readily recognized by the spherometer when replaced.
Any one desiring to investigate this subject further will find it fully
discussed in that splendid series of papers by Dr. Alfred Mayer on the
minute measurements of modern science published in SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN
SUPPLEMENTS, to which I was indebted years ago for most valuable
information, as well as to most encouraging words from Prof. Thurston,
whom you all so well and favorably know. I now invite your attention to
the method for testing the flat surfaces on which Prof. Rowland rules the
beautiful diffraction gratings now so well known over the scientific
world, as also other plane surfaces for heliostats, etc., etc. I am now
approaching the border land of what may be called the abstruse in science,
in which I humbly acknowledge it would take a vast volume to contain all I
don't know; yet I hope to make plain to you this most beautiful and
accurate method, and for fear I may forget to give due credit, I will say
that I am indebted to Dr. Hastings for it, with whom it was an original
discovery, though he told me he afterward found it had been in use by
Steinheil, the celebrated optician of Munich. The principle was discovered
by the immortal Newton, and it shows how much can be made of the ordinary
phenomena seen in our every-day life when placed in the hands of the
investigator. We have all seen the beautiful play of colors on the soap
bubble, or when the drop of oil spreads over the surface of the water.
Place a lens of long curvature on a piece of plane polished glass, and,
looking at it obliquely, a black central spot is seen with rings of
various width and color surrounding it. If the lens is a true curve, and
the glass beneath it a true plane, these rings of color will be perfectly
concentric and arranged in regular decreasing intervals. This apparatus is
known as Newton's color glass, because he not only measured the phenomena,
but established the laws of the appearances presented. I will now endeavor
to explain the general principle by which this phenomenon is utilized in
the testing of plane surfaces. Suppose that we place on the lower plate,
lenses of constantly increasing curvature until that curvature becomes
nil, or in other words a true plane. The rings of color will constantly
increase in width as the curvature of the lens increases, until at last
one color alone is seen over the whole surface, provided, however, the
same angle of observation be maintained, and provided further that the
film of air between the glasses is of absolutely the same relative
thickness throughout. I say the film of air, for I presume that it would
be utterly impossible to exclude particles of dust so that absolute
contact could take place. Early physicists maintained that absolute
molecular contact was impossible, and that the central separation of the
glasses in Newton's experiment was 1/250,000 of an inch, but Sir Wm.
Thomson has shown that the separation is caused by shreds or particles of
dust. However, if this separation is equal throughout, we have the
phenomena as described; but if the dust particles are thicker under one
side than the other, our phenomena will change to broad parallel bands as
in Fig. 8, the broader the bands the nearer the absolute parallelism of
the plates. In Fig. 7 let _a_ and _b_ represent the two plates we are
testing. Rays of white light, _c_, falling upon the upper surface of plate
_a_, are partially reflected off in the direction of rays _d_, but as
these rays do not concern us now, I have not sketched them. Part of the
light passes on through the upper plate, where it is bent out of its
course somewhat, and, falling upon the _lower_ surface of the upper plate,
some of this light is again reflected toward the eye at _d_. As some of
the light passes through the upper plate, and, passing through the film of
air between the plates, falling on the upper surface of the _lower_ one,
this in turn is reflected; but as the light that falls on this surface has
had to traverse the film of air _twice_, it is retarded by a certain
number of half or whole wave-lengths, and the beautiful phenomena of
interference take place, some of the colors of white light being
obliterated, while others come to the eye. When the position of the eye
changes, the color is seen to change. I have not time to dwell further on
this part of my subject, which is discussed in most advanced works on
physics, and especially well described in Dr. Eugene Lommel's work on "The
Nature of Light." I remarked that if the two surfaces were perfectly
_plane_, there would be one color seen, or else colors of the first or
second order would arrange themselves in broad parallel bands, but this
would also take place in plates of slight curvature, for the requirement
is, as I said, a film of air of equal thickness throughout. You can see at
once that this condition could be obtained in a perfect convex surface
fitting a perfect concave of the same radius. Fortunately we have a check
to guard against this error. To produce a perfect plane, _three surfaces
must_ be worked together, unless we have a true plane to commence with;
but to make this true plane by this method we _must_ work three together,
and if each one comes up to the demands of this most rigorous test, we may
rest assured that we have attained a degree of accuracy almost beyond
human conception. Let me illustrate. Suppose we have plates 1, 2, and 3,
Fig. 11. Suppose 1 and 2 to be accurately convex and 3 accurately concave,
of the same radius. Now it is evident that 3 will exactly fit 1 and 2, and
that 1 and 2 will separately fit No. 3, _but_ when 1 and 2 are placed
together, they will only touch in the center, and there is no possible
way to make three plates coincide when they are alternately tested upon
one another than to make _perfect planes_ out of them. As it is difficult
to see the colors well on metal surfaces, a one-colored light is used,
such as the sodium flame, which gives to the eye in our test, dark and
bright bands instead of colored ones. When these plates are worked and
tested upon one another until they all present the same appearance, one
may be reserved for a test plate for future use. Here is a small test
plate made by the celebrated Steinheil, and here two made by myself, and I
may be pardoned in saying that I was much gratified to find the
coincidence so nearly perfect that the limiting error is much less than
0.00001 of an inch. My assistant, with but a few months' experience, has
made quite as accurate plates. It is necessary of course to have a glass
plate to test the metal plates, as the upper plate _must_ be transparent.
So far we have been dealing with perfect surfaces. Let us now see what
shall occur in surfaces that are not plane. Suppose we now have our
perfect test plate, and it is laid on a plate that has a compound error,
say depressed at center and edge and high between these points. If this
error is regular, the central bands arrange themselves as in Fig. 9. You
may now ask, how are we to know what sort of surface we have? A ready
solution is at hand. The bands _always travel in the direction of the
thickest film of air_, hence on lowering the eye, if the convex edge of
the bands travel in the direction of the arrow, we are absolutely certain
that that part of the surface being tested is convex, while if, as in the
central part of the bands, the concave edges advance, we know that part is
hollow or too low. Furthermore, any small error will be rigorously
detected, with astonishing clearness, and one of the grandest qualities of
this test is the absence of "personal equation;" for, given a perfect test
plate, _it won't lie_, neither will it exaggerate. I say, won't lie, but I
must guard this by saying that the plates must coincide absolutely in
temperature, and the touch of the finger, the heat of the hand, or any
disturbance whatever will vitiate the results of this lovely process; but
more of that at a future time. If our surface is plane to within a short
distance of the edge, and is there overcorrected, or convex, the test
shows it, as in Fig. 10. If the whole surface is regularly convex, then
concentric rings of a breadth determined by the approach to a perfect
plane are seen. If concave, a similar phenomenon is exhibited, except in
the case of the convex, the broader rings are near the center, while in
the concave they are nearer the edge. In lowering the eye while observing
the plates, the rings of the convex plate will advance outward, those of
the concave inward. It may be asked by the mechanician, Can this method be
used for testing our surface plates? I answer that I have found the
scraped surface of iron bright enough to test by sodium light. My
assistant in the machine work scraped three 8 inch plates that were tested
by this method and found to be very excellent, though it must be evident
that a single cut of the scraper would change the spot over which it
passed so much as to entirely change the appearance there, but I found I
could use the test to get the general outline of the surface under process
of correction. These iron plates, I would say, are simply used for
preliminary formation of polishers. I may have something to say on the
question of surface plates in the future, as I have made some interesting
studies on the subject. I must now bring this paper to a close, although I
had intended including some interesting studies of curved surfaces. There
is, however, matter enough in that subject of itself, especially when we
connect it with the idiosyncrasies of the material we have to deal with, a
vital part of the subject that I have not touched upon in the present
paper. You may now inquire, How critical is this "color test"? To answer
this I fear I shall trench upon forbidden grounds, but I call to my help
the words of one of our best American physicists, and I quote from a
letter in which he says by combined calculation and experiment I have
found the limiting error for white light to be 1/50000000 of an inch, and
for Na or sodium light about fifty times greater, or less than 1/800000 of
an inch. Dr. Alfred Mayer estimated and demonstrated by actual experiment
that the smallest black spot on a white ground visible to the naked eye is
about 1/800 of an inch at the distance of normal vision, namely, 10
inches, and that a line, which of course has the element of extension,
1/5000 of an inch in thickness could be seen. In our delicate "color test"
we may decrease the diameter of our black spot a thousand times and still
its perception is possible by the aid of our monochromatic light, and we
may diminish our line ten thousand times, yet find it just perceivable on
the border land of our test by white light. Do not presume I am so foolish
as to even think that the human hand, directed by the human brain, can
ever work the material at his command to such a high standard of
exactness. No; from the very nature of the material we have to work with,
we are forbidden even to hope for such an achievement; and could it be
possible that, through some stroke of good fortune, we could attain this
high ideal, it would be but for a moment, as from the very nature of our
environment it would be but an ignis fatuus. There is, however, to the
earnest mind a delight in having a high model of excellence, for as our
model is so will our work approximate; and although we may go on
approximating _our_ ideal forever, we can never hope to reach that which
has been set for us by the great Master Workman.

       *       *       *       *       *




[JOURNAL OF GAS LIGHTING.]

PHOTOMETRICAL STANDARDS.


In carrying out a series of photometrical experiments lately, I found that
it was a matter of considerable difficulty to keep the flames of the
standard candles always at their proper distance from the light to be
measured, because the wick was continually changing its position (of
course carrying the flame with it), and thus practically lengthening or
shortening the scale of the photometer, according as the flame was carried
nearer to or farther from the light at the other end of the scale. In
order, therefore, to obtain a correct idea of the extent to which this
variation of the position of the wick might influence the readings of the
photometer scale, I took a continuous number of photographs of the flame
of a candle while it was burning in a room quite free from draught; no
other person being in it during the experiment except a photographer, who
placed sensitive dry plates in a firmly fixed camera, and changed them
after an exposure of 30 seconds. In doing this he was careful to keep
close to the camera, and disturb the air of the room as little as
possible. In front of the candle a plumb-line was suspended, and remained
immovable over its center during the whole operation. The candle was
allowed to get itself into a normal state of burning, and then the wick
was aligned, as shown in the photographs Nos. 1 and 2, after which it was
left to itself.

[Illustration: VARIATION IN PHOTOMETRICAL STANDARDS.]

With these photographs (represented in the cuts) I beg to hand you
full-sized drawings of the scales of a 100 inch Evans and a 60 inch
Letheby photometer, in order to give your readers an opportunity of
estimating for themselves the effect which such variations from the true
distance between the standard light and that to be measured, as shown in
this series of photographs, must exercise on photometrical observations
made by the aid of either of the instruments named.

W. SUGG.

       *       *       *       *       *




BLEACHING OR DYEING-YARNS AND GOODS IN VACUO.


[Illustration]

Many attempts have been made to facilitate the penetration of textile
fabrics by the dyeing and bleaching solutions, with which they require to
be treated, by carrying out the treatment in vacuo, _i.e._, in such
apparatus as shall allow of the air being withdrawn. The apparatus shown
in the annexed engraving--Austrian Pat. Jan. 15, 1884--although not
essentially different from those already in use, embodies, the _Journal of
the Society of Chemical Industry_ says, some important improvements in
detail. It consists of a drum A, the sides of which are constructed of
stout netting, carried on a vertical axis working through a stuffing-box,
which is fitted in the bottom of the outer or containing vessel or keir B.
The air can be exhausted from B by means of an air pump. A contains a
central division P, also constructed of netting, into which is inserted
the extremity of the tube R, after being twice bent at a right angle. P is
also in direct connection with the efflux tube E, E and R serving to
convey the dye or bleach solutions to and from the reservoir C. The
combination of the rotary motion communicated to A, which contains the
goods to be dyed or bleached, with the very thorough penetration and
circulation of the liquids effected by means of the vacuum established in
B, is found to be eminently favorable to the rapidity and evenness of the
dye or bleach.

       *       *       *       *       *




ON THE MOULDING OF PORCELAIN.

By CHAS. LAUTH.


The operation of moulding presents numerous advantages over other methods
of shaping porcelain, for by this process we avoid irregularities of form,
twisting, and visible seams, and can manufacture thin pieces, as well as
pieces of large dimensions, of a purity of form that it is impossible to
obtain otherwise.

The method of moulding small objects has been described with sufficient
detail in technical works, but such is not the case with regard to large
ones, and for this reason it will be of interest to quote some practical
observations from a note that has been sent me by Mr. Constantine Renard,
who, for several years, has had the superintendence of the moulding rooms
of the Sevres works.

The process of moulding consists in pouring porcelain paste, thinned with
water, into very dry plaster moulds. This mixture gradually hardens
against the porous sides with which it is in contact, and, when the
thickness of the hardened layer is judged sufficient, the mould is emptied
by inverting it. The excess of the liquid paste is thus eliminated, while
the thicker parts remain adherent to the plaster. Shortly afterward, the
absorption of the water continuing, the paste so shrinks in drying as to
allow the object to detach itself from the mould. As may be seen, nothing
is simpler when it concerns pieces of small dimensions; but the same is
not the case when we have to mould a large one. In this case we cannot get
rid of the liquid paste by turning the mould upside down, because of the
latter's size, and, on another hand, it is necessary to take special
precautions against the subsidence of the paste. Recourse is therefore had
to another method. In the first place, an aperture is formed in the lower
part of the mould through which the liquid may flow at the desired moment.
Afterward, in order to prevent the solidified but still slightly soft
paste from settling under its own weight at this moment, it is supported
by directing a current of compressed air into the mould, or, through
atmospheric pressure, by forming a vacuum in the metallic jacket in which
the mould is inclosed.

The history and description of these processes have been several times
given, and I shall therefore not dwell upon them, but shall at once
proceed to make known the new points that Mr. Renard has communicated to
me.

The first point to which it is well to direct the manufacturer's attention
is the preparation of the plaster moulds. When it concerns an object of
large dimensions, of a vase a yard in height, for example, the moulder is
obliged to cut the form or core horizontally into three parts, each of
which is moulded separately. To this effect, it is placed upon a core
frame and surrounded with a cylinder of sheet zinc. The workman pours the
plaster into the space between the latter and the core, and, while doing
so, must stir the mass very rapidly with a stick, so that at the moment
the plaster sets, it shall be as homogeneous as possible. In spite of such
precautions, it is impossible to prevent the densest parts of the plaster
from depositing first, through the action of gravity. These will naturally
precipitate upon the table or upon the slanting sides of the core, and the
mould will therefore present great inequalities as regards porosity. Since
this defect exists in each of the pieces that have been prepared in
succession, it will be seen that when they come to be superposed for the
moulding of the piece, the mould as a whole will be formed of zones of
different porosities, which will absorb water from the paste unequally.
Farther along we shall see the inconveniences that result from this, and
the manner of avoiding them.

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

The mould, when finished, is dried in a stove. Under such circumstances it
often happens that there forms upon the surface of the plaster a hard
crust which, although it is of no importance as regards the outside of the
mould, is prejudicial to the interior because it considerably diminishes
its absorbing power. This trouble may be avoided by coating the surfaces
that it is necessary to preserve with clear liquid paste; but Mr. Renard
advises that the mould be closed hermetically, so that the interior shall
be kept from contact with warm air. In this way it is possible to prevent
the plaster from hardening, as a result of too quick a desiccation. I now
come to the operation of moulding. In the very first place, it is
necessary to examine whether it is well to adopt the arrangement by
pressure of air or by vacuum. The form of the objects will determine the
choice. A very open piece, like a bowl, must be moulded by vacuum, on
account of the difficulty of holding the closing disk in place if it be of
very large dimensions. The same is the case with large vases of wood form.
On the contrary, an elongated piece tapering from above is more easily
moulded by pressure of the air, as are also ovoid vessels 16 to 20 inches
in height. In any case it must not be forgotten that the operation by
vacuum should be preferred every time the form of the objects is adapted
to it, because this process permits of following and directing the drying,
while with pressure it is impossible to see anything when once the
apparatus is closed.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

_Moulding by Pressure of the Air._--The plaster mould having been put in
place upon the mould board, and the liquid paste having been long and
thoroughly stirred in order to make it homogeneous, and get rid of the air
bubbles, we open the cock that puts the paste reservoir in communication
with the lower part of the mould, care having been taken beforehand to
pour a few pints of water into the bottom of the mould. The paste in
ascending pushes this water ahead of it, and this slightly wets the
plaster and makes the paste rise regularly. When the mould is entirely
filled, the paste is still allowed to flow until it slightly exceeds the
upper level, and, spreading out over the entire thickness of the plaster,
forms a sort of thick flange. The absorption of the liquid begins almost
immediately, and, consequently, the level lowers. A new quantity of paste
is introduced, and we continue thus, in regulating its flow so as to keep
the mould always full. This operation is prolonged until the layer is
judged to be sufficiently thick, this depending upon the dimensions, form,
or construction of the vessel. The operation may take from one to five
hours.

The desired thickness having been obtained, it becomes a question of
allowing the paste to descend and at the same time to support the piece by
air pressure. The flange spoken of above is quickly cut, and the paste is
made to rise again for the last time, in order to form a new flange, but
one that this time will be extremely thin; then a perforated disk designed
for forming the top joint, and acting as a conduit for the air, is placed
upon the mould. This disk is fastened down with a screw press, and when
the apparatus is thus arranged the eduction cock is opened, and the air
pump maneuvered.

If the flange did not exist, the air would enter between the mould and the
piece at the first strokes of the piston, and the piece would be
inevitably broken. Its object, then, is to form a hermetical joint,
although it must at the same time present but a slight resistance, since,
as soon as the liquid paste has flowed out, the piece begins to shrink,
and it is necessary that at the first movement downward it shall be able
to disengage itself, since it would otherwise crack.

As soon as the piece begins to detach itself from the mould the air enters
the apparatus, and the pressure gauge connected with the air pump begins
to lower. It is then necessary, without a moment's loss of time, to remove
the screw press, the disk, and the upper part of the mould itself, in
order to facilitate as much as possible the contraction of the piece.
Finally, an hour or an hour and a half later, it is necessary to remove
the lower part of the mould, this being done in supporting the entire
affair by the middle. The piece and what remains of the mould are, in
reality, suspended in the air. All these preparations are designed to
prevent cracking.

_Moulding by Vacuum._--The operation by vacuum follows the same phases as
those just described. It is well, in order to have a very even surface,
not to form a vacuum until about three hours after the paste has been made
to ascend. Without such a precaution the imperfections in the mould will
be shown on the surface of the object by undulations that are
irremediable.

The first flange or vein must be preserved, and it is cut off at the
moment the piece is detached.

Moulding by vacuum, aside from the advantages noted above, permits of
giving the pieces a greater thickness than is obtained in the pressure
process. According to Mr. Renard, when it is desired to exceed one inch at
the base of the piece (the maximum thickness usually obtained), the
operation is as follows: The piece is moulded normally, and it is
supported by a vacuum; but, at the moment at which, under ordinary
circumstances, it would be detached, the paste is made to ascend a second
time, when the first layer (already thick and dry) acts as a sort of
