
       *       *       *       *       *




A CHIPPENDALE SIDEBOARD.


[Illustration: A CHIPPENDALE SIDEBOARD.]

Our illustration this week is of a unique and handsome piece of
Chippendale work. The outline is elegant, and the scrollings delicate. The
pedestals are peculiar in their form, the panels being carved in
draperies, etc. In the frieze are two drawers, with grotesque heads
forming the handles. The back is fitted with shaped glass and surmounted
by an eagle. The whole forms a very characteristic piece of work of the
period, having been made about 1760-1770. As our readers are aware, Thomas
Chippendale published his book of designs in 1764, with the object of
promoting good French design in this field of art. This piece of furniture
was sold at auction lately for 85 guineas.--_Building News._

       *       *       *       *       *




LIQUEFACTION OF THE ELEMENTARY GASES.

By JULES JAMIN, of the Institute of France.


The earlier experiments of MM. Cailletet and Raoul Pictet in the
liquefaction of gases, and the apparatus by means of which they performed
the process, were described in the _Popular Science Monthly_, March and
May, 1878. The experiments have since been continued and improved upon by
MM. Cailletet and Pictet, and others, with more complete results than had
been attained at the time the first reports were published, and with the
elucidation of some novel properties of gases, and the disclosure of
relations, previously not well understood, between the gaseous and the
liquid condition. The experiments of Faraday, in the compression of gases
by the combined agency of pressure and extreme cold, left six gases which
still refused to enter into the liquid state. They were the two elements
of the atmosphere (oxygen and nitrogen), nitric oxide, marsh-gas, carbonic
oxide, and hydrogen. Many new experiments were tried before the principle
that governs the change from the gaseous to the liquid, or from the liquid
to the gaseous form was discovered. Aime sank manometers filled with air
into the sea till the pressure upon them was equal to that of four hundred
atmospheres; Berthelot, by the expansion of mercury in a thermometer tube,
succeeded in exerting a pressure of seven hundred and eighty atmospheres
upon oxygen. Both series of experiments were without result. M. Cailletet,
having fruitlessly subjected air and hydrogen to a pressure of one
thousand atmospheres, came to the conclusion that it was impossible to
liquefy those gases at the ordinary temperature by pressure alone.
Previously it had been thought that the obstacle to condensing gases by
pressure alone lay in the difficulty of obtaining sufficient pressure, or
in that of finding a vessel suitable for manipulation that would be
capable of resisting it. M. Cailletet's thought led to the discovery of
another fundamental property of gases.

The experiments of Despretz and Regnault had shown that the scope of
Mariotte's law (that the volume of gases increases or diminishes inversely
as the pressure upon them) was limited, and that its limits were different
with different substances. Andrews confirmed the observations of these
investigators, and extended them. Compressing carbonic acid at 13 deg. C. (55 deg.
Fahr.), he found that the rate of diminution in volume increased more
rapidly than Mariotte's law demanded, and at a progressive rate. At fifty
atmospheres the gas all at once assumed the liquid form, became very
dense, and fell to the bottom of the vessel, where it remained separated
from its vapor by a clearly defined surface, like that which distinguishes
water in the air. Experimenting in the same way with the gas at a higher
temperature (21 deg. C. or 70 deg. Fahr.), he found that the same result was
produced, but more slowly; and it seemed to be heralded in advance by a
more rapid diminution in volume previous to the beginning of the change,
which continued after the process had been accomplished; as if an
anticipatory preparation for the liquid state were going on previous to
the completion of the change. Performing the experiment again at 32 deg. C.
(90 deg. Fahr.), the anticipatory preparation and the after-continuation of
the contraction were more marked, and, instead of a separate and distinct
liquid, wavy and mobile striae were perceived on the sides of the vessel as
the only signs of a change of state which had not yet been effected. At
temperatures above 32 deg. C. (90 deg. Fahr.), there were neither striae nor
liquefaction, but there seemed to be a suggestion of them, for, under a
particular degree of pressure, the density of the gas was augmented, and
its volume diminished at an increasing rate. The temperature of 32 deg. C.
(90 deg. Fahr.) is, then, a limit, marking a division between the temperatures
which permit and those which prevent liquefaction; it is the critical
point, at which is defined the separation, for carbonic acid, between two
very distinct states of matter. Below this point, the particular matter
may assume the aspect of a liquid; above it, the gas cannot change its
appearance, but enters into the opposite constitution from that of a
liquid.

Generally, a liquid has considerably greater density than its vapor. But,
if a vessel containing both is heated, the liquid experiences a dilatation
which is gradually augmented till it equals and even exceeds that of the
gas; whence, of course, an equal volume of the liquid will weigh less and
less. On the other hand, a constantly larger quantity of vapor is formed,
which accumulates above the liquid and becomes heavier and heavier. Now if
the density of the vapor increases, and that of the liquid diminishes,
they will reach a point, under a suitable temperature, when they will be
the same. There will then be no reason for the liquid to sink or the vapor
to rise, or for the existence of any line of separation between them, and
they will be mixed and confounded. They will no longer be distinguishable
by their heat of constitution. It is true that, in passing into the state
of a vapor, a liquid absorbs a great deal of latent heat, but that is
employed in scattering the molecules and keeping them at a distance; and
there will be none of it if the distance does not increase. We are then,
at this stage of our experiments, in the presence of a critical point, at
which we do not know whether the matter is liquid or gaseous; for, in
either condition, it has the same density, the same heat of constitution,
and the same properties. It is a new state, the gaso-liquid state. An
experiment of Cagniard-Latour re-enforced this explanation of the
phenomena. Heating ether in closed vessels to high temperatures, he
brought it to a point where the liquid could be made wholly to disappear,
or to be suddenly reformed on the slightest elevation or the slightest
depression of temperature accordingly as it was raised just above or
cooled to just below the critical point. The discovery of these properties
suggested an explanation of the failure of previous attempts to liquefy
air. Air at ordinary low temperatures is in the gaso-liquid condition, and
its liquefaction is not possible except when a difference exists between
the density of the vapor and that of the liquid greater than it is
possible to produce under any conditions that can exist then. It was
necessary to reduce the temperature to below the critical point; and it
was by adopting this course that MM. Cailletet and Raoul Pictet achieved
their success. The rapid escape of the compressed gas itself from a
condition of great condensation at an extremely low temperature was
employed as the agent for producing a greater degree of cold than it had
been possible before to obtain. M. Cailletet used oxygen escaping at -29 deg.
C. from a pressure of three hundred atmospheres; M. Raoul Pictet, the same
gas escaping at -140 deg. from a pressure of three hundred and twenty
atmospheres; and both obtained oxygen and nitrogen, and M. Pictet
hydrogen, in what they thought was a liquid, and possibly even in a solid
form.

Still, it could not be asserted that hydrogen and the elements of the air
had been completely liquefied. These gases had not yet been seen collected
in the static condition at the bottom of a tube and separated from their
vapors by the clearly defined concave surface which is called a
_meniscus._ The experiments had, however, proved that liquefaction is
possible at a temperature of below -120 deg. C. (-184 deg. Fahr.). To make the
process practicable, it was only necessary to find sufficiently powerful
refrigerants; and these were looked for among gases that had proved more
refractory than carbonic acid and protoxide of nitrogen. M. Cailletet
selected ethylene, a hydrocarbon of the same composition as illuminating
gas, which, when liquefied by the aid of carbonic acid and a pressure of
thirty-six atmospheres, boils at -103 deg. C. (-153 deg. Fahr.). M. Wroblewski, of
Cracow, who had witnessed some of M. Cailletet's experiments, and obtained
his apparatus, and M. Olzewski, in association with him, also experimented
with ethylene, and had the pleasure of recording their first complete
success early in April, 1883. Causing liquid ethylene to boil in an
air-pump vacuum at -103 deg. C., they were able to produce a temperature of
-150 deg. C. (-238 deg. Fahr.), the lowest that had ever been observed. Oxygen,
having been previously compressed in a glass tube, became a permanent
liquid, with a clearly defined meniscus. It presented itself, like the
other liquefied gases, under the form of a transparent and colorless
substance, resembling water, but a little less dense. Its critical point
was marked at -113 deg. C. (-171 deg. Fahr.), below which the liquid could be
formed, but never above it; while it boiled rapidly at -186 deg. C. (-303 deg.
Fahr.). A few days afterward, the Polish professors obtained the
liquefaction of nitrogen, a more refractory gas, under a pressure of
thirty-six atmospheres, at -146 deg. C. (-231 deg. Fahr.). Long, difficult, and
expensive operations were required to produce this result, for the extreme
degree of cold it demanded had to be produced by boiling large quantities
of ethylene in a vacuum. M. Cailletet devised a cheaper process, by
employing another hydrocarbon that rises from the mud of marshes, and is
called _formene_. It is less easily liquefied than ethylene, but for that
very reason can be boiled in the air at a lower temperature, or at -160 deg.C.
(-256 deg. Fahr.); and at this temperature nitrogen and oxygen can be
liquefied in a bath of formene as readily as sulphurous acid in the common
freezing mixture.

MM. Cailletet, Wroblewski, and Olzewski have continued their experiments
in liquefaction, and acquired increased facility in the handling of liquid
ethylene, formene, atmospheric air, oxygen, and nitrogen. M. Olzewski was
able to report to the French Academy of Sciences, on the 21st of July,
1884, that by placing liquefied nitrogen in a vacuum he had succeeded in
producing a temperature of -213 deg.C. (-351 deg. Fahr.), under which hydrogen was
liquefied. Contrary to the suppositions founded on the metallic behavior
of this element, that it would present the appearance of a molten metal,
like mercury, the liquid had the mobile behavior and the transparency of
the hydrocarbons.

       *       *       *       *       *




EXAMINATION OF FATS.


The methods employed up to the present in examination of fats, animal and
vegetable, are mere reactions lacking general application; scattered
throughout the literature, and doubtful with regard to reliability, they
are of little or no value to the experimenter--an approximate quantitative
examination even of a simple mixture being exceedingly difficult if not
impossible, since the qualitative composition of fatty substances is the
same, and the separation of the nearer components impracticable. The
object of analysis consisted in estimating the accompanying impurities of
fat, as, resin, albuminoids, and pigments. The nature of these substances
depends on the mode of extraction and preservation of the fat, and are
subject in the course of time to alteration. The only reaction based upon
the chemical constitution of fat is produced by treatment of oleic or
linoleic acid with nitrous acid, which therefore is of some value in the
examination of drying oils. Of general application are the methods which
correspond to the chemical constitution of fats, and thus determine the
relative quantity of the components; advantage can then be derived from
qualitative reactions, inasmuch as they further affirm the result of the
quantitative test, or dispel any doubt with regard to the correctness of
the result. The principal methods which comply with these demands have
been carefully studied by Hueble for the purpose of discovering a process
of general application; methods founded on the determination of density,
freezing, and melting point were compared with those dependent on the
solubility of fatty substances in glacial acetic acid or a mixture of
alcohol and acetic acid; also the method of Hehner for testing of butter,
the determination of glycerine and oleic acid, and at length the process
of saponification. Nearly all fats contain members belonging to one of the
three series of fatty acids, _e.g._, acids of the type of acetic acid
(stearic and palmitic acids); such as are derivatives of acrylic acid
(oleic and erucic acids); and such as are homologues of tetrolic acid
(linoleic acid). It is likely that the relative quantity of each of these
acids is variable, with regard to the same fat, within definite limits,
and changes with the nature of the fatty substance. The groups of fatty
acids are distinguished by a characteristic deportment toward halogens;
while members of the first series are indifferent to haloids, those of the
second and third class combine readily, without suffering substitution,
with two respectively four atoms of a haloid. In view of this behavior the
first series is termed saturated, the second and third that of unsaturated
acids. Addition of halogen to one of the unsaturated acids yields on
subsequent examination an invariable quantity of the former, representing
two or four atoms, according to one or the other of unsaturated groups;
and as the molecular weights of fatty acids are unequal, the percentage
quantity of halogen will be found varying with regard to members belonging
to the same series. The amount of iodine absorbed by some of the fatty
acids is illustrated by the following items:

Hypogallic acid, C_{16}H_{30}O_{2}, combines with 100.00 grammes. iodine.
Oleic acid,      C_{18}H_{34}O_{2}      "      "   90.07    "        "
Erucic acid,     C_{22}H_{42}O_{2}      "      "   75.15    "        "
Ricinoleic acid, C_{18}H_{34}O_{3}      "      "   85.24    "        "
Linoleic acid,   C_{16}H_{28}O_{2}      "      "  201.59    "        "

Of the halogens employed in the examination, iodine is preferable to
either chlorine or bromine; it acts but slowly at ordinary, but
energetically at elevated temperatures. The reagents are solution of
mercury iodo-chloride prepared by dissolving of 25 grms. iodine, 500 c.c.
alcohol of 95 per cent., and of 30 grms. mercury chloride in an equal
measure of the same solvent; both liquids are filtered and united; a
standard solution of sodium hyposulphite produced by digestion of 24 grms.
of the dry salt with 1 liter water and titration with iodine solution;
solution of potassium iodide of 1:10; chloroform, and finally a solution
of starch. The above solution of mercury iodo-chloride acts on both free
unsaturated acids and glycerides, producing addition products. For testing
a sample of 0.2 to 0.4 grm. of a liquid, and from 0.8 to 1.0 grm. of a
solid fat being used, which is dissolved in 10 c.c. chloroform and treated
with 20 c.c. mercury iodo-chloride solution run into it from a burette, if
the liquid appear opalescent a further measure of chloroform is
introduced, while the amount of mercury iodo-chloride must be such as to
produce a brownish coloration of the chloroform for two subsequent hours.
The excess of iodine is determined, on addition of from 10 to 15 c.c.
potassium iodide solution and 150 c.c. distilled water, by means of
caustic soda. From a burette divided into 0.1 c.c. a solution of caustic
soda is poured with continual gyration of the flask into the tinged
liquid, and the percentage of combined iodine ascertained by difference;
for this purpose 20 c.c. of mercury iodo-chloride are tested, on
introduction of a solution of potassium iodide and starch, previously to
its use as reagent. Adulteration of solid or semi-liquid fats, especially
lard, butter, and tallow, with vegetable oils are readily detected by this
method, since the latter yield on examination a high percentage of iodine.
Animal fats, absorb comparatively less halogen than vegetable fats, and
the power to combine with iodine increases with the transition from the
solid to the liquid state, and attains its maximum with vegetable
oils--the method being adapted to the examination of fat mixtures
containing glycerides and free saturated fatty acids, provided that
substances which under similar conditions combine with iodine are absent.
These conditions are fulfilled with regard to the examination of animal
fats and soap. Ethereal oils are also acted upon by iodine; the reaction
proceeds similar to that observed in ordinary fat mixtures. Alcoholic
mercury iodo-chloride can probably be used with success in synthetical
chemistry, as it allows determination of the free affinities of the
molecule and conversion of unsaturated compounds into saturated
chlorine-iodo addition products.--_Rundschau._

       *       *       *       *       *




NOTES ON NITRIFICATION.[2]

[Footnote 2: A paper by R. Warington, read before the Chemical Section of
the British Association at Montreal.]

By R. WARINGTON.


In the following brief notes I propose to consider in the first place the
present position of the theory of nitrification, and next to give a short
account of the results of some recent experiments conducted in the
Rothamsted Laboratory.

_The Theory of Nitrification._--The production of nitrates in soils, and
in waters contaminated with sewage, are facts thoroughly familiar to
chemists. It is also well known that ammonia, and various nitrogenous
organic matters, are the materials from which the nitric acid is produced.
Till the commencement of 1877 it was generally supposed that this
formation of nitrates from ammonia or nitrogenous organic matter was the
result of simple oxidation by the atmosphere. In the case of soil it was
imagined that the action of the atmosphere was intensified by the
condensation of oxygen in the pores of the soil; in the case of waters no
such assumption was possible. This theory was most unsatisfactory, as
neither solutions of pure ammonia, nor of any of its salts, could be
nitrified in the laboratory by simple exposure to air. The assumed
condensation of oxygen in the pores of the soil also proved to be a
fiction as soon as it was put by Schloesing to the test of experiment.

Early in 1877, two French chemists, Messrs. Schloesing and Muentz,
published preliminary experiments showing that nitrification in sewage and
in soils is the result of the action of an organized ferment, which occurs
abundantly in soils and in most impure waters. This entirely new view of
the process of nitrification has been amply confirmed both by the later
experiments of Schloesing and Muentz, and by the investigations of other
chemists, among which are those by myself conducted in the Rothamsted
Laboratory.

The evidence for the ferment theory of nitrification is now very complete.
Nitrification in soils and waters is found to be strictly limited to the
range of temperature within which the vital activity of living ferments is
confined. Thus nitrification proceeds with extreme slowness near the
freezing-point, and increases in activity with a rise in temperature till
37 deg. is reached; the action then diminishes, and ceases altogether at 55 deg..
Nitrification is also dependent on the presence of plant-food suitable for
organisms of low character. Recent experiments at Rothamsted show that in
the absence of phosphates no nitrification will occur. Further proof of
the ferment theory is afforded by the fact that antiseptics are fatal to
nitrification. In the presence of a small quantity of chloroform, carbon
bisulphide, salicylic acid, and apparently also phenol, nitrification
entirely ceases. The action of heat is equally confirmatory. Raising
sewage to the boiling-point entirely prevents its undergoing
nitrification. The heating of soil to the same temperature effectually
destroys its nitrifying power. Finally, nitrification can be started in
boiled sewage, or in other sterilized liquid of suitable composition, by
the addition of a few particles of fresh surface soil or a few drops of a
solution which has already nitrified; though without such addition these
liquids may be freely exposed to filtered air without nitrification taking
place.

The nitrifying organism has been submitted as yet to but little
microscopical study; it is apparently a micrococcus.

It is difficult to conceive how the evidence for the ferment theory of
nitrification could be further strengthened; it is apparently complete in
every part. Although, however, nearly the whole of this evidence has been
before the scientific public for more than seven years, the ferment theory
of nitrification can hardly be said to have obtained any general
acceptance; it has not indeed been seriously controverted, but neither has
it been embraced. In hardly a single manual of chemistry is the production
of saltpeter attributed to the action of a living ferment existing in the
soil. Still more striking is the absence of any recognition of the
evidence just mentioned when we turn to the literature and to the public
discussions on the subjects of sewage, the pollution of river water, and
other sanitary questions. The oxidation of the nitrogenous organic matter
of river water is still spoken of by some as determined by mere contact
with atmospheric oxygen, and the agitation of the water with air as a
certain means of effecting oxidation; while by others the oxidation of
nitrogenous organic matter in a river is denied, simply because free
contact with air is not alone sufficient to produce oxidation. How much
light would immediately be thrown on such questions if it were recognized
that the oxidation of organic matter in our rivers is determined solely by
the agency of life, is strictly limited to those conditions within which
life is possible, and is most active in those circumstances in which life
is most vigorous. It is surely most important that scientific men should
make up their minds as to the real nature of those processes of oxidation
of which nitrification is an example. If the ferment theory be doubted,
let further experiments be made to test it, but let chemists no longer go
on ignoring the weighty evidence which has been laid before them. It is
partly with the view of calling the attention of English and American
chemists to the importance of a decision on this question that I have been
induced to bring this subject before them on the present occasion. I need
hardly add that such results as the nitrification of sewage by passing it
through sand, or the nitrification of dilute solutions of blood prepared
without special precaution, are no evidence whatever against the ferment
theory of nitrification. If it is to be shown that nitrification will
occur in the absence of any ferment, it is clear that all ferments must be
rigidly excluded during the experiments; the solutions must be sterilized
by heat, the apparatus purified in a similar manner, and all subsequent
access of organisms carefully guarded against. It is only experiments made
in this way that can have any weight in deciding the question.

Leaving now the theory of nitrification, I will proceed to say a few
words, first, as to the distribution of the nitrifying organism in the
soil; secondly, as to the substances which are susceptible of
nitrification; thirdly, upon certain conditions having great influence on
the process.

_The Distribution of the Nitrifying Organism in the Soil._--Three series
of experiments have been made on the distribution of the nitrifying
organism in the clay soil and subsoil at Rothamsted. Advantage was taken
