that in 1832 he was called upon by the Philadelphia and Germantown
Railroad Company to construct the old "Ironsides,"[7] which was
similar in many ways to the "John Bull," as an examination of the
model preserved in the National Museum will show. The success of this
engine laid the foundation for the great Baldwin Locomotive Works,
which is in existence to-day, sending locomotives to every part of the
globe.

  [Footnote 7: A handsome model of the "Ironsides" was presented to
  the United States National Museum by the Baldwin Locomotive
  Company in 1888.]


THE LINE FROM BORDENTOWN TO SOUTH AMBOY.

The Camden and Amboy Company having obtained control of the steamboat
routes between Philadelphia and Bordentown, and between South Amboy
and New York, directed their energies to completing the railway across
the State.

Although the grading of the road from Bordentown to Camden had been
commenced in the summer of 1831, work on that end of the line was
abandoned for about two years, the entire construction force being put
on the work between Bordentown and South Amboy.

The road from Bordentown to Hightstown was completed by the middle of
September, 1832, and from Hightstown to South Amboy in the December
following. The "deep cut" at South Amboy, and the curves of the track
there, gave the civil engineers great trouble.


THE FIRST AMERICAN STANDARD TRACK.

The laying of the track through the "deep cut" led to an event of
great importance to future railway construction. The authorities at
Sing Sing having failed to deliver the stone blocks rapidly enough,
Mr. Stevens ordered hewn wooden cross ties to be laid temporarily, and
the rail to be directly spiked thereto. A number of these ties were
laid on the sharpest curves in the cut. They showed such satisfactory
properties when the road began to be operated that they were permitted
to remain, and the stone blocks already in the track were replaced by
wooden ties as rapidly as practicable. Without doubt the piece of
track in "deep cut" was the first in the world to be laid according to
the present American practice of spiking the rail directly to the
cross tie.


THE LINE OPENED BETWEEN BORDENTOWN AND SOUTH AMBOY.

Among the memoranda compiled by Benjamin Fish, published in his
memoir, I find the following:

    "First cars were put on the Camden and Amboy Railroad
    September 19, 1832. They were drawn by two horses. They took
    the directors and a few friends from Bordentown to Hightstown
    and back.

    "On December 17, 1832, the first passengers were taken from
    Bordentown through to South Amboy. Fifty or sixty people went.
    It was a rainy day.

    "On January 24, 1833, the first freight cars were put on the
    railroad. There were three cars, drawn by one horse each, with
    six or seven thousand pounds of freight on each car.

    "Freight came from New York by steam boat to South Amboy. I
    drove the first car, John Twine drove the second car and
    Edmund Page the third one. We came to the Sand Hills (near
    Bordentown) by railroad, there loaded the goods on wagons (it
    was winter, and the river was frozen over), arriving in
    Philadelphia by sunrise next morning. The goods left New York
    at 12 o'clock, noon. This was done by the old firm of Hill,
    Fish & Abbe."

Immediately after the road from Bordentown to South Amboy was
completed, and as late as the summer of 1833, passengers were brought
from Philadelphia to the wharf at White Hill by steamboat, and from
there were rapidly driven to Amboy. Two horses were hitched to each
car, and as they were driven continuously on the run, three changes of
horses were required, the finest horses obtainable being purchased for
this purpose. The time consumed in crossing the State (thirty-four
miles) was from two and a half to three hours.

Early in September, 1833, the locomotive "John Bull" was put on the
train leaving Bordentown about 7 o'clock in the morning, and returning
leaving South Amboy at 4 P.M. This was the first passenger train
regularly run by steam on the route between New York and Philadelphia.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BRITISH CRUISER AEOLUS.


The new twin screw cruiser AEolus was launched from the Devonport
Dockyard on the 13th November. The first keel plate of the AEolus was
laid in position on the 10th March last year, and up to the present
time fully two thirds of the estimated weight has been worked into her
structure. Says _Industries_: She is built of steel, with large
phosphor bronze castings for stern post, shaft brackets, and stem, the
latter terminating in a formidable ram. The hull is sheathed with
wood, and will be covered with copper to enable her to keep the seas
for a lengthened period on remote stations, where there is a lack of
docking accommodation. All the vital portions, such as machinery,
boilers, magazines, and steering gear, are protected by a steel deck
running fore and aft, terminating forward in the ram, of which it
virtually forms a part. Subdivision has been made a special feature in
this type of vessel, and the hull under the upper deck is divided into
nearly 100 water tight compartments. Between perpendiculars the AEolus
measures 300 ft. in length, the extreme breadth being 43 ft. 8 in.,
and moulded depth 22 ft. 9 in., with a displacement of 3,600 tons on a
mean draught of water of 17 ft. 6 in. She will be supplied by Messrs.
Hawthorn, Leslie & Co., of Newcastle on Tyne, with two sets of
vertical triple-expansion engines, capable of developing collectively
9,000 h.p., which is estimated to realize a speed of 19.75 knots. As
vertical engines have been adopted, the necessary protection of the
cylinders, which project above the steel protective deck, is obtained
by fitting an armored breastwork of steel 5 in. thick, supported by a
7 in. teak backing, around the engine hatchway. Provision is made for
a bunker coal capacity of 400 tons, and this is calculated to give a
radius of action of 8,000 knots at a reduced speed of 10 knots. The
armament of the ship will consist of two 6 in. breech-loading guns on
central pivot stands, one mounted on the poop and another on the
forecastle; six quick-firing 4.7 in. guns, mounted three on each
broadside; eight quick-firing 6-pounder guns, four on each broadside;
besides one 3-pounder Hotchkiss and four 5-barrel Nordenfeldt guns. In
addition four torpedo tubes are fitted, one forward, one aft, and one
on each broadside. All the necessary appliances for manipulating the
engines, guns, steering gear, etc., when in action, are placed in a
conning tower built of steel 3 in. thick, and situated at the after
end of the forecastle. The AEolus will be rigged with two pole mast,
carrying light fore and aft sails only. Her total cost is estimated at
L188,350, of which L100,000 is regarded as the cost of hull. When
complete she will be manned by a complement of 254 officers and men.
In the slipway vacated by the AEolus a second class cruiser, to be
named the Hermione, will be laid down forthwith. The Hermione may be
regarded as an enlarged AEolus, and will measure 320 ft. in length, 49
ft. 6 in. in breadth, with a displacement of 4,360 tons, on a mean
draught of water of 19 ft. The new cruiser will be supplied with
propelling machinery of the same power as the AEolus, to be constructed
in the dockyard from Admiralty designs. The coal capacity of the
Hermione is to be 400 tons, and her estimated speed is 19.5 knots.

       *       *       *       *       *




TRIALS OF H.M. CRUISER BLAKE.


Special interest, says _Engineering_, attaches to the trials of the
protected cruiser Blake, in view of the assertion frequently made by
Admiralty authorities, from the first lord downward, to the effect
that with her sister ship Blenheim she would surpass anything hitherto
attempted. The condition of steaming continuously for long periods and
over great distances at 20 knots per hour was made a ruling condition
in the design, and with forced draught she was to be able to attain 22
knots when occasion required. But all idea of getting these high
results has been abandoned. Our readers do not need to be reminded of
the frequent failure of boilers in the navy. Although in the newer
ships, profit has been gained by experience, larger boilers being
provided with separate combustion chambers for each furnace; the
Blake's boilers belong to the type of defective design, with the
result that, were they pressed under forced draught, the tubes would
leak. It was, therefore, decided some time ago to be content with
natural draught results, and on Wednesday, Nov. 18, the vessel was
taken out from Portsmouth, and ran for seven hours with satisfactory
results, considerably exceeding the contract power. But the speed was
but 19.12 knots, and 22 knots can never be attained, except, of
course, new boilers be provided, and when an expenditure of 5 or 6 per
cent. of the first cost of the vessel (433,755_l._) would give her new
boilers, it seems a pity to be content with the lesser speed, more
particularly as the vessel is well designed and the engines efficient.

[Illustration: THE NEW BRITISH CRUISER BLAKE.]

Before dealing with the engines and their trials, it may be stated
that the vessel is of 9000 tons displacement at 25 ft. 9 in. mean
draught. Her length is 375 ft. and her beam 65 ft. She was built at
Chatham, and the armament consists of two 92 in. 22-ton breech-loading
guns, ten 6-in. 5-ton guns and sixteen 3-pounder quick-firing, and
eight machine guns, with torpedo launching carriages and tubes. The
propelling engines were manufactured by Messrs. Maudslay Sons & Field,
Lambeth. They were designed to develop 13,000 horses with natural, and
20,000 with forced draught. They consist of four distinct sets of
triple expansion inverted cylinder engines, and occupy with boilers,
etc., nearly two-thirds of the length of the ship. They are placed in
four separate compartments, two sets being coupled together on the
starboard and port sides respectively for driving each screw. There
are four high pressure cylinders, 36 in. in diameter; four
intermediate cylinders, 52 in.; and four low pressure cylinders, 80
in.; with a stroke of 4 ft. Each set of engines has an air pump 33 in.
in diameter and 2 ft. stroke, and a surface condenser having 12,800
tubes and an aggregate surface of 2250 square feet, the length of the
tubes between the tube plates being 9 ft. There is also in each
compartment one centrifugal circulating pump driven by a small
independent engine, of the diameter of 3 ft. 9 in., and capable of
pumping from the bilge as well as the sea. The screw propellers are 18
ft. 3 in. in diameter with a mean pitch of 24 ft. 6 in.

Steam is furnished by six main double-ended boilers, having four
furnaces at each end, and one auxiliary boiler, with a heating surface
of 900 sq. ft., the dimensions of the former being 15 ft. 2 in. by 18
ft., and of the latter 10 ft. by 9 ft. long. The total area of
firegrate surface is 863 sq. ft, and of heating surface 26.936 sq. ft.
Each engine room is kept cool by four 4 ft. 6 in. fans. Forced draught
is produced by twelve 5 ft. 6 in. fans, three being stationed in each
stokehold. The electric lighting machinery consists of three dynamos
of Siemens manufacture driven by a Willans engine, each of which is
capable of producing a current of 400 amperes. The after main engines
can be easily disconnected and worked separately for slow speeds.

The Blake had her steering gear tested on Tuesday, Nov. 17. With both
engines going full power ahead and turning to starboard, with her helm
hard over 35 deg., she completed the circle in 4 min. 40 sec., the
port circle being completed in 5 min. 5 sec. The diameter was
estimated approximately to be about 575 yards. Forty-five seconds were
required to change from engine steering to steering by hand. By manual
gear the helm was moved from midships to hard a-starboard in 40 sec.,
from starboard to hard a-port in 2 min. 10 sec., and from hard a-port
to midships in 2 min. 20 sec. The heavy balanced rudder and the speed
of the ship throwing great labor upon the crew manning the wheels, the
hand gear was afterward disconnected and the connection with the
steering engine completed in 40 sec.

[Illustration: THE NEW BRITISH CRUISER BLAKE]

On Nov. 18, when the vessel went on speed trials, the draught of the
vessel was 24 ft. 8 in. forward and 26 ft. 8 in. aft, which gave her
the mean load immersion provided for in her design. There was a
singular absence of vibration, said to be due to the space over which
the machinery is spread, but perhaps also due, in part at least, to
the number of cranks, as the cylinders deliver six throws throughout
the circle of revolution. The results of each hour's steaming are as
under:

Hours.      Revolutions.   Steam.      Power.
1st hour        86.86      120.6       13,568
2d   "          89.26      128.0       15,298
3d   "          88.55      125.0       14,251
4th  "          89.58      127.6       14,759
5th  "          89.40      125.0       14,394
6th  "          89.55      125.0       14,512
7th  "          89.15      126.0       14,893

The trial was originally intended to continue for eight hours, but at
the end of the seventh, as the light began to fade, and as, moreover,
the engines were working with a smoothness and efficiency that showed
no signs of flagging, it was considered expedient to terminate the
run.

Steam pressure in boilers                                125.5  lb.
Air pressure in stoke holds                                0.42 in.
Revolutions per minute, starboard                         88.41
Revolutions per minute, port                              89.39

                                  |     Starboard.   |      Port.      |
                                  +---------+--------+--------+--------|
                                  |  Forward|   Aft  | Forward|   Aft  |
Vacuum in condensers.             |    27.85|   27.85|   28.1 |   29.1 |
Mean pressure in cylinders, high  |    43.04|   38.95|   42.36|   42.45|
Mean pressure in cylinders, inter.|    31.49|   30.82|   30.17|   28.38|
Mean pressure in cylinders, low   |    11.68|   12.4 |   12.85|   12.32|
Indicated horse power each engine |  3631.42| 3589.07| 3721.37| 3583.50|
Total                             |       7220.39    |      7304.88    |
Collectively                      |              14525.37              |

As will be seen, the collective power exceeds the contract power under
natural draught by 1,525.37 horses, and was obtained with less than
the Admiralty limit of air pressure. The coal used on the occasion was
Harris' deep navigation, but no account was taken of the amount
consumed. Four runs were made on the measured mile with and against
the tide, the mean of means disclosing a speed of 19.12 knots. The
average speed of the seven hours' steaming, as measured by patent log,
was 19.28 knots. This fell short by over three-quarters of a knot of
what was anticipated in proportion to the power indicated by the
engines. Up to the limit of air pressure used the boilers answered
admirably.

       *       *       *       *       *




HINTS TO SHIPMASTERS.


A Master in charge of a tramp steamer in these days _must_, if he
wishes for any comfort in life, take good care of himself, for the
pressure and hurry which is inseparable from his position, combined
with the responsibilities and anxieties of his calling, put a very
great strain upon him, and will, in time, unless he takes special
care, have a serious effect on his health; this is more particularly
the case with men of the nervous temperament. It cannot be expected
that in this age, when so many thousands of people on shore fail from
overwork and "high pressure," steamship masters, who as a class, are
overworked and harrassed to a serious extent, should altogether
escape. Again, unless a shipmaster takes an interest in the health,
comfort, and well-being of his crew, he, in the first place, neglects
one of his duties, and, secondly, sows the seeds of discomfort and
annoyance to himself. Let us consider his duties to himself
personally.

First, then, he must prepare himself to undergo, periodically, the
discomfort of want of proper rest and irregularity in times of meals;
he may, for instance, not be able to leave the bridge for over
forty-eight hours or more on a stretch, and, of course, any shipmaster
who may read this will know that this is no uncommon occurrence;
during this time he may be unable to get regular meals, and what he
does get may have to be eaten in a hurry and at an anxious time when
he cannot properly enjoy and digest it.

A time like this may be followed by a period of rest, when the days
will hang heavily on his hands, and he will be tempted to long
afternoon sleeps merely to get through the weary hours.

Now, as a course of this kind of thing is bound, unless care be
exercised, to act unfavorably on the digestion and bring on some form
of dyspepsia, so also the nights and days of great anxiety and moments
of great strain will, besides increasing the dyspeptic tendency, be
apt to bring on nervousness in some form or other. It is a fact that
in these times, and often from want of attention to health, nearly
every shipmaster long in harness is more or less nervous.

There are people in the present day who have actually talked of making
their chief engineer (who exercises his special trade at sea or on
shore as suits himself and is in no sense _a seaman_) the master of
the vessel, and turning the shipmaster into a mere pilot. Those who
talk in this way forget that to do this the _responsibility_ must be
shifted on to the engineer. Of course such a change as this cannot
happen, the country would not stand it; but I merely mention it to
show the vast amount of ignorance there is, even among those who
should be well informed, as to the real strain and responsibility on
the modern shipmaster.

The master then, if anxious to do the best for himself, should, if
possible, be a total abstainer, for two reasons: first, because, as he
will be obliged to be irregular in his feeding, alcohol in any form
will do him harm and tend to augment the dyspepsia. Secondly, because,
often in times of great mental strain, combined with exposure, a glass
of spirits will give _great temporary relief_ (which is of itself a
dangerous fact for a weak-minded man), but this will always be
followed by depression, and will in reality be doing great harm
instead of lasting good. Spirituous liquor may be necessary for a few,
but these should use it under medical advice if at all. It is a hard
thing for many men to give up their grog, but there is not a man of
any experience in the merchant service who has not seen its blasting
effects on many a master and officer. It is almost impossible to find
a substitute for it which shall recommend itself to anyone who has
really a liking for it, about the only things being coffee, lime
juice, or lemonade and ginger ale. So-called temperance drinks are all
of them very nasty stuff, besides containing a large percentage of
alcohol; rather than swallow these one had better not change his
habits. The master then, being an abstainer, should also give some
care to his diet. Very heavy meals of meat and strong food should not
be taken at sea, because there are no means of taking proper exercise,
and it is impossible to work them off properly. Again, long, heavy,
after-dinner sleeps should not be indulged in; a quiet nap of ten
minutes would in many cases be beneficial, but the long sleep up to
five o'clock is positively harmful to any man. One of the _best_
things a master can do is to take up some work. No matter what it is
so long as he takes an interest in it, such as joiner work, fret work,
painting, writing, learning a musical instrument or a foreign
language, or anything of that sort. It will be of incalculable benefit
to both mind and body.

On occasions when it is absolutely necessary to be on deck for long
periods, the steward ought to have orders to attend _himself
personally_ to the master's wants--to see that his meals are properly
cooked and brought up to him at regular intervals, and that there is
always a _well made_ cup of coffee to be had when wanted. The ordinary
cup of coffee as made at sea is generally a beastly mixture and not
worth drinking. The steward has an easy life and should not be spared
at these times, but should always be turned out when wanted, _night or
day_, and made to look after these things himself, and a man who
growls at having this to do or who will not take the proper trouble to
see things well cooked and served up nicely with cheerfulness should
_at once_ be discharged, and a good man, of whom there are plenty,
shipped in his place. The master, of course, should always be on the
bridge when required, and in fog certainly all the time; but many men
are over-cautious in this respect through sheer nervousness, and
oftentimes expose and fatigue themselves to no purpose, harass their
officers, and make them unreliable, so that when the time comes that
their presence on deck is absolutely necessary, they are, through
exhaustion of mind and body, in anything but a fit state to take
charge of the ship, or be cool and collected in a moment of sudden
emergency. Should a man feel that through hard work and exposure he is
becoming shaky, he should at once leave off _entirely_ the false
relief which drink gives and consult a physician. A _good_ man with
_experience_ will in almost any case be able to help him, and, besides
medicine, give him such hints for regulating his diet and mode of
living as will enable him to bear better than before the strain and
wear and tear of his life.[1]

  [Footnote 1: For the _fluttering_, unsteady feeling often felt,
  the following, if not abused, will be found beneficial: Take as
  much bromide of potassium as will lie, not heaped up, on a
  shilling, and half a teaspoonful of sal volatile (aromatic spirits
  of ammonia). Mix in a wine glass full of water; but this should
  only be taken when absolutely necessary, and not habitually.]

As to the crew. A master who has full command of himself ought to be
able to rule judiciously even the most unruly crew, but before he is
in a really _strong_ position to do this, he must treat them fairly
and honestly. In many cases a bad start is made with a new set of men
(of course this will not apply to the high class mail steamers, nor
perhaps to what are termed weekly boats). They come on board and find
their forecastle just as the last crew left it, full of a week's
filth,[2] possibly lumbered up with hauling lines and what-not,
wanting painting badly, and often showing unmistakable signs of
overhead leakage. This is quite enough to make a respectable man
discontented, and naturally so. In common fairness, the often wretched
place that the men have to occupy ought to be put in decent order to
receive the new crew. Again, they should be distinctly made to
understand, when signing articles, what their _food_ will be, and what
their pay and allowances will come to. It is to be feared that bad
feeding is the cause of much trouble in these days. From first coming
on board discipline should be _enforced_; many officers, both young
and old, are greatly remiss in enforcing this, with the consequence
that day by day it is harder to do, till at last it is impossible, and
anarchy reigns triumphant. If a seaman finds that he is _fairly_
treated, and that he _must_ obey orders, he will in nine cases out of
ten conduct himself well, and give no trouble. The more high class
type of man the master is the better he will treat his men, and the
more exacting he will be in compelling discipline, both in his
officers and crew.

  [Footnote 2: This should not be. It is most decidedly one of the
  master's duties to see that the men on _both_ sides of the
  forecastle keep their places clean, and for this purpose it is a
  very good plan to give them an hour or two every week, and it is
  only right that if a crew fled a forecastle clean to receive them,
  they should be made to leave it in the same state.]

Engineers and firemen are often sources of annoyance in these days.
Firemen are a lower class generally than seamen, and more inclined to
insubordination; in many cases the engineers are quite incapable of
keeping them in proper order, and it sometimes happens that in an
engine room row it falls to the lot of the deck officers to restore
discipline.

The master should remember that his engineers are officers of the
ship, with their own responsibility, that his chief engineer is of
some importance on board, and that it is necessary in the owner's
interests that they should work together amicably. In ordinary cargo
vessels, the engineer is often better educated than the master
himself, and should _never_ be treated as an inferior while he behaves
with proper respect to the master. To his own deck officers the master
should behave with ordinary courtesy, and, if he finds them
trustworthy, should not spoil them and render them unreliable by
always keeping on or about the bridge; an officer who is never left by
himself in charge will soon fancy himself incapable. It is to be
feared that many young officers are spoiled in this way.

Familiarity with the men before the mast is always unwise. It is not a
good practice in ordinary vessels, where a new crew is shipped each
voyage, to begin by calling the men "Tom" and "Jack." An officer to
have any real command over the men _must_ keep himself apart from them
and show them the difference of their positions. A judicious
shipmaster will warn his young mates about this.

The usual system of mess room for engineers, the officers messing in
the cabin with the master, is a good one, though it is a question
whether it would not be a _very_ good thing if the chief engineer
always messed with the master so long as he was a decent, respectable
man. It is often one of the causes of ill health in the master that he
keeps too much to himself, seldom if ever speaking to his officers
except on business connected with the ship. A man who does this has
far too much time to think, and if he has any trivial illness is apt
to brood over it and actually make himself ill.

It is much wiser and better for all concerned that the master should,
within certain limits, be on friendly terms at any rate with his first
mate, if not with all his officers. Any man with common tact can
always find means for checking undue familiarity, and it will
generally be found that officers treated as equals instead, as is
often the case, as though they were an inferior race of beings, will
be much more inclined to do their work with zeal, and to back up the
master in all his troubles. Many men when they get command seem to
