of oxygen with molecule of carbon in the blood lies the mainspring of
all animal motion; the motion of the heart itself is secondary to
that. Destroy that union, however slightly, and the balance is lost,
and the animal body is, in a plain word, _ill_.

Cold or decreased temperature, below a given standard, which for sake
of comparison we may take at a mean of 40 deg. Fahr., reduces this
combination of oxygen and carbon in blood. In my Lettsomian lectures
to the Medical Society of London, delivered in 1860, I entered very
fully into this subject, and illustrated points of it largely by
experiment. Since then I have done more, and although I have not time
here to state the details of these researches, I will epitomize the
principal facts. I found then that, by exposing blood in chambers into
which air can pass in and out, the blood could be oxidized at
temperatures of 70 deg. if the distribution of air and blood were
effectually secured, and I also found a proper standard of oxidation
from a proper temperature. Afterward I proceeded to test for
combination at lower temperatures, and discovered a gradually
decreasing scale until I arrived at 40 deg. Fahr., when efficient
combination ceased. Of course, my method was a very crude imitation of
nature, but it was sufficient to show this fair and reliable result,
that the oxidation of blood decreases as the temperature of the oxygen
decreases.

From this point I went to animal life itself. I exposed animals to
pure cold oxygen and to cold atmospheric air, and compared the results
with other experiments in which animals of similar weight were exposed
to warm air and warm oxygen. The facts gleaned were most important,
for they proved conclusively that the products of combustion, that is
to say, the products resulting from the union of oxygen and carbon,
were reduced in proportion as the temperature of the oxygen was
reduced. In the course of this inquiry another singular and
instructive fact was elicited. It has been long known that at ordinary
temperature, say 60 deg., pure neutral oxygen does not support animal life
so well as oxygen that is diluted with nitrogen. In the nitrogen the
molecules of oxygen are more freely distributed under the influence of
motion, that is the meaning of the observed fact. What, then, would be
the respective influence of low and high temperatures on the
respiration of pure oxygen? To settle this question, animals of the
same size and weight were placed in equal measures of oxygen gas and
common air at a temperature of 30 deg. Fahr., and with the inevitable
result that the animal in the pure oxygen ceased to respire one-third
sooner than did the animal in common air. Carrying the inquiry
further, I found that if the oxygen gas were warmed to 50 deg. Fahr., the
respiration was continued six times as long as in the previous
experiment, while if the warming were carried to 70 deg., it was sustained
twenty-four times as long. I reversed the experiment; I made oxygen
with cold produce anaesthetic sleep in a warm-blooded animal.

I need not carry this argument further; it is the easiest of the
demonstrative facts of physiological science that reduction of
temperature lessens the combining power of oxygen for blood, and
therewith causes a reduction of animal force, and a tendency to arrest
of that force, which, in the end, means _death_.


MECHANICAL COLD.

The third element in the action of cold is more purely mechanical, and
this, though in a sense secondary, is of immense import. When any
body, capable of expansion by heat, that is to say, by radiant motion
of its own particles, is reduced in temperature, it loses volume,
contracts, or shrinks. The animal body is no exception to this rule; a
ring that will fit tightly to the warm finger will fall off the same
finger after exposure to cold. The whole of the soft parts shrink, and
the vessels contract and empty themselves of their blood. Cold applied
to the skin in an extreme degree blanches the skin, and renders it
insensible and bloodless, so that if you prick it it does not bleed,
neither does it feel. In cases where the body altogether is exposed to
extreme cold this shrinking of the external parts is universal; the
whole surface becomes pale and insensible; the blood in the small
vessels superficially placed is forced inward upon the heart and
vessels of the interior organs; the brain is oppressed with blood;
sleep, or coma, as it is technically called, follows, and at last life
is suspended.

In exposure to the lowest wave of temperature in this country these
extreme effects are not commonly developed; but minor effects are
brought out which are most significant. In particular, the effect on
the lungs is strongly marked. The capillary vessels of the lungs,
making up that fine network which plays over the computed six hundred
millions of air vesicles, undergo paralysis when the cold air enters,
and in proportion as such obstruction from this cause is decisive, the
blood that should be brought to the air vesicles is impeded, and the
process of oxidation is mechanically as well as chemically suppressed.
The same contraction is also exerted on the vessels of the skin,
driving the blood into the interior and better protected organs. Hence
the reason why on leaving a warm room to enter a cold frosty air there
is an immediate action of the visceral organs from pressure of blood
on them, and not unfrequently a tendency to diarrhoea from temporary
congestion of the digestive tract. Three factors are at work, in fact,
whenever the low wave of temperature affects the animal body;
abstraction of heat from the body, beyond what is natural; arrest of
chemical action and of combustion; paralysis of the minute vessels
exposed to the cold.


COMBINED EFFECTS.

We cannot view the extent of change in the organic life induced by the
low wave of heat without seeing at once the sweep of mischief which
exposure to the wave may effect. It exerts an influence on healthy
life in the middle-aged man, and I know of no disease which it does
not influence disastrously. Is the healthy man exhausted, it favors
internal congestion; has he a weak point in the vascular system of his
brain, it renders that point liable to pressure and rupture, with
apoplexy as the sequence; is he suffering from bronchial disease, and
obstruction, already, in his air passages, here is a means by which
the evils are doubled; has he a feeble, worn-out heart, it is unable
to bear the pressure that is put upon it; has he partial obstruction
of the kidney circulation, he is threatened with complete obstruction;
is he indifferently fed, he is weakened generally. It is from this
extent of action that the mortality of all diseases runs up so fast
when the low wave of heat rolls over the population, affecting, as we
have seen, the feeblest first.

Another danger sometimes follows which is remote, but may be fatal,
even to persons who are in health. It is one of the best known facts
in science that when a part of the surface of the body has been
exposed long to cold, the greatest risk is run in trying suddenly to
warm it. The vessels become rapidly dilated, their coats relax, and
extreme congestion follows. But what is true of the skin is true
equally, and with more practical force, of the lungs. A man, a little
below par, goes out when the wave of temperature is low, and feels
oppressed, cold, weak, and miserable; the circulation through his
lungs has been suppressed, and he is not duly oxidizing; he returns to
a warm place, he rushes to the fire, breathes eagerly and long the
heated air, and adds to the warmth by taking perchance a cup of
stimulant; then he goes to bed and wakes in a few hours with what is
called pneumonia, or with bronchitis, or with both diseases. What has
happened? The simple physical fact of reaction under too sudden an
exposure to heat after exposure to cold. The capillaries of the lungs
have become engorged, and the circulation static, so that there must
be reaction of heat, inflammation, before recovery can occur. Nearly
all bronchial affections are induced in this manner, not always nor
necessarily in the acute form, but more frequently by slow degrees, by
repetition and repetition of the evil. Colds are often taken in this
same way, from the exposed mucous surfaces of the nose and throat
being subjected first to a chill, then to heat.

The wave of low temperature affecting a mixed population finds
inevitably a certain number of persons of all ages and conditions on
whom to exert its power. It catches them too often when they least
expect it. An aged man, with sluggish heart, goes to bed and reclines
to sleep in a temperature, say, of 50 deg. or 55 deg.. In his sleep, were it
quite uninfluenced from without, his heart and his breathing would
naturally decline. Gradually, as the night advances, the low wave of
heat steals over the sleeper, and the air he was breathing at 55 deg.
falls and falls to 40 deg., or it may be to 35 deg. or 30 deg.. What may naturally
follow less than a deeper sleep? Is it not natural that the sleep so
profound shall stop the laboring heart? Certainly. The great narcotic
never travels without fastening on some victims in this wise, removing
them, imperceptibly to themselves, into sleep ending in absolute
death.


SOME SIMPLE RULES.

The study of the physiological influence of the wave of low
temperature, and of its relation to the wave of mortality, suggests a
few rules, simple, and easily remembered.

1. Clothing is the first thing to attend to. To have the body, during
variable weather, such as now obtains, well enveloped from head to
foot in non-conducting substance is essential. Who neglects this
precaution is guilty of a grievous error, and who helps the poor to
clothe effectively does more for them than can readily be conceived
without careful attention to the subject we have discussed.

2. In sitting-rooms and in bedrooms it is equally essential to
maintain an equable temperature; a fire in a bedroom is of first value
at this season. The fire sustains the external warmth, encourages
ventilation, and gives health not less than comfort.

3. In going from a warm into a cold atmosphere, in breasting the wave
of low temperature, no one can harm by starting forth thoroughly warm.
But in returning from the cold into the warm the act should always be
accomplished gradually. This important rule may readily be carried in
mind by connecting it with the fact that the only safe mode of curing
a frozen part is to rub it with ice, so as to restore the temperature
slowly.

4. The wave of low temperature requires to be met by good, nutritious,
warm food. Heat-forming foods, such as bread, sugar, butter, oatmeal
porridge, and potatoes, are of special use now. It would be against
science and instinct alike to omit such foods when the body requires
heat.

5. It is an entire mistake to suppose that the wave of cold is
neutralized in any sense by the use of alcoholics. When a glass of hot
brandy and water warms the cold man, the credit belongs to the hot
water, and any discredit that may follow to the brandy. So far from
alcohol checking the cold in action, it goes with it, and therewith
aids in arresting the motion of the heart in the living animal,
because it reduces oxidation.

6. Excessive exercise of the body, and overwork either of body or of
mind, should be avoided, especially during those seasons when a sudden
fall of temperature is of frequent occurrence. For exhaustion, whether
physical or mental, means loss of motion in the organism; and loss of
motion is the same as loss of heat.

One further consideration, suggested by the subject of this paper, has
reference to the bearing of the public toward the labors of the
medical man in meeting the effects of the low wave of heat. The
public, looking on the doctor as a sort of mystical high priest who
ought to save, may often be dissatisfied with his work. Let the
dissatisfied think of what is meant by saving when there is a sudden
fall in the thermometer. Let them recall that it is not bronchitis as
a cause of death, nor apoplexy, nor heart disease, as such, that the
doctor is called on to meet; but an all-pervading influence which
overwhelms like the sea, and against which, in the mass, individual
effort stands paralyzed and helpless. When the doctor is summoned the
mischief has at least commenced, and, it may be, is so far over that
treatment by mere medicines sinks into secondary significance. Then
he, true minister of health, candid enough to bow humbly before the
great and inevitable truth, and professing no specific cure by nostrum
or symbol, can only try to avert further danger by teaching elementary
principles, and by making the unlearned the participators in his own
learning.--_The Asclepiad._

       *       *       *       *       *


THE TREATMENT OF GLAUCOMA.

As this disease is so fatal to vision, any remedy that may be
suggested to diminish the frequency of its termination in blindness
cannot fail to be read of with interest. M. Nicati, in the _Revue
generate de clinique et de therapeutique_, has had marked success in
the treatment of glaucoma by drainage of the posterior chamber, either
by sclerotomy or by sclero-iritomy, as the conditions of the
individual case may require.--_N.Y. Med. Jour._

       *       *       *       *       *




A TWIN SCREW LAUNCH RUN BY A COMPOUND ENGINE.


[Illustration: TWIN SCREW STEAM LAUNCH GEMINI.]

The launch shown in our illustration was built in New Westminster,
British Columbia, Canada. She is 42 ft. keel and 7 ft. beam, and has 4
ft. depth of hold. She has an improved Clarke compound engine, also
shown in an accompanying illustration, with a high pressure piston
four inches in diameter, and a low pressure piston eight inches in
diameter, the stroke being six inches, and the engine driving two
twenty-six inch screws. With 130 pounds of steam, and making 275
revolutions per minute, the launch attains a speed of nine miles per
hour, thus fully demonstrating the adaptability of this engine to the
successful working of twin screws.

[Illustration: THE CLARKE COMPOUND TWIN-SCREW OPERATING ENGINE.]

In the Clarke engine, the exhaust pipe from the high pressure cylinder
leads to the steam chest of the low pressure cylinder, while the
piston in the upper cylinder is secured on a piston rod extending
downward and connected with a piston operating in the lower cylinder,
the exhaust pipe from the latter leading to the outside. On the piston
rod common to both cylinders is secured a crosshead pivotally
connected by two pitmen with opposite crank arms on crank shafts
mounted to turn in suitable bearings on the base, which also supports
a frame carrying the low pressure cylinder, on top of which is a frame
supporting the high pressure cylinder. The valves in the two steam
chests are connected with each other by a valve rod connected at its
lower end in the usual manner with the reversing link, operated from
eccentrics secured on one of the crank shafts.

The crank arms stand at angles to each other, so that the crank shafts
are turned in opposite directions, and the position of the link is
such that it can be readily changed by the reversing lever to
simultaneously reverse the motion of the crank shafts. On the crank
shafts are also formed two other crank arms pivotally connected by
opposite pitmen with a slide mounted in vertical guideways, supported
on a frame erected on the base, the motion of the crank shafts causing
the vertical sliding motion of the slide traveling loosely in the
guideways, and thus serving as a governor, as, in case one of the
propellers becomes disabled, the power of the shaft carrying the
disabled propeller is directly transferred to the other shaft through
the crank arms, pitmen, and slide, and the other propeller is caused
to do all the work. All the parts of the engine are within easy reach
of the engineer, and there are so few working parts in motion that the
friction is reduced to a minimum.

It is said that the plan of construction and the operation of this
engine have been carefully observed by practical engineers, and that,
considering the dimensions of the boat, her speed, the smallness of
the power, the ease with which she passes the centers, the absence of
vibration while running, and the very few working parts in motion, the
engine is a notable success. She can be run at a very high velocity
without injury or risk, and is designed to be very economical in cost
and in weight and space. This engine has been recently patented in the
United States and foreign countries by Mr. James A. Clarke, of New
Westminster.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVEMENTS IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF RIVER AND CANAL BARGES.

By M. RITTER (KNIGHT) VON SZABEL, late Austrian Naval Officer, of
Vienna.


This innovation consists essentially in an arrangement by which two
distinct vessels, on being revolved round their longitudinal axis to
an angle of 90 deg., can be combined into one single duplex vessel, or, to
put it in different words, a larger vessel is arranged so that it can
be parted into two halves (called "semi-barges"), which can be used
and navigated with equal facility as two distinct vessels, as if
combined into one. By the combination of the two semi-barges into one
duplex barge the draught of the vessel is nearly doubled, the ratio
existing between the draught of a loaded semi-vessel and the equally
loaded duplex vessels being 5:8 (up to 8.5)

The advantage of the invention consists:

    1. In this difference of draught.

    2. In the smaller width of the semi-vessel as compared with
    the duplex vessel.

    3. In the fact that the combination and separation of the
    vessels can be effected, without the least disturbance of the
    cargo, in a minimum of time.

It facilitates the utilization, to the highest possible extent, of the
varying conditions and dimensions of canal locks and rivers.

The transition from rivers to canals, and from larger canals to
smaller ones, is expedited by the possibility afforded of, on the
arrival at the locks, dividing the vessel in a space of a few minutes;
of passing with the semi-vessel, singly, the various smaller locks or
the shallow canal, after which the two sections may be re-combined and
navigated again as one vessel. The process of "folding up" the two
vessels will of course take longer than that of separation.

On rivers, the channels of which are interrupted by sand banks and
rapids, the same operation may be carried out, thus avoiding the
expense and delay necessitated by, perhaps, repeated "lightering,"
i.e., reduction of the cargo.

Thus, the through traffic on large rivers like the Danube, with its
repeated obstacles to navigation, such as the "iron gate," and several
sand-banks known and dreaded by bargemen, would be materially
facilitated, any necessity for unloading part of the cargo being
obviated; moreover, such a duplex vessel composed of two semi-vessels
affords the advantage of utilizing to a fuller degree the power of
traction, and one large vessel will be more convenient for traffic
than two smaller ones.

Further, the mode of construction of the semi-vessels--both ends of
which are of a similar pattern--allows of their being navigated up and
down a water channel without the necessity of turning them round;
provision having also been made for the fixing of the rudder at either
end, which would therefore merely require exchanging. This is of some
advantage in narrow river beds and canals, and applies equally to the
duplex vessel as to the single semi-vessels.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

Each semi-barge on its part is also constructed of two equal
halves--which are, however, inseparable--and as there is no distinct
stem or stern, any one of these semi-vessels will fit any other
semi-vessels of the same dimensions, and can be attached to the same
by means of the coupling apparatus, and the two "folded up" into one
duplex vessel. This process does not present any material
difficulties. The two single boats on being coupled together can be
made to lean over toward each other, by filling their lateral water
compartments, to such an extent that the further closing up can be
easily effected by means of specially constructed windlasses. In the
case of petroleum vessels the "folding up" operation is facilitated by
the circumstance that the petroleum may be made to serve the purposes
of water ballast.

As regards the size and tonnage of the new vessels, this will of
course depend on the local condition of the rivers and canals to be
navigated. Thus a vessel destined for traffic on canals with locks of
varying dimensions will have to be adapted to the dimensions of the
smallest existing lock.

Supposing the size of the latter to be such as found in the case of
the Rhine-Marne or the Rhine-Rhone Canal, or on the Neckar down to
Cannstadt, or in the Danube-Main Canal and some smaller canals in the
Weser district, etc., viz.:

    Length of lock     34.5 meters.
    Width               5.2   "
    Depth               1.6 to 2.0 meters.

The semi-barge may be made 32 meters in length, 4 meters in breadth
and 2.5 meters total depth, and with a draught of 1.5 meters will be
capable of carrying a load of 100 tons (of 1,000 kilos each).
Correspondingly the duplex vessel will be able to carry 200 tons, with
a minimum draught of 2.4 meters and a width of 5.4 meters, but, with a
favorable height of the water level, the draught of the semi-barge may
be increased to 1.65 and that of duplex vessels to 2.7 meters.

Where not limited to certain proportions by the dimensions of the
locks to be passed, the vessel may in the first place be made longer;
the width and height may also be increased accordingly (provided that
the proportion of breadth to width is kept within the ratio 4:2.5), so
that the semi-barges may be constructed for a single burden up to 300
tons, or 600 for the duplex vessel.

As regards the nature of the cargo, parcels would not be admissible in
this instance, but any kind of homogeneous cargo would be suitable
which would bear laying over on one side.

Thus this style of vessel would be well adapted for petroleum tank
vessels, for the transport of all kinds of cereals, flour, coffee, and
sugar in sacks--these latter being held in position by an arrangement
of planking and boards so as to prevent any overturning of the goods
on the vessels being folded up or taken apart. Similarly in the case
of a cargo of loose grain or other loose produce, the same must be
prevented from being upset by a kind of wooden casing.

Two semi-vessels loaded with different cargoes may be coupled
together, provided that there is not too much difference between their
respective draughts. Slight differences may be balanced by the water
compartments being filled to a greater or smaller extent.

The peculiar position of the hatches allows of loading the
semi-vessels separately as well as when coupled together.

If there is for the time being no necessity for using the vessels in
their capacity of separate and duplex barges, any kind of cargo might
be loaded that does not require large hatches.

The vessels, on account of their more complicated construction, will
be somewhat more expensive, but wherever the advantage offered by them
outweighs the extra expenditure, they can be used with success.

The innovation might be of particular importance where a new canal
system is being constructed, since the latter might be subdivided into
main canals and branch canals--similarly as in the case of ordinary
and narrow gauge railways--the main canal being built of a larger
section and with larger locks to suit the duplex barges, while the
branch canals could be planned of smaller dimensions calculated to
suit the semi-barge. Thus the first cost of such a canal system would
be materially reduced as compared with a canal installation of one
uniform section throughout.

Likewise in mountainous districts with rock soil it would be an
important consideration whether a canal had to be blasted out of the
solid rock or a tunnel cut, in dimensions suitable for a vessel of 6
or of 14 square meters section below the water line.

In this case, even in certain portions of a main canal--where rendered
desirable by the rocky nature of the ground--a smaller section might
be adopted, which would only be large enough for single semi-barges,
so that the duplex vessel would in these instances have to be taken
apart in the same way as in a branch canal.

The saving to be effected by constructing a canal on this principle,
as compared with a canal of one uniform section throughout, must be
considerable, and the advantages of the arrangement are apparent.

The appended figures will further illustrate the arrangement. Fig. 1
shows two separate semi-barges ready to pursue their journey
independently. Fig. 2 shows two semi-barges coupled together ready to
be "folded up" by means of ropes and specially constructed
windlasses--their lateral water compartments having previously been
filled. Fig. 3 shows the duplex vessel after the "folding up"
