remembering the form just well enough to have got the curve wrong end
up, and knowing nothing of the principle, have succeeded in building a
housing that is absolutely weak and absolutely ugly, with just enough
of the original left to show from where it was stolen. If the housing
is constructed on the brace plan, should not the braces be straight,
as in the old Bement, and the center line of strain pass through the
center line of the brace? If the housing is to take the form of a
curve, the section should be practically uniform, and the curve drawn
by an artist. Many times housings are quite rigid enough in the
direction of the travel of the table, but weak against side pressure.
The hollow box section, with secure attachment to the bed and a deep
cross beam at the top, are the remedies.

Raising and lowering cross heads, large and small, by two screws is a
slow and laborious job, and slow when done by power. Counterweights
just balancing the cross head, with metal straps rather than chains or
ropes, large wheels with small anti-friction journals, and the cross
head guarded by one post only, changes a slow to a quick arrangement,
and a task to a comfort. Housings of the hollow box section furnish an
excellent place for the counterweights.

The moving head, which is not expected to move while under pressure,
seems to have settled into one form, and when hooked over a square
ledge at the top, a pretty satisfactory form, too. But in other
machines built in the form of planing machines, in which the head is
traversed while cutting, as is the case with the profiling machine,
the planer head form is not right. Both the propelling screw, or
whatever gives the side motion, should be as low down as possible, as
should also be the guide.

There is a principle underlying the Sellers method of driving a planer
table that may be utilized in many ways. The endurance goes far beyond
any man's original expectations, and the explanation, very likely,
lies in the fact that the point of contact is always changing. To
apply the same principle to a common worm gear it is only necessary to
use a worm in a plain spur gear, with the teeth cut at an angle the
wrong way, and set the worm shaft at an angle double the amount,
rather than at 90 deg.. Such a worm gear will, I fancy, outwear a dozen of
the scientific sort. It would likely be found a convenience to have
the head of a planing machine traverse by a handle or crank attached
to itself, so it could be operated like the slide rest of a lathe,
rather than as is now the case from the end of the cross head. The
principle should be to have things convenient, even at an additional
cost. Anything more than a single motion to lock the cross head to the
housing or stanchions should not be countenanced in small planers at
least. Many of the inferior machines show marked improvements over the
better sorts, so far as handiness goes, while there is nothing to
hinder the handy from being good and the good handy.

When we consider that since the post-drilling machine first made its
appearance, there have been added Blasdell's quick return, the
automatic feed, belt-driven spindles, back gears placed where they
ought to be, with many minor improvements, it is not safe to assume
that the end has been reached; and when we consider that as a piece of
machine designing, considered in an artistic sense entirely, the
Bement post drill is the finest the world ever saw (the Porter-Allen
engine not excepted, which is saying a good deal), is it not strange
that of all mechanical designs none other has taken on such outrageous
forms as this?

One thing that would seem to be desirable, and that ordinary skill
might devise, is some sort of snap clutch by which the main spindle
could be stopped instantly by touching a trigger with the foot; many
drills and accidents would be saved thereby. Of the many special
devices I have seen for use on a drilling machine, one used by Mr.
Lipe might be made of universal use. It is in the form of a bracket or
knee adjustably attached to the post, which has in its upper surface a
V into which round pieces of almost any size can be fastened, so that
the drill will pass through it diametrically. It is not only useful in
making holes through round bars, but straight through bosses and
collars as well.

The radial drill has got so it points its nose in all directions but
skyward, but whether in its best form is not certain. The handle of
the belt shipper, in none that I have seen, follows around within
reach of the drill as conveniently as one would like.

As the one suggestion I have to make in regard to the shaping machine
best illustrates the subject of maintaining true wearing surfaces, I
will leave it until I reach that part of my paper.

(_To be continued._)

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MECHANICS OF A LIQUID.


A liquid comes in handy sometimes in measuring the volume of a
substance where the length, breadth, and thickness is difficult to get
at. It is a very simple operation, only requiring the material to be
plunged under water and measure the amount of displacement by giving
close attention to the overflow. It is a process that was first
brought into use in the days when jewelers and silversmiths were
inclined to be a little dishonest and to make the most of their
earnings out of the rule of their country. If we remember rightly, the
voice of some one crying "Eureka" was heard about that time from
somebody who had been taking a bath up in the country some two miles
from home. Tradition would have us believe that the inventor left for
the patent office long before his bathing exercises were half through
with, and that he did the most of his traveling at a lively rate while
on foot, but it is more reasonable to suppose that bath tubs were in
use in those days, and that he noticed, as every good philosopher
should, that his bathing solution was running over the edge of the tub
as fast as his body sunk below the surface. Taking to the heels is
something that we hear of even at this late day.

[Illustration]

It was not many years ago that an inventor of a siphon noticed how
water could be drawn up hill with a lamp wick, and the thought struck
him that with a soaking arrangement of this kind in one leg of the
siphon a flow of water could be obtained that would always be kept in
motion. Without taking a second thought he dropped his work in the hay
field, and ran all the way to London, a distance of twenty miles, to
lay his scheme before a learned man of science. He must have felt like
being carried home on a stretcher when he learned that a performance
of this kind was a failure. Among the others who have given an
exhibition of this kind we notice an observer who was more successful.
Being an overseer in a cotton mill, he had only to run over to his
dining room and secure two empty fruit jars and pipe them up, as
shown. He had had trouble in measuring volume by the liquid process by
having everything he attempted to measure get a thorough wetting, and
there were many substances that were to be experimented upon that
would not stand this part of the operation, such as fibers and a
number of pulverized materials. One of the jars was packed in tight,
nearly half full of cotton, and the other left entirely empty. The
question now is to measure the volume of cotton without bringing any
of the fibers in contact with the water. The liquid is poured into the
tunnel in the upright tube under head enough to partially fill the
jars when the overflow that stands on a level with the line, D E, is
open to allow the air in each jar to adjust itself as the straight
portions are wanted to work from. The overflow is then closed and head
enough of water put on to compress the air in the empty jar down into
half its volume. It may take a pipe long enough to reach up into the
second story, but it need not be a large one, and pipes round a cotton
mill are plentiful. In the jar containing cotton the water has not
risen so high, there being not so much air to compress, and comes to
rest on the line, C. Now we have this simple condition to work from.
If the water has risen so as to occupy half of the space that has been
taken up by the amount of air in one jar, it must have done the same
in the other, and if it could have been carried to twice the extent in
volume would reach the bottom of the jar in the one containing nothing
but air, and to the line, H I, in the jar containing cotton.

The fibers then must have had an amount of material substance about
them to fill the remaining space entirely full, so that a particle of
air could not be taken into account anywhere. The cotton has produced
the same effect that a solid substance would do if it just filled the
space shown above the line, H I, for the water has risen into half the
space that is left below it. This enables an overseer to look into the
material substance of textile fibers by bringing into use the
elasticity of atmospheric air, reserving the liquid process for
measuring volume to govern the amount of compressibility.--_Boston
Journal of Commerce._

       *       *       *       *       *




VOLUTE DOUBLE DISTILLING CONDENSER.


This distiller and condenser which we illustrate has been designed,
says _Engineering_, for the purpose of obtaining fresh water from sea
water. It is very compact, and the various details in connection with
it may be described as follows: Steam from the boiler is admitted into
the evaporator through a reducing valve at a pressure of about 60 lb.,
and passing through the volute, B, evaporates the salt water contained
in the chamber, C; the vapor thus generated passing through the pipe,
D, into the volute condenser, E, where it is condensed. The fresh
water thus obtained flows into the filter, from which it is pumped
into suitable drinking tanks.

[Illustration: VOLUTE DOUBLE DISTILLING APPARATUS.]

The steam from the boiler after passing through the volute, B, is
conveyed by means of a pipe to the second volute, H, where it is
condensed, and the water resulting is conveyed by means of a pump to
the hot well or feed tank. The necessary condensing water enters at J
and is discharged at K. The method of keeping the supply of salt water
in the evaporator at a constant level is very efficient and ingenious.
To the main circulating discharge pipe, a small pipe, L, is fitted,
which is in communication with the chamber, M, and through this the
circulating sea water runs back until it attains a working level in
the evaporator, when a valve in the end of pipe, L, is closed by the
action of the float, N, the regulation of admission being thus
automatic and certain. The steam from the boiler can be regulated by
means of a stop valve, and the pressure in the evaporator should not
exceed 4 lb., while the pressure gauge is so arranged that the
pressure in both condenser and evaporator is shown at the same time. A
safety valve is fitted at the top of the condenser, and an automatic
blow-off valve, P, is arranged to blow off when a certain density of
brine has been attained in the evaporator. The "Esco" triple pump
(Fig. 3), which has been specially manufactured for this purpose, has
three suctions and deliveries, one for circulating water, the second
for the condensed steam, and a third for the filtered drinking water,
so that the latter is kept fresh and clean.

The condenser and pumps are manufactured by Ernest Scott & Co., Close
Works, Newcastle on Tyne, and were shown by them at the late
exhibition in their town.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED CURRENT METER.


Paul Kotlarewsky, of St. Petersburg, has invented an instrument for
measuring or ascertaining the velocity of water and air currents.

Upon the shaft or axis of the propeller wheel, or upon a shaft geared
therewith, there is a hermetically closed tube or receptacle, D, which
is placed at right angles with the shaft, and preferably so that its
longitudinal axis shall intersect the axis of said shaft. In this tube
or receptacle is placed a weight, such as a ball, which is free to
roll or slide back and forth in the tube. The effect of this
arrangement is, that as the shaft revolves, the weight will drop
alternately toward opposite ends of the tube, and its stroke, as it
brings up against either end, will be distinctly heard by the observer
as well as felt by him if, as is usually the case, the apparatus when
in use is held by him. By counting the strokes which occur during a
given period of time, the number of revolutions during that period can
readily be ascertained, and from that the velocity of the current to
be measured can be computed in the usual way.

When the apparatus is submerged in water, by a rope held by the
observer, it will at once adjust itself to the direction of the
current. The force of the current, acting against the wings or blades
of the propeller wheel, puts the latter in revolution, and the tube,
D, will be carried around, and the sliding weight, according to the
position of the tube, will drop toward and bring up against
alternately opposite ends of said tube, making two strokes for every
revolution of the shaft.

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FLOWER INDUSTRY OF GRASSE.


A paper on this subject was read before the Chemists' Assistants'
Association on March 8, by Mr. F.W. Warrick, and was listened to with
much interest.

Mr. Warrick first apologized for presenting a paper on such a
frivolous subject to men who had shown themselves such ardent
advocates of the higher pharmacy, of the "ologies" in preference to
the groceries, perfumeries, and other "eries." But if perfumery could
not hope to take an elevated position in the materiae pharmaceuticae, it
might be accorded a place as an adjunct, if only on the plea that
those also serve who only stand and wait.

Mr. Warrick mentioned that his family had been connected with this
industry for many years, and that for many of the facts in the paper
he was indebted to a cousin who had had twenty years' practical
experience in the South, and who was present that evening.


GRASSE.

The town of Grasse is perhaps more celebrated than any other for its
connection with the perfume industry in a province which is itself
well known to be its home.

This, the department of the Alpes Maritimes, forms the southeastern
corner of France. Its most prominent geographical features are an
elevated mountain range, a portion of the Alps, and a long seaboard
washed by the Mediterranean--whence the name Alpes Maritimes.

The calcareous hills round Grasse and to the north of Nice are more or
less bare, though they were at one time well wooded; the reafforesting
of these parts has, however, made of late great progress. Nearer the
sea vegetation is less rare, and there many a promontory excites the
just admiration of the visitor by its growth of olives, orange and
lemon trees, and odoriferous shrubs. Who that has ever sojourned in
this province can wonder that Goethe's Mignon should have ardently
desired a return to these sunny regions?

Visitors on these shores on the first day of this year found Goethe's
lines more poetical than true--

  Where a wind ever soft from the blue heaven blows,
  And the groves are of laurel, and myrtle, and rose;

for they gathered round their fires and coughed and groaned in chorus,
and entertained each other with accounts of their ailments. But this
was exceptional, and the climate of the Alpes Maritimes is on the
whole as near perfection as anything earthly can be. This, however, is
not due to its latitude, but rather to its happy protection from the
north by its Alps and to its being bathed on the south by the warm
Mediterranean and the soft breezes of an eastern wind (which evidently
there bears a different reputation to that which it does with us). The
mistral, or cold breeze from the hills, is indeed the only climatic
enemy, if we except an occasional earthquake.

The town of Grasse itself is situated in the southern portion of the
department, and enjoys its fair share of the advantages this situation
affords. It is about ten miles from Cannes (Lord Brougham's creation),
and, as the crow flies, twenty-five miles from Nice, though about
forty miles by rail, for the line runs down to Cannes and thence along
the shore to Nice.

Built on the side of a hill some 1,000 feet above the level of the
sea, the town commands magnificent views over the surrounding country,
especially in the direction of the sea, which is gloriously visible.
An abundant stream, the Foux, issuing from the rocks just above the
town, is the all productive genius of the place; it feeds a hundred
fountains and as many factories, and then gives life to the
neighboring fields and gardens.

The population of Grasse is about 12,000, and the flora of its
environs represents almost all the botany of Europe. Among the
splendid pasture lands, 7,000 feet above the sea, are fields of
lavender, thyme, etc. From 7,000 to 6,000 feet there are forests of
pine and other gymnosperms. From 6,000 to 4,000 feet firs and the
beech are the most prominent trees. Between 4,000 and 2,000 feet we
find our familiar friends the oak, the chestnut, cereals, maize,
potatoes. Below this is the Mediterranean region. Here orange, lemon,
fig, and olive trees, the vine, mulberry, etc., flourish in the open
as well as any number of exotics, palms, aloes, cactuses, castor oil
plants, etc. It is in this region that nature with lavish hand bestows
her flowers, which, unlike their compeers in other lands, are not born
to waste their fragrance on the desert air or to die "like the bubble
on the fountain," but rather (to paraphrase George Eliot's lofty
words) to die, and live again in fats and oils, made nobler by their
presence.

The following are the plants put under contribution by the perfume
factories of the district, viz., the orange tree, bitter and sweet,
the lemon, eucalyptus, myrtle, bay laurel, cherry laurel, elder; the
labiates; lavender, spike, thyme, etc.; the umbelliferous fennel and
parsley, the composite wormwood and tarragon, and, more delicate than
these, the rose, geranium, cassie, jasmin, jonquil, mignonette, and
violet.


THE PERFUME FACTORY.

In the perfume factory everything is done by steam. Starting from the
engine room at the bottom, the visitor next enters the receiving room,
where early in the morning the chattering, patois-speaking natives
come to deliver the flowers for the supply of which they have
contracted. The next room is occupied with a number of steam-jacketed
pans, a mill, and hydraulic presses. Next comes the still room, the
stills in which are all heated by steam. In the "extract" department,
which is next reached, are large tinned-copper drums, fitted with
stirrers, revolving in opposite directions on vertical axes.
Descending to the cellar--the coolest part of the building--we find
the simple apparatus used in the process of enfleurage. The apparatus
is of two kinds. The smaller is a frame fitted with a sheet of stout
glass. A number of these, all of the same size, when placed one on the
top of the other, form a tolerably air tight box. The larger is a
frame fitted with wire netting, over which a piece of molleton is
placed. The other rooms are used for bottling, labeling, etc.

The following are some of the details of the cultivation and
extraction of perfumes as given in Mr. Warrick's paper:


ORANGE PERFUMES.

The orange tree is produced from the pip, which is sown in a sheltered
uncovered bed. When the young plant is about 4 feet high, it is
transplanted and allowed a year to gain strength in its new
surroundings. It is then grafted with shoots from the Portugal or
Bigaradier. It requires much care in the first few years, must be well
manured, and during the summer well watered, and if at all exposed
must have its stem covered up with straw in winter. It is not expected
to yield a crop of flowers before the fourth year after
transplantation. The flowering begins toward the end of April and
lasts through May to the middle of June. The buds are picked when on
the point of opening by women, boys, and girls, who make use of a
tripod ladder to reach them. These villagers carry the fruits (or,
rather, flowers) of their day's labor to a flower agent or
commissionnaire, who weighs them, spreads them out in a cool place
(the flowers, not the villagers), where they remain until 1 or 2 A.M.;
he then puts them into sacks, and delivers them at the factory before
the sun has risen. They are here taken in hand at once; on exceptional
days as many as 160 tons being so treated in the whole province. After
the following season, say end of June, the farmers prune their trees;
these prunings are carted to the factory, where the leaves are
separated and made use of.

During the autumn the ground round about the trees is well weeded, dug
about, and manured. The old practice of planting violets under the
orange trees is being abandoned. Later on in the year those blossoms
which escaped extermination have developed into fruits. These, when
destined for the production of the oil, are picked while green.

The orange trees produce a second crop of flowers in autumn, sometimes
of sufficient importance to allow of their being taken to the
factories, and always of sufficient importance to provide brides with
the necessary bouquets.

Nature having been thus assisted to deliver these, her wonderful
productions, the flowers, the leaves, and the fruits of the orange
tree, at the factory, man has to do the rest. He does it in the
following manner:

The flowers are spread out on the stone floor of the receiving room in
a layer some 6 to 8 inches deep; they are taken in hand by young
girls, who separate the sepals, which are discarded. Such of the
petals as are destined for the production of orange flower water and
neroli are put into a still through a large canvas chute, and are
covered with water, which is measured by the filling of reservoirs on
the same floor. The manhole of the still is then closed, and the
contents are brought to boiling point by the passage of superheated
steam through the coils of a surrounding worm. The water and oil pass
over, are condensed, and fall into a Florentine receiver, where the
oil floating on the surface remains in the flask, while the water
escapes through the tube opening below. A piece of wood or cork is
placed in the receiver to break up the steam flowing from the still;
this gives time for the small globules of oil to cohere, while it
breaks the force of the downward current, thus preventing any of the
oil being carried away.

The first portions of the water coming from the still are put into
large tinned copper vats, capable of holding some 500 gallons, and
there stored, to be drawn off as occasion may require into glass
carboys or tinned copper bottles. This water is an article of very
large consumption in France; our English cooks have no idea to what an
extent it is used by the _chefs_ in the land of the "darned mounseer."

The oil is separated by means of a pipette, filtered, and bottled off.
It forms the oil of neroli of commerce; 1,000 kilos. of the flowers
yield 1 kilo. of oil. That obtained from the flowers of the
Bigaradier, or bitter orange, is the finer and more expensive quality.

The delicate scent of orange flowers can be preserved quite unchanged
by another and more gentle process, viz., that of maceration. It was
noticed by some individual, whose name has not been handed down to us,
that bodies of the nature of fat and oil are absorbers of the
odor-imparting particles exhaled by plants. This property was seized
upon by some other genius equally unknown to fame, who utilized it to
