
   [Footnote 1: Read at the recent meeting of the Gas Institute,
   Glasgow.]

BY GEORGE ANDERSON, OF LONDON.


The paper I have to lay before you describes the last product of the
brain of one of your past presidents--Alexander Angus Croll--in
connection with our industry. It may not be so well known to some of
the younger as it is to many of the older members of the Institute
that the fertile brain of Mr. Croll has done much for the improvement
and the extension of the gas industry. I consider that he has been the
most successful pioneer both in the cheapening and the purification of
gas--two elements without which our industry would progress but slowly
if at all; and the success which has crowned his efforts, to our
advantage, has reflected itself favorably on himself, showing by his
financial success that he has also been a good man of business. All
these are conditions which enhance the value of this paper. In the
present instance, I claim no other credit than that of being the
mouthpiece of Mr. Croll, whose assistant I was for ten of the busiest
and most important years of his eventful life; and having (with my son
Bruce) taken part in the experiments, I have been asked to describe
the process to the Institute.

The manufacture of sulphate of ammonia, as hitherto conducted, has
consisted either in bringing together sulphuric acid and ammoniacal
liquor or in distilling the liquor by external heat, or by the
introduction of steam, and bringing it into contact with the acid in
the form of gases and vapor of water. In either case a large volume of
noxious gases is given off, the chief of which, being sulphureted
hydrogen, has to be fixed by another method, in order to comply with
acts of Parliament for the prevention of nuisances.

By the processes hitherto used, we sometimes get only 11/4 tons of salts
to every ton of acid used; while in the more perfect forms of
apparatus, we may get 1-1/3 tons of salts. By Mr. Croll's process,
however, we get an increased yield of salts on the acid used, as
follows: The experiments were made with sulphuric acid of the specific
gravity of 1838, or nearly concentrated oil of vitriol; and the
quantity used was 8 ounces in each experiment. The ammoniacal liquor
was of uniform strength throughout all the experiments, being kept in
a corked jar; and the solution of sulphate of ammonia was passed
through filter paper before being crystallized. Thus we obtained a
white salt. In each experiment the solution of sulphate was divided
into four equal parts by weight, and one part filtered and
crystallized to dryness over a spirit lamp; the weight in each
experiment being as nearly as possible the same, or 31/4 oz. of salt to
2 oz. of acid--being in the proportion of 26 oz. of sulphate to 1 lb.
of acid, or 321/2 cwt. of salts to 20 cwt. of acid.

The results surprised me; and being uniform over a number of
experiments, pleased me. Still, I preserved the character of a critic
and said: "I should like to treat 8 oz. of acid in the ordinary
way--saturating it with ammoniacal liquor, and then crystallizing it."
"Oh!" Mr. Croll said, "we know what that will produce." I replied:
"Yes; but I would like to do it with the precise acid and liquor we
have been using, so that we may have the experiment on all fours with
yours, barring your process." These experiments were made at his
country residence. I was staying there for the night. So next morning
I got down before him, went at my experiment, saturated 8 oz. of acid
(and a nice smell I made) out in the grounds, treated it afterward by
division into four parts, filtered and crystallized it, all as before,
with the result that I obtained 23/4 oz., as against his 31/2 oz.--or in
the proportion of 271/2 cwt. of salt to the ton of acid, as against his
321/2 cwt.

I now thought of business. "What is the royalty to be?" I said, as we
sat at breakfast. This we settled as we Scotch say "in a crack," or as
an Englishman would say "in a jiffy." Mr. Croll decided to have the
apparatus put up on a manufacturing scale here in Glasgow; and I
determined to erect similar apparatus at one of my gas works.

I dare say that it will be uppermost in your minds, Whence comes the
increased yield of salts? Well, I will state one fact, and leave you
to ruminate on it, namely, by Mr. Croll's process we did not seem to
produce any sulphureted hydrogen. The experiments were conducted in a
room with ordinary doors and windows, but without a chimney; and we
were not troubled with any offensive smell--a state of things that
could not possibly have existed had we been experimenting with any
other apparatus hitherto employed in the manufacture of sulphate of
ammonia. The apparatus, which will presently be described, only
substitutes, for the present mode of distillation, a new one, which
forms the subject of Mr. Croll's patent. All other parts of present
apparatus can remain as they now exist.

Mr Croll has also introduced another mode of producing sulphate of
ammonia, which dispenses with all the apparatus hitherto in use after
the distillatory portion, and produces the salt in a state fit for the
farmer, ready to be put on the land. This process consists in sending
the products of distillation through a vessel filled with wood sawdust
saturated with sulphuric acid. The ammonia becomes fixed and
crystallized in the sawdust, and is ready for use. There are many
works, both at home and abroad, to which the conveyance of sulphuric
acid is both difficult and expensive, on account of the cost of
carriage and the breakage which occurs; and thus in many such works
the ammonia is not utilized. This saturated sawdust process will, I
think, remove the difficulty; for I find that dry sawdust absorbs
double its own weight of sulphuric acid, and this could be conveyed in
the most ordinary casks in a damp state, and save all waste and
annoyance from breakage of bottles. In this state it could be used by
the farmer, or the sulphate of ammonia could be washed out,
crystallized, and exported in the state of salt.

In the remainder of this paper I have been assisted by my son Bruce,
who also assisted in the experiments that I have described. He has
since been engaged on the trials on a manufacturing scale; and I ask
you to permit him to read the concluding portion of the paper, in
which he will describe the process, and what he has done.

The process referred to in the foregoing portion of the paper is a
method employed for heating the liquor, whereby a chemical action is
brought into play, with the results already mentioned. This method
consists in passing the products of combustion of a furnace from a
clear fire in a hot state through a still containing the ammoniacal
liquor. The hot gases from the furnace impart their heat to the
liquor, causing the volatilization of the condensed gases, and at the
same time act chemically upon the liquor and evolved gases, so that
ammonia and sulphuric acid are resulting products, in the compound
state of sulphate of ammonia. The formation of the ammonia produced in
the process is probably due to the decomposition of nitrogenous bodies
contained in solution in the liquor--the sulphocyanide, for instance;
the nitrogen being given off in the form of ammonia. Of the sulphuric
acid produced, we look upon the sulphureted hydrogen as the source,
also any sulphites existing in the liquor, which in their volatile
state take up the atom of oxygen necessary for their conversion into
sulphate.

[Illustration]

The apparatus used in working the process consists of a tower still,
containing a number of superposed trays about 3 or 4 inches apart,
with a lipped hole through the bottom of each at the side. The trays
are so placed in the tower that the holes are at alternate sides. The
liquor passes into the top of the still, and zigzags down through the
series of trays, as in an ordinary Coffey still. The bottom tray
differs from the rest; being much deeper, and having holes through it
connecting it with the furnace, which is set immediately below it. The
products of combustion of the fuel are caused to pass from the furnace
up through the holes in the trays in the still, and, together with the
gases evolved from the liquor, are directed into the saturator, where
the sulphate of ammonia is obtained either in solution or in the
crystalline state.

Where the process is at present being worked, an exhauster is used to
draw the furnace gases through the still; but it might be advantageous
to use a blower.

A small plant has been put in action at the gas works in Kilkenny and
another on a larger scale, and differing somewhat in detail, here in
Glasgow at the Alum and Ammonia Company's works, where the liquor from
the Tradeston Gas Works is converted. The trials on a working scale
have only been made at both places within the past ten days; and, so
far, nothing has appeared against the principle, though in certain of
the details of construction some alterations are being made to improve
it. The extra yield of salt from a given quantity of acid obtained in
the experiments has been proved in practice, as also the absorption of
the sulphureted hydrogen.

The other day, while ammoniacal liquor of about 9 oz. strength was
being run at the rate of 70 gallons per hour through the still, 5 feet
in diameter and 10 feet high, containing seventeen trays, no smell of
sulphureted hydrogen was perceptible from the waste gases from the
saturator, although on applying lead paper a slight trace of this
impurity was noticeable, and it may be stated that the gases were
being delivered at the ground level, where there was no difficulty in
testing them.

In the Glasgow apparatus we have found it advisable to enlarge the
pipe leading the gases into the saturator, as the volume of these is
much greater than would be the case in the ordinary method of working.
Further experience will probably indicate the desirability of
increasing the height of the still, which, being only 10 feet, is not
more than half the height that Coffey stills are ordinarily made.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ANALYSIS OF URINE.


INTRODUCTION.

Whatever may be the position of British pharmacists in comparison with
those of other countries, it cannot be said that they have paid the
attention to the analysis of urine which the subject has received from
pharmacists on the Continent. Considering the importance of the
subject, this curious neglect can only be attributed to the fact that
the pharmacist in Great Britain is but slowly attaining the position
of chemical expert to the physician, which his foreign _confrere_ has
so long held with credit and even distinction. In France, for example,
M. Mehu, whose name is familiar to readers of this journal, is looked
upon as one of the leading authorities on morbid urine and its
analysis, and yet a list of goodly pharmaceutical papers shows that,
as the medical analyst, he has not forgotten his connection with pure
pharmacy.

There are several points about urinary analysis which entitle it to a
very high position in the estimation of pharmacists. In the first
place, the physician is no more likely to be fonder of the test tube
than of the pestle, of analyzing urine than of compounding his own
medicines. Leading men in the profession are more and more setting
their faces against the dispensing doctor, and there are numbers among
them who admit that they succeed no better as analysts than they do as
dispensers.

Some old fashioned practitioners trouble themselves very little about
their patients' urine, except, perhaps, in respect of sugar and
albumen. On the other hand, numbers of leading physicians, including
especially those highly educated gentlemen who cultivate a consulting
practice, are in the habit of pushing urinary analysis almost to an
excess. One well-known specialist of the writer's acquaintance, with
an extensive West End practice, makes quantitative determinations of
urea, uric acid, and total acidity, in addition to conducting other
diagnostic experiments, on every occasion that he interviews his
patients. By this means he has accumulated in his case books a mass of
data which he considers most valuable as an aid to diagnosis, and
through that to successful treatment.

Pharmacists are proverbially neat-handed, as Mr. Martindale would say,
and their habit of conducting dispensing operations which involve the
dexterous manipulation of very small quantities of material fit them
admirably to undertake volumetric and other rapid analytical
determinations. Compared with the doctor there is no doubt that in
this matter the chemist is _facile princeps_, and from the nature of
their respective occupations such could only have been expected. A few
chemists throughout the country lay themselves out to save their local
doctors from unwelcome test tube practice, and these almost to a man
find it pay. Some charge a handsome fee to patients, and a small one
when the analysis comes through the physician. Others find it to their
interest to furnish medical men with qualitative reports on sugar or
albumen gratuitously. Although this practice has certain obvious
drawbacks, if a doctor sends his prescriptions to a chemist, the
latter is often willing to gratuitously perform his chemical work. In
the present article we propose to describe briefly but fully the
methods which have been found of most value in practice.


PRELIMINARY OPERATIONS.

It is the practice of some physicians to direct the patient to
preserve all the urine passed in twenty-four hours, and to forward
this in one bottle for analysis. Others, again, merely send a small
sample of "morning" and "evening" urine in separate phials, desiring
only a comparative report. In the former case the _volume_ should be
accurately measured, and the quantity noted either in fluid ounces or
cubic centimeters before commencing the analysis. This need not be
done if small samples only are received. The _color_ should be noted.
It varies greatly, through every shade of yellow and amber to dark
brown, with a tinge of green or red, if the coloring matter of bile or
blood is present. Also note relative _transparency_ or _cloudiness_,
_specific gravity_, and _reaction_, as all these observations are
useful in diagnosis. _Odor_ is not quite so important. The _specific
gravity_ should be taken at about 60 deg. F. in an ordinary specific
gravity bottle, or more conveniently by means of a good _urinometer_.
In the latter case it is very important to have an instrument of known
accuracy, many of those in the market being valueless. Urinometers of
glass, though fragile, are decidedly more cleanly and less liable to
get out of order than the gilded brass instruments carried in the
pocket by many physicians. Mr. J.J. Hicks, of 8 Hatton Garden, E.C.,
manufactures a very creditable "patent urinometer" at an extremely low
cost. Healthy urine has a density of from 1.015 to 1.025; but
variations from this range are common.

[Illustration]

A fair quantity of the urine, after shaking, should be placed in a
tall conical glass vessel, to allow easy collection of the precipitate
for subsequent, microscopical examination. If an abundant amorphous
deposit of a fawn or pink--from _uroerythrin_--color slowly settles
and is readily diffused, _urates_ in excess can be anticipated. Their
presence is proved by the readiness with which they dissolve on
warming with the supernatant urine to about the temperature of the
blood. No difficulty is experienced if small quantities of albumen are
present, as that body is not coagulated until the temperature rises
much higher. A sandy precipitate of free _uric acid_ will not dissolve
on warming the urine, and its identity can further be determined by
means of the microscope, or by applying a well-known color-reaction. A
grain or so is oxidized into reddish alloxan and alloxantin by
carefuly evaporating with a few drops of strong nitric acid on a piece
of porcelain. A little ammonia is then added, when the fine _purple_
murexide stain will be produced.

It is always advisable to mention the reaction to test papers of all
samples received. Urine is normally _acid_, but there are certain
diseases which render fluid neutral or alkaline. The urea of acid
urine on standing is changed by a putrefactive ferment into ammonic
carbonate, but this decomposition in a state of health should not
take place for at least twenty-four hours. Alkalies, or organic salts
of alkaline metals, when taken as medicine render the urine alkaline,
and the indication is then not of much moment; but if none of these
causes exist, the condition is of serious diagnostic import. Where it
is desired to determine the degree of acidity of the urine voided,
say, by a gouty patient, a dilute volumetric solution of caustic soda
should be employed, using a few drops of an alcoholic solution of
phenolphthalein as an indicator, and reporting in terms of oxalic
acid. The soda solution may conveniently contain the equivalent of one
milligramme of recrystallized oxalic acid (H_{2}C_{2}O_{4}.2H_{2}O) in
each cubic centimeter.


UREA.

Carbamide, as it is called by systematic chemists, or _urea_, is next
to water the largest constituent of urine, and forms about one-third
of its total solids. Derived from ammonic carbonate by abstracting two
molecules of the elements of water, it is readily converted by
putrefaction into that salt, and the urine under these circumstances
becomes strongly alkaline in reaction. Earthy phosphates then fall
naturally out of solution, so that the putrid fluid is always well
furnished with sediment. Nitrogen that has served its purpose as
muscle or other proteid leaves the animal economy chiefly in the form
of urea, and its proportion in the urine, therefore, is a fair index
of the activity of wasting influences.

For its determination Knop's sodic hypobromite method, on account of
its convenience, is now generally preferred. The volumetric process of
Liebig, which depends on the formation of an insoluble compound of
urea with mercuric nitrate, possesses no advantages and is troublesome
to work. The principle of the hypobromite process is simple. In a
strongly alkaline solution urea is broken up by sodic hypobromite, its
nitrogen being evolved in the gaseous state, and its carbon and
hydrogen oxidized to carbonic anhydride and water respectively. The
volume of free nitrogen obtained bears a direct ratio to the amount of
urea decomposed.

[Illustration]

Among the number of instruments which have been introduced for the
purpose of conveniently measuring the evolved gas, that of Gerrard, an
illustration of which we give, is one of the simplest, cheapest, and
best. The ureometer tube, _b_, is connected at the base with a movable
reservoir, _c_, and by means of a rubber tube passing through a cork
at the top to the generating bottle, _a_. To use the apparatus, fill
_b_ to zero with water and have the reservoir placed so high that it
contains only an inch or so of the liquid. Replace the cork with
attached tube tightly in _b_. Now pour into the generating bottle 25
c.c. of a solution prepared by dissolving 1 part of caustic soda in 21/2
parts of distilled water, and dexterously break in the liquid a tube
containing 2.2 c.c. of bromine. The tubes will be found very
convenient, obviating entirely the suffocating fumes diffused in the
act of measuring bromine. Allow to stand in the solution of sodic
hypobromite thus prepared a test tube containing exactly 5 c.c. of the
urine under examination. Cork the bottle as shown in the illustration,
see that the water is at zero, and that the liquid in the reservoir is
at the same level, and then allow the urine to gradually mix with the
hypobromite solution. Cool the evolved gas by placing the bottle in
cold water, adjust the levels of the water in the tube and reservoir
(to obviate a correction for pressure), and read off the percentage of
urea in terms of which the tube is graduated. Stale urine, the urea of
which has largely been converted into ammonic carbonate, still yields
a very fair result, that salt being also completely split up by the
powerful oxidant employed. Should the urine contain albumen, it is
advisable to remove it by boiling and filtering, as, although only
slowly decomposed by the hypobromite solution, it communicates to the
liquid such a tendency to froth that the disengagement of the nitrogen
is seriously impeded. Most of those alkaloids which might possibly be
present do not yield the gas when treated in this manner, and
therefore may be disregarded.


SUGAR.

Glucose, so characteristic of _diabetes mellitus_, is not difficult of
detection or estimation. The facility with which it reduces alkaline
cupric, argentic, bismuthous, ferric, mercuric salts, indigo and
potassic picrate and chromate solutions has been utilized for the
preparation of several ready methods for its determination. Trommer's
test consists in adding enough cupric sulphate to color green, then
excess of alkali, and boiling. Yellow to brick-red cuprous oxide forms
as a heavy precipitate if glucose is present. The organic matter of
the urine prevents the precipitation of cupric hydrate on the addition
of the alkali. This test is delicate and deservedly popular. Fehling's
well-known solution contains sodio-potassic tartrate, which serves the
purpose chiefly of retaining the copper in solution. Unfortunately,
Fehling's original solution has a tendency to become hyper-sensitive
if kept long, a proneness to change that is much increased on
dilution. When so altered, the solution will yield a more or less
copious precipitate of cuprous oxide on merely boiling, and quite
independent of the presence of glucose. This decomposition is obviated
by preserving the copper salt in a separate solution from the tartrate
and alkali, and mixing before use. Schmiedeberg substitutes mannite
and Cresswell glycerin for the Rochelle salt, in order to render the
solution stable. Some prepared by the writer over twelve months ago,
according to the suggestion of the latter physician, has since shown
no signs of decomposition, and is now as good as it was then. For
qualitative purposes the solution may be prepared thus: Dissolve 35
gm. of recrystallized cupric sulphate and 200 c.c. of pure glycerin in
100 c.c. of distilled water. Dissolve separately 80 gm. of caustic
soda in 400 c.c. of water. Mix the solutions and boil for a quarter of
an hour. A small amount of reduction from impurity in the glycerin
takes place. Allow to stand till clear, decant, and dilute to 1,250
c.c. Ten cubic centimeters will then equal roughly 5 centigrammes of
glucose. For exact quantitative determination it is necessary to
standardize the solution with pure anhydrous dextrose.

To a practiced operator the indications yielded by the use of this
test are of great value; but beginners are exceedingly liable to
mistake its various reactions, and to report the urine as saccharine
when normal traces only of sugar are present. The bismuth test of
Bottger, as greatly improved by Nylander, is fairly delicate, and not
so easily misread as Fehling's. A large volume of reagent being used
with a comparatively small quantity of urine, the precipitate of
earthy phosphates does not interfere in the least with the reaction.
On boiling about 3 drachms of Nylander's solution and 20 minims of
urine for a minute or two, the liquid darkens with a trace of sugar,
and becomes opaque and black if the latter is present in quantity. The
reagent is prepared by dissolving 494 grains of caustic soda, 247
grains of Rochelle salt, and 154 grains of subnitrate of bismuth (free
from silver) in 13 fluid oz. of distilled water. It should be decanted
for use from any sediment.

[Illustration: DR. PAVY'S APPARATUS.]

In those cases where the amount of glucose present is required to be
determined, Dr. Pavy's ammonia cupric process distances all compeers
for ease of application and delicacy of end-reaction, combined with
considerable accuracy. His solution differs from that of Fehling in
containing ammonia, which dissolves the cuprous oxide as soon as it is
formed, yielding a colorless solution. It is only necessary,
therefore, to note the moment that the blue color of the liquid is
exactly discharged, in order to tell when all the copper present has
been reduced. Pavy's solution is prepared as follows: Dissolve 356
grains of Rochelle salt and the same weight of caustic potash in
distilled water; dissolve separately 73 grains of recrystallized
cupric sulphate in more water with heat. Add the copper solution to
that first prepared, and when cold add 12 fluid oz. of strong ammonia
(sp. gr. 0.880), and distilled water to 40 fluid oz. The estimation is
thus conducted: Dilute 10 c.c. of the ammoniated cupric
solution--equivalent to 5 milligrammes of glucose--with 20 c.c. of
distilled water, and place in a 6 or 8 oz. flask. Attach this by means
of a cork to the nozzle of an ordinary Mohr's burette, _b_, preferably
fitted with a glass stopcock, and filled previously with the diluted
urine. The small tube, _c_, which traverses the cork is intended to
permit the escape of steam. Now raise the blue liquid in the flask to
active ebullition--not too violent--by the aid of a spirit lamp or
small Bunsen flame. Turn the stopcock in order to allow the urine to
flow into the boiling solution at the rate of about 100 drops per
minute (not more or much less) until the azure tint is exactly
discharged. Then stop the flow, and note the number of cubic
centimeters used. That amount of dilute urine will contain 5
milligrammes of glucose. To render the determination as accurate as
possible, the urine should be diluted to such an extent that not less
than 4 or more than 7 c.c. are required to decolorize the solution,
and the proportions necessary will be found to vary from 1 part of
urine in 21/2 to 1 in 30 or 40. The subsequent calculation is very
simple. If you wish to give the percentage of sugar, multiply 0.005 by
100, and divide the product by the number of cubic centimeters of
dilute urine employed. The figure thus obtained, multiplied by the
extent of dilution--i.e., if there is 1 of urine in 10, multiply by
10--gives the required percentage. The number of grains per fluid
ounce can of course be obtained by multiplying the percentage by
4.375. To observe easily the exact end-reaction a piece of white paper
should be placed behind the flask. If the analyst objects to the
escape of the waste ammoniacal fumes, they may be conducted by a
suitable arrangement into water or dilute acid. In addition to glucose
there are small quantities of other copper-reducing bodies present in
all urine, which always render the reading higher than strict accuracy
would demand. Their aggregate proportion, however, is, comparatively
speaking, so minute that for most medical purposes their presence may
be disregarded. Greater care must be exercised, though, in those
instances where such a deoxidizer as chloral hydrate is accidentally
present. In case of doubt, a little washed and pressed yeast should be
allowed to stand with the urine for a day or two in a warm place.
