freely at the disposal of the United States Government for the war and a
10-ton plant was built at Saltville, Va., by the Ordnance Department.
But the armistice put a stop to its operations and left the future of
the process undetermined.

[Illustration: A CHEMICAL REACTION ON A LARGE SCALE

From the chemist's standpoint modern warfare consists in the rapid
liberation of nitrogen from its compounds]

[Illustration: Courtesy of E.I. du Pont de Nemours Co.

BURNING AIR IN A BIRKELAND-EYDE FURNACE AT THE DU PONT PLANT

An electric arc consuming about 4000 horse-power of energy is passing
between the U-shaped electrodes which are made of copper tube cooled by
an internal current of water. On the sides of the chamber are seen the
openings through which the air passes impinging directly on both sides
of the surface of the disk of flame. This flame is approximately seven
feet in diameter and appears to be continuous although an alternating
current of fifty cycles a second is used. The electric arc is spread
into this disk flame by the repellent power of an electro-magnet the
pointed pole of which is seen at bottom of the picture. Under this
intense heat a part of the nitrogen and oxygen of the air combine to
form oxides of nitrogen which when dissolved in water form the nitric
acid used in explosives.]

[Illustration: Courtesy of E.I. du Pont de Nemours Co.

A BATTERY OF BIRKELAND-EYDE FURNACES FOR THE FIXATION OF NITROGEN AT THE
DU PONT PLANT]

We might have expected that the fixation of nitrogen by passing an
electrical spark through hot air would have been an American invention,
since it was Franklin who snatched the lightning from the heavens as
well as the scepter from the tyrant and since our output of hot air is
unequaled by any other nation. But little attention was paid to the
nitrogen problem until 1916 when it became evident that we should soon
be drawn into a war "with a first class power." On June 3, 1916,
Congress placed $20,000,000 at the disposal of the president for
investigation of "the best, cheapest and most available means for the
production of nitrate and other products for munitions of war and useful
in the manufacture of fertilizers and other useful products by water
power or any other power." But by the time war was declared on April 6,
1917, no definite program had been approved and by the time the
armistice was signed on November 11, 1918, no plants were in active
operation. But five plants had been started and two of them were nearly
ready to begin work when they were closed by the ending of the war.
United States Nitrate Plant No. 1 was located at Sheffield, Alabama, and
was designed for the production of ammonia by "direct action" from
nitrogen and hydrogen according to the plans of the American Chemical
Company. Its capacity was calculated at 60,000 pounds of anhydrous
ammonia a day, half of which was to be oxidized to nitric acid. Plant
No. 2 was erected at Muscle Shoals, Alabama, to use the process of the
American Cyanamid Company. This was contracted to produce 110,000 tons
of ammonium nitrate a year and later two other cyanamid plants of half
that capacity were started at Toledo and Ancor, Ohio.

At Muscle Shoals a mushroom city of 20,000 sprang up on an Alabama
cotton field in six months. The raw material, air, was as abundant there
as anywhere and the power, water, could be obtained from the Government
hydro-electric plant on the Tennessee River, but this was not available
during the war, so steam was employed instead. The heat of the coal was
used to cool the air down to the liquefying point. The principle of this
process is simple. Everybody knows that heat expands and cold contracts,
but not everybody has realized the converse of this rule, that expansion
cools and compression heats. If air is forced into smaller space, as in
a tire pump, it heats up and if allowed to expand to ordinary pressure
it cools off again. But if the air while compressed is cooled and then
allowed to expand it must get still colder and the process can go on
till it becomes cold enough to congeal. That is, by expanding a great
deal of air, a little of it can be reduced to the liquefying point. At
Muscle Shoals the plant for liquefying air, in order to get the nitrogen
out of it, consisted of two dozen towers each capable of producing 1765
cubic feet of pure nitrogen per hour. The air was drawn in through two
pipes, a yard across, and passed through scrubbing towers to remove
impurities. The air was then compressed to 600 pounds per square inch.
Nine tenths of the air was permitted to expand to 50 pounds and this
expansion cooled down the other tenth, still under high pressure, to the
liquefying point. Rectifying towers 24 feet high were stacked with trays
of liquid air from which the nitrogen was continually bubbling off since
its boiling point is twelve degrees centigrade lower than that of
oxygen. Pure nitrogen gas collected at the top of the tower and the
residual liquid air, now about half oxygen, was allowed to escape at the
bottom.

The nitrogen was then run through pipes into the lime-nitrogen ovens.
There were 1536 of these about four feet square and each holding 1600
pounds of pulverized calcium carbide. This is at first heated by an
electrical current to start the reaction which afterwards produces
enough heat to keep it going. As the stream of nitrogen gas passes over
the finely divided carbide it is absorbed to form calcium cyanamid as
described on a previous page. This product is cooled, powdered and wet
to destroy any quicklime or carbide left unchanged. Then it is charged
into autoclaves and steam at high temperature and pressure is admitted.
The steam acting on the cyanamid sets free ammonia gas which is carried
to towers down which cold water is sprayed, giving the ammonia water,
familiar to the kitchen and the bathroom.

But since nitric acid rather than ammonia was needed for munitions, the
oxygen of the air had to be called into play. This process, as already
explained, is carried on by aid of a catalyzer, in this case platinum
wire. At Muscle Shoals there were 696 of these catalyzer boxes. The
ammonia gas, mixed with air to provide the necessary oxygen, was
admitted at the top and passed down through a sheet of platinum gauze of
80 mesh to the inch, heated to incandescence by electricity. In contact
with this the ammonia is converted into gaseous oxides of nitrogen (the
familiar red fumes of the laboratory) which, carried off in pipes,
cooled and dissolved in water, form nitric acid.

But since none of the national plants could be got into action during
the war, the United States was compelled to draw upon South America for
its supply. The imports of Chilean saltpeter rose from half a million
tons in 1914 to a million and a half in 1917. After peace was made the
Department of War turned over to the Department of Agriculture its
surplus of saltpeter, 150,000 tons, and it was sold to American farmers
at cost, $81 a ton.

For nitrogen plays a double role in human economy. It appears like
Brahma in two aspects, Vishnu the Preserver and Siva the Destroyer. Here
I have been considering nitrogen in its maleficent aspect, its use in
war. We now turn to its beneficent aspect, its use in peace.




III

FEEDING THE SOIL


The Great War not only starved people: it starved the land. Enough
nitrogen was thrown away in some indecisive battle on the Aisne to save
India from a famine. The population of Europe as a whole has not been
lessened by the war, but the soil has been robbed of its power to
support the population. A plant requires certain chemical elements for
its growth and all of these must be within reach of its rootlets, for it
will accept no substitutes. A wheat stalk in France before the war had
placed at its feet nitrates from Chile, phosphates from Florida and
potash from Germany. All these were shut off by the firing line and the
shortage of shipping.

Out of the eighty elements only thirteen are necessary for crops. Four
of these are gases: hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and chlorine. Five are
metals: potassium, magnesium, calcium, iron and sodium. Four are
non-metallic solids: carbon, sulfur, phosphorus and silicon. Three of
these, hydrogen, oxygen and carbon, making up the bulk of the plant, are
obtainable _ad libitum_ from the air and water. The other ten in the
form of salts are dissolved in the water that is sucked up from the
soil. The quantity needed by the plant is so small and the quantity
contained in the soil is so great that ordinarily we need not bother
about the supply except in case of three of them. They are nitrogen,
potassium and phosphorus. These would be useless or fatal to plant life
in the elemental form, but fixed in neutral salt they are essential
plant foods. A ton of wheat takes away from the soil about 47 pounds of
nitrogen, 18 pounds of phosphoric acid and 12 pounds of potash. If then
the farmer does not restore this much to his field every year he is
drawing upon his capital and this must lead to bankruptcy in the long
run.

So much is easy to see, but actually the question is extremely
complicated. When the German chemist, Justus von Liebig, pointed out in
1840 the possibility of maintaining soil fertility by the application of
chemicals it seemed at first as though the question were practically
solved. Chemists assumed that all they had to do was to analyze the soil
and analyze the crop and from this figure out, as easily as balancing a
bank book, just how much of each ingredient would have to be restored to
the soil every year. But somehow it did not work out that way and the
practical agriculturist, finding that the formulas did not fit his farm,
sneered at the professors and whenever they cited Liebig to him he
irreverently transposed the syllables of the name. The chemist when he
went deeper into the subject saw that he had to deal with the colloids,
damp, unpleasant, gummy bodies that he had hitherto fought shy of
because they would not crystallize or filter. So the chemist called to
his aid the physicist on the one hand and the biologist on the other and
then they both had their hands full. The physicist found that he had to
deal with a polyvariant system of solids, liquids and gases mutually
miscible in phases too numerous to be handled by Gibbs's Rule. The
biologist found that he had to deal with the invisible flora and fauna
of a new world.

Plants obey the injunction of Tennyson and rise on the stepping stones
of their dead selves to higher things. Each successive generation lives
on what is left of the last in the soil plus what it adds from the air
and sunshine. As soon as a leaf or tree trunk falls to the ground it is
taken in charge by a wrecking crew composed of a myriad of microscopic
organisms who proceed to break it up into its component parts so these
can be used for building a new edifice. The process is called "rotting"
and the product, the black, gummy stuff of a fertile soil, is called
"humus." The plants, that is, the higher plants, are not able to live on
their own proteids as the animals are. But there are lower plants,
certain kinds of bacteria, that can break up the big complicated proteid
molecules into their component parts and reduce the nitrogen in them to
ammonia or ammonia-like compounds. Having done this they stop and turn
over the job to another set of bacteria to be carried through the next
step. For you must know that soil society is as complex and specialized
as that above ground and the tiniest bacterium would die rather than
violate the union rules. The second set of bacteria change the ammonia
over to nitrites and then a third set, the Amalgamated Union of Nitrate
Workers, steps in and completes the process of oxidation with an
efficiency that Ostwald might envy, for ninety-six per cent. of the
ammonia of the soil is converted into nitrates. But if the conditions
are not just right, if the food is insufficient or unwholesome or if
the air that circulates through the soil is contaminated with poison
gases, the bacteria go on a strike. The farmer, not seeing the thing
from the standpoint of the bacteria, says the soil is "sick" and he
proceeds to doctor it according to his own notion of what ails it. First
perhaps he tries running in strike breakers. He goes to one of the firms
that makes a business of supplying nitrogen-fixing bacteria from the
scabs or nodules of the clover roots and scatters these colonies over
the field. But if the living conditions remain bad the newcomers will
soon quit work too and the farmer loses his money. If he is wise, then,
he will remedy the conditions, putting a better ventilation system in
his soil perhaps or neutralizing the sourness by means of lime or
killing off the ameboid banditti that prey upon the peaceful bacteria
engaged in the nitrogen industry. It is not an easy job that the farmer
has in keeping billions of billions of subterranean servants contented
and working together, but if he does not succeed at this he wastes his
seed and labor.

The layman regards the soil as a platform or anchoring place on which to
set plants. He measures its value by its superficial area without
considering its contents, which is as absurd as to estimate a man's
wealth by the size of his safe. The difference in point of view is well
illustrated by the old story of the city chap who was showing his farmer
uncle the sights of New York. When he took him to Central Park he tried
to astonish him by saying "This land is worth $500,000 an acre." The old
farmer dug his toe into the ground, kicked out a clod, broke it open,
looked at it, spit on it and squeezed it in his hand and then said,
"Don't you believe it; 'tain't worth ten dollars an acre. Mighty poor
soil I call it." Both were right.

[Illustration: Courtesy of American Cyanamid Co.

FIXING NITROGEN BY CALCIUM CARBIDE

A view of the oven room in the plant of the American Cyanamid Company.
The steel cylinders standing in the background are packed with the
carbide and then put into the ovens sunk in the floor. When these are
heated internally by electricity to 2000 degrees Fahrenheit pure
nitrogen is let in and absorbed by the carbide, making cyanamid, which
may be used as a fertilizer or for ammonia.]

[Illustration: Photo by International Film Service

A BARROW FULL OF POTASH SALTS EXTRACTED FROM SIX TONS OF GREEN KELP BY
THE GOVERNMENT CHEMISTS]

[Illustration: NATURE'S SILENT METHOD OF NITROGEN FIXATION

The nodules on the vetch roots contain colonies of bacteria which have
the power of taking the free nitrogen out of the air and putting it in
compounds suitable for plant food.]

The modern agriculturist realizes that the soil is a laboratory for the
production of plant food and he ordinarily takes more pains to provide a
balanced ration for it than he does for his family. Of course the
necessity of feeding the soil has been known ever since man began to
settle down and the ancient methods of maintaining its fertility, though
discovered accidentally and followed blindly, were sound and
efficacious. Virgil, who like Liberty Hyde Bailey was fond of publishing
agricultural bulletins in poetry, wrote two thousand years ago:

  But sweet vicissitudes of rest and toil
  Make easy labor and renew the soil
  Yet sprinkle sordid ashes all around
  And load with fatt'ning dung thy fallow soil.

The ashes supplied the potash and the dung the nitrate and phosphate.
Long before the discovery of the nitrogen-fixing bacteria, the custom
prevailed of sowing pea-like plants every third year and then plowing
them under to enrich the soil. But such local supplies were always
inadequate and as soon as deposits of fertilizers were discovered
anywhere in the world they were drawn upon. The richest of these was the
Chincha Islands off the coast of Peru, where millions of penguins and
pelicans had lived in a most untidy manner for untold centuries. The
guano composed of the excrement of the birds mixed with the remains of
dead birds and the fishes they fed upon was piled up to a depth of 120
feet. From this Isle of Penguins--which is not that described by Anatole
France--a billion dollars' worth of guano was taken and the deposit was
soon exhausted.

Then the attention of the world was directed to the mainland of Peru and
Chile, where similar guano deposits had been accumulated and, not being
washed away on account of the lack of rain, had been deposited as sodium
nitrate, or "saltpeter." These beds were discovered by a German, Taddeo
Haenke, in 1809, but it was not until the last quarter of the century
that the nitrates came into common use as a fertilizer. Since then more
than 53,000,000 tons have been taken out of these beds and the
exportation has risen to a rate of 2,500,000 to 3,000,000 tons a year.
How much longer they will last is a matter of opinion and opinion is
largely influenced by whether you have your money invested in Chilean
nitrate stock or in one of the new synthetic processes for making
nitrates. The United States Department of Agriculture says the nitrate
beds will be exhausted in a few years. On the other hand the Chilean
Inspector General of Nitrate Deposits in his latest official report says
that they will last for two hundred years at the present rate and that
then there are incalculable areas of low grade deposits, containing less
than eleven per cent., to be drawn upon.

Anyhow, the South American beds cannot long supply the world's need of
nitrates and we shall some time be starving unless creative chemistry
comes to the rescue. In 1898 Sir William Crookes--the discoverer of the
"Crookes tubes," the radiometer and radiant matter--startled the British
Association for the Advancement of Science by declaring that the world
was nearing the limit of wheat production and that by 1931 the
bread-eaters, the Caucasians, would have to turn to other grains or
restrict their population while the rice and millet eaters of Asia would
continue to increase. Sir William was laughed at then as a
sensationalist. He was, but his sensations were apt to prove true and it
is already evident that he was too near right for comfort. Before we
were half way to the date he set we had two wheatless days a week,
