
The seedling pines extended almost to the game-herd and would offer
concealment for the approach, but the animals were grazing into the
wind, and their scent was much keener than their vision. This would
preclude one of their favorite hunting techniques, that of lurking in the
high grass ahead of the quarry. It had rained heavily in the past few
days, and the undermat of dead grass was soaked, making a fire-hunt
impossible. Kalvar Dard knew that he could stalk to within easy
carbine-shot, but he was unwilling to use cartridges on game; and in
view of the proximity of Hairy People, he did not want to divide his
band for a drive hunt.

"What's the scheme?" Analea asked him, realizing the problem as well as
he did. "Do we try to take them from behind?"

"We'll take them from an angle," he decided. "We'll start from here and
work in, closing on them at the rear of the herd. Unless the wind shifts
on us, we ought to get within spear-cast. You and I will use the spears;
Varnis can come along and cover for us with a carbine. Glav, you and
Olva and Dorita stay here with the children and the packs. Keep a sharp
lookout; Hairy People around, somewhere." He unslung his rifle and
exchanged it for Olva's spears. "We can only eat about two of them
before the meat begins to spoil, but kill all you can," he told Analea;
"we need the skins."

Then he and the two girls began their slow, cautious, stalk. As long as
the grassland was dotted with young trees, they walked upright, making
good time, but the last five hundred yards they had to crawl, stopping
often to check the wind, while the horse-herd drifted slowly by. Then
they were directly behind the herd, with the wind in their faces, and
they advanced more rapidly.

"Close enough?" Dard whispered to Analea.

"Yes; I'm taking the one that's lagging a little behind."

"I'm taking the one on the left of it." Kalvar Dard fitted a javelin to
the hook of his throwing-stick. "Ready? Now!"

He leaped to his feet, drawing back his right arm and hurling, the
throwing-stick giving added velocity to the spear. Beside him, he was
conscious of Analea rising and propelling her spear. His missile caught
the little bearded pony in the chest; it stumbled and fell forward to
its front knees. He snatched another light spear, set it on the hook of
the stick and darted it at another horse, which reared, biting at the
spear with its teeth. Grabbing the heavy stabbing-spear, he ran forward,
finishing it off with a heart-thrust. As he did, Varnis slung her
carbine, snatched a stone-headed throwing axe from her belt, and knocked
down another horse, then ran forward with her dagger to finish it.

By this time, the herd, alarmed, had stampeded and was galloping away,
leaving the dead and dying behind. He and Analea had each killed two;
with the one Varnis had knocked down, that made five. Using his dagger,
he finished off one that was still kicking on the ground, and then began
pulling out the throwing-spears. The girls, shouting in unison, were
announcing the successful completion of the hunt; Glav, Olva, and Dorita
were coming forward with the children.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was sunset by the time they had finished the work of skinning and
cutting up the horses and had carried the hide-wrapped bundles of meat
to the little brook where they had intended camping. There was firewood
to be gathered, and the meal to be cooked, and they were all tired.

"We can't do this very often, any more," Kalvar Dard told them, "but we
might as well, tonight. Don't bother rubbing sticks for fire; I'll use
the lighter."

He got it from a pouch on his belt--a small, gold-plated, atomic
lighter, bearing the crest of his old regiment of the Frontier Guards.
It was the last one they had, in working order. Piling a handful of dry
splinters under the firewood, he held the lighter to it, pressed the
activator, and watched the fire eat into the wood.

The greatest achievement of man's civilization, the mastery of the
basic, cosmic, power of the atom--being used to kindle a fire of natural
fuel, to cook unseasoned meat killed with stone-tipped spears. Dard
looked sadly at the twinkling little gadget, then slipped it back into
its pouch. Soon it would be worn out, like the other two, and then they
would gain fire only by rubbing dry sticks, or hacking sparks from bits
of flint or pyrites. Soon, too, the last cartridge would be fired, and
then they would perforce depend for protection, as they were already
doing for food, upon their spears.

And they were so helpless. Six adults, burdened with seven little
children, all of them requiring momently care and watchfulness. If the
cartridges could be made to last until they were old enough to fend for
themselves.... If they could avoid collisions with the Hairy People....
Some day, they would be numerous enough for effective mutual protection
and support; some day, the ratio of helpless children to able adults
would redress itself. Until then, all that they could do would be to
survive; day after day, they must follow the game-herds.




4


For twenty years, now, they had been following the game. Winters had
come, with driving snow, forcing horses and deer into the woods, and the
little band of humans to the protection of mountain caves. Springtime
followed, with fresh grass on the plains and plenty of meat for the
people of Kalvar Dard. Autumns followed summers, with fire-hunts, and
the smoking and curing of meat and hides. Winters followed autumns, and
springtimes came again, and thus until the twentieth year after the
landing of the rocket-boat.

Kalvar Dard still walked in the lead, his hair and beard flecked with
gray, but he no longer carried the heavy rifle; the last cartridge for
that had been fired long ago. He carried the hand-axe, fitted with a
long helve, and a spear with a steel head that had been worked painfully
from the receiver of a useless carbine. He still had his pistol, with
eight cartridges in the magazine, and his dagger, and the bomb-bag,
containing the big demolition-bomb and one grenade. The last shred of
clothing from the ship was gone, now; he was clad in a sleeveless tunic
of skin and horsehide buskins.

Analea no longer walked beside him; eight years before, she had broken
her back in a fall. It had been impossible to move her, and she stabbed
herself with her dagger to save a cartridge. Seldar Glav had broken
through the ice while crossing a river, and had lost his rifle; the next
day he died of the chill he had taken. Olva had been killed by the Hairy
People, the night they had attacked the camp, when Varnis' child had
been killed.

They had beaten off that attack, shot or speared ten of the huge
sub-men, and the next morning they buried their dead after their custom,
under cairns of stone. Varnis had watched the burial of her child with
blank, uncomprehending eyes, then she had turned to Kalvar Dard and said
something that had horrified him more than any wild outburst of grief
could have.

"Come on, Dard; what are we doing this for? You promised you'd take us
to Tareesh, where we'd have good houses, and machines, and all sorts of
lovely things to eat and wear. I don't like this place, Dard; I want to
go to Tareesh."

From that day on, she had wandered in merciful darkness. She had not
been idiotic, or raving mad; she had just escaped from a reality that
