
"Yeah, framed!" snapped Bush. "I was taking a credit pouch to Venusport
from Atom City when it was stolen from me."

"Could you prove it?" asked Tom.

"How could I prove it when I don't know what happened to it?" growled
Bush. "Listen, Corbett, you can't hold a little thing like that against
me. A man is entitled to one mistake--"

Tom held up his hand. "Mr. Bush, you also had your space papers
suspended for six months and were caught during the suspension blasting
off with false papers. Was that a mistake?"

"Well, what do you expect a man to do? Go hungry? I've been a spaceman
longer than you've been alive. I had to have a job. There wasn't
anything else I could do." His voice trailed off into a whine.

"But you did, willfully and with full knowledge of your act, violate the
space code by using false papers, didn't you?" pursued Tom.

"Yeah, but--" whined Bush.

"I'm sorry," said Tom, standing up. "Your application has been
rejected."

Bush stood up and snatched the application from Tom. His mouth began to
twitch furiously. "Why, you little--"

"That's enough, Bush!" snapped Vidac, who had suddenly entered the room.
"Leave your application on the desk and get out!"

Bush turned and looked at Vidac, nodded, and glared at Tom before
stalking from the room. Vidac smiled at Tom's questioning look and
walked over. He sat on the edge of Tom's desk and picked up Bush's
application.

"Funny thing about Bush, Tom," Vidac mused.

"What, sir?" asked Tom.

"Notice the nervous twitch he has on the side of his face?"

"Yes, sir," said Tom.

"I've known Bush a long time. Many years. He used to be the happiest
little space joker in the system, singing all the time, playing a
concertina. And then he lost that credit pouch. It bothered him real
bad."

"I guess it would, sir," said Tom.

"And then he got caught blasting off with false papers and of course
that made him a marked man. He developed the nervous twitch right after
that. He's a good man, Tom. And I think we ought to give him another
chance."

[Illustration]

Tom gasped. "But, sir, he's broken the space code!"

Vidac looked at Tom and smiled. "I know, Tom, and it's a serious thing.
But I think he deserves another chance."

"We've refused people for a lot less than that, sir," said Tom
emphatically, "before you came."

Vidac's face hardened. "I said we were going to give him another
chance!"

Tom met the lieutenant governor's eyes coolly. "Yes, sir." He stamped
the application and handed it to Vidac.

"It's pretty easy to sit in judgment of others, Tom," said Vidac,
smiling again. "If there are any more--ah--questionable applicants, I
suggest you send them to me. And if I want to give them another chance,
you will, of course, follow orders."

"Very well, sir," replied Tom, tight-lipped. "If you say so."

Vidac's eyes hardened. "_I say so_, Corbett!" He turned and walked from
the room.

Tom sat down weakly. As he was about to buzz for the next applicant, the
door burst open and Roger came into the room. The blond-haired cadet's
lips were pulled tight in a grim line.

"There's something rocket-blasting screwy around here, Tom!" he
exclaimed.

"What do you mean?" asked Tom.

"I just rejected a real low-down space crawler--a guy named Tad
Winters."

"Yes?" Tom was alert, anticipating Roger's answer.

"He went to Vidac and came back later with his application approved."

Tom slammed his fist on the desk. "That proves it! Governor Hardy has to
be told what's going on!" He flipped on the teleceiver near by and asked
the central communications operator to connect him with the governor's
office. In a moment the face of Christopher Hardy sharpened into focus
on the screen.

"What is it, Corbett?" asked the governor.

"I'd like to talk to you, sir, if I may. Something's just come up and
I'm not sure what to do."

"Well, whatever it is, I'm sure Governor Vidac will be able to take care
of it. Speak to him."

Tom gulped and glanced at Roger. "But, sir," he stammered,
"it's--it's--"

"It's what, Corbett? Hurry, lad! I haven't got all day."

"What I have to say is--is--about the lieutenant governor, sir," Tom
managed finally.

"Now listen, son," said Hardy, "I have a lot of confidence in you three
boys. You've all done a fine job. But I screened Mr. Vidac myself, and
I'm satisfied that he is just the man I need. After Captain Strong was
recalled to the Academy, I had to have a man to take over for him. And I
am satisfied that Mr. Vidac is about as fine a man as I could get! Now
don't bother me again. You've done a fine job, as I said. But don't let
it go to your heads!"

"Yes, sir," said Tom, clamping his teeth together. "Very well, sir!"

"One more thing," said Hardy. "We've about finished here at Luna City.
When you've processed the last of the applicants, prepare the _Polaris_
for a return trip to Space Academy." He paused and smiled. "I think I
might be able to convince Commander Walters you need a two weeks'
leave!" He smiled again and then his face disappeared from the screen.

Tom looked up at Roger. "I don't like it, Roger. Maybe I'm wrong, but
either the governor is pretty dumb or Vidac is the slickest thing in
space!"

"Could be both," drawled Roger.

Tom looked at the pile of applications on his desk, and then at the door
to Vidac's office.

"Whatever it is, we've got to tell Captain Strong!"




CHAPTER 5


"For the last time, Captain Strong has been sent on a special mission to
Pluto!" said the supervisory officer at the Academy. "Now stop bothering
me or I'll log all three of you with twenty galley demerits!"

"Very well, sir," said Tom. "But could you tell us if the mission had
anything to do with the Roald project?"

"Cadet Corbett," replied the officer wearily, "even if I knew I couldn't
tell you. It was a special order from Commander Walters' office. Captain
Strong blasted off three days ago with a full crew of guardsmen in a
rocket cruiser."

"And he didn't--" began Roger.

"And he didn't leave any message for you," concluded the officer.

"Thank you, sir," said Tom. "Come on, fellows, let's go. We've got to
blast off for Mars in half an hour and we haven't got our gear packed."

The officer watched the three cadets leave and then called after them.
"If Captain Strong returns before you get back from Mars, Corbett, I'll
ask him to leave a message!"

"Thanks, sir," said Tom.

The three boys left the Tower building and hopped on a slidewalk for
the spaceport. The Academy was buzzing with activity as Solar Guard
officers, scientists, and enlisted men attended to the millions of
details of the mass flight of the colonists into deep space.

They met Mike McKenny, the stubby warrant officer, at the air lock of
the Solar Guard rocket destroyer that would take them to Mars. After
they had climbed into the ship, they waited for a full hour before they
could get clearance to blast off. And, in flight, they were forced to
maintain constant alert and careful position in the heavy flow of
traffic to and from Earth.

"Never saw the Academy so busy in all my life," commented Mike. "Must be
a thousand ships there and in the Atom City fitting docks."

"Yeah," agreed Roger. "This is going to be some push!"

From Mars, Titan, Ganymede, Luna City, Venus, the Asteroid Colonies, and
as far away as the uranium mines of Pluto, the colonists arrived, to be
quartered at Space Academy. Excited, and anxious to begin their new
life, they assembled for their antibiotic shots and the last medical
check by the Solar Guard doctors. There were crystal miners from Titan,
farmers from Venus, Mars, and Earth, prospectors from the New Sahara
desert of Mars, engineers from the atmosphere booster stations on
Ganymede, and just plain citizens who wanted a new life on the distant
satellite of Wolf 359. All had gathered for the great mass flight into
space.

At the same time the giant fleet of ships needed to carry the colonists
to Roald was being assembled. Officers of the Solar Guard worked late
into the night, examining the construction of every ship in the Alliance
for use in the flight to Roald. If a jet liner or merchantman was found
to be satisfactory, it was purchased at full price from the owners and
flown to refitting docks at Space Academy and Atom City where work was
begun converting it to a special use. Every ship was to be cannibalized
on Roald, its hull taken apart to provide housing and its power decks
converted into electropower plants. Now working with Mike McKenny, the
three Space Cadets were part of a large group of transfer crews engaged
in flying ships to Earth.

[Illustration: _The Solar Guard worked late into the night, examining
every ship in the Alliance_]

Returning from Mars, where they had picked up a giant jet liner, the
three cadets landed on the crowded Academy spaceport and turned
hopefully to Mike.

"You think we can get a twenty-four-hour pass, Mike?" asked Roger.

"Yeah," growled Astro. "Governor Hardy promised us a two-week leave, but
I guess he got swamped under details!"

Mike scratched his head. "I don't know, boys," he said. "I can't give it
to you, but I'll speak to Commander Walters for you. I know it's been a
pretty rough grind for all of you."

"Thanks, Mike," said Tom. "We'd appreciate it."

Later, when the three boys had signed over the giant ship to the
refitting crews, they headed for their dormitory for a refreshing
shower.

As Astro began to strip off his jacket, he suddenly asked, "Do you think
Captain Strong has returned from Pluto yet?"

"I doubt it," answered Roger. "I'm sure there would have been a message
for us on the chatter wire if he had." Roger referred to a tape recorder
that was standard equipment in each of the dormitory rooms, used
expressly for messages.

"You know something," said Tom. "I think we ought to go directly to
Commander Walters about Vidac."

"Commander Walters!" growled Astro. "Are you off your rocket?"

"Why shouldn't we?" agreed Roger.

"I'll tell you why!" said Astro. "Commander Walters probably is so busy
you couldn't get near him with a six-inch atomic blaster. And what are
we going to say after we get there? Just that Vidac has let some space
crawlers into the expedition?"

"That's enough, isn't it?" asked Roger.

"We can't let this slide, Astro," said Tom determinedly. "Somebody's got
to do something about Vidac, and if the governor won't, it should be
brought to Commander Walters' attention."

"Come on. Let's do it right now," urged Roger. "We'll be sticking our
necks out, but since when have we ever let that stop us?"

Astro shrugged his shoulders and quickly redressed. The three boys left
the dormitory building and started hopping from one slidewalk to
another, as they made their way to the Tower building. All around them
the activity of the Academy seemed to have increased. Everyone seemed to
be rushing somewhere. Even the green-clad Earthworm cadets had been
pressed into service as messengers. And mixed in with the officials were
the colonists wandering around sight-seeing.

"Say!" exclaimed Astro. "Isn't that Jane Logan?"

"Where?" asked Roger. Astro pointed to a parallel slidewalk where the
girl colonist from Venus was being whisked along in the same direction.
"Well, blast my jets!" cried Roger. "So it is!"

"Relax, Roger," said Astro with a wink at Tom. "Business before
pleasure!"

"Yeah--yeah, but this is business too," said Roger, jumping lightly to
the near-by slidewalk beside the pretty young colonist.

"Well," he exclaimed, "if it isn't the little space doll from Venus!"

Jane Logan turned around and smiled. "Well, Cadet Manning!" And seeing
Astro and Tom come up, she smiled a greeting to them. "And Cadets Astro
and Corbett!"

"Never mind them," said Roger. "I'm the only one that counts."

"Why, Cadet Manning," said the girl archly, "I had no idea you were so
important."

"As a matter of fact, I'm going up to see Commander Walters right now on
some important business."

"Commander Walters?" gasped Jane. "Ohhhh!"

Roger grinned. "Sure, and while I'm up there, I'll get a
twenty-four-hour pass and we'll take in the sights at Atom City tonight.
O.K.?"

"Well, I don't know what my father would say about that!"

"Ah, tell him you're going to go out with me," said Roger, "and there
won't be any trouble."

"Psst! Roger!" Astro hissed suddenly, punching Roger in the ribs. Roger
gave the big cadet a frowning look and turned back to Jane.

"We'll have dinner, and then see a stereo, and I know a nice quiet spot
where we can talk--"

"Talk?" demanded a gruff voice behind Roger.

The cadet whirled to find himself staring into the grim face of Hyram
Logan. "Just what would you talk about, Cadet Manning?" demanded Jane's
father. Billy stood at his father's side, grinning broadly.

"Uh--er--ah--radar, sir, the--er--problems we find in radar."

Logan turned to Jane. "Are you interested in radar, Jane?"

"Not particularly, Father," said Jane, a twinkle in her eye. Tom and
Astro were trying unsuccessfully to stifle their laughter.

His face suddenly flushing crimson, Roger looked around and stammered,
"I--uh--I just remembered--got to see a feller about a hot rocket!" And
Roger jumped off the slidewalk to disappear into the Tower building.

Laughing out loud now, Tom and Astro said good-by to Jane and her father
and followed Roger.

Inside the gleaming Tower of Galileo, the two boys raced up the
slidestairs and caught up with Roger.

"Well, Romeo," said Astro, slapping him on the back, "that was what I
call a strategic retreat in the face of overwhelming odds."

"Ah, go blast your jets!" snarled Roger.

"Never mind, Roger," said Tom, "we probably won't get the pass, anyway."

Suppressing smiles, Astro and Tom followed Roger down the long corridor
toward the office of Commander Walters. In the anteroom they waited
while an aide announced them to the commander. Standing before the
aide's desk, they could see the commander's face come into focus on the
small teleceiver screen, and they were alarmed to see Governor Hardy
seated beside him.

"What is it, Sergeant?" asked Commander Walters.

"Cadets Corbett, Manning, and Astro of the _Polaris_ unit to see you,
sir," said the enlisted guardsman.

"Send them right in," said Walters.

The aide flipped off the teleceiver and smiled up at the cadets. "Go
ahead, fellows. He's in a good mood today, so you don't have to worry
about demerits."

Tom thanked the guardsman and started for the door to the inner office,
but Roger grabbed him by the arm and pulled him back.

"We can't go in there now, Tom," he whispered. "Not with Governor Hardy
sitting there!"

"I know," replied Tom. "But we can't back out now. He's been told we're
