do that?"

"You know why. I couldn't have told them, 'This is little Allan Hartley,
just thirteen years old; please, Mr. Policeman, go and arrest Frank
Gutchall before he goes root-toot-toot at his wife with my pappa's
Luger.' That would have gone over big, now, wouldn't it?"

"And suppose he really wants to shoot a dog; what sort of a mess will I
be in?"

"No mess at all. If I'm wrong--which I'm not--I'll take the thump for
it, myself. It'll pass for a dumb kid trick, and nothing'll be done. But
if I'm right, you'll have to front for me. They'll keep your name out of
it, but they'd give me a lot of cheap boy-hero publicity, which I don't
want." He picked up his pencil again. "We should have the complete
returns in about twenty minutes."

       *       *       *       *       *

That was a ten-minute under-estimate, and it was another quarter-hour
before the detective-sergeant who returned the Luger had finished
congratulating Blake Hartley and giving him the thanks of the
Department. After he had gone, the lawyer picked up the Luger, withdrew
the clip, and ejected the round in the chamber.

"Well," he told his son, "you were right. You saved that woman's life."
He looked at the automatic, and then handed it across the table. "Now,
let's see you put that firing pin back."

Allan Hartley dismantled the weapon, inserted the missing part, and put
it together again, then snapped it experimentally and returned it to his
father. Blake Hartley looked at it again, and laid it on the table.

"Now, son, suppose we have a little talk," he said softly.

"But I explained everything." Allan objected innocently.

"You did not," his father retorted. "Yesterday you'd never have thought
of a trick like this; why, you wouldn't even have known how to take this
pistol apart. And at dinner, I caught you using language and expressing
ideas that were entirely outside anything you'd ever known before. Now,
I want to know--and I mean this literally."

Allan chuckled. "I hope you're not toying with the rather medieval
notion of obsession," he said.

Blake Hartley started. Something very like that must have been flitting
through his mind. He opened his mouth to say something, then closed it
abruptly.

"The trouble is, I'm not sure you aren't right," his son continued. "You
say you find me--changed. When did you first notice a difference?"

"Last night, you were still my little boy. This morning--" Blake Hartley
was talking more to himself than to Allan. "I don't know. You were
unusually silent at breakfast. And come to think of it, there was
something ... something strange ... about you when I saw you in the
hall, upstairs.... Allan!" he burst out, vehemently. "What has happened
to you?"

Allan Hartley felt a twinge of pain. What his father was going through
was almost what he, himself, had endured, in the first few minutes after
waking.

"I wish I could be sure, myself, Dad," he said. "You see, when I woke,
this morning, I hadn't the least recollection of anything I'd done
yesterday. August 4, 1945, that is," he specified. "I was positively
convinced that I was a man of forty-three, and my last memory was of
lying on a stretcher, injured by a bomb explosion. And I was equally
convinced that this had happened in 1975."

"Huh?" His father straightened. "Did you say nineteen _seventy_-five?"
He thought for a moment. "That's right; in 1975, you will be
forty-three. A bomb, you say?"

Allan nodded. "During the siege of Buffalo, in the Third World War," he
said, "I was a captain in G5--Scientific Warfare, General Staff. There'd
been a transpolar air invasion of Canada, and I'd been sent to the front
to check on service failures of a new lubricating oil for combat
equipment. A week after I got there, Ottawa fell, and the retreat
started. We made a stand at Buffalo, and that was where I copped it. I
remember being picked up, and getting a narcotic injection. The next
thing I knew, I was in bed, upstairs, and it was 1945 again, and I was
back in my own little thirteen-year-old body."

"Oh, Allan, you just had a nightmare to end nightmares!" his father
assured him, laughing a trifle too heartily. "That's all!"

"That was one of the first things I thought of. I had to reject it; it
just wouldn't fit the facts. Look; a normal dream is part of the
dreamer's own physical brain, isn't it? Well, here is a part about two
thousand per cent greater than the whole from which it was taken. Which
is absurd."

"You mean all this Battle of Buffalo stuff? That's easy. All the radio
commentators have been harping on the horrors of World War III, and you
couldn't have avoided hearing some of it. You just have an undigested
chunk of H. V. Kaltenborn raising hell in your subconscious."

"It wasn't just World War III; it was everything. My four years at high
school, and my four years at Penn State, and my seven years as a
reporter on the Philadelphia Record. And my novels: '_Children of the
Mist_,' '_Rose of Death_,' '_Conqueror's Road_.' They were no kid stuff.
Why, yesterday I'd never even have thought of some of the ideas I used
in my detective stories, that I published under a _nom-de-plume_. And my
hobby, chemistry; I was pretty good at that. Patented a couple of
processes that made me as much money as my writing. You think a
thirteen-year-old just dreamed all that up? Or, here; you speak French,
don't you?" He switched languages and spoke at some length in good
conversational slang-spiced Parisian. "Too bad you don't speak Spanish,
too," he added, reverting to English. "Except for a Mexican accent you
could cut with a machete, I'm even better there than in French. And I
know some German, and a little Russian."

       *       *       *       *       *

Blake Hartley was staring at his son, stunned. It was some time before
he could make himself speak.

"I could barely keep up with you, in French," he admitted. "I can swear
that in the last thirteen years of your life, you had absolutely no
