of the rough pillar? But if so, why the question of color? There it was
again! And now, centering all his attention on that one point, the
Terran picked out the outline of a head--a head grotesque enough to be
something conjured out of Lumbrilo's sorcerer's imagination. Had Dane
not seen its like among the tri-dee prints in Captain Jellico's
collection, he would have believed that his eyes were playing tricks.

It was a bullet-shaped head, embellished by two out-sized prick ears,
the hair-tufted pointed tips of which projected well above the top of
the skull. Round eyes were set deeply in sunken pits. The mouth was a
swinish snout from which lolled a purple tongue, though the rest of that
gargoyle head was very close in color to the rock against which it half
rested.

Dane had no doubts that the rock ape was spying upon the small camp.
Having heard tales of those semi-intelligent animals--the most
intelligent native creatures of Khatka--most of which were concerned
with their more malignant characteristics, Dane was alarmed. That lurker
could be an advance scout of some pack. And a pack of rock apes, if able
to surprise their prey, were formidable opponents.

Asaki stirred, sat up. And that round head above turned to follow the
Chief Ranger's every move.

"Above ... by the finger rock ... to the right...." Dane kept his voice
close to a whisper. When he saw the sudden constriction of muscle across
the Khatkan's bare shoulders, he knew that the other had heard and
understood.

Only, if Asaki had spotted the rock ape, he did not betray his
knowledge. The Khatkan got lithely to his feet. Then one of those feet
stirred Nymani into the instant wakefulness of the wilderness-trained
man.

Dane slid his hand about the bole of the tree and touched Jellico,
watched the captain's gray eyes open with a similar awareness. Asaki
picked up his needler. Weapon in hand, he whirled and fired almost in
one connected movement. It was the fastest shot Dane had ever seen.

The gargoyle head lifted away from the rock, and then turned to one side
as its body, somehow vaguely obscene in its resemblance to the human
form, fell away, to sprawl limply down-slope.

Though the dead rock ape had not had a chance to give tongue, there came
a cry from above, a coughing, deep-throated hawking. Down the steep
incline bumped a round white ball, bouncing past the tumbled carcass of
the ape, sailing up into the air, to strike and burst open a few feet
away.

"Back!" With one arm Asaki sent Jellico, his nearest neighbor, tumbling
back into the jungle. Then the Chief Ranger pumped a stream of needle
rays into the remains of the ball. A shrill, sweet humming arose as red
motes, vivid as molten copper in the sunlight, climbed on wings beating
too fast to be seen.

The debris of the nest smoked into nothing. But no needle ray could hope
to stop all the poisonous army issuing forth from it, fighting mad, to
seek any warm-blooded creature within scenting distance. The men threw
themselves into the brush, rolling in the thick mold of the vegetable
decay on the ground, rubbing its moist plaster over their bodies in
frantic haste.

Red-hot fire, far worse than any of the splinter torment Dane had
undergone the night before, pierced between his shoulders. He rolled on
his back, shoving himself along, both to kill the fire-wasp and coat the
sting with cooling mold. Cries of pain told him that he was not the only
sufferer, as all dug hands into the slimy stuff under them and slapped
it over their faces and heads.

"Apes...." That half shout got through to alert the men on the jungle
floor. True to their nature, the rock apes, now streaming downhill, were
coughing their challenges, advertising their attack. And it was only
that peculiarity of their species which saved their intended victims.

The apes came forward, partially erect, at a shambling run. The first
two, bulls close to six feet, went down under fire from Asaki's needler.
A third somehow escaped, swerving to the left, and came bounding at an
angle toward Dane. The Terran jerked free his force blade as that swine
snout split wide to show greenish tusks and the horrible stench of the
creature's body made him gasp.

A taloned paw clawed at him eagerly, slipped from his slime-covered body
just as he brought the force blade up. Foul breath coughed in his face
and he stumbled back as the heavy body of the ape crashed against him,
cut in half by the weapon. To Dane's sickened horror the paws still
clawed for him, the fangs still gnashed as he rolled free of the mangled
body and somehow got to his feet.

The roar of a blaster, of two blasters, drowned out the clamor of the
apes as Dane drew his fire ray, set his shoulders against a tree bole
and prepared to fight it out. He fired, saw a smaller and more nimble
enemy go down screeching. Then there were none left on their shaggy
feet, though some on the ground dragged themselves forward, still
striving to reach the men.

Dane slapped a fire-wasp from his leg. He was glad of the support of the
tree at his back as the smell of the ape's blood drenching him from
chest level down, and the mess on the ground, made his stomach churn.

When he could control his retching, he straightened. To his relief he
saw that all the others were on their feet, apparently unharmed. But
Tau, catching sight of the younger spaceman, gasped and started for him.

"Dane! What did they do?"

His junior laughed a little hysterically. "Not mine...." He swabbed with
a handful of grass at his bloodied breeches and blundered on into the
sunlight.

Nymani found them a foam-flecked stream below a miniature falls where
the swift current prevented the lurking of sand worms. They stripped
eagerly, cleaning first themselves and then their fouled clothing while
Tau tended the wealth of fire-wasp stings. There was little he could do
to relieve the swelling and pain, until Asaki produced a reed-like plant
which, chopped in sections, yielded a sticky purple liquid that dried on
the skin as a tar gum--the native remedy. So, glued and plastered, they
climbed away from the water and prepared to spend the night in a hollow
between two leaning rocks, certainly not as snug as the cave but a
fortress of sorts.

"And credit-happy space hoppers pay a fortune for an outing like this!"
Tau commented bitterly, hunching well forward so that a certain stung
portion of his anatomy would not come in contact with the rock beneath
him.

"Hardly for this," Jellico replied, and Dane saw Nymani grin
one-sidedly, his other cheek puffed and painted sticky purple.

"We do not always encounter apes and fire-wasps in the same day,"
supplied the Chief Ranger. "Also, guests at the preserves wear stass
belts."

Jellico snorted. "I don't think you'd get any repeats from your clients
otherwise! What do we meet tomorrow? A herd of graz on stampede, or
something even more subtle and deadly?"

Nymani got up and walked a little way from their rock shelter. He turned
down-slope and Dane saw his nostrils expand as they had when he had
investigated the cave.

"Something is dead," he said slowly. "A very large something. Or else--"

Asaki strode down to join his men. He gave a curt nod and Nymani skidded
on down the mountain side.

"What is it?" Jellico asked.

"It might be many things. There is one I hope it is not," was the Chief
Ranger's somewhat evasive reply. "I will hunt a labbla--there was fresh
spoor at the stream." He set off along their back trail to return a half
hour later, the body of his kill slung across one shoulder. He was
skinning it when Nymani trotted back.

"Well?"

"Death pit," supplied the Hunter.

"Poachers?" Jellico inquired.

Nymani nodded. Asaki continued his task, but there was a glint in his
dark eyes as he butchered with sure and expert strokes. Then he glanced
at the shadow extending beyond the rocks.

"I, too, would see," he told Nymani.

Jellico arose, and Dane, interested, followed. Some five minutes later
none of them needed the native keenness of smell to detect the presence
of some foulness ahead. The odor of corruption was almost tangible in
the sultry air. And it grew worse until they stood on the edge of a pit.
Dane retreated hurriedly. This was as bad as the battlefield of the rock
apes. But the captain and the two Khatkans stood calmly assessing the
slaughter left by the hide poachers.

"Glam, graz, hoodra," Jellico commented. "Tusks and hides--the full line
of trade stuff."

Asaki, his expression bleak, stepped back from the pit. "Day old
calves, old ones, females--all together. They kill wantonly and leave
those they do not choose to pelt."

"Trail--" Nymani pointed eastward. "Leads to Mygra swamp."

"The swamps!" Asaki was shaken. "They must be mad!"

"Or know more about this country than your men do," Jellico corrected.

"If poachers can enter Mygra, then we can follow!"

But not now, Dane protested silently. Certainly Asaki did not mean that
_they_ were to track outlaws into swamps the Khatkan had already labeled
unexplored death traps!




V


Sitting up, Dane stared wide-eyed into the dark. A handful of glowing
coals, guarded by rocks, was the center of their camp. He hunched up to
that hardly knowing why he moved. His hands were shaking, his skin damp
with sweat no heat produced. Yet, now that he was conscious of the
night, the Terran could not remember the nightmare from which he had
just awakened, though he was left with a growing apprehension which he
could not define. What prowled out there in that dark? Walked the
mountain side? Listened, spied and waited?

Dane half started to his feet as a form did move into the dim light of
the fire. Tau stood there, regarding him with sober intensity.

"Bad dream?"

The younger man admitted to that with a nod, partly against his will.

"Well, you aren't the only one. Remember any of it?"

With an effort, Dane looked away from the encircling dark. It was as if
the fear which had shaken him awake, now embodied, lurked right there.

"No." He rubbed sleep-smarting eyes.

"Neither did I," Tau remarked. "But both of 'em must have been
jet-powered."

"I suppose one could expect to have nightmares after yesterday." Dane
advanced the logical explanation, yet at the same time something deep
inside him denied every word of it. He had known nightmares before; none
of them had left this aftertaste. And he wanted no return of sleep
tonight. Reaching to the pile of wood he fed the fire as Tau settled
down beside him.

"There is something else...." the medic began, and then fell silent.
Dane did not press him. The younger man was too busy fighting a growing
desire to whirl and aim the fire ray into that darkness, to catch in its
withering blast that lurking thing he could _feel_ padded there, biding
its time.

Despite his efforts Dane did drowse again before morning, waking
unrefreshed, and, to his secret dismay, with no lessening of his odd
dislike for the country about them.

Asaki did not suggest that they trail the poachers into the morass of
Mygra. Instead the Chief Ranger was eager to press on in the opposite
direction, find a way over the range to the preserve where he could
assemble a punitive force to deal with the outlaws. So they began an
upward climb which took them away from the dank heat of the lowlands,
into the parched blaze of the sunbaked ledges above.

The sun was bright, far too bright, and there were few shadows left. Yet
Dane, stopping to drink sparingly from his canteen, could not lose that
sense of eyes upon him, of being tracked. Rock apes? Cunning as those
beasts were, it was against their nature to trail in utter silence, to
be able to carry through a long-term project. Lion, perhaps?

He noted that Nymani and Asaki took turns at rear guard today, and that
each was alert. Yet, oddly enough, none of them mentioned the uneasiness
they must all share.

They had a dry climb, finding no mountain stream to renew their water
supply. All being experienced in wilderness travel, they made a mouthful
of liquid go a long way. When the party halted slightly before midday,
canteens were still half full.

"_Haugh!_"

They jerked up, hands on weapons. A rock ape, its hideous body clearly
seen here, capered, coughed, spat. Asaki fired from the hip and the
thing screeched, clawed at its chest where the dark blood spewed out,
and raced for them. Nymani cut the beast down and they waited tensely
for the attack of the thing's tribe, which should have followed the
abortive lunge on the part of their scout. But there was
nothing--neither sound nor movement.

What did follow froze them all momentarily. That mangled body began to
move again, drew itself together, crawled toward them. Dane knew that it
was impossible that the creature could live with such wounds. Yet the
beast advanced, its head lolling on its hunched shoulders so that the
eyes were turned blindly up to the full glare of the sun, while it
crawled to reach the man it could not see.

"Demon!" Nymani dropped his needler, shrank back against the rocks.

As the thing advanced, before their eyes the impossible happened. Those
gaping wounds closed, the head straightened on the almost invisible
neck, the eyes glared once more with life, and slaver dripped from the
swine snout.

Jellico caught up the needler Nymani had dropped. With a coolness Dane
envied, the captain shot. And for the second time the rock ape
collapsed, torn to ribbons.

Nymani screamed, and Dane tried to choke back his own cry of horrified
protest. The dead thing put on life for the second time, crawled, got
somehow to its feet, healed itself, and came on. Asaki, his face
greenish-pale, stepped out stiffly as if each step he took was forced by
torture. He had dropped his needler. Now he caught up a rock as large as
his own head, raised it high with arms on which the muscles stood out
like ropes. He hurled the stone, and Dane heard as well as saw the
missile go home. The rock ape fell for the third time.

When one of those taloned paws began to move again, Nymani broke. He
ran, his screams echoing thinly in the air, as the thing lurched up, the
gory mess of its head weaving about. If his feet would have obeyed him,
Dane might have followed the Khatkan. As it was, he drew his ray and
aimed it at that shambling thing. Tau struck up the barrel.

The medic's face was livid; there was the same horror in his eyes. But
he moved out to front that monster.

A spot of shadow coalesced on the ground, deepened in hue, took on
substance. Crouched low facing the rock ape, its haunches quivering for
a deadly spring, narrowed green eyes holding on its prey, was a black
leopard.

The tiny forward and backward movements of its body steadied, and it
arched through the air, brought down the ape. A pitting, snarling tangle
rolled across the slope--and was gone!

Asaki's hands shook as he drew them down his sweating face. Jellico
readied a second clip in the needler mechanically. But Tau was swaying
so that Dane leaped to take the shock of the other's weight as he
collapsed. Only for a moment did the medic hang so, then he struggled to
stand erect.

"Magic?" Jellico's voice, as controlled as ever, broke the silence.

"Mass hallucination," Tau corrected him. "Very strong."

