question of them dying out. But it's only been in the last twenty
years that we've been able to make nuclear-electric engines, and this
is the first time any of us have gotten east of the Mississippi."

"How did your group manage to survive?" Loudons said. "You call it the
Toon; I suppose that's what the word platoon has become, with time.
You were, originally, a military platoon?"

"_Pla_-toon!" the white-bearded man said. "Of all the unpardonable
stupidity! Of course that was what it was. And the title, Tenant, was
originally _lieu_-tenant; I know that, though we have all dropped the
first part of the word. That should have led me, if I'd used my wits,
to deduce platoon from toon.

"Yes, sir. We were originally a platoon of soldiers, two hundred years
ago, at the time when the Wars ended. The Old Toon, and the First
Tenant, were guarding pows, whatever they were. The pows were all
killed by a big bomb, and the First Tenant, Lieutenant Gilbert Dunbar,
took his ... his platoon and started to march to Deecee, where the
Government was, but there was no Government, any more. They fought
with the people along the way. When they needed food, or ammunition,
or animals to pull their wagons, they took them, and killed those who
tried to prevent them. Other people joined the Toon, and when they
found women whom they wanted, they took them. They did all sorts of
things that would have been crimes if there had been any law, but
since there was no law any longer, it was obvious that there could be
no crime. The First Ten--Lieutenant--kept his men together, because he
had The Books. Each evening, at the end of each day's march, he read
to his men out of them.

[Illustration: ]

"Finally, they came here. There had been a town here, but it had been
burned and destroyed, and there were people camping in the ruins. Some
of them fought and were killed; others came in and joined the platoon.
At first, they built shelters around this building, and made this
their fort. Then they cleared away the ruins, and built new houses.
When the cartridges for the rifles began to get scarce, they began to
make gunpowder, and new rifles, like these we are using now, to shoot
without cartridges. Lieutenant Dunbar did this out of his own
knowledge, because there is nothing in The Books about making
gunpowder; the guns in The Books are rifles and shotguns and revolvers
and airguns; except for the airguns, which we haven't been able to
make, these all shot cartridges. As with your people, we did not die
out, because we had women. Neither did we increase greatly--too many
died or were killed young. But several times we've had to tear down
the wall and rebuild it, to make room inside it for more houses, and
we've been clearing a little more land for fields each year. We still
read and follow the teachings of The Books; we have made laws for
ourselves out of them."

"And we are waiting here, for the Slain and Risen One," Tenant Jones
added, looking at Altamont intently. "It is impossible that He will
not, sooner or later, deduce the existence of this community. If He
has not done so already."

"Well, sir," the Toon Leader changed the subject abruptly, "enough of
this talk about the past. If I understand rightly, it is the future in
which you gentlemen are interested." He pushed back the cuff of his
hunting shirt and looked at an old and worn wrist watch.
"Eleven-hundred; we'll have lunch shortly. This afternoon, you will
meet the other people of the Toon, and this evening, at
eighteen-hundred, we'll have a mess together outdoors. Then, when we
have everybody together, we can talk over your offer to help us, and
decide what it is that you can give us that we can use."

"You spoke, a while ago, of what you could do for us, in return,"
Altamont said. "There's one thing you can do, no further away than
tomorrow, if you're willing."

"And that is--?"

"In Pittsburgh, somewhere, there is an underground crypt, full of
books. Not bound and printed books; spools of microfilm. You know what
that is?"

The others shook their heads. Altamont continued:

"They are spools on which strips are wound, on which pictures have
been taken of books, page by page. We can make other, larger pictures
from them, big enough to be read--"

"Oh, photographs, which you enlarge. I understand that. You mean, you
can make many copies of them?"

"That's right. And you shall have copies, as soon as we can take the
originals back to Fort Ridgeway, where we have equipment for enlarging
them. But while we have information which will help us to find the
crypt where the books are, we will need help in getting it open."

"Of course! This is wonderful. Copies of The Books!" the Reader
exclaimed. "We thought we had the only one left in the world!"

"Not just The Books, Stamford; other books," the Toon Leader told him.
"The books which are mentioned in The Books. But of course we will
help you. You have a map to show where they are?"

"Not a map; just some information. But we can work out the location of
the crypt."

"A ritual," Stamford Rawson said happily. "Of course."

       *       *       *       *       *

They lunched together at the house of Toon Sarge Hughes with the Toon
Leader and the Reader and five or six of the leaders of the community.
The food was plentiful, but Altamont found himself wishing that the
first book they found in the Carnegie Library crypt would be a cook
book.

In the afternoon, he and Loudons separated. The latter attached
himself to the Tenant, the Reader, and an old woman, Irene Klein, who
was almost a hundred years old and was the repository and arbiter of
most of the community's oral legends. Altamont, on the other hand,
started, with Alex Barrett, the gunsmith, and Mordecai Ricci, the
miller, to inspect the gunshop and grist mill. Joined by half a dozen
more of the village craftsmen, they visited the forge and foundry, the
sawmill, the wagon shop. Altamont looked at the flume, a rough
structure of logs lined with sheet aluminum, and at the nitriary, a
shed-roofed pit in which potassium nitrate was extracted from the
community's animal refuse. Then, loading his guides into the
helicopter, they took off for a visit to the powder mill on the island
and a trip up the river.

They were a badly scared lot, for the first few minutes, as they
watched the ground receding under them through the transparent plastic
nose. Then, when nothing disastrous seemed to be happening,
exhilaration took the place of fear, and by the time they set down on
the tip of the island, the eight men were confirmed aviation
enthusiasts. The trip up-river was an even bigger success; the high
point came when Altamont set his controls for _Hover_, pointed out a
snarl of driftwood in the stream, and allowed his passengers to fire
one of the machine guns at it. The lead balls of their own
black-powder rifles would have plunked into the waterlogged wood
without visible effect; the copper-jacketed machine-gun bullets ripped
it to splinters. They returned for a final visit to the distillery
awed by what they had seen.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Monty, I don't know what the devil to make of this crowd," Loudons
said, that evening, after the feast, when they had entered the
helicopter and prepared to retire. "We've run into some weird
communities--that lot down in Old Mexico who live in the church and
claim they have a divine mission to redeem the world by prayer,
fasting and flagellation, or those yogis in Los Angeles--"

"Or the Blackout Boys in Detroit," Altamont added.

"That's understandable," Loudons said, "after what their ancestors
went through in the Last War. But this crowd, here! The descendants of
an old United States Army infantry platoon, with a fully developed
religion centered on a slain and resurrected god--Normally, it would
take thousands of years for a slain-god religion to develop, and then
only from the field-fertility magic of primitive agriculturists. Well,
you saw these people's fields from the air. Some of the members of
that old platoon were men who knew the latest methods of scientific
farming; they didn't need naive fairy tales about the planting and
germination of seed."

"Sure this religion isn't just a variant of Christianity?"

"Absolutely not. In the first place, these Sacred Books can't be the
Bible--you heard Tenant Jones say that they mentioned firearms that
used cartridges. That means that they can't be older than 1860 at the
very earliest. And in the second place, this slain god wasn't
crucified or put to death by any form of execution; he perished,
together with his enemy, in combat, and both god and devil were later
resurrected. The Enemy is supposed to be the master mind back of these
cannibal savages in the woods and also in the ruins."
