carbonic acid gas, which is always the residuum of respiration, might,
from weakness, settle in the lungs, and thus become the cause of disease
and death. The presence of carbonic acid in the lower bronchial tubes
and cells, existing in quantities sufficient to prevent the natural
combustion by breathing, was brought to my mind in March, 1847, while
searching for the cause of an agonizing paroxysm of sick headache. The
distressed feelings of obstructed life with which I was tossing and
struggling, together with the agonizing pain in the head and pressure on
the stomach, might well arise from such a cause. Standing (for position
is important) in a full current of air from an open window, I commenced
a species of violent artificial breathing, for the purpose of ejecting
the supposed heavy gas, and filling my lungs with pure air. This was
done by contracting the chest on every side to its smallest possible
dimensions, and at the same time throwing out the air violently and from
the bottom of the thorax, as if under the operation of an emetic; then
alternating by opening the chest to its greatest capacity, and drawing
in, by successive inhalations, all the fresh air possible, and pressing
it down to the lowest depths of the lungs. This process at first gave
such intensity and sharpness to the pain in the head, that it required
much resolution to continue it; nevertheless it was persevered in. After
a few minutes, the pain diminished, and soon entirely ceased. This was
followed by free perspiration, and equalized, warmth and circulation.
Perfect repose and quiet sleep ensued. Friends, who a short time before
had seen a countenance like that of a dying person, and knew how slow
was ordinary cure, were astonished, an hour afterwards, to behold, on my
awaking, the full glow of restored health.[6]

On the re-appearance of cholera, during the summer of 1849, my mind was
peculiarly affected, from the belief that a false theory of circulation
prevailed, although there was a true theory, which, if generally
believed, might lead to the knowledge of the cause and cure of this
terrific malady; and thus thousands of lives be saved which would
otherwise be lost. This thought almost distracted me; and believing that
my sex stood in the way of my theory's being acknowledged, I sometimes
wished that it might please God to take me out of the world. Then coming
to better thoughts; I cast away despondency as unworthy of me; and
determined to proceed to the further investigation and development of
the great truth, of which I had, as I believed, been made the unworthy
recipient. I studied my theory anew, while I read the most approved
works on cholera; and I came to the belief that imperfect respiration,
caused by the want of due oxygen in the air, was the principal
predisposing cause of the premonitory symptoms; while the death that
supervened was often caused by the settling of carbonic acid gas, the
residuum of animal combustion, in the lower air-cells of the lungs. The
symptoms of the cholera, as treated by the best writers, were full of
new proofs of the truth of my theory, especially of its last step, the
formation of steam or vapor in the lungs. Without that, the collapse of
cholera was a fearful mystery; with it, everything was plain. With a
coldness that would collapse the lungs, the bowels must naturally be
drawn up (and with dreadful pains) to supply their place. The ghastly
change in the face must occur when cold has condensed its arterial
vapor. If respiration could restore heat, before any lesions had taken
place in the organism, the patient might recover. Then I began rewriting
my theory in a work afterwards published, with the title, "Respiration
and its Effects, especially in relation to Asiatic Cholera and other
Sinking Diseases."

While thus occupied, the debilitating air of the season weighed upon my
health and spirits. I had been affected for about three days with what I
regarded as the ordinary complaints of the season, when one night, after
my family had retired, I found myself suddenly very ill--my symptoms
being coldness, debility, and spasmodic pains. I believed myself to be
attacked with cholera. I efficiently practised the artificial
respiration in fresh air as before described. Gaining strength as I
proceeded, I soon found a death-like coldness giving place to genial
warmth. Violent exercise, with artificial breathing, was kept up some
time, with such rests and full free breathings as nature required; after
which, I slept, perspired profusely, and was well in the morning.

This was an occurrence which sunk deep into my mind; and the more so, as
I could not speak much of it, for the truth was too improbable to be
believed. But the successful issue of this, my first experiment upon the
dreaded disease, prepared me to act with boldness and efficiency in a
case which occurred in my own house about a week after.

On the 14th of August, 1849, Jane Phayre, an Irish woman in my service,
of about twenty-five years of age, having been ill for four days with
diarrhoea, was suddenly struck with what the French call cholera
_foudroyant_--from fright. Alarmed by unwonted sounds near her window in
a basement room, she mounted the window-seat to look out at the top
sash, and found her face close to that of a man dying of cholera, who in
his death-cramps was brought from a steamboat on a litter, and thus
rested upon the pavement. The cover was lifted from his face, and the
sight and the smell struck her with faintness and trembling; and with
difficulty she reached her bed. I was called to go to her quickly by
Eliza Fagan, who said that Jane was very bad. She had a clay-cold
death-look, and a frightful blackness around her eyes. Her face, as I
saw it, was livid, pinched in features, and corpse-like, and her pulse
but a feeble flutter; and she seemed only to breathe from the top of her
lungs. She tried, as she afterwards told me, to say, "I am dying," but
her speech was husky and inarticulate. She says her sight and hearing
were gone; and while Eliza and I were dragging her out of doors, she
could not see the window, and did not feel her feet. We placed her in an
upright position, with her back resting against a board-wall, a fresh
breeze blowing full in her face. Her senses were now partially restored.
I told her to breathe violently, for she must get the bad air out of her
lungs and the good air in; and I showed her how she must do it. At first
she said, "I can't, for something rises up in the inside." When I told
her, sternly, that her life depended on it, and she must, she tried to
obey me. At first, it gave her severe headache, but as soon as deep
breathing was fairly begun, while I was watching her face with intense
anxiety, the color changed from the clay-cold death-look to the full
flush of the warm hue of life, and she joyfully exclaimed, "Oh! I feel
well!"

When the removal of carbonic acid gas had made way for oxygen to be
brought to the yet uninjured lungs, the carbon of the venous blood
ignited, the motive power was furnished, the blood was again moved
forward into the arterial system, and the dammed up venous current,
receiving the suction force, rushed on so violently as at times nearly
to produce suffocation; but the struggle was soon over, and the lungs,
free both from carbonic acid gas and an unnatural quantity of venous
blood, once more received pure air--and to the relieved sufferer
respiration became delightful--the circulation passed freely through an
unbroken system--and THE CHOLERA WAS CURED.

Was there, in the whole wide world, another person besides myself who
would have taken such a living corpse, dragged it out of doors, and set
it upright, on feet which could not feel, with the expectation that it
might breathe out death, breathe in life, and be restored? The result is
a proof, _a posteriori_; that the theory on which the experiment was
made is true.

Other cases occurred, where, under different circumstances, cures of
cholera were effected. One, as instantaneous, and in some respects as
remarkable as that of Jane Phayre, was that of my friend and former
pupil, Mrs. Gen. Gould, of Rochester, who sent for me, believing herself
to be dying of cholera. I have her letter, which, by permission, is
published in my work on Respiration; and also a letter from her
physician, Dr. Bloss, of Troy, testifying that her disease was cholera,
and that he had little hope of her restoration. This letter is published
in the appendix of a report on my theory, read in Buffalo, August 8th,
1851, to a convention of the New York State Association of Teachers.
