words tumbled over one another. "A hundred pounds of gold leaf--that's
the purser's price. He's with them--whatever it is. He promised to do
something or other for them."

She stopped. "Well?" I prompted.

"That's all. Shac's current was interrupted."

"Tell him to try it again, Venza! I'll talk with him. No! I'd better
let him alone. Can you get him to keep his mouth shut?"

"I think he might do anything I told him. He's a man!"

"Find out what you can."

She drew away from me abruptly. "There's Anita and George Prince."

They came to the corner of the deck, but turned back. Venza caught my
look. And understood it.

"You do love Anita Prince, Gregg?" Venza was smiling. "I wish you....
I wish some man handsome as you would gaze after me like that." She
turned solemn. "You may be interested to know, she loves you. I could
see it. I knew it when I mentioned you to her this morning."

"Me? Why we've hardly spoken!"

"Is it necessary? I never heard that it was."

I could not see Venza's face; she stood up suddenly. And when I rose
beside her, she whispered, "We should not be seen talking so long.
I'll find out what I can."

I stared after her slight robed figure as she turned into the lounge
archway and vanished.




VI


Captain Carter was grim. "So they've bought him off, have they? Go
bring him in here, Gregg. We'll have it out with him now."

Snap, Dr. Frank, Balch, our first officer, and I were in the Captain's
chart room. It was four P.M. Earth time. We were sixteen hours upon
our voyage.

I found Johnson in his office in the lounge. "Captain wants to see
you. Close up."

He closed his window upon an American woman passenger who was
demanding the details of Martian currency, and followed me forward.
"What is it, Gregg?"

"I don't know."

Captain Carter banged the slide upon us. The chart room was insulated.
The hum of the current was obvious. Johnson noticed it. He stared at
the hostile faces of the surgeon and Balch. And he tried to bluster.

"What's this? Something wrong?"

Carter wasted no words. "We have information, Johnson, that there's
some undercover plot aboard. I want to know what it is. Suppose you
tell us."

The purser looked blank. "What do you mean? We've gamblers aboard, if
that's--"

"To hell with that," growled Balch. "You had a secret interview with
that Martian, _Set_ Miko, and with George Prince!"

Johnson scowled from under his heavy brows, and then raised them in
surprise. "Did I? You mean changing their money? I don't like your
tone, Balch. I'm not your under-officer!"

"But you're under me!" roared the Captain. "By God, I'm master here!"

"Well, I'm not disputing that," said the purser mildly. "This
fellow--"

"We're in no mood for argument," Dr. Frank cut in. "Clouding the
issue...."

"I won't let it be clouded," the Captain exclaimed.

I had never seen Carter so choleric. He added:

"Johnson, you've been acting suspiciously. I don't give a damn whether
I've proof of it or not. Did you or did you not meet George Prince and
that Martian, last night?"

"No, I did not. And I don't mind telling you, Captain Carter, that
your tone also is offensive!"

"Is it?" Carter seized him. They were both big men. Johnson's heavy
face went purplish red.

"Take your hands--!" They were struggling. Carter's hands were
fumbling at the purser's pockets. I leaped, flung an arm around
Johnson's neck, pinning him.

"Easy there! We've got you, Johnson!"

Snap tried to help me. "Go on! Bang him on the head, Gregg. Now's your
chance!"

We searched him. A heat ray cylinder--that was legitimate. But we
found a small battery and eavesdropping device similar to the one
Venza had mentioned that Shac the gambler was carrying.

"What are you doing with that?" the Captain demanded.

"None of your business! Is it criminal? Carter, I'll have the line
officials dismiss you for this! Take your hands off me--all of you!"

"Look at this!" exclaimed Dr. Frank.

From Johnson's breast pocket the surgeon drew a folded document. It
was a scale drawing of the _Planetara_ interior corridors, the lower
control rooms and mechanisms. It was always kept in Johnson's safe.
And with it, another document: the ship's clearance papers--the secret
code passwords for this voyage, to be used if we should be challenged
by any Interplanetary Police ship.

Snap gasped, "My God, that was in my radio room strong box! I'm the
only one on this vessel except the Captain who's entitled to know
those passwords!"

Out of the silence, Balch demanded, "Well, what about it, Johnson?"

The purser was still defiant. "I won't answer your questions, Balch.
At the proper time, I'll explain--Gregg Haljan, you're choking me!"

I eased up. But I shook him. "You'd better talk."

He was exasperatingly silent.

"Enough!" exploded Carter. "He can explain when we get to port.
Meanwhile I'll put him where he'll do no more harm. Gregg, lock him in
the cage."

We ignored his violent protestations. The cage--in the old days of sea
vessels on Earth, they called it the brig--was the ship's jail. A
steel-lined, windowless room located under the deck in the peak of the
bow. I dragged the struggling Johnson there, with the amazed watcher
looking down from the observatory window at our lunging starlit forms.

"Shut up, Johnson! If you know what's good for you--"

He was making a fearful commotion. Behind us, where the deck narrowed
at the superstructure, half a dozen passengers were gazing in
surprise.

"I'll have you thrown out of the service, Gregg Haljan!"

I shut him up finally. And flung him down the ladder into the cage and
sealed the deck trap door upon him. I was headed back for the chart
room when from the observatory came the lookout's voice:

"An asteroid, Haljan! Officer Blackstone wants you."

I hurried to the turret bridge. An asteroid was in sight. We had
nearly attained our maximum speed now. An asteroid was approaching, so
dangerously close that our trajectory would have to be altered. I
heard Blackstone's signals ringing in the control rooms; and met
Carter as he ran to the bridge with me.

"That scoundrel! We'll get more out of him, Gregg. By God, I'll put
the chemicals on him--torture him--illegal or not!"

We had no time for further discussion. The asteroid was rapidly
approaching. Already, under the glass, it was a magnificent sight. I
had never seen this tiny world before--asteroids are not numerous
between the Earth and Mars, or in toward Venus.

At a speed of nearly a hundred miles a second the asteroid swept into
view. With the naked eye, at first it was a tiny speck of star-dust
unnoticeable in the gem-strewn black velvet of space. A speck. Then a
gleaming dot, silver white, with the light of our Sun upon it.

I stood with Carter and Blackstone on the turret bridge. It was
obvious, that unless we altered our course, the asteroid would pass
too close for safety. Already we were feeling its attraction; from the
control rooms came the report that our trajectory was disturbed by
this new mass so near.

"Better make your calculations now, Gregg," Blackstone urged.

I cast up the rough elements from the observational instruments in the
turret. When I had us upon our new course, with the attractive and
repulsive plates in the _Planetara's_ hull set in their altered
combinations, I went to the bridge again.

The asteroid hung over our bow quarter. No more than twenty or thirty
thousand miles away. A giant ball now, filling all that quadrant of
the heavens. The configurations of its mountains, its land and water
areas, were plainly visible.

"Perfectly habitable," Blackstone said. "But I've searched all over
the hemisphere with the glass. No sign of human life--certainly
nothing civilized--nothing in the fashion of cities."

A fair little world, by the look of it. A tiny globe, come from the
region beyond Neptune. We swept past the asteroid. The passengers were
all gathered to view the passing little world. I saw, not far from me,
Anita, standing with her brother; and the giant figure of Miko with
them. Half an hour since this wandering little world had showed
itself, it swiftly passed, began to dwindle behind us. A huge half
moon. A thinner, smaller quadrant. A tiny crescent, like a silver
barpin to adorn some lady's breast. And then it was a dot, a point of
light indistinguishable among the myriad others hovering in this great
black void.

The incident of the passing of the asteroid was over. I turned from
the deck window. My heart leaped. The moment for which all day I had
been subconsciously longing was at hand. Anita was sitting in a deck
chair, momentarily alone. Her gaze was on me as I glanced her way, and
she smiled an invitation for me to join her.




VII


"But, Miss Prince, why are you and your brother going to Ferrok-Shahn?
His business--"

Even as I voiced it, I hated myself for such a question. So nimble in
the humble mind that mingled with my rhapsodies of love, was my need
for information of George Prince.

"Oh," she said. "This is pleasure, not business, for George." It
seemed to me that a shadow crossed her face. But it was gone in an
instant, and she smiled. "We have always wanted to travel. We are
alone in the world, you know--our parents died when we were children."

I filled in her pause. "You will like Mars. So many interesting things
to see."

She nodded. "Yes, I understand so. Our Earth is so much the same all
over, cast all in one mould."

"But a hundred or more years ago, it was not, Miss Prince. I have read
how the picturesque Orient, differing from ... well, Greater New York
or London, for instance--"

"Transportation did that," she interrupted eagerly. "Made everything
the same--the people all look alike ... dress alike."

We discussed it. She had an alert, eager mind, childlike with its
curiosity, yet strangely matured. And her manner was naively earnest.
Yet this was no clinging vine, this Anita Prince. There was a
firmness, a hint of masculine strength in her chin and in her manner.

"If I were a man, what wonders I could achieve in this marvelous age!"
Her sense of humor made her laugh at herself. "Easy for a girl to say
that," she added.

"You have greater wonders to achieve, Miss Prince," I said
impulsively.

"Yes? What are they?" She had a very frank and level gaze, devoid of
coquetry.

My heart was pounding. "The wonders of the next generation. A little
son, cast in your own gentle image--"

What madness, this clumsy, brash talk! I choked it off.

But she took no offense. The dark rose-petals of her cheeks were
mantled deeper red, but she laughed.

"That is true." She turned abruptly serious. "I should not laugh. The
wonders of the next generation--conquering humans marching on...." Her
voice trailed away. My hand went to her arm. Strange tingling
something which poets call love! It burned and surged through my
trembling fingers into the flesh of her forearm.

The starlight glowed in her eyes. She seemed to be gazing, not at the
silver-lit deck, but away into distant reaches of the future.

Our moment. Just a breathless moment given us as we sat there with my
hand burning her arm, as though we both might be seeing ourselves
joined in a new individual--a little son, cast in his mother's gentle
image and with the strength of his father. Our moment, and then it was
over. A step sounded. I sat back. The giant gray figure of Miko came
past, his great cloak swaying, with his clanking sword ornament
beneath it. His bullet head, with its close-clipped hair, was hatless.
He gazed at us, swaggering past, and turned the deck corner.

Our moment was gone. Anita said conventionally, "It has been pleasant
to talk with you, Mr. Haljan."

"But we'll have many more," I said. "Ten days--"

"You think we'll reach Ferrok-Shahn on schedule?"

"Yes. I think so.... As I was saying, Miss Prince, you'll enjoy Mars.
A strange, aggressively forward-looking people."

An oppression seemed on her. She stirred in her chair.

"Yes they are," she said vaguely. "My brother and I know many Martians
in Greater New York." She checked herself abruptly. Was she sorry she
had said that? It seemed so.

Miko was coming back. He stopped this time. "Your brother would see
you, Anita. He sent me to bring you to his room."

The glance he shot me had a touch of insolence. I stood up and he
towered a head over me.

Anita said, "Oh yes. I'll come."

I bowed. "I will see you again, Miss Prince. I thank you for a
pleasant half-hour."

The Martian led her away. Her little figure was like a child with a
giant. It seemed, as they passed the length of the deck, with me
staring after them, that he took her arm roughly. And that she shrank
from him in fear.

And they did not go inside. As though to show me that he had merely
taken her from me, he stopped at a distant deck window and stood
talking to her. Once he picked her up as one would pick up a child to
show it some distant object through the window.

Was Anita afraid of this Martian's wooing? Yet was held to him by some
power he might have over her brother? The vagrant thought struck me.




VIII


