not for inhabitants, at least for relics of life no longer existent there,
this would surely be the place. It was, therefore, with no small degree
of curiosity, notwithstanding the unexpectedly frightful and repulsive
appearance that the surface of the moon presented, that I now saw myself
rapidly approaching the region concerning whose secrets my imagination
had so often busied itself. When Mr. Edison and I had paid our previous
visit to the moon on the first experimental trip of the electrical ship,
we had landed at a point on its surface remote from this, and, as I have
before explained, we then made no effort to investigate its secrets. But
now it was to be different, and we were at length to see something of
the wonders of the moon.


Like a Human Face.

I had often on the earth drawn a smile from my friends by showing them
Cape Heraclides with a telescope, and calling their attention to the
fact that the outline of the peak terminating the cape was such as
to present a remarkable resemblance to a human face, unmistakably a
feminine countenance, seen in profile, and possessing no small degree of
beauty. To my astonishment, this curious human semblance still remained
when we had approached so close to the moon that the mountains forming
the cape filled nearly the whole field of view of the window from which
I was watching it. The resemblance, indeed, was most startling.


The Resemblance Disappears.

"Can this indeed be Diana herself?" I said half aloud, but instantly
afterward I was laughing at my fancy, for Mr. Edison had overheard me
and exclaimed, "Where is she?"

"Who?"

"Diana."

"Why, there," I said, pointing to the moon. But lo! the appearance was
gone even while I spoke. A swift change had taken place in the line
of sight by which we were viewing it, and the likeness had disappeared
in consequence.

A few moments later my astonishment was revived, but the cause this
time was a very different one. We had been dropping rapidly toward the
mountains, and the electrician in charge of the car was swiftly and
constantly changing his potential, and, like a pilot who feels his way
into an unknown harbor, endeavoring to approach the moon in such a manner
that no hidden peril should surprise us. As we thus approached I suddenly
perceived, crowning the very apex of the lofty peak near the termination
of the cape, the ruins of what appeared to be an ancient watch tower. It
was evidently composed of Cyclopean blocks larger than any that I had
ever seen even among the ruins of Greece, Egypt and Asia Minor.


The Moon Was Inhabited.

Here, then, was visible proof that the moon had been inhabited, although
probably it was not inhabited now. I cannot describe the exultant feeling
which took possession of me at this discovery. It settled so much that
learned men had been disputing about for centuries.

"What will they say," I exclaimed, "when I show them a photograph
of that?"

Below the peak, stretching far to right and left, lay a barren beach
which had evidently once been washed by sea waves, because it was marked
by long curved ridges such as the advancing and retiring tide leaves
upon the shore of the ocean.

This beach sloped rapidly outward and downward toward a profound abyss,
which had once, evidently, been the bed of a sea, but which now appeared
to us simply as the empty, yawning shell of an ocean that had long
vanished.

It was with no small difficulty, and only after the expenditure of
considerable time, that all the floating ships of the squadron were
gradually brought to rest on this lone mountain top of the moon. In
accordance with my request, Mr. Edison had the flagship moored in the
interior of the great ruined watch tower that I have described. The
other ships rested upon the slope of the mountain around us.

Although time pressed, for we knew that the safety of the earth depended
upon our promptness in attacking Mars, yet it was determined to remain
here at least two or three days in order that the wrecked car might be
repaired. It was found also that the passage of the highly electrified
meteor had disarranged the electrical machinery in some of the other
cars, so that there were many repairs to be made besides those needed
to restore the wreck.

Burying the Dead.

Moreover, we must bury our unfortunate companions who had been killed by
the meteor. This, in fact, was the first work that we performed. Strange
was the sight, and stranger our feelings, as here on the surface of a
world distant from the earth, and on soil which had never before been
pressed by the foot of man, we performed that last ceremony of respect
which mortals pay to mortality. In the ancient beach at the foot of the
peak we made a deep opening, and there covered forever the faces of our
friends, leaving them to sleep among the ruins of empires, and among
the graves of races which had vanished probably ages before Adam and
Eve appeared in Paradise.

While the repairs were being made several scientific expeditions were
sent out in various directions across the moon. One went westward to
investigate the great ring plain of Plato, and the lunar Alps. Another
crossed the ancient Sea of Showers toward the lunar Apennines.

One started to explore the immense crater of Copernicus, which, yawning
fifty miles across, presents a wonderful appearance even from the distance
of the earth. The ship in which I, myself, had the good fortune to embark,
was bound for the mysterious lunar mountain Aristarchus.

Before these expeditions started, a careful exploration had been made in
the neighborhood of Cape Heraclides. But, except that the broken walls
of the watch tower on the peak, composed of blocks of enormous size,
had evidently been the work of creatures endowed with human intelligence,
no remains were found indicating the former presence of inhabitants upon
this part of the moon.


A Gigantic Human Footprint.

But along the shore of the old sea, just where the so-called Bay of
Rainbows separates itself from the abyss of the Sea of Showers, there
were found some stratified rocks in which the fascinated eyes of the
explorer beheld the clear imprint of a gigantic human foot, measuring
five feet in length from toe to heel.


Detailing the Marvellous Adventures of the Earth's Warriors in
Unknown Worlds.

The most minute search failed to reveal another trace of the presence
of the ancient giant, who had left the impress of his foot in the wet
sands of the beach here so many millions of years ago that even the
imagination of the geologists shrank from the task of attempting to fix
the precise period.


The Great Footprint.

Around this gigantic footprint gathered most of the scientific members
of the expedition, wearing their oddly shaped air-tight suits, connected
with telephonic wires, and the spectacle, but for the impressiveness of
the discovery, would have been laughable in the extreme. Bending over
the mark in the rock, nodding their heads together, pointing with their
awkwardly accoutred arms, they looked like an assemblage of antediluvian
monsters collected around their prey. Their disappointment over the
fact that no other marks of anything resembling human habitation could
be discovered was very great.

Still this footprint in itself was quite sufficient, as they all declared,
to settle the question of the former inhabitation of the moon, and it
would serve for the production of many a learned volume after their
return to the earth, even if no further discoveries should be made in
other parts of the lunar world.


Expeditions Over the Moon.

It was the hope of making such other discoveries that led to the dispatch
of the other various expeditions which I have already named. I had chosen
to accompany the car that was going to Aristarchus, because, as every one
who had viewed the moon from the earth was aware, there was something very
mysterious about that mountain. I knew that it was a crater nearly thirty
miles in diameter and very deep, although its floor was plainly visible.


The Glowing Mountains.

What rendered it remarkable was the fact that the floor and the walls of
the crater, particularly on the inner side, glowed with a marvellous
brightness which rendered them almost blinding when viewed with a
powerful telescope.

So bright were they, indeed, that the eye was unable to see many of the
details which the telescope would have made visible but for the flood
of light which poured from the mountains. Sir William Herschel had been
so completely misled by this appearance that he supposed he was watching
a lunar volcano in eruption.

It had always been a difficult question what caused the extraordinary
luminosity of Aristarchus. No end of hypotheses had been invented to
account for it. Now I was to assist in settling these questions forever.

From Cape Heraclides to Aristarchus the distance in an air line was
something over 300 miles. Our course lay across the north-eastern part
of the Sea of Showers, with enormous cliffs, mountain masses and peaks
shining on the right, while in the other direction the view was bounded by
the distant range of the lunar Apennines, some of whose towering peaks,
when viewed from our immense elevation, appeared as sharp as the Swiss
Matterhorn.

When we had arrived within about a hundred miles of our destination
we found ourselves floating directly over the so-called Harbinger
Mountains. The serrated peaks of Aristarchus then appeared ahead of us,
fairly blazing in the sunshine.


A Gigantic String Of Diamonds.

It seemed as if a gigantic string of diamonds, every one as great as
a mountain peak, had been cast down upon the barren surface of the
moon and left to waste their brilliance upon the desert air of this
abandoned world.

As we rapidly approached, the dazzling splendor of the mountain became
almost unbearable to our eyes, and we were compelled to resort to the
device, practiced by all climbers of lofty mountains, where the glare
of sunlight upon snow surfaces is liable to cause temporary blindness,
of protecting our eyes with neutral-tinted glasses.

Professor Moissan, the great French chemist and maker of artificial
diamonds, fairly danced with delight.

"Voila! Voila! Voila!" was all that he could say.


A Mountain of Crystals.

When we were comparatively near, the mountain no longer seemed to glow
with a uniform radiance, evenly distributed over its entire surface,
but now innumerable points of light, all as bright as so many little
suns, blazed away at us. It was evident that we had before us a mountain
composed of, or at least covered with, crystals.

Without stopping to alight on the outer slopes of the great ring-shaped
range of peaks which composed Aristarchus, we sailed over their rim and
looked down into the interior. Here the splendor of the crystals was
greater than on the outer slopes, and the broad floor of the crater,
thousands of feet beneath us, shone and sparkled with overwhelming
radiance, as if it were an immense bin of diamonds, while a peak in the
centre flamed like a stupendous tiara incrusted with selected gems.

Eager to see what these crystals were, the car was now allowed rapidly
to drop into the interior of the crater. With great caution we brought
it to rest upon the blazing ground, for the sharp edges of the crystals
would certainly have torn the metallic sides of the car if it had come
into violent contact with them.

Donning our air-tight suits and stepping carefully out upon this
wonderful footing we attempted to detach some of the crystals. Many of
them were firmly fastened, but a few--some of astonishing size--were
readily loosened.


A Wealth of Gems.

A moment's inspection showed that we had stumbled upon the most
marvellous work of the forces of crystallization that human eyes had
ever rested upon. Some time in the past history of the moon there had
been an enormous outflow of molten material from the crater. This had
overspread the walls and partially filled up the interior, and later its
surface had flowered into gems, as thick as blossoms in a bed of pansies.

The whole mass flashed prismatic rays of indescribable beauty and
intensity. We gazed at first speechless with amazement.

"It cannot be, surely it cannot be," said Professor Moissan at length.

"But it is," said another member of the party.

"Are these diamonds?" asked a third.

"I cannot yet tell," replied the Professor. "They have the brilliancy
of diamonds, but they may be something else."

"Moon jewels," suggested a third.

"And worth untold millions, whatever they are," remarked another.


Jewels from the Moon.

These magnificent crystals, some of which appeared to be almost flawless,
varied in size from the dimensions of a hazelnut to geometrical solids
several inches in diameter. We carefully selected as many as it was
convenient to carry and placed them in the car for future examination. We
had solved another long standing lunar problem and had, perhaps, opened
up an inexhaustible mine of wealth which might eventually go far toward
reimbursing the earth for the damage which it had suffered from the
invasion of the Martians.

On returning to Cape Heraclides we found that the other expeditions
had arrived at the rendezvous ahead of us. Their members had wonderful
stories to tell of what they had seen, but nothing caused quite so much
astonishment as that which we had to tell and to show.

The party which had gone to visit Plato and the lunar Alps brought back,
however, information which, in a scientific sense, was no less interesting
than what we had been able to gather.

They had found within this curious ring of Plato, which is a circle of
mountains sixty miles in diameter, enclosing a level plain remarkably
smooth over most of its surface, unmistakable evidences of former
inhabitation. A gigantic city had evidently at one time existed near
the centre of this great plain. The outlines of its walls and the
foundation marks of some of its immense buildings were plainly made out,
and elaborate plans of this vanished capital of the moon were prepared
by several members of the party.


More Evidences of Habitation.

One of them was fortunate enough to discover an even more precious
relic of the ancient lunarians. It was a piece of petrified skullbone,
representing but a small portion of the head to which it had belonged,
but yet sufficient to enable the anthropologists, who immediately fell
to examining it, to draw ideal representations of the head as it must
have been in life--the head of a giant of enormous size, which, if it
had possessed a highly organized brain, of proportionate magnitude,
must have given to its possessor intellectual powers immensely greater
than any of the descendants of Adam have ever been endowed with.


Giants in Size.

Indeed, one of the professors was certain that some little concretions
found on the interior of the piece of skull were petrified portions
of the brain matter itself, and he set to work with the microscope to
examine its organic quality.

In the mean time, the repairs to the electrical ships had been completed,
and, although these discoveries upon the moon had created a most profound
sensation among the members of the expedition, and aroused an almost
irresistible desire to continue the explorations thus happily begun,
yet everybody knew that these things were aside from the main purpose in
view, and that we should be false to our duty in wasting a moment more
upon the moon than was absolutely necessary to put the ships in proper
condition to proceed on their warlike voyage.


Departing from the Moon.

Everything being prepared then, we left the moon with great regret, just
forty-eight hours after we had landed upon its surface, carrying with us
a determination to revisit it and to learn more of its wonderful secrets
in case we should survive the dangers which we were now going to face.




Chapter VI.


A day or two after leaving the moon we had another adventure with a
wandering inhabitant of space which brought us into far greater peril
than had our encounter with the meteor.

The airships had been partitioned off so that a portion of the interior
could be darkened in order to serve as a sleeping chamber, wherein,
according to the regulations prescribed by the commander of the squadron
each member of the expedition in his turn passed eight out of every
twenty-four hours--sleeping if he could, if not, meditating, in a more
or less dazed way, upon the wonderful things that he was seeing and
doing--things far more incredible than the creations of a dream.

One morning, if I may call by the name morning the time of my periodical
emergence from the darkened chamber, glancing from one of the windows,
I was startled to see in the black sky a brilliant comet.


The Adventure With The Comet.

A Thrilling Story of an Encounter that Nearly Ended the Great
Expedition.

No periodical comet, as I knew, was at this time approaching the
neighborhood of the sun, and no stranger of that kind had been
detected from the observatories making its way sunward before we left
the earth. Here, however, was unmistakably a comet rushing toward the
sun, flinging out a great gleaming tail behind it and so close to us
that I wondered to see it remaining almost motionless in the sky. This
phenomenon was soon explained to me, and the explanation was of a most
disquieting character.

The stranger had already been perceived, not only from the flagship, but
from the other members of the squadron, and, as I now learned, efforts
had been made to get out of the neighborhood, but for some reason the
electrical apparatus did not work perfectly--some mysterious disturbing
force acting upon it--and so it had been found impossible to avoid an
encounter with the comet, not an actual coming into contact with it,
but a falling into the sphere of its influence.


In the Wake of the Comet.

In fact, I was informed that for several hours the squadron had been
dragging along in the wake of a comet, very much as boats are sometimes
towed off by a wounded whale. Every effort had been made to so adjust
the electric charge upon the ships that they would be repelled from the
cometic mass, but, owing apparently to eccentric changes continually
going on in the electric charge affecting the clashing mass of meteoric
bodies which constituted the head of the comet, we found it impossible
to escape from its influence.

At one instant the ships would be repelled; immediately afterward they
would be attracted again, and thus they were dragged hither and thither,
but never able to break from the invisible leash which the comet had
cast upon them. The latter was moving with enormous velocity toward
the sun, and, consequently, we were being carried back again, away from
the object of our expedition, with a fair prospect of being dissipated
in blazing vapors when the comet had dragged us, unwilling prisoners,
into the immediate neighborhood of the solar furnace.

Even the most cool-headed lost his self-control in this terrible
emergency. Every kind of device that experience or the imagination
could suggest was tried, but nothing would do. Still on we rushed with
the electrified atoms composing the tail of the comet sweeping to and
fro over the members of the squadron, as they shifted their position,
like the plume of smoke from a gigantic steamer, drifting over the sea
birds that follow in its course.


Is This the End?

Was this to end it all, then? Was this the fate that Providence had
in store for us? Were the hopes of the earth thus to perish? Was the
expedition to be wrecked and its fate to remain forever unknown to the
planet from which it had set forth? And was our beloved globe, which had
seemed so fair to us when we last looked upon it near by, and in whose
defence we had resolved to spend our last breath, to be left helpless
and at the mercy of its implacable foe in the sky?

