  'Tis a law that with_ Aves _prevails,
  And even in_ Homo _survives."_

"Just my precious papa's ideas!" she murmured, with a toss of her head,
and something like a little sniff. "What a nuisance it all is!
Aristocracy of intellect, indeed! Just as if any of us, even my dear
Dad, if he _is_ considered one of the cleverest and most learned men in
Europe, were anything more than what Newton called himself--a little
child picking up pebbles and grains of sand on the shore of a boundless
and fathomless ocean, and calling them knowledge. I'm not quite sure
that that's correct, but it's something like it. Still, that's not the
question. How on earth am I to tell poor Mark? Oh dear! he'll have to be
'Mr Merrill' now, I suppose. What a shame! I've half a mind to rebel,
and vindicate the Law of Selection at any price. Ah, there he is. Well,
I suppose I've got to get through it somehow."

As she spoke, one of the French windows under the verandah opened, and a
man in a panama hat, Norfolk jacket and knickerbockers, came out and
raised his hat as he stepped off the verandah.

With a sigh and a frown she closed the book sharply, got up and tossed
it into the chair. No daintier or more desirable incarnation of the
eternal feminine could have been imagined than she presented as she
walked slowly across the lawn to meet the man whom the Law of Selection
had designated as her natural mate, and whom her father, for reasons
presently to be made plain, had forbidden her to marry on pain of exile
from his affections for ever.

The face he turned towards her as she approached was not exactly
handsome as an artist or some women would have defined the word, but it
was strong, honest, and open--just the sort of face, in short, to match
the broad shoulders, the long, cleanly-shaped, athletic limbs, and the
five feet eleven of young, healthy manhood with which Nature had
associated it.

A glance at his face and another one at him generally would, in spite of
the costume, have convinced any one who knows the genus that Mark
Merrill was a naval officer. He had that quiet air of restrained
strength, of the instinctive habit of command which somehow or other
does not distinguish any other fighting man in the world in quite the
same degree. His name and title were Lieutenant-Commander Mark Gwynne
Merrill, of His Majesty's Destroyer _Blazer_, one of the coolest-headed
and yet most judiciously reckless officers in the Service.

There was a light in his wide-set, blue-grey eyes, and a smile on his
strong, well-cut lips which were absolutely boyish in their anticipation
of sheer delight as she approached; and then, after one glance at her
face, his own changed with a suddenness, which, to a disinterested
observer, would have been almost comic.

"I'm awfully sorry, Mark," she began, in a tone which literally sent a
shiver--a real physical shiver--through him, for he was very, very much
in love with her.

"What on earth is the matter, Niti?" he said, looking at the fair face
and downcast eyes which, for the first time since he had asked the
eternal question and she had answered it according to his heart's
desire, had refused to meet his. "Let's have it out at once. It's a lot
better to be shot through the heart than starved to death, you know. I
suppose it's something pretty bad, or you wouldn't be looking down at
the grass like that," he continued.

"Oh, it's--it's--it's a _beastly_ shame, that's what it is, so there!"
And as she said this Miss Nitocris Marmion, B.Sc., stamped her foot on
the turf and felt inclined to burst out crying, just as a milkmaid might
have done.

"Which means," said Mark, pulling himself up, as a man about to face a
mortal enemy would do, "that the Professor has said 'No.' In other
words, he has decided that his learned and lovely daughter shall not, as
I suppose he would put it, mate with an animal of a lower order--a mere
fighting-man. Well, Miss Marmion----"

"Oh, don't; _please_ don't!" she exclaimed, almost piteously, dropping
into a big wicker armchair by the verandah and putting her hands over
her eyes.

He had an awful fear that she was going to cry, and, as the Easterns
say, he felt his heart turning to water within him. But her highly
trained intellect came to her aid. She swallowed the sob, and looked up
at him with clear, dry eyes.

"It isn't quite that, Mark," she continued. "You know I wouldn't stand
anything like that even from the dear old Dad. Much as I love him, and
even, as you know, in some senses almost worship him, it isn't that.
It's this theory of heredity of his--this scientific faith--bigotry, I
call it, for it is just the same to him as Catholicism was to the
Spaniards in the sixteenth century. In fact, I told him the other night
that he reminded me of the Spanish grandee whose daughters were
convicted of heresy by the Inquisition, and who showed his devotion to
the Church by lighting the faggots which burned them with his own
hands."

"And what did he say to that?" said the sailor, not because he wanted to
know, but because there was an awkward pause that needed filling.

"I would rather not tell you, Mark, if you don't mind," she said slowly
and looking very straightly and steadily at him. "You know--well, I
needn't tell you again what I've told you already. You know I care for
you, and I always shall, but I cannot--I dare not--disobey my father. I
owe all that I ever had to him. He has been father, mother, teacher,
friend, companion--everything to me. We are absolutely alone in the
world. If I could leave him for anybody, I'd leave him for you, but I
won't disobey him and break his heart, as I believe I should, even for
you."

"You're perfectly right, Niti, perfectly," said Commander Merrill, in a
tone of steady conviction which inspired her with an almost irresistible
impulse to get up and kiss him. "You couldn't honestly do anything else,
and I know the shortest way to make you hate me would be to ask you to
do that something else. But still," he went on, thrusting his hands into
the pockets of his Norfolk jacket, "I do think I have a sort of right
to have some sort of explanation, and with your permission I shall just
ask him for one."

"For goodness' sake, don't do that, Mark--don't!" she pleaded. "You
might as well go and ask a Jewish Rabbi why he wouldn't let his daughter
marry a Christian. Wise and clever as he is in other things, poor Dad is
simply a fanatic in this, and--well, if he did condescend to explain,
I'm afraid you might mistake what he would think the correct scientific
way of putting it, for an insult, and I couldn't bear to think of you
quarrelling. You know you're the only two people in the world I--I--Oh
dear, what _shall_ I do!"

It was at this point that the Law of Natural Selection stepped in.
Natural laws of any sort have very little respect for the refinements of
what mortals are pleased to call their philosophy. Professor Marmion was
a very great man--some men said he was the greatest scientist of his
age--but at this moment he was but as a grain of sand among the wheels
of the mighty machine which grinds out human and other destinies.

Commander Merrill took a couple of long, swift strides towards the chair
in which Nitocris was leaning back with her hands pressed to her eyes.
He picked her up bodily, as he might have picked a child of seven up,
put her protesting hands aside, and slowly and deliberately kissed her
three times squarely on the lips as if he meant it; and the third time
her lips moved too. Then he whispered:

"Good-bye, dear, for the present, at any rate!"

After which he deposited her tenderly in the chair again, and, with just
one last look, turned and walked with quick, angry strides across the
lawn and round the semi-circular carriage-drive, saying some things to
himself between his clenched teeth, and thinking many more.

A few yards outside the gate he came face to face with the Professor.

"Good-morning, sir," said Merrill, with a motion of his hand towards his
hat.

"Oh, good-morning, Mr Merrill," replied the Professor a little stiffly,
for relations between them had been strained for some considerable time
now. "I presume you have been to the house. I am sorry that you did not
find me at home, but if it is anything urgent and you have half an hour
to spare----"

He stopped in his speech, silenced by a shock of something like shame.
He was prevaricating. He knew perfectly well that "it" was the most
urgent errand a man could have, next to his duty to his country, that
had brought the young sailor to his house. Twenty-four hours ago he
would not have noticed such a trifle: but it was no trifle now; for to
his clearer vision it was a sin, an evasion of the immutable laws of
Truth, utterly unworthy of the companion of Nitocris the Queen in that
other existence which he had just left.

"You have seen Niti, I suppose?" he continued, with singular directness.

"Yes," replied Merrill. "You will remember that the week was up this
morning, and so I called to learn my fate, and your daughter has told
me. I presume that your decision is final, and that, therefore, there is
nothing more to be said on the subject."

"My decisions are usually final, Mr Merrill, because I do not arrive at
them without due consideration. I am deeply grieved, as I have told you
before, but my decision is a deduction from what I consider to be an
unbreakable chain of argument which I need not trouble you with.
Personally and socially, of course, it would be impossible for me to
have the slightest objection to you. In fact, apart from your execrable
fighting profession, I like you; but otherwise, as you know, I cannot
help looking at you as the survival of an age of barbarism, a hark-back
of humanity, for all the honour in which that trade is held by an
ignorant and deluded world; and so for the last time it is my painful
task to tell you that there can be no union between your blood and mine.
Outside that, of course, there is no reason why we should not remain
friends."

"Very well, sir," replied Merrill, "I have heard your decision, and Miss
Marmion has told me she is resolved to abide by it; I should be
something less than a man if I attempted to alter her resolve. We are
ordered on foreign service this week, and so for the present,
good-bye."

He lifted his hat, turned away and walked down the road with teeth
clenched and eyes fixed straight in front of him, and a shade of grey
under the tan of his skin.

The Professor looked after him for a few moments and turned in at the
gate, saying:

"It's a great pity in some ways--many ways, in fact. He's a fine young
fellow and a thorough gentleman, and I'm afraid they're very fond of
each other, but of course to let Niti marry him would be the negation of
the belief and teaching of more than half a lifetime. I hope the poor
girl won't take it too keenly to heart. I'm afraid he seems rather hard
hit, poor chap, but of course there's no help for it. Just fancy me the
father-in-law of a fighting man, and the grandfather of what might be a
brood of fighters! No, no; that is quite out of the question."




CHAPTER VII

MOSTLY POSSIBILITIES


The Professor went into the garden feeling just a trifle uncomfortable.
He not only loved his daughter dearly, but he also had a very deep and
well-justified respect for her intellect and scholarly attainments. Her
unfortunate love for a man whom he honestly believed to be a totally
unfit mate for her was the only shadow that had ever drifted between
them since she had become, not only his daughter, but his friend and
companion, and the enthusiastic sharer of his intellectual pursuits. Of
course, anything like a scene was utterly out of the question; but there
is a silence more eloquent than words, and it was that that he was
mostly afraid of.

He found her walking up and down the lawn with her hands behind her
back. She was a little paler than usual, and there was a shadow in her
eyes. She came towards him, and said quite quietly:

"Mr Merrill has been here, Dad, to say good-bye. I told him, and so we
have said it."

The simple words were spoken with a quiet and yet tender dignity which
made him feel prouder than ever of his daughter and all the more sorry
for her.

"I met him just outside the gate, Niti," he replied, looking at her
through a little mist in his eyes, "He spoke most honourably, and like
the gentleman that he is. I hope you will believe me----"

"I believe you in everything, Dad," she said quickly; "and since the
matter is ended, it will only hurt us both to say any more about it.
Now, I have some news," she continued, in a tone whose alteration was
well assumed.

"Ah! and what is that, Niti?" he asked, looking up at her with a smile
of relief.

"It's something that I hope you will be able to get some of your solemn
fun out of. One of the items in the 'Social Intelligence' to-day states
that your old friend, Professor Hoskins van Huysman, and his wife and
daughter have come to London, and will stay ten days before 'proceeding'
to Paris and the South of France, and so, of course, they will be here
for your lecture, and naturally he will not resist the temptation of
making one of your audience."

"Van Huysman!" exclaimed the Professor. "That Yankee charlatan, confound
him! I shouldn't wonder if he had the impudence to take part in the
discussion afterwards."

"Then," laughed Nitocris, "you must take care to have all your heavy
guns ready for action. But, of course, Dad, you won't let your--well,
your scientific feelings get mixed up with social matters, will you?
Because, you know, I like Brenda very much; she's the prettiest and
brightest girl I know. You know, she can do almost anything, and yet
she's as unaffected----"

"As some one else we know," interrupted the Professor with another
smile.

"And then, you know, Mrs van Huysman," continued Nitocris with a little
flush, "is such a dear, innocent, good-natured thing, so good-hearted
and so deliciously American. Of course, you can fight with the Professor
as much as you like in print, and in lecture halls--I know you both love
it--but you'll still be friends socially, won't you?"

"Which, of course, means garden-parties and river trips, and similar
frivolities that learned young ladies love so much. You needn't trouble
about that, Niti. I shall not allow my zeal for scientific truth to
interfere with your social pleasures, you may be quite sure. Science, as
you know, has nothing to do with what we call Society, except as one of
the most curious phenomena of Sociology. Drive into town whenever you
like and see them. Present my respectful compliments, and ask them to
dinner, or whatever you like. And now I must get to my work--I've only
three more days, and my notes are not anything like complete."

"Very well, Dad; I think I'll telephone them--they're stopping at the
Savoy--extravagant people!--to say that I'll run in this afternoon and
have tea. Oh! and, by the way," she added, as he turned towards the
house, "there's another item. Lord Leighton has been called home
suddenly on some business, and will be here the day after to-morrow."

"Oh! indeed," said the Professor, pausing. "Well, I shall be delighted
to see him--but I don't know what I shall have to say to him about that
Mummy."

Nitocris turned away towards her chair with a faint smile on her lips.
With a woman's rapid intuition, she had seen a glimmer of hope in the
conjunction of these two announcements. Although Professor van Huysman's
personal fortune was not as great as his attainments or his fame, Brenda
would be very rich, for her mother was the only sister of a widower
whose sole interest and occupation in life was piling up dollars. He had
dollars in everything, from pork and lumber to canned goods, and her own
father's scientific inventions, and Brenda was the bright particular
star of his affections.

On the other hand, Lord Leighton, son and heir of the invalid Earl of
Kyneston, was a fairly well-to-do young nobleman, good-looking, a
scholar, and a good sportsman, who had done brilliantly at Cambridge,
and then devoted himself to Egyptian exploration with a whole-souled
ardour which had quickly won Professor Marmion's heart, and a ready
consent to his "trying his luck" with his daughter to boot. This had not
a little to do with the present unfortunate condition of her own love
affairs.

She had already refused Lord Leighton, letting him down, of course, as
gently as possible, but withal firmly and uncompromisingly. Who could
better console him than this beautiful and brilliant American girl, and
what would better suit that lovely head of hers than an English coronet
which was bright with the untarnished traditions of five hundred years?

Wherefore, then and there, Miss Nitocris Marmion, Bachelor of Science,
Licentiate of Literature and Art, and Gold-Medallist in Higher
Mathematics at the University of London, decided upon her first
experiment in match-making.

When the Professor got into his study and shut the door, there was a
curious smiling expression upon his refined, intellectual features.
Instead of sitting down to his desk, he lit a pipe and began walking up
and down the room, communing with his own soul in isolated sentences, as
was his wont when he was trying to arrive at any difficult decision.

In order to appreciate his deliberations and their result, it will be
necessary to say that Professor Hoskins van Huysman was one of the most
distinguished physicists in America, and he had also gained distinction
in applied mathematics. In addition to this, he was the inventor of many
marvellous contrivances for the demonstration and measurement of the
more obscure physical forces. His official position was that of Lecturer
and Demonstrator in Physical Science in Harvard University.

He and Professor Marmion had been deadly opponents in the field of
controversy for years. The latter had once detected an error in a very
learned monograph which he had published in the _Scientific American_ on
the "Co-Relation of the Etheric Forces in the Phenomena of Light and
Heat," and of course he had never forgiven him. From that day forth a
relentless duel of wits between them had continued. Every essay,
monograph, or book that the one published, the other criticised with
cold but ruthless severity, to the great delectation of the scientific
world, if not to the clarification of its atmosphere.

Socially, they were cordial acquaintances, if not friends. What they
really thought of each other was known only to themselves and to their
immediate domestic circles.

Naturally Professor Marmion was well aware that his elevation to the
higher plane of N4 gave him an enormous advantage over his adversary,
for now he could, if he chose, smite him hip and thigh, in a strictly
scientific sense, and reduce him to utter confusion and public ridicule,
and the question which he had come to discuss with himself was: In how
far, if at all, was he justified in so using the extra-human powers with
which he had been endowed?

The moment that he began to do this he became conscious of another
curious complication of his recent development. On the higher plane he
had argued the matter out with no more emotion than a calculating
machine would have betrayed, and he had come to a conclusion that was
absolutely luminous and just: but now that he came to argue the same
question on the lower plane he found that he was doing it under human
limitations, and therefore with human feelings.

"No," he said in the peculiar low, musing tone which was habitual to him
during these monologues, "no; after all, I do not see that there would
be any harm in that. Wrong, nay, sinful it would undoubtedly be to prove
to demonstration that religious, social, and physical laws, may, under
certain changing circumstances, be both true and false at the same time.
I am, or was--or whatever it is--perfectly right in considering that to
deliberately produce such a chaos as that would do would be the most
colossal crime that a man could commit against humanity, as far as this
plane is concerned, but there can be no harm in making a few
mathematical experiments."

He took a few more turns up and down the room, pulling slowly at his
pipe, and with his mind not wholly unoccupied with speculations as to
what Professor Van Huysman's feelings might be if he were watching the
said experiments. Then he began again:

"At the worst I shall only be carrying certain investigations a few
steps farther, and developing theories which have been seriously
discussed by the hardest-headed scholars in the world. Both the Greek
and the Alexandrian philosophers speculated on the possibility of a
state of four dimensions; and didn't Cayley, before this very Society,
deliberately say that at the present rate of progress in the Higher
Mathematics, the eye of Intellect might ere long see across the border
of tri-dimensional space?

"Surely I cannot do any very great harm by carrying his arguments to
their logical conclusions--if I can. Of course, physical demonstrations
would never do: I should frighten my brilliant and learned audience out
of its seven senses; but, as for mere mathematics--well, I may make them
stare, and set a good many highly-respected brains--my gifted friend
Huysman's, among them--working pretty hard. Of course, he will be
especially furious, but there's no harm in that either. Yes, I shall
certainly do it. If he can't understand my demonstrations, that's not my
concern."

He went and sat down at his desk, still smiling, and went very carefully
through the notes he had already made, and then through Professor
Hartley's letter, and his speculations on the Forty-Seventh Proposition.
This done, he plunged into a fresh vortex of figures, and symbols, and
diagrams, in which he remained for the next two hours, his mind
hovering, as it were, over the borderland which at once divides and
unites the higher and the lower planes. When he returned to earth, the
dreamy, abstracted look faded away from his face; his eyes lit up, and
the pleasant smile came back.

He opened the middle drawer in his desk, and took out the first page of
the fair copy of his notes, which Nitocris had made for him--thinking
the while how easy it would have been for him in the state of N4 to
take it out without opening the drawer at all--and looked at it. It was
headed:

"RECENT PROGRESS IN THE HIGHER MATHEMATICS."

He crossed the title out carefully, and wrote above it:

"AN EXAMINATION OF SOME SUPPOSED MATHEMATICAL IMPOSSIBILITIES."

"There," he murmured, as he put the sheet back; "I think that such a
theme, adequately treated, will considerably astonish my learned friends
in general, and my esteemed critic, Van Huysman, in particular."

From which remark it will be gathered that Franklin Marmion had
certainly recrossed the dividing line between the two Planes of
Existence.



