the bottles in the liquor cabinet next to the refrigerator. "I'm sure
I have a bottle of it. Now wait a minute; it's here somewhere."

When Dad passes on and some medium claims to have produced a spirit
communication from him, I will not accept it as genuine without the
expression: "Now wait a minute; it's here somewhere."

Bish wanted to know what I was fixing for myself, and I told him.

"Never mind the rum, Ralph. I believe," he said, "that I shall join
Walt in a fruit fizz."

Well, whattaya know! Maybe my stealthy temperance campaign was having
results. Dad looked positively startled, and then replaced the bottle
he was holding.

"I believe I'll make it unanimous," he said. "Fix me up a fruit fizz,
too, Walt."

I mixed two more fruit fizzes, and we carried them over to the table.
Bish sipped at his critically.

"Palatable," he pronounced it. "Just a trifle on the mild side, but
definitely palatable."

Dad looked at him as though he still couldn't believe the whole thing.
Dinner was slow coming. We finished our fizzes, and Bish and I both
wanted repeats, and Dad felt that he had to go along. So I made three
more. We were finishing them when Mrs. Laden started bringing in the
dinner. Mrs. Laden is a widow; she has been with us since my mother
died, the year after I was born. She is violently anti-liquor.
Reluctantly, she condones Dad taking a snort now and then, but as soon
as she saw Bish Ware, her face started to stiffen.

She put the soup on the table and took off for the kitchen. She always
has her own dinner with Julio. That way, while they're eating he can
tell her all the news that's fit to print, and all the gossip that
isn't.

For the moment, the odd things I'd been noticing about our
distinguished and temporarily incapacitated visitor came under the
latter head. I told Dad and Bish about my observations, beginning with
the deafening silence about Glenn Murell at the library. Dad began
popping immediately.

"Why, he must be an impostor!" he exclaimed. "What kind of a racket do
you think he's up to?"

"Mmm-mm; I wouldn't say that, not right away," Bish said. "In the
first place, Murell may be his true name and he may publish under a
nom de plume. I admit, some of the other items are a little
suspicious, but even if he isn't an author, he may have some
legitimate business here and, having heard a few stories about this
planetary Elysium, he may be exercising a little caution. Walt, tell
your father about that tallow-wax we saw, down in Bottom Level Fourth
Ward."

I did, and while I was talking Dad sat with his soup spoon poised
halfway to his mouth for at least a minute before he remembered he was
holding it.

"Now, that is funny," he said when I was through. "Why do you
suppose...?"

"Somebody," Bish said, "some group of ship captains, is holding wax
out from the Co-operative. There's no other outlet for it, so my guess
is that they're holding it for a rise in price. There's only one way
that could happen, and that, literally, would be over Steve Ravick's
dead body. It could be that they expect Steve's dead body to be around
for a price rise to come in over."

I was expecting Dad to begin spouting law-and-order. Instead, he hit
the table with his fist; not, fortunately, the one that was holding
the soup spoon.

"Well, I hope so! And if they do it before the _Cape Canaveral_ gets
in, they may fix Leo Belsher, too, and then, in the general
excitement, somebody might clobber Mort Hallstock, and that'd be grand
slam. After the triple funeral, we could go to work on setting up an
honest co-operative and an honest government."

"Well, I never expected to hear you advocating lynch law, Dad," I
said.

He looked at me for a few seconds.

"Tell the truth, Walt, neither did I," he admitted. "Lynch law is a
horrible thing; don't make any mistake about that. But there's one
thing more horrible, and that's no law at all. And that is the present
situation in Port Sandor.

"You know what the trouble is, here? We have no government. No legal
government, anyhow; no government under Federation law. We don't even
have a Federation Resident-Agent. Before the Fenris Company went
broke, it was the government here; when the Space Navy evacuated the
colonists, they evacuated the government along with them. The thousand
who remained were all too busy keeping alive to worry about that. They
didn't even care when Fenris was reclassified from Class III,
uninhabited but inhabitable, to Class II, inhabitable only in
artificial environment, like Mercury or Titan. And when Mort Hallstock
got hold of the town-meeting pseudo government they put together fifty
years ago and turned it into a dictatorship, nobody realized what had
happened till it was too late. Lynch law's the only recourse we have."

"Ralph," Bish told him, "if anything like that starts, Belsher and
Hallstock and Ravick won't be the only casualties. Between Ravick's
goons and Hallstock's police, they have close to a hundred men. I
won't deny that they could be cleaned out, but it wouldn't be a
lynching. It would be a civil war."

"Well, that's swell!" Dad said. "The Federation Government has never
paid us any attention; the Federation planets are scattered over too
many million cubic light-years of space for the Government to run
around to all of them wiping everybody's noses. As long as things are
quiet here, they'll continue to do nothing for us. But let a story hit
the big papers on Terra, _Revolution Breaks Out on Fenris_--and
that'll be the story I'll send to Interworld News--and watch what
happens."

"I will tell you what will happen," Bish Ware said. "A lot of people
will get killed. That isn't important, in itself. People are getting
killed all the time, in a lot worse causes. But these people will all
have friends and relatives who will take it up for them. Start killing
people here in a faction fight, and somebody will be shooting somebody
in the back out of a dark passage a hundred years from now over it.
You want this planet poisoned with blood feuds for the next century?"

Dad and I looked at one another. That was something that hadn't
occurred to either of us, and it should have. There were feuds, even
now. Half the little settlements on the other islands and on the
mainland had started when some group or family moved out of Port
Sandor because of the enmity of some larger and more powerful group or
family, and half our shootings and knife fights grew out of old
grudges between families or hunting crews.

"We don't want it poisoned for the next century with the sort of thing
Mort Hallstock and Steve Ravick started here, either," Dad said.

"Granted." Bish nodded. "If a civil war's the only possible way to get
rid of them, that's what you'll have to have, I suppose. Only make
sure you don't leave a single one of them alive when it's over. But if
you can get the Federation Government in here to clean the mess up,
that would be better. Nobody starts a vendetta with the Terran
Federation."

"But how?" Dad asked. "I've sent story after story off about crime and
corruption on Fenris. They all get the file-and-forget treatment."

Mrs. Laden had taken away the soup plates and brought us our main
course. Bish sat toying with his fork for a moment.

"I don't know what you can do," he said slowly. "If you can stall off
the blowup till the _Cape Canaveral_ gets in, and you can send
somebody to Terra...."

All of a sudden, it hit me. Here was something that would give Bish a
purpose; something to make him want to stay sober.

"Well, don't say, 'If _you_ can,'" I said. "Say, 'If _we_ can.' You
live on Fenris, too, don't you?"




5

MEETING OUT OF ORDER


Dad called the spaceport hospital, after dinner, and talked to Doc
Rojansky. Murell was asleep, and in no danger whatever. They'd given
him a couple of injections and a sedative, and his system was throwing
off the poison satisfactorily. He'd be all right, but they thought he
ought to be allowed to rest at the hospital for a while.

By then, it was time for me to leave for Hunters' Hall. Julio and Mrs.
Laden were having their dinner, and Dad and Bish went up to the
editorial office. I didn't take a car. Hunters' Hall was only a half
dozen blocks south of the Times, toward the waterfront. I carried my
radio-under-false-pretense slung from my shoulder, and started
downtown on foot.

The business district was pretty well lighted, both from the ceiling
and by the stores and restaurants. Most of the latter were in the
open, with small kitchen and storage buildings. At a table at one of
them I saw two petty officers from the _Peenemuende_ with a couple of
girls, so I knew the ship wasn't leaving immediately. Going past the
Municipal Building, I saw some activity, and an unusually large number
of police gathered around the vehicle port. Ravick must have his
doubts about how the price cut was going to be received, and Mort
Hallstock was mobilizing his storm troopers to give him support in
case he needed it. I called in about that, and Dad told me fretfully
to be sure to stay out of trouble.

Hunters' Hall was a four-story building, fairly substantial as
buildings that don't have to support the roof go, with a landing stage
on top and a vehicle park underneath. As I came up, I saw a lot of
cars and jeeps and ships' boats grounded in and around it, and a crowd
of men, almost all of them in boat-clothes and wearing whiskers,
including quite a few characters who had never been out in a
hunter-ship in their lives but were members in the best of good
standing of the Co-operative. I also saw a few of Hallstock's
uniformed thugs standing around with their thumbs in their gun belts
or twirling their truncheons.

I took an escalator up to the second floor, which was one big room,
with the escalators and elevators in the rear. It was the social room,
decorated with photos and models and solidigraphs of hunter-ships,
photos of record-sized monsters lashed alongside ships before
cutting-up, group pictures of ships's crews, monster tusks, dried
slashers and halberd fish, and a whole monster head, its tusked mouth
open. There was a big crowd there, too, at the bar, at the game
machines, or just standing around in groups talking.

I saw Tom Kivelson and his father and Oscar Fujisawa, and went over to
join them. Joe Kivelson is just an outsize edition of his son, with a
blond beard that's had thirty-five years' more growth. Oscar is
skipper of the _Pequod_--he wouldn't have looked baffled if Bish Ware
called him Captain Ahab--and while his family name is Old Terran
Japanese, he had blue eyes and red hair and beard. He was almost as
big as Joe Kivelson.

"Hello, Walt," Joe greeted me. "What's this Tom's been telling me
about Bish Ware shooting a tread-snail that was going to sting Mr.
Murell?"

"Just about that," I said. "That snail must have crawled out from
between two stacks of wax as we came up. We never saw it till it was
all over. It was right beside Murell and had its stinger up when Bish
shot it."

"He took an awful chance," Kivelson said. "He might of shot Mr.
Murell."

I suppose it would look that way to Joe. He is the planet's worst
pistol shot, so according to him nobody can hit anything with a
pistol.

"He wouldn't have taken any chance not shooting," I said. "If he
hadn't, we'd have been running the Murell story with black borders."

Another man came up, skinny, red hair, sharp-pointed nose. His name
was Al Devis, and he was Joe Kivelson's engineer's helper. He wanted
to know about the tread-snail shooting, so I had to go over it again.
I hadn't anything to add to what Tom had told them already, but I was
the _Times_, and if the _Times_ says so it's true.

"Well, I wouldn't want any drunk like Bish Ware shooting around me
with a pistol," Joe Kivelson said.

That's relative, too. Joe doesn't drink.

"Don't kid yourself, Joe," Oscar told him. "I saw Bish shoot a knife
out of a man's hand, one time, in One Eye Swanson's. Didn't scratch
the guy; hit the blade. One Eye has the knife, with the bullet mark on
it, over his back bar, now."

"Well, was he drunk then?" Joe asked.

"Well, he had to hang onto the bar with one hand while he fired with
the other." Then he turned to me. "How is Murell, now?" he asked.

I told him what the hospital had given us. Everybody seemed much
relieved. I wouldn't have thought that a celebrated author of whom
nobody had ever heard before would be the center of so much interest
in monster-hunting circles. I kept looking at my watch while we were
talking. After a while, the Times newscast came on the big screen
across the room, and everybody moved over toward it.

They watched the _Peenemuende_ being towed down and berthed, and the
audiovisual interview with Murell. Then Dad came on the screen with a
record player in front of them, and gave them a play-off of my
interview with Leo Belsher.

Ordinary bad language I do not mind. I'm afraid I use a little myself,
while struggling with some of the worn-out equipment we have at the
paper. But when Belsher began explaining about how the price of wax
had to be cut again, to thirty-five centisols a pound, the language
those hunters used positively smelled. I noticed, though, that a lot
of the crowd weren't saying anything at all. They would be Ravick's
boys, and they would have orders not to start anything before the
meeting.

"Wonder if he's going to try to give us that stuff about substitutes?"
Oscar said.

"Well, what are you going to do?" I asked.

"I'll tell you what we're not going to do," Joe Kivelson said. "We're
not going to take his price cut. If he won't pay our price, he can use
his [deleted by censor] substitutes."

"You can't sell wax anywhere else, can you?"

"Is that so, we can't?" Joe started.

Before he could say anything else, Oscar was interrupting:

"We can eat for a while, even if we don't sell wax. Sigurd Ngozori'll
carry us for a while and make loans on wax. But if the wax stops
coming in, Kapstaad Chemical's going to start wondering why...."

By this time, other _Javelin_ men came drifting over--Ramon Llewellyn,
the mate, and Abdullah Monnahan, the engineer, and Abe Clifford, the
navigator, and some others. I talked with some of them, and then
drifted off in the direction of the bar, where I found another hunter
captain, Mohandas Gandhi Feinberg, whom everybody simply called the
Mahatma. He didn't resemble his namesake. He had a curly black beard
with a twisted black cigar sticking out of it, and nobody, after one
look at him, would have mistaken him for any apostle of nonviolence.

He had a proposition he was enlisting support for. He wanted balloting
at meetings to be limited to captains of active hunter-ships, the
captains to vote according to expressed wishes of a majority of their
crews. It was a good scheme, though it would have sounded better if
the man who was advocating it hadn't been a captain himself. At least,
it would have disenfranchised all Ravick's permanently unemployed
"unemployed hunters." The only trouble was, there was no conceivable
way of getting it passed. It was too much like trying to curtail the
powers of Parliament by act of Parliament.

The gang from the street level started coming up, and scattered in
twos and threes around the hall, ready for trouble. I'd put on my
radio when I'd joined the Kivelsons and Oscar, and I kept it on,
circulating around and letting it listen to the conversations. The
Ravick people were either saying nothing or arguing that Belsher was
doing the best he could, and if Kapstaad wouldn't pay more than
thirty-five centisols, it wasn't his fault. Finally, the call bell for
the meeting began clanging, and the crowd began sliding over toward
the elevators and escalators.

The meeting room was on the floor above, at the front of the building,
beyond a narrow hall and a door at which a couple of Ravick henchmen
wearing guns and sergeant-at-arms brassards were making everybody
check their knives and pistols. They passed me by without getting my
arsenal, which consisted of a sleep-gas projector camouflaged as a
jumbo-sized lighter and twenty sols in two rolls of forty quarter sols
each. One of these inside a fist can make a big difference.

Ravick and Belsher and the secretary of the Co-op, who was a little
scrawny henpecked-husband type who never had an opinion of his own in
his life, were all sitting back of a big desk on a dais in front.
After as many of the crowd who could had found seats and the rest,
including the Press, were standing in the rear, Ravick pounded with
the chunk of monster tusk he used for a gavel and called the meeting
to order.

"There's a bunch of old business," he said, "but I'm going to rule
that aside for the moment. We have with us this evening our
representative on Terra, Mr. Leo Belsher, whom I wish to present. Mr.
Belsher."

Belsher got up. Ravick started clapping his hands to indicate that
