The native sergeant in the little room said something under his breath;
the captain laughed. Edith Shaw gaped for an instant and said,
"_Muggawsh_!" Travis simply remarked that he'd be damned.

"They do look kind of unusual, don't they?" Miles said. "I wouldn't
doubt that this is the biggest assemblage of shoonoon in history. They
aren't exactly a gregarious lot."

"Maybe this is the beginning of a new era. First meeting of the Kwannon
Thaumaturgical Society."

A couple more K.N.I. privates came in with serving-tables on
contragravity floats and began passing bowls of a frozen native-food
delicacy of which all Kwanns had become passionately fond since its
introduction by the Terrans. He let them finish, and then, after they
had been relieved of the empty bowls, he nodded to the K.N.I. sergeant,
who opened a door on the left. They all went through into the room they
had been seeing in the screen. There was a stir when the shoonoon saw
him, and he heard his name, in its usual native mispronunciation,
repeated back and forth.

"You all know me," he said, after they were seated. "Have I ever been an
enemy to you or to the People?"

"No," one of them said. "He speaks for us to the other Terrans. When we
are wronged, he tries to get the wrongs righted. In times of famine he
has spoken of our troubles, and gifts of food have come while the
Government argued about what to do."

[Illustration]

He wished he could see Edith Shaw's face.

"There was a sickness in our village, and my magic could not cure it,"
another said. "Mailsh Heelbare gave me oomphel to cure it, and told me
how to use it. He did this privately, so that I would not be made to
look small to the people of the village."

And that had infuriated EETA; it was a question whether unofficial help
to the natives or support of the prestige of a shoonoo had angered them
more.

"His father was a trader; he gave good oomphel, and did not cheat.
Mailsh Heelbare grew up among us; he took the Manhood Test with the boys
of the village," another oldster said. "He listened with respect to the
grandfather-stories. No, Mailsh Heelbare is not our enemy. He is our
friend."

"And so I will prove myself now," he told them. "The Government is angry
with the People, but I will try to take their anger away, and in the
meantime I am permitted to come here and talk with you. Here is a chief
of soldiers, and one of the Government people, and your words will be
heard by the oomphel machine that remembers and repeats, for the
Governor and the Great Soldier Chief."

They all brightened. To make a voice recording was a wonderful honor.
Then one of them said:

"But what good will that do now? The Last Hot Time is here. Let us be
permitted to return to our villages, where our people need us."

"It is of that that I wish to speak. But first of all, I must hear your
words, and know what is in your minds. Who is the eldest among you? Let
him come forth and sit in the front, where I may speak with him."


Then he relaxed while they argued in respectfully subdued voices.
Finally one decrepit oldster, wearing a cloak of yellow ribbons and
carrying a highly obscene and ineffably sacred wooden image, was brought
forward and installed on the front-and-center cushion. He'd come from
some village to the west that hadn't gotten the word of the swarming;
Gonzales' men had snagged him while he was making crop-fertility magic.

Miles showed him the respect due his advanced age and obviously great
magical powers, displaying, as he did, an understanding of the regalia.

"I have indeed lived long," the old shoonoo replied. "I saw the Hot Time
before; I was a child of so high." He measured about two and a half feet
off the floor; that would make him ninety-five or thereabouts. "I
remember it."

"Speak to us, then. Tell us of the Gone Ones, and of the Sky Fire, and
of the Last Hot Time. Speak as though you alone knew these things, and
as though you were teaching me."

Delighted, the oldster whooshed a couple of times to clear his outlets
and began:

"In the long-ago time, there was only the Great Spirit. The Great Spirit
made the World, and he made the People. In that time, there were no more
People in the World than would be in one village, now. The Gone Ones
dwelt among them, and spoke to them as I speak to you. Then, as more
People were born, and died and went to join the Gone Ones, the Gone Ones
became many, and they went away and build a place for themselves, and
built the Sky Fire around it, and in the Place of the Gone Ones, at the
middle of the Sky Fire, it is cool. From their place in the Sky Fire,
the Gone Ones send wisdom to the people in dreams.

"The Sky Fire passes across the sky, from east to west, as the
Always-Same does, but it is farther away than the Always-Same, because
sometimes the Always Same passes in front of it, but the Sky Fire never
passes in front of the Always-Same. None of the grandfather-stories, not
even the oldest, tell of a time when this happened.

"Sometimes the Sky Fire is big and bright; that is when the Gone Ones
feast and dance. Sometimes it is smaller and dimmer; then the Gone Ones
rest and sleep. Sometimes it is close, and there is a Hot Time;
sometimes it goes far away, and then there is a Cool Time.

"Now, the Last Hot Time has come. The Sky Fire will come closer and
closer, and it will pass the Always-Same, and then it will burn up the
World. Then will be a new World, and the Gone Ones will return, and the
People will be given new bodies. When this happens, the Sky Fire will go
out, and the Gone Ones will live in the World again with the People; the
Gone Ones will make great magic and teach wisdom as I teach to you, and
will no longer have to send dreams. In that time the crops will grow
without planting or tending or the work of women; in that time, the game
will come into the villages to be killed in the gathering-places. There
will be no more hunger and no more hard work, and no more of the People
will die or be slain. And that time is now here," he finished. "All the
People know this."

"Tell me, Grandfather; how is this known? There have been many Hot Times
before. Why should this one be the Last Hot Time?"

"The Terrans have come, and brought oomphel into the World," the old
shoonoo said. "It is a sign."

"It was not prophesied beforetime. None of the People had prophesies of
the coming of the Terrans. I ask you, who were the father of children
and the grandfather of children's children when the Terrans came; was
there any such prophesy?"


The old shoonoo was silent, turning his pornographic ikon in his hands
and looked at it.

"No," he admitted, at length. "Before the Terrans came, there were no
prophesies among the People of their coming. Afterward, of course, there
were many such prophesies, but there were none before."

"That is strange. When a happening is a sign of something to come, it is
prophesied beforetime." He left that seed of doubt alone to grow, and
continued: "Now, Grandfather, speak to us about what the People believe
concerning the Terrans."

"The Terrans came to the World when my eldest daughter bore her first
child," the old shoonoo said. "They came in great round ships, such as
come often now, but which had never before been seen. They said that
they came from another world like the World of People, but so far away
that even the Sky Fire could not be seen from it. They still say this,
and many of the People believe it, but it is not real.

"At first, it was thought that the Terrans were great shoonoon who made
powerful magic, but this is not real either. The Terrans have no magic
and no wisdom of their own. All they have is the oomphel, and the
oomphel works magic for them and teaches them their wisdom. Even in the
schools which the Terrans have made for the People, it is the oomphel
which teaches." He went on to describe, not too incorrectly, the
reading-screens and viewscreens and audio-visual equipment. "Nor do the
Terrans make the oomphel, as they say. The oomphel makes more oomphel
for them."

"Then where did the Terrans get the first oomphel?"

"They stole it from the Gone Ones," the old shoonoo replied. "The Gone
Ones make it in their place in the middle of the Sky Fire, for
themselves and to give to the People when they return. The Terrans stole
it from them. For this reason, there is much hatred of the Terrans among
the People. The Terrans live in the Dark Place, under the World, where
the Sky Fire and the Always-Same go when they are not in the sky. It is
there that the Terrans get the oomphel from the Gone Ones, and now they
have come to the World, and they are using oomphel to hold back the
Sky-Fire and keep it beyond the Always-Same so that the Last Hot Time
will not come and the Gone Ones will not return. For this reason, too,
there is much hatred of the Terrans among the People."

"Grandfather, if this were real there would be good reason for such
hatred, and I would be ashamed for what my people had done and were
doing. But it is not real." He had to rise and hold up his hands to
quell the indignant outcry "Have any of you known me to tell not-real
things and try to make the People act as though they were real? Then
trust me in this. I will show you real things, which you will all see,
and I will give you great secrets, which it is now time for you to have
and use for the good of the People. Even the greatest secret," he added.

There was a pause of a few seconds. Then they burst out, in a hundred
and eighty-four--no, three hundred and sixty eight--voices:

_"The Oomphel Secret, Mailsh Heelbare?"_

He nodded slowly. "Yes. The Oomphel Secret will be given."

He leaned back and relaxed again while they were getting over the
excitement. Foxx Travis looked at him apprehensively.

"Rushing things, aren't you? What are you going to tell them?"

"Oh, a big pack of lies, I suppose," Edith Shaw said scornfully.

Behind her and Travis, the native noncom interpreter was muttering
something in his own language that translated roughly as: "This better
be good!"

The shoonoon had quieted, now, and were waiting breathlessly.

"But if the Oomphel Secret is given, what will become of the shoonoon?"
he asked. "You, yourselves, say that we Terrans have no need for magic,
because the oomphel works magic for us. This is real. If the People get
the Oomphel Secret, how much need will they have for you shoonoon?"

Evidently that hadn't occurred to them before. There was a brief flurry
of whispered--whooshed, rather--conversation, and then they were silent
again. The eldest shoonoo said:

"We trust you, Mailsh Heelbare. You will do what is best for the People,
and you will not let us be thrown out like broken pots, either."

"No, I will not," he promised. "The Oomphel Secret will be given to you
shoonoon." He thought for a moment of Foxx Travis' joking remark about
the Kwannon Thaumaturgical Society. "You have been jealous of one
another, each keeping his own secrets," he said. "This must be put away.
You will all receive the Oomphel Secret equally, for the good of all the
People. You must all swear brotherhood, one with another, and later if
any other shoonoo comes to you for the secret, you must swear
brotherhood with him and teach it to him. Do you agree to this?"


The eldest shoonoo rose to his feet, begged leave, and then led the
others to the rear of the room, where they went into a huddle. They
didn't stay huddled long; inside of ten minutes they came back and took
their seats.

"We are agreed, Mailsh Heelbare," the spokesman said.

Edith Shaw was impressed, more than by anything else she had seen.
"Well, that was a quick decision!" she whispered.

"You have done well, Grandfathers. You will not be thrown out by the
People like broken pots; you will be greater among them than ever. I
will show you how this will be.

"But first, I must speak around the Oomphel Secret." He groped briefly
