anything you want to do."

"I told your father I'd look after you, and I'm going to do it," he
replied, indirectly. "I would do it anyway, of course--even if you are
ten or twelve years older than I thought you were."

"Yes, Dad never has realized that I'm more than eight years old. I
see--you were going out there and be slaughtered?" He flushed, but made
no reply. "In that case I'm glad I'm here--that would have been silly.
I think we'd better hold that council of war you mentioned a while ago,
don't you?"

"I need a smoke--do you indulge?"

"No thanks. I tried it a few times at school, but never liked it."

He searched his pockets, bringing to light an unopened package and a
tattered remnant which proved to contain one dilapidated cigarette.
He studied it thoughtfully. "I'll smoke this wreck," he decided, "while
it's still smokable. We'll save the rest of them--I'm afraid it'll be
a long time between smokes. Well, let's confer!"

"This will have to be a one-sided conference. I don't imagine that any
of my ideas will prove particularly helpful. You talk and I'll listen.

"You can't tell what ideas may be useful--chip in any time you feel the
urge. Here's the dope, as I see it. They're highly intelligent creatures
and are in all probability neither Martians nor Venerians. If any of
them had any such stuff as that, some of us would have known about it
and, besides, I don't believe they would have used it in just that way.
Mercury is not habitable, at least for organic beings; and we have never
seen any sign of any other kind of inhabitants who could work with
metals and rays. They're probably from Jupiter, although possibly from
further away. I say Jupiter, because I would think, judging from the
small size of the ship, that it may still be in the experimental stage,
so that they probably didn't come from any further away than Jupiter.
Then, too, if they were very numerous, somebody would have sighted one
before. I'd give my left leg and four fingers for one good look at the
inside of that ship."

"Why didn't you take it, then? You never even looked toward it, after
that one first glimpse."

"I'll say I didn't--the reason being that they may have automatic
detectors, and as I have suggested before, our system of vision is so
crude that its use could be detected with a clothesline or a basket
full of scrap iron. But to resume: Their aim is to capture, not destroy,
since they haven't killed anybody except the one crew that attacked
them. Apparently they want to study us or something. However, they don't
intend that any of us shall get away, nor even send out a word of what
has happened to us. Therefore it looks as though our best bet is to hide
now, and try to sneak away on them after a while--direct methods won't
work. Right?"

"You sound lucid. Is there any possibility of getting back, though, if
we got anywhere near Jupiter? It's so far away!"

"It's a long stretch from Jupiter to any of the planets where we have
power-plants, all right--particularly now, when Mars and Tellus are
subtending an angle of something more than ninety degrees at the sun,
and Venus is between the two, while Jupiter is clear across the sun from
all three of them. Even when Jupiter is in mean opposition to Mars, it
is still some five hundred and fifty million kilometers away, so you
can form some idea as to how far it is from our nearest planet now.
No, if we expect to get back under our own power, we've got to break away
pretty quick--these lifeboats have very little accumulator capacity, and
the receptors are useless above about three hundred million
kilometers...."

"But it'll take us a long time to go that far, won't it?"

"Not very. Our own ships, using only the acceleration of gravity, and
both plus and minus at that, make the better than four hundred million
kilometers of the long route to Mars in five days. These birds are using
almost that much acceleration, and I don't see how they do it. They must
have a tractor ray. Brandon claimed that such a thing was theoretically
possible, but Westfall and I couldn't see it. We ragged him about it a
lot--and he was right. I thought, of course, they'd drift with us, but
they are using power steadily. They've got _some_ system!"

"Suppose they could be using intra-atomic energy? We were taught that it
was impossible, but you've shattered a lot of my knowledge today."

"I wouldn't want to say definitely that it is absolutely impossible,
but the deeper we go into that line, the more unlikely intra-atomic
energy power-plants become. No, they've got a real power-transmission
system--one that can hold a tight beam together a lot farther than
anything we have been able to develop, that's all. Well, we've given
them quite a lot of time to get over any suspicion of us, let's see
if we can sneak away from them."

       *       *       *       *       *

By short and infrequent applications of power to the dirigible
projectors of the life-boat, Stevens slowly shifted the position of
the fragment which bore their craft until it was well clear of the
other components of the mass of wreckage. He then exerted a very small
retarding force, so that their bit would lag behind the procession, as
though it had accidently been separated. But the crew of the captor was
alert, and no sooner did a clear space show itself between them and the
mass than a ray picked them up and herded them back into place. Stevens
then nudged other pieces so that they fell out, only to see them also
rounded up. Hour after hour he kept trying--doing nothing sufficiently
energetic to create any suspicion, but attempting everything he could
think of that offered any chance of escape from the clutches of their
captors. Immovable at the plate, his hands upon the controls, he
performed every insidious maneuver his agile brain could devise, but
he could not succeed in separating their vehicle from its fellows.
Finally, after a last attempt, which was foiled as easily as were its
predecessors, he shut off his controls and turned to his companion
with a grin.

"I didn't think I could get away with it--they're keen, that gang--but
I had to keep at it as long as it would have done us any good."

"Wouldn't it do us any good now?"

"Not a bit--we're going so fast that we couldn't stop--we're out of even
radio range of our closest power-plant. We'll have to put off any more
attempts until they slow us down. They're fairly close to at least one
of the moons of Jupiter, we'll have our best chance--so good, in fact,
that I really think we can make it."

"But what good would that do us, if we couldn't get back?" Dire
foreboding showed in her glorious eyes.

"Lots of things not tried yet, girl, and we'll try them all. First, we
get away. Second, we try to get in touch with Norman Brandon...."

"How? No known radio will carry half that far."

"No, but I think that a radio as yet unknown may be able to--and there
is a bare possibility that I'll be able to communicate."

"Oh wonderful--that lifts a frightful load off my mind," she breathed.

"But just a minute--I said I'd come clean with you, and I will. The odds
are all against us, no matter what we do. If that unknown radio won't
work--and it probably won't--there are several other things we can try,
but they're all pretty slim chances. Even if we get away, it'll probably
be about the same thing as though you were to be marooned on a desert
island without any tools, and with your rescue depending upon your
ability to build a high-powered radio station with which to call to
a mainland for help. However, if we don't try to get away, our only
alternative is letting them know we're here, and joining our friends
in captivity."

"And then what?"

"You know as much as I do. Imprisonment and restraint, certain; death,
possible; return to Earth, almost certainly impossible--life as guests,
highly improbable."

"I'm with you, Steve, all the way."

"Well, it's time to spring off--we've both been awake better than fifty
hours. Personally, I'm all in, and you're so near dead that you're a
physical wreck. We'll get us a bite of supper and turn in."

An appetizing supper was prepared from the abundant stores and each
ate a heartier meal than either would have believed possible. Stevens
considered his unopened package of cigarettes, then regretfully put it
back into his pocket still unopened and turned to Nadia.

"Well, little fellow, it's time to shove off, and then some. You might
as well sleep here, and I'll go in there. If anything scares you, yell.
Good-night, old trapper!"

"Wait a minute, Steve." Nadia flushed, and her brown eyes and black
eyebrows, in comparison with her golden-blond hair, lent her face a
quizzical, elfin expression that far belied her feelings as she stared
straight into his eyes. "I've never even been away from the Earth
before, and with all this happening I'm simply scared to death. I've
been trying to hide it, but I couldn't stand it alone, and we're going
to be together too long and too close for senseless conventions to
affect us. There's two bunks over there--why don't you sleep in one
of them?"

He returned her steadfast gaze for a moment in silence.

"All x with me, Nadia," he answered, keeping out of his voice all
signs of the tenderness he felt for her, and of his very real admiration
for her straightforward conduct in a terrifying situation. "You trust
me, then?"

"_Trust_ you! Don't be silly--I know you! I know you, and I know Brandon
and Westfall--I know what you've done, and exactly the kind of men you
are. _Trust_ you!"

"Thanks, old golf-shootist," and promises were made and received
in a clasp from which Nadia's right hand, strong as it was, emerged
slightly damaged.

"By the way, what is your first name, fellow-traveller?" she asked in
lighter vein. "Nobody, not even Dad or Breckie, ever seems to call you
anything but 'Steve' when they talk about you." She was amazed at the
effect of her innocent question, for Stevens flushed to his hair and
spluttered.

"It's _Percy_!" He finally, snorted. "Percival Van Schravendyck Stevens.
Wouldn't that tear it?"

"Why, I think Percival's a real nice name!"

"Silence!" he hissed in burlesque style. "Young woman, I have revealed
to you a secret known to but few living creatures. On your life, keep
it inviolate!"

"Oh, very well, if you insist. Good-night--Steve!" and she gave him a
radiant and honest smile: the first smile he had seen since the moment
of the attack.




CHAPTER III

Castaways Upon Ganymede


Upon awakening, the man's first care was to instruct the girl in the
operation of the projectors, so that she could keep the heavily-armored
edge of their small section, which she had promptly christened "The
Forlorn Hope," between them and the grinding, clashing mass of wreckage,
and thus, if it should become necessary, protect the relatively frail
inner portions of their craft from damage.

"Keep an eye on things for a while, Nadia," he instructed, as soon as
she could handle the controls, "and don't use any more power than is
absolutely necessary. We'll need it all, and besides, they can probably
detect anything we can use. There's probably enough leakage from the
ruptured accumulator cells to mask quite a little emission, but don't
use much. I'm going to see what I can do about making this whole wedge
navigable."

"Why not just launch what's left of this lifeboat? It's space-worthy,
isn't it?"

"Yes, but it's too small. Two or three of the big dirigible projectors
of the lower band are on the rim of this piece-of-pie-shaped section
we're riding, I think. If so, and if enough batteries of accumulators
are left intact to give them anywhere nearly full power, we can get an
acceleration that will make a lifeboat look sick. Those main dirigibles,
you know, are able to swing the whole mass of the _Arcturus_, and what
they'll do to this one chunk of it--we've got only a few thousand tons
of mass in this piece--will be something pretty. Also, having the metal
may save us months of time in mining it."

He found the projectors, repaired or cut out the damaged accumulator
cells, and reconnected them through the controls of the lifeboat.
He moved into the "engine-room" the airtanks, stores, and equipment
from all the other fragments which, by means of a space-suit, he could
reach without too much difficulty. From the battery rooms of those
fragments--open shelves, after being sliced open by the shearing ray--he
helped himself to banks of accumulator cells from the enormous driving
batteries of the ill-fated _Arcturus_, bolting them down and connecting
them solidly until almost every compartment of their craft was one mass
of stored-up energy.

Days fled like hours, so furiously busy were they in preparing their
peculiar vessel for a cruise of indefinite duration. Stevens cut himself
short on sleep and snatched his meals in passing; and Nadia, when not
busy at her own tasks of observing, housekeeping, and doing what little
piloting was required, was rapidly learning to wield most effectively
the spanner and pliers of the mechanic and electrician.

"I'm afraid our time is getting short, Steve," she announced, after
making an observation. "It looks as though we're getting wherever it
is we're going."

"Well, I've got only two more jobs to do, but they're the hardest of the
lot. It is Jupiter, or can you tell yet?"

"Jupiter or one of its satellites, I think, from the point where they
reversed their power. Here's the observation you told me to take."

"Looks like Jupiter," he agreed, after he had rapidly checked her
figures. "We'll pass very close to one of those two satellites--probably
Ganymede--which is fine for our scheme. All four of the major satellites
have water and atmosphere, but Ganymede, being largest, is best for our
purposes. We've got a couple of days yet--just about time to finish up.
Let's get going--you know what to do."

"Steve, I'm afraid of it. It's too dangerous--isn't there some other
way?"

"None that I can see. The close watch they're keeping on every bit of
this junk makes it our only chance for a get-away. I'm pretty sure I
can do it--but if I should happen to get nipped, just use enough power
to let them know you're here, and you won't be any worse off than if
I hadn't tried to pull off this stunt."

He donned a space-suit, filled a looped belt with tools, picked up a
portable power-drill, and stepped into the tiny air-lock. Nadia deftly
guided their segment against one of the larger fragments and held it
there with a gentle, steady pressure, while Stevens, a light cable
paying out behind him, clambered carefully over the wreckage, brought
his drill into play, and disappeared inside the huge wedge. In less than
an hour he returned without mishap and reported to the glowing girl.

"Just like shooting fish down a well! Most of the accumulator cells were
tight, and installing the relays wasn't a bad job at all. Believe me,
girl, there'll be junk filling all the space between here and Saturn
when we touch them off!"

"Wonderful, Steve!" Nadia exclaimed. "It won't be so bad seeing you go
into the others, now that you have this one all rigged up."

       *       *       *       *       *

Around and around the mass of wreckage they crept, and in each of the
larger sections Stevens connected up the enormous fixed or dirigible
projectors to whatever accumulator cells were available through
sensitive relays, all of which he could close by means of one radio
impulse. The long and dangerous task done, he stood at the lookout
plate, studying the huge disk which had been the upper portion of the
lower half of the _Arcturus_ and frowning in thought. Nadia reached over
his shoulder and switched off the plate.

"Nix on that second job, big fellow!" she declared. "They aren't really
necessary, and you're altogether too apt to be killed trying to get
them. It's too ghastly--I won't stand for your trying it, so that
ends it."

"We ought to have them, really," he protested. "With those special
tools, cutting torches, and all the stuff, we'd be sitting pretty.
We'll lose weeks of time by not having them."

"We'll just have to lose it, then. You can't get 'em, any more than
a baby can get the moon, so stop crying about it," she went over the
familiar argument for the twentieth time. "That stuff up there is all
grinding together like cakes of ice in a floe; the particular section
