from my laboratory."

"But, Vic!" I protested. "Do you really mean that we're less than a mile
from your laboratory; from our own world? If we were, we could see it;
we'd bump into our own trees and houses and people; we'd be knocked down
by automobiles, and--"

"Two bodies cannot occupy the same space at the same time. Old law of
simple physics. Is that what you mean?" interrupted Vic.

"Why, yes."

"And a body; what's that?"

"A body? Why, matter, I suppose."

"And matter is what?"

"Anything that occupies space," I replied triumphantly. I had remembered
that much from my physics classes.

"True," smiled Vic. "But let's see. It is possible to have sound and
light in the same place, isn't it? We can even add other things: heat
and electricity, for example. Speaking of electricity, a tremendous
current of it adds nothing to the weight of the wire carrying it, and
nothing to its bulk, unless we have a heating overload. Current enough
to kill a thousand men, or to do the work of a million horses, weighs
nothing, is invisible, and actually does nothing until released in some
form or other, either by accident or design."

"True, but electricity isn't matter. Our old world is matter; I'm
matter, and you're matter. Why don't we bump into things?"

"Our old world is matter, true enough, but for the rest, you're wrong,
Pete, old son. You're _not_ matter, any more. You're something else. In
terms of our own being, you do not exist in your present form. This
world does not exist. And the reverse is just as true."

       *       *       *       *       *

I stared at him, bewildered.

"What am I, then--a ghost?"

"Nothing of the sort. You're old Pete Grahame, a darned good half-back,
and the world's rottenest scientist. Only you've been passed into
another form of being, through the action of four little quartz bulbs
whose periods of vibrations form a beat--but that's over your head,
Pete, old son, and we'll have time to talk over details when we get
back. Right now, we're in somewhat of a jam." Instinctively, he glanced
at Hope; it was her danger, and not his own, that had brought that
haggard pallor to his face in so short a time.

"That's what I don't understand. What do these people--if you can call
them that--want of us?"

Vic looked down, frowning.

"I'm not sure I'm right," he replied after a moment, "but if I am--they
wish us to kill them. As many as possible.

"When I found myself here, I wandered nearly to the city before I was
molested. When they did appear, and tried to lay hands on me, I warned
them back, and finally shot one of them.

"The effect was magical. They seemed unable to believe the evidence of
their eyes. They rushed me eagerly, each seeming to beg for a bullet.

"I gave them what they wanted, still hoping I could frighten them away.
A great crowd formed around me, and the rabble was sent flying by a
number of the men who seem to hold some office, distinguished by a
jewel-like emblem around their throats. If I read their actions
correctly, they claimed the privilege of death by virtue of their
greater authority.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well, I finally decided that my gun did anything but frighten them.
They were angry when I refused to do any more slaughtering, and led me
here. Every once in a while one of the captains would come in and
command me to kill him. I refused, for that's the only trump card I
held.

"When Hope, here, acted like the foolish little kid she is, she was not
even armed, and they rushed her here without delay. My theory is that
these people live in a dreary world in which there is no pleasure. Their
faces seem to show that. Apparently they live a very long time, and have
no means of shortening that life. They are not intelligent. Things that
would kill a man of our own world have no effect on them, for remember
that they are not physical beings. You have seen them appear out of thin
air, and dissolve in the same fashion?"

"Yes."

"That is simply their mode of transportation. They pass invisibly
through the air, just as electricity passes through a wire; quickly,
invisibly, silently. Then they assume their original form where they
will--just, again, as electricity passes from the end of the wire
exactly the same as it entered it, allowing only for voltage drops and
some other factors that aren't pertinent here.

"What we must do, and right now, is to settle upon some means of getting
to the proper spot at the proper time. You marked the moment of your
departure, I suppose?"

"Exactly." I glanced down at my wrist watch, and noted with relief that
it was still running. I observed then, for the first time, that the
watch, my clothing, and even my hand, were not real; they were like the
rest of the things in this monstrous state that Vic called Infra-Media.
"I left at three after ten. It's now fourteen minutes of eleven--Good
Lord! Less than an hour since I stood there in your laboratory!"

"Then our next chance to get back will be at three minutes after one,"
nodded Vic. "I wonder if there is any chance of--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Before he could complete the sentence the door was flung open, and five
of the older men, led by a sixth with a larger jewel at his throat,
filed solemnly into the room and motioned that we were to leave.

At the doorway, a double file of creatures closed in about us, and we
were led, by long corridors and mighty winding ramps, toward the top of
the building.

"Now what?" I whispered to Vic.

"I don't know. That chap with the big stone at his throat seems to be
the head man of the city. I think his name is Ee-pay; the others seem to
call him that. Maybe it's just a title. But what they're up to now, I
