"Have you read anything on Kendrick's experiments with synthetic
emotion?"

"Can't say that I have."

"Kendrick, down at Penton Technological Institute, has done some
remarkable things in drawing the stuff of human emotion from one person,
holding it on a tape, and transferring it to another person."

"On the face of it, that sounds ridiculous."

"Doesn't it? Nevertheless, the vibrations set up, or created you might
say, by a person in anger, consist of some sort of _stuff_--in the sense
of an incredibly high frequency wave. Radio or television waves are the
best comparisons.

"Kendrick, in one demonstration, took a young man who was very much in
love with a certain young lady. A really love-sick lad. He placed him in
the recording unit gave him the young lady's picture, and told him to
let his mind dwell on her to the exclusion of all else."

Doctor Entman smiled briefly. "This, I imagine, wasn't difficult for the
lad to do. Entman then put another young man, one who was unacquainted
with the girl, into a receiving unit and exposed him, after giving him
the girl's picture, to the vibrations created by the lovelorn chap.
Later, they saw to it that the second lad was introduced to the girl.
The results were rather startling, in that the young lady suddenly had
two ardent suitors in place of one."

Brent Taber scratched his ear and looked dubious. "That sounds pretty
sensational. But maybe the second lad just plain happened to fall in
love with the girl by natural processes."

"True, but the experiments tended to eliminate that possibility. Other
emotions were tested. How about a man walking up to a man he'd never
seen before in his life and busting him in the nose?"

"Okay, okay. Then you think--"

"I think a lot of things. Here, I see the possibility of a race with
superior science, having moved far ahead of us in the directions
Kendrick is pointing toward in his research. For instance, with more
advanced knowledge and know-how, they've probably been able to charge a
synthetic body with a complete set of functioning emotional responses.
Grant them that and we can also concede a tailor-made ego."

"I don't mind admitting I'm scared, Doctor," Brent Taber said.

"I think it's a time to be scared."

"But if a race of people were that advanced, if their intention is
hostile, why do they pussyfoot around this way? Why don't they just come
down and take us over?"

"I've wondered that, too. And yet, a race on some planet out there in
the universe might not evolve according to what we consider a logical
pattern."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that while they can create a synthetic man, their interests, and
therefore their progress, may have stayed in peaceful channels. For
instance, they may not have bothered with anything as elementary as the
atom bomb."

"It's a thought."

"A wishful thought, I'll admit. But it does have some validity. Also, it
has a fact of some possible value to back it up."

"What fact?"

"That they _haven't_ come down and taken us over."

"You almost cheer me, Doctor. Almost, but not quite."

"Actually," Entman said, "I've been wondering about something else."

"What's that?"

"When and how they came here before."

"You mean, where did they get the model for the ten androids?"

"Yes. They had to have not only a model, but also some knowledge
concerning our geographical and atmospheric conditions. The two hearts
indicate that they knew the elements contained in our air--the pressures
and so forth necessary to our existence--and were unable to construct a
working model that would function under our conditions with a single
heart. So they put in two."

"It looks as though they missed on some other things, too. Seven of the
androids have expired."

Entman shrugged. "Still--a remarkable job, particularly since they would
have no chance for a trial-and-error test under the conditions that
would prevail. It's surprising that _any_ of the androids were able to
keep functioning."

"The eighth one is pretty sick. He may be gone by now. And about their
earlier coming, I can give you one point. They came quietly, probably at
night, grabbed their model, and moved out fast."

"How do you know that?"

"Because, obviously, they think all men on earth look alike. Or, at
least, we can assume that. Else how did they expect to get away with ten
identical androids?"

Entman's eyes widened. "I never thought of that," he muttered.

       *       *       *       *       *

Senator Crane, a doggedly determined man, had listened to the replay of
Brent Taber's top-secret conference again and again. In the comfortable
rationalization of which he was capable, his whole zeal and hostility
were fashioned around Brent's "arrogant disregard of democratic
processes." Who did this bureaucrat think he was? Did he consider
himself smarter than the People? Did he feel they couldn't be trusted
with revelations affecting their survival? Well, by God, they'd been
trusted with word of the bomb and its implications, and they'd reacted
admirably. So they were entitled to frankness concerning this new threat
to their security.

Of course, Senator Crane reserved the right to enlighten them in his own
time and in his own way. After all, hadn't they elected him and thus
given him leeway to use his own judgment in their best interests?

But who the hell had elected Brent Taber?

Nobody.

So Crane listened to the recording and picked out what he classified as
the key lines.

     _A routine autopsy revealed some peculiar things ... The man had
     two hearts...._

     _The blood? Could it have been a new kind of plasma?..._

     _All in all, gentlemen, eight identical specimens have been picked
     up in various American cities ...

     Exactly alike...._


Crane ran through the rest of it and threw himself moodily into a chair.
The idiots! The stupid unelected, self-appointed guardians of democracy!
Not once--not _once_, mind you--had a single one of these great brains
referred to the obvious.

It was a Russian plot!

All those allusions to the extraterrestrial was so much bilge. The
Russians were infiltrating the country with synthetic men. This
meant--oh, God--it meant that in a short time Russia would be able to
create an army of these monsters and overwhelm the world.

Senator Crane sprang to his feet and measured his indignation in long
strides across the thick, expensive carpeting on his floor. The
traitor! The sheer, compulsive opportunist! That was certainly all that
Brent Taber could be called. Using this deadly situation as a means of
furthering his own interests.

Senator Crane deliberately stilled his rage and objectively considered
what he should do about it. With the obvious source of the androids
logically deduced, there was only his own defensive procedures to be
considered. And they had to be considered carefully. As he saw himself,
he stood alone, against a group of bumbling idiots, with the future of
the nation at stake. What to do?

The key question, of course, was: How soon will Russia be able to mount
an army? Probably not very soon, he decided. That fact gave him time to
ferret out more information; to become completely sure of himself.

One thing you had to realize about the American public--or about any
mass of humanity, for that matter--a thing of importance had to be
presented dramatically. This, in a sense, was the duty of the elected
public servant--to recognize this somewhat childish failing of the
average intelligence and make allowances for it. _You can do this, of
course_, Senator Crane told himself, _when you love the people_.

And, fortunately for their survival, Senator Crane loved the American
people.

So, for a few moments, he o'erleaped the hard work ahead and saw the
goal--envisioned the headlines:

     SENATOR CRANE UNCOVERS DEADLY PERIL TO THE NATION

     Due entirely to the patriotic, selfless efforts of one United
     States Senator, the nation has been warned in time of....

     SENATOR CRANE STUNS CONGRESS AND THE NATION WITH HIS REVELATIONS

     Standing alone on the rostrum, a heroic figure pitted, as it were,
     against all the sinister forces that bore from within, one valiant
     United States Senator....

Crane had dropped back into his chair. His eyes had closed, the better
to visualize a grateful nation expending their plaudits.

And because he was a man who used a great deal of energy in pursuing an
objective, he tired at times. He became drowsy now....

... And went gently to sleep.




5


"Doctor Corson. Calling Doctor Corson. Please come to the second-floor
reception room."

Frank Corson got the call as he was leaving the maternity ward. He took
the elevator down and found a rather sloppily dressed, middle-aged man
sitting on a lounge beside a weather-beaten camera that tended to mark
his profession.

"I'm Les King, a free-lance news photographer. You're Doctor Corson?"

Frank Corson's reaction was slightly hostile. He wondered why. "I'm
Doctor Corson."

"I'm on the trail of a patient that came here late last night. Name,
William Matson. They tell me he was your patient."

Frank nodded briefly.

"They say he was released."

"That's right."

"A little over an hour ago."

"Right."

"They say he had a broken leg."

"If that's what they said, it must be a matter of record."

"Well, they're wrong on both counts. He came to see me over three hours
ago--and both his legs were as good as mine."

Frank Corson did not volunteer the information that he had personally
taken William Matson to his furnished room in Greenwich Village and that
Matson was there at this very moment, awaiting Frank's return.

"I think there must be some mistake on your part," Frank said.

"No mistake. But something very definitely got crossed up. Maybe we
ought to have a little talk--the two of us."

Anger stirred in Frank Corson. Did this Les King character think a
beaten-up camera gave him the right to walk in and make demands. "I'm
busy now. And I can't see what we'd have to talk about."

"A hell of a lot, maybe. There are some things you may not know about
this deal. You might have let a big thing slip through your fingers."

"Look here, I'm not interested in anything you've got to say. And I
think you've got a hell of a nerve, coming in here and cross-examining
me on something that's--"

King reacted with weary patience. "Take it easy. I'm just trying to get
some information that can help both of us, maybe."

"How could it possibly help me?"

"To make it simple, there's a standing ten-thousand-dollar reward for
knowledge of the whereabouts of a Judge Sam Baker who disappeared ten
years ago from a little upstate New York town. Now, if you aren't
interested--"

"Are you telling me that William Matson is Sam Baker?"

"Let's say a hell of a lot indicates it. Matson left here without giving
a home address. If you know what it is, we can do business. If you
don't--"

"I'm off duty in an hour," Frank Corson said. "Maybe we should talk it
over."

"That's better. In the meantime, if you'll tell me where I can find
Matson--"

Frank smiled. "Wait an hour. Then I'll show you. But we'll talk about it
first."

       *       *       *       *       *

The tenth android, one of the two so earnestly sought after by Brent
Taber, had observed the accident at 59th Street and Park Avenue on the
previous night. He'd stood on the curb, lost in the crowd that gathered,
and had watched the proceedings carefully. A man who was not a man, a
machine that was not a machine, he incorporated, in many respects, the
best qualities of both. Now, as the leader of the group deposited from
space for a specific purpose, he exhibited these qualities excellently.

He waited. He observed. He added the accident to the several other
unforeseen incidents that endangered the project and its objective, and
stored them in his memory-bank.

He watched the minor drama as it unfolded, and what was somewhat akin to
a danger bell went off in his mind when he saw a bright flash, traced
its source to a camera, and carefully studied the man who had taken the
picture. Pictures, he knew, could be dangerous. He must get his hands on
the picture, if possible.

He waited. He observed. He evaluated. The situation had gotten somewhat
out of his control, but he did not blame himself for this. Certain
emotions had been made a part of his being, but guilt, a useless one,
had been omitted, as had been any ability to react to love, compassion,
anger or hatred.

So, with no hope of reward or fear of punishment, he had recorded the
facts that he had been unable to communicate telepathically with eight
of the units under his command and that, therefore, they were no longer
operational. He had no way of knowing what had happened to them. This,
however, did not make his work one bit less vital. Even though eight
units were unaccounted for, his intelligent handling of the ninth
android, and of himself, was still vitally important. It was up to him
to see that the project was brought to a successful conclusion.

He watched as the ambulance came, noted the name of the hospital, and
recorded the proceedings. But he allowed the ambulance to drive away,
keeping his attention pointed at the man who had taken the picture.

When the man moved off down the street, the tenth android followed. When
the man entered Central Park, he was observed from a discreet distance.
When he came out again, he was followed into Times Square, down into
Greenwich Village, back uptown and, finally, to an apartment building in
the West Seventies. There he was observed opening a mailbox, and the
name thereon was duly recorded.
