helicopter had lifted into the air and faded from sight.

Hunter hesitated, then spoke to her:

"I understand you want to talk more about the Space Guard, Princess
Lyla?"

"_Princess_ Lyla!" Her lips curled as she turned to face him and she
seemed to spit the words at him in sudden, unexpected resentment. "I
love the meaningless sound of my official figurehead title! It's so much
better than being regarded as a living person with feelings that can be
hurt!"

"But Princ ... I mean--" He floundered, not quite sure what had caused
her reaction.

She made a visible effort to compose herself. "I'm sorry," she said. "I
suppose my ... husband ... is quite right; an immature female has no
business trying to rule a world and the sooner the marriage is
confirmed, the sooner a competent man can take over the job."

"No," he said. "I think--"

He decided that what he thought had better be left unsaid.

"I'll"--she looked toward the cabin she shared with Narf--"let you know
when we can talk."

She went back toward the cabin, walking slowly. From inside Narf's half
of it came the sound of Narf's voice as he spoke to Sonig:

"... Of course, this collection of heads is nothing compared with what I
have in the Sea Islands ... but some interesting stories here ... take
that snow fox there...."

Hunter sighed, and saw that Lyla had stopped before her door, as though
dreading to enter. Narf's voice droned on:

"... Only wounded, so I finished it with a knife. Even with its heart
half cut out, it still wanted to live ... beautiful pelt ... coat for
Janalee, the strip-tease queen ... always had a way with women--Lyla
could tell you that ... had my pick of hundreds but I'm letting her be
my choice...."

He saw Lyla half lift her hand, as in some mute gesture of protest, then
she turned and walked swiftly away; up the path that led into the ghost
trees, and out of sight.

He waited, but she did not come back. He went into his cabin and moved
about restlessly, hearing again Narf's sadism-and-sex boasting and
seeing again how she turned and almost ran from it--

       *       *       *       *       *

"_Rootenant!_"

Alonzo was panting, a look of frantic appeal in his eyes.

"Prease herp me ... Princess Ryra ... she wirr die!"

He felt his heart lurch. "She's hurt?" he demanded, and was already on
his way to the door.

"She are about to cry and she are going to where the tree tigers riv.
They wirr kirr her--prease come with me!"

He asked no more questions but went out the door and up the path, Alonzo
running ahead of him.

The ghost trees grew thinner as they went up the mountain's slope, and
the blue-green fernlike trees of the tiger forest began to appear. They
grew thicker and thicker, until the ground was black with their shadows
and the midday sunlight was filtered out by the foliage overhead. Alonzo
was trailing her, his nose to the ground, and Hunter hurried close
behind him, watching for the red-and-white of the clothes she was
wearing and hoping they would not find her too late.

They were deep in the forest when they found her.

She was standing motionless in the center of a clearing, facing away
from him and looking as small and alone as a lost child. She seemed to
be waiting....

He realized for the first time how alone she really was, with only a
doglike alien, Alonzo, to love her or care what might happen to her, and
with a future she could not bear to face. But Rockford had been wrong
when he had said, _For her, there is no escape_.

There was escape for her. She had only to wait, as she was waiting now,
and it would come in the windlike whisper of a tiger's rush through the
grass behind her....

He hurried to her. She turned, and he saw the stains of tears now dry on
her face and in her eyes the darkness of utter defeat.

"I was afraid you might get hurt, Lyla--"

Then, seemingly without volition on his part, he put his arms around her
and she was clinging to him and crying in muffled sobs and trying to say
something about, "_I didn't think anybody cared...._"

It was some time later, when her crying was finished, that he was
reminded of the tigers by Alonzo:

"Rootenant ... awr the time, some tigers are coming croser and croser.
We better get her out of here, Rootenant, before they find us."

Lyla looked down at Alonzo. "Thank you, Alonzo, for watching over me and
... and--" Her voice caught and she dropped to her knees and hugged the
shaggy head tight against her.

Hunter watched ahead, Lyla beside him as they went through the dense
trees. Alonzo walked soft-footed behind them, watching the rear. When
they came to the first ghost trees and the dwindling of the tiger trees,
Hunter thought it safe to walk slower and talk to her.

"I saw you go," he said. "I didn't know where until Alonzo came running
to tell me."

"I heard him bragging about killing, and about his women--I was weak,
wasn't I?"

"Weak?"

"I was afraid to face the future, just because it isn't to be exactly
like I thought I wanted."

"What was the kind you wanted, Lyla?"

"Oh ... I guess I wanted a husband who could see me only, and children,
and evenings together in the flower garden, and ... well, all the silly,
sentimental little things that mean so much to a woman."

He thought, _Even with its heart half cut out, it still wanted to live
... Coat for Janalee ... the strip-tease queen...._

They passed through the last of the tiger trees and she said, "We're
safe, now. The tigers never attack anyone outside their forest."

She was walking slowly and he said, "We should get on back before you're
missed, shouldn't we?"

"Who would miss me?" she asked. "So long as I remain physically intact
for the marriage night, who cares where or why I went away?"

There was the cold bleakness of winter in her eyes as she spoke, and in
her voice the first undertone of brass. He saw that this was already the
beginning of the change that Narf would make in her; the transformation
of a girl young and wanting to love and be loved into a hard and cynical
woman.

He put his arm around her shoulder, thinking that he should tell her
that _he_ cared and that she must never let Narf change her.

"Lyla, I--"

He realized how futile and foolish the words would sound. She would
marry Narf, he would return to Earth, and they would never meet again.
There were no words for him to speak on this last walk together, no way
to tell her that he wanted to help her, to protect and care for her. No
way to express the feeling inside him....

He did what seemed as natural under the circumstances as it had been for
him to put his arm around her in the clearing. He tilted up her face and
bent his head to kiss her.

And walked with jarring impact into the knobby elbow of a ghost tree
limb.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

The sun was down and dusk was darkening the camp when they arrived back
at her cabin.

"Thank you, Dale," she said. Her hand squeezed his arm. "I didn't know I
had a friend ... but now we'll have to be strangers because--"

[Illustration]

Gravel crunched loudly on one of the paths in the ghost trees and they
looked back, to see Narf and Sonig coming, walking swiftly. Even at the
distance, there was anger like a red aura about Narf.

"Well," Lyla said softly, "here comes my medicine."

Sonig stopped at his own cabin, to stand just within the doorway,
watching. Narf strode on and stopped before Hunter and Lyla, his face
twisted with savage hatred as he looked at Hunter. He spoke to Lyla with
grating vehemence:

"You've done an excellent job of making an ass of yourself--and of
me--haven't you? Come on in the cabin!"

Narf seized her by the arm, towering over her as he jerked her around
toward the door. Hunter stepped quickly forward, feeling the hot flash
of his own anger, but there was the paleness of Lyla's face as she
looked back, an appeal on it that said, _No!_ He stopped, realizing that
Narf would not physically harm the woman who would make him king of
Vesta, and that any interference on his part would only make everything
the harder for her.

He watched the two go into the cabin--into Lyla's half--and Narf slammed
the door shut behind them. There followed the quick bang of windows
being closed, and then Narf's muffled tirade began: "_... May think I'm
a fool ... I'm going to tell you a few things...._"

Sonig was still standing within his doorway. Hunter knew, without seeing
it, that the thin-lipped smile would be on Sonig's face.

He turned and walked back to his own cabin. There was nothing he could
do but withdraw--and listen from a distance and be ready to act if it
seemed she was in danger.

He sat on his doorstep in the darkness, hearing occasional phrases in
Narf's unrelenting abuse. One was: "_So prim you had to countermand my
order for a key to that lock--then you went out to play with that second
lieutenant...._"

Alonzo materialized out of the darkness, coming as silently as a shadow.
He was no longer the bumbling clown. The idiotic grin was gone and his
eyes were green fire, slanted and catlike, his teeth flashing white in a
snarl as he looked back toward the sound of Narf's voice.

"She are _my_ Princess Ryra," Alonzo said. "He are cursing her. If he
ever hurt her, I wirr tear out his throat and his river."
