makes it so easy for us to give up life forbids us to mourn the friends
we leave, or them to mourn us. With you, it is the intercourse you have
had with friends that is the source of your tenderness for them. With
us, it is the anticipation of the intercourse we shall enjoy which is
the foundation of fondness. As our friends vanish from our future with
the approach of their death, the effect on our thoughts and affections
is as it would be with you if you forgot them by lapse of time. As our
dying friends grow more and more indifferent to us, we, by operation of
the same law of our nature, become indifferent to them, till at the last
we are scarcely more than kindly and sympathetic watchers about the beds
of those who regard us equally without keen emotions. So at last God
gently unwinds instead of breaking the bands that bind our hearts
together, and makes death as painless to the surviving as to the dying.
Relations meant to produce our happiness are not the means also of
torturing us, as with you. Love means joy, and that alone, to us,
instead of blessing our lives for a while only to desolate them later
on, compelling us to pay with a distinct and separate pang for every
thrill of tenderness, exacting a tear for every smile."

"There are other partings than those of death. Are these, too, without
sorrow for you?" I asked.

"Assuredly," was the reply. "Can you not see that so it must needs
be with beings freed by foresight from the disease of memory? All the
sorrow of parting, as of dying, comes with you from the backward vision
which precludes you from beholding your happiness till it is past.
Suppose your life destined to be blessed by a happy friendship. If you
could know it beforehand, it would be a joyous expectation, brightening
the intervening years and cheering you as you traversed desolate
periods. But no; not till you meet the one who is to be your friend do
you know of him. Nor do you guess even then what he is to be to you,
that you may embrace him at first sight. Your meeting is cold and
indifferent. It is long before the fire is fairly kindled between you,
and then it is already time for parting. Now, indeed, the fire burns
well, but henceforth it must consume your heart. Not till they are dead
or gone do you fully realize how dear your friends were and how sweet
was their companionship. But we--we see our friends afar off coming
to meet us, smiling already in our eyes, years before our ways meet.
We greet them at first meeting, not coldly, not uncertainly, but with
exultant kisses, in an ecstasy of joy. They enter at once into the full
possession of hearts long warmed and lighted for them. We meet with that
delirium of tenderness with which you part. And when to us at last the
time of parting comes, it only means that we are to contribute to each
other's happiness no longer. We are not doomed, like you, in parting, to
take away with us the delight we brought our friends, leaving the ache
of bereavement in its place, so that their last state is worse
than their first. Parting here is like meeting with you, calm and
unimpassioned. The joys of anticipation and possession are the only food
of love with us, and therefore Love always wears a smiling face. With
you he feeds on dead joys, past happiness, which are likewise the
sustenance of sorrow. No wonder love and sorrow are so much alike
on Earth. It is a common saying among us that, were it not for the
spectacle of the Earth, the rest of the worlds would be unable to
appreciate the goodness of God to them; and who can say that this is not
the reason the piteous sight is set before us?"

"You have told me marvelous things," I said, after I had reflected. "It
is, indeed, but reasonable that such a race as yours should look down
with wondering pity on the Earth. And yet, before I grant so much, I
want to ask you one question. There is known in our world a certain
sweet madness, under the influence of which we forget all that is
untoward in our lot, and would not change it for a god's. So far is
this sweet madness regarded by men as a compensation, and more than a
compensation, for all their miseries that if you know not love as
we know it, if this loss be the price you have paid for your divine
foresight, we think ourselves more favored of God than you. Confess that
love, with its reserves, its surprises, its mysteries, its revelations,
is necessarily incompatible with a foresight which weighs and measures
every experience in advance."

"Of love's surprises we certainly know nothing," was the reply. "It
is believed by our philosophers that the slightest surprise would kill
beings of our constitution like lightning; though of course this is
merely theory, for it is only by the study of Earthly conditions that we
are able to form an idea of what surprise is like. Your power to endure
the constant buffetings of the unexpected is a matter of supreme
amazement to us; nor, according to our ideas, is there any difference
between what you call pleasant and painful surprises. You see, then,
that we cannot envy you these surprises of love which you find so
sweet, for to us they would be fatal. For the rest, there is no form of
happiness which foresight is so well calculated to enhance as that of
love. Let me explain to you how this befalls. As the growing boy begins
to be sensible of the charms of woman, he finds himself, as I dare say
it is with you, preferring some type of face and form to others. He
dreams oftenest of fair hair, or may be of dark, of blue eyes or brown.
As the years go on, his fancy, brooding over what seems to it the best
and loveliest of every type, is constantly adding to this dream-face,
this shadowy form, traits and lineaments, hues and contours, till at
last the picture is complete, and he becomes aware that on his heart
thus subtly has been depicted the likeness of the maiden destined for
his arms.

"It may be years before he is to see her, but now begins with him one
of the sweetest offices of love, one to you unknown. Youth on Earth is a
stormy period of passion, chafing in restraint or rioting in excess. But
the very passion whose awaking makes this time so critical with you is
here a reforming and educating influence, to whose gentle and potent
sway we gladly confide our children. The temptations which lead your
young men astray have no hold on a youth of our happy planet. He hoards
the treasures of his heart for its coming mistress. Of her alone he
thinks, and to her all his vows are made. The thought of license would
be treasop to his sovereign lady, whose right to all the revenues of
his being he joyfully owns. To rob her, to abate her high prerogatives,
would be to impoverish, to insult, himself; for she is to be his, and
her honor, her glory, are his own. Through all this time that he dreams
of her by night and day, the exquisite reward of his devotion is the
knowledge that she is aware of him as he of her, and that in the inmost
