face was bitter as he stomped across the room, then returned to shake
his fist under Pete's nose. "But did you see him?" he choked. "Governor
of the colony! What does he know about growing _taaro_ in this kind of
soil? Did you see those hands? Soft, dainty, pink! How could a man with
hands like that govern a colony?"

Pete looked over at John Tegan. "Well, John?"

The big man looked up, his eyes hollow under craggy brows. "It's below
the belt, Pete. But if the government's been overthrown, then the
captain is right. It leaves us out on a limb."

Pete shook his head. "_I_ can't give him an answer," he said. "The
answer has got to come from the colony. All I can do is speak for the
colony."

Tegan stared at the floor. "We're an Earth colony," he said softly. "I
know that. I was born in New York. I lived there for many years. But
Earth isn't my home any more. This is." He looked at Pete. "I built it,
and so did you. All of us built it, even when things were getting stormy
back home. Maybe that's why we came, maybe somehow we saw the
handwriting on the wall."

"But when did it happen?" Mel burst out suddenly. "How could _anything_
so big happen so fast?"

"Speed was the secret," Pete said gloomily. "It was quick, it was well
organized, and the government was unstable. We're just caught in the
edge of it. Pity the ones living there, now. But the new government
considers the colonies as areas for exploitation instead of
development."

"Well, they can't do it," Mario cried. "This is _our_ land, _our_ home.
Nobody can tell us what to grow in our fields."

Pete's fist slammed down on the desk. "Well, how are you going to stop
them? The law of the land is sitting out there in that ship. Tomorrow
morning he's coming back here to install his fat little friend as
governor. He has guns and soldiers on that ship to back him up. What are
you going to do about it?"

"Fight it," Mario said.

"How?"

Jack Mario looked around the room. "There are only a dozen men on that
ship," he said softly. "We've got seventy-four. When Varga comes back to
the village tomorrow, we tell him to take his friend back to the ship
and shove off. We give him five minutes to get turned around, and if he
doesn't, we start shooting."

"Just one little thing," said Pete quietly. "What about the supplies?
Even if we fought them off and won, what about the food, the clothing,
the replacement parts for the machines?"

"We don't need machinery to farm this land," said Mario eagerly.
"There's food here, food we can live on; the Dusties showed us that the
first winter. And we can farm the land for our own use and let the
machinery rust. There's nothing they can bring us from Earth that we
can't do without."

"We couldn't get away with it!" Mel Dorfman shook his head bitterly.
"You're asking us to cut ourselves off from Earth completely. But they'd
never let us. They'd send ships to bomb us out."

"We could hide, and rebuild after they had finished."

Pete Farnam sighed. "They'd never leave us alone, Jack. Didn't you see
that captain? His kind of mind can't stand opposition. We'd just be a
thorn in the side of the new Earth Government. They don't want _any_
free colonies."

"Well, let's give them one." Mario sat down tiredly, snapping his
fingers at the Dustie. "Furs!" he snarled. He looked up, his dark eyes
burning. "It's no good, Pete. We can't let them get away with it.
Produce for them, yes. Try to raise the yield for them, yes. But not a
governor. If they insist on that we can throw them out, and keep them
out."

"I don't think so. They'd kill every one of us first."

John Tegan sat up, and looked Pete Farnam straight in the eye. "In that
case, Peter, it might just be better if they did."

Pete stared at him for a moment and slowly stood up. "All right," he
said. "Call a general colony meeting. We'll see what the women think.
Then we'll make our plans."

       *       *       *       *       *

The ship's jeep skidded to a halt in a cloud of dust. Captain Varga
peered through the windshield. Then he stood up, staring at the three
men blocking the road at the edge of the village. The little pink-faced
man at his side turned white when he saw their faces, and his fingers
began to tremble. Each of the men had a gun.

"You'd better clear the road," the captain snapped. "We're driving
through."

Pete Farnam stepped forward. He pointed to Nathan. "Take your friend
there back to the ship. Leave him there. We don't want him here."

Nathan turned to Varga. "I told you," he said viciously. "Too big for
their boots. Go on through."

The captain laughed and gunned the motor, started straight for the men
blocking the road. Then Jack Mario shot a hole in his front tire. The
jeep lurched to a stop. Captain Varga stood up, glaring at the men.
"Farnam, step out here," he said.

"You heard us," Pete said, without moving. "Crops, yes. We'll try to
increase our yield. But no overseer. Leave him here and we'll kill him."
