"Hm-m-m. Well." Tarnhorst frowned in thought for a moment, then came to
a decision. "I can't give you the detailed data, of course; that would
be a violation of the People's Mutual Welfare Code. But I can give you
the general story."

"I just want to know what sort of thing to look for," Danley said.

"Certainly. Certainly. Well." Tarnhorst paused to collect his thoughts,
then launched into his speech. "It has now been over eighty years since
the first colonists came out here to the Belt. At first, the ties with
Earth were quite strong, naturally. Only a few actually intended to stay
out there the rest of their lives; most of them intended to make
themselves a nice little nest egg, come back home, and retire. At the
same time, the World State was slowly evolving from its original loosely
tied group of independent nations toward what it is today.

"The people who came out here were mostly misfits, sociologically
speaking." He smiled sardonically. "They haven't changed much.

"At any rate, as I said, they were strongly tied to Earth. There was the
matter of food, air, and equipment, all of which had to be shipped out
from Earth to begin with. Only the tremendous supply of metal--almost
free for the taking--made such a venture commercially possible. Within
twenty-five years, however, the various industrial concerns that managed
the Belt mining had become self-supporting. The robot scoopers which are
used to mine methane and ammonia from Jupiter's atmosphere gave them
plenty of organic raw material. Now they grow plants of all kinds and
even raise food animals.

"They began, as every misfit does, to complain about the taxes the
government put on their incomes. The government, in my opinion, made an
error back then. They wanted to keep people out in the Belt, since the
mines on Earth were not only rapidly being depleted, but the mining
sites were needed for living space. Besides, asteroid metals were
cheaper than metals mined on Earth. To induce the colonists to remain in
the Belt, no income tax was levied; the income tax was replaced by an
eighty per cent tax on the savings accumulated when the colonist
returned to Earth to retire.

"They resented even that. It was explained to them that the asteroids
were, after all, natural resources, and that they had no moral right to
make a large profit and deprive others of their fair share of the income
from a natural resource, but they insisted that they had earned it and
had a right to keep it.

"In other words, the then government bribed them to stay out here, and
the bribe was more effective than they had intended."

"So they stayed out here and kept their money," Danley said.

"Exactly. At that time, if you will recall, there was a great deal of
agitation against colonialism--there had been for a long time, as a
matter of fact. That agitation was directed against certain
industrialist robber-baron nations who had enslaved the populace of
parts of Asia and Africa solely to produce wealth, and not for the
benefit of the people themselves. But the Belt operators took advantage
of the anticolonialism of the times and declared that the Belt cities
were, and by right ought to be, free and independent political entities.
It was a ridiculous assumption, of course, but since the various Belt
cities were, at that time, under the nominal control of three or four of
the larger nations, the political picture required that they be allowed
to declare themselves independent. It was not anticipated at the time
that they would be so resistant toward the World Government."

He smiled slightly. "Of course, by refusing to send representatives to
the People's Congress, they have, in effect, cut themselves off from any
voice in human government."

Then he shrugged. "At the moment, that is neither here nor there. What
interests us at the moment is the death rate curve of the anchor-sinkers
or whatever they are. Did you know that it is practically impossible for
anyone to get a job out there in the Belt unless he has had experience
in the anchor-setting field?"

"No," Danley admitted.

"It's true. For every other job, they want only men with space
experience. And by 'space experience' they mean anchor-setting, because
that's the only job a man can get without previous space experience.
They spend six months in a special school, learning to do the work,
according to our friend, Mr. Georges Alhamid. Then they are sent out to
set anchors. Small ones, at first, in rocks only a few meters in
diameter--then larger ones. After a year or so at that kind of work,
they can apply for more lucrative positions.

"I see nothing intrinsically wrong in that, I will admit, but the
indications are that the schooling, which should have been getting more
efficient over the years, has evidently been getting more lax. The death
rate has gone up."

"Just a minute," Danley interrupted. "Do you mean that a man has to have
what they call 'space experience' before he can get _any_ kind of job?"

Tarnhorst shook his head and was pleased to find that no nausea
resulted. "No, of course not. Clerical jobs, teaching jobs, and the like
don't require that sort of training. But there's very little chance for
advancement unless you're one of the elite. A physician, for example,
wouldn't have many patients unless he had had 'space experience'; he
wouldn't be allowed to own or drive a space boat, and he wouldn't be
allowed to go anywhere near what are called 'critical areas'--such as
air locks, power plants, or heavy industry installations."

"It sounds to me as though they have a very strong union," said Danley.

"If you want to call it that, yes," Tarnhorst said. "Anything that has
anything to do with operations in space requires that sort of
experience--and there are very few jobs out here that can avoid having
anything to do with space. Space is only a few kilometers away." The
expression on his face showed that he didn't much care for the thought.

"I don't see that that's so bad," Danley said. "Going out there isn't
something for the unexperienced. A man who doesn't know what he's doing
can get himself killed easily, and, what's worse, he's likely to take
others with him."

"You speak, of course, from experience," Tarnhorst said with no trace of
sarcasm. "I accept that. By not allowing inexperienced persons in
critical areas, the Belt Companies are, at least indirectly, looking out
for the welfare of the people. But we mustn't delude ourselves into
thinking that that is their prime objective. These Belt Companies are no
better than the so-called 'industrial giants' of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries. The government here is farcical. The sole job is to
prevent crime and to adjudicate small civil cases. Every other function
of proper government--the organization of industry, the regulation of
standards the subsidizing of research, the control of prices, and so
on--are left to the Belt Companies or to the people. The Belt Cities are
no more than what used to be called 'company towns'."

"I understand that," Danley said. "But they seem to function fairly
smoothly."

Tarnhorst eyed him. "If, by, 'smoothly functioning', you mean the denial
of the common rights of human freedom and dignity yes. Oh, they give
their sop to such basic human needs as the right of every individual to
be respected--but only because Earth has put pressure on them.
Otherwise, people who, through no fault of their own, were unable to
work or get 'space experience' would be unable to get jobs and would be
looked down upon as pariahs."

"You mean there are people here who have no jobs? I wouldn't think that
unemployment would be a problem out here."

"It isn't," said Tarnhorst, "yet. But there are always those
unfortunates who are psychologically incapable of work, and society must
provide for them. The Belt Cities provide for a basic education, of
course. As long as a person is going to school, he is given a stipend.
But a person who has neither the ability to work nor the ability to
study is an outcast, even though he is provided for by the companies. He
is forced to do something to earn what should be his by right; he is
given menial and degrading tasks to do. We would like to put a stop to
that sort of thing, but we ... ah ... have no ... ah ... means of doing
so." He paused, as though considering whether he had said too much.

"The problem at hand," he went on hurriedly, "is the death curve. When
this technique for taking the rocks to the smelters was being worked
out, the death rate was--as you might imagine--quite high. The Belt
Companies had already been operating out here for a long time before the
stony meteorites were mined commercially. At first, the big thing was
nickel-iron. That's what they came here to get in the beginning. That's
where most of the money still is. But the stony asteroids provide them
with their oxygen.

"This anchor-setting technique was worked out at a time when the Belt
Companies were trying to find ways to make the Belt self-sufficient.
After they got the technique worked out so that it operated smoothly,
the death rate dropped 'way down. It stayed down for a little while, and
then began to rise again. It has nearly reached an all-time high.
Obviously, something is wrong, and we have to find out what it is."

Danley scratched ruminatively behind his right ear and wished he'd had
the opportunity to study history. He had been vaguely aware, of the
broad outlines, but the details had never been brought to his attention
before. "Suppose Alhamid _is_ trying to hide something," he said after a
moment. "What would it be, do you think?"

Tarnhorst shrugged and spread his hands. "What could it be but some sort
of money-saving scheme? Inferior materials being used at a critical
spot, perhaps. Skimping on quality or quantity. Somewhere, somehow, they
are shaving costs at the risk of the workers' lives. We have to find out
what it is."

Peter Danley nodded. _You don't mean_ "_we_," Danley thought to himself.
I _am the one who's going to have to go out there and find it, while you
sit here safe_. He felt that there was a pretty good chance that these
Belt operators might kill him to keep him from finding out what it was
they were saving money on.

Aloud, he said: "I'll do what I can, Mr. Tarnhorst."

Tarnhorst smiled. "I'm certain you will. That's why I needed someone who
knows more about this business than I."

"And when we do find it--what then?"

"Then? Why, then we will force them to make the proper changes or there
will be trouble."

       *       *       *       *       *

Georges Alhamid heard the whole conversation early the next morning. The
governor himself brought the recording over to his office.

"Do you think he knew he was being overheard?"

The governor shrugged. "Who knows. He waltzed all around what he was
trying to say, but that may have been just native caution. Or he may not
want Danley to know what's on his mind."

"How could he bring Danley out here without telling him anything
beforehand?" Alhamid asked thoughtfully. "Is Danley really that
ignorant, or was the whole conversation for our ears?"

"I'm inclined to think that Danley really didn't know. Remember, George,
the best way to hold down the ones below you is to keep them from
gaining any knowledge, to keep data out of their hands--except for the
carefully doctored data you want them to have."

"I know," Alhamid said. "History isn't exactly a popular subject on
Earth." He tapped his fingers gently on the case of the playback and
looked at it as if he were trying to read the minds of the persons who
had spoken the words he had just heard.

"I really think he believed that his nullifying equipment was doing its
job," the governor continued. "He wouldn't have any way of knowing we
could counteract it."

Alhamid shrugged. "It doesn't matter much. We still have to assume that
he's primarily out to bring the Belt Cities under Earth control. To do
that, all he'd have to do is find something that could be built up into
a scandal on Earth."

"Not, _all_, George," the governor said. "It would take a lot more than
that alone. But it would certainly be a start in the right direction."

"One thing we do know," Alhamid said, "is that nobody on Earth will
allow any action against the Belt unless popular sentiment is definitely
against us. As long as we are apparently right-thinking people, we're
all right. I wonder why Tarnhorst is so anxious to get us under the
thumb of the People's Congress? Is it purely that half-baked idealism of
his?"

"Mostly. He has the notion that everybody has a right to be accorded the
respect of his fellow man, and that that right is something that every
person is automatically given at birth, not something he has to earn.
What gave him his particular gripe against us, I don't know, but he's
been out to get us ever since his trip here three years ago."

"You know, Larry," Alhamid said slowly, "I'm not quite sure which is
harder to understand: How a whole civilization could believe that sort
of thing, or how a single intelligent man could."

"It's a positive feedback," the governor said. "That sort of thing has
wrecked civilizations before and will do it again. Let's not let it
wreck ours. Are you ready for the conference with our friend now?"

Georges Alhamid looked at the clock on the wall. "Ready as I'll ever be.
You'd better scram, Larry. We mustn't give Mr. Tarnhorst the impression
that there's some sort of collusion between business and government out
there in the Belt."

