He didn't even bother to look insulted. "No. Just have to make sure
she doesn't get hurt by any of the machinery, that's all. Most of the
stuff is automatic, and she has a habit of getting too close. I guess
she thinks she can talk a machine out of hurting her as easily as she
can talk a man into standing on his head."

Jack Ravenhurst was coming back to the table. I noticed that she'd
fixed her hair nicely and put on make-up. It made her look a lot more
feminine than she had while she was on the flitterboat.

"Well," she said as she sat down, "have you two decided what to do
with me?"

Colonel Brock just smiled and said: "I guess we'll have to leave that
up to you, Miss Ravenhurst." Then he stood up. "Now, if you'll excuse
me, I'll be about my business."

Jack nodded, gave him a quick smile, and fell to on her steak with the
voraciousness of an unfed chicken in a wheat bin.

Miss Jaqueline Ravenhurst evidently had no desire to talk to me at the
moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

On Ceres, as on most of the major planetoids, a man's home is his
castle, even if it's only a hotel room. Raw nickel-iron, the basic
building material, is so cheap that walls and doors are seldom made of
anything else, so a hotel room is more like a vault than anything else
on Earth. Every time I go into one of the hotels on Ceres or Eros, I
get the feeling that I'm either a bundle of gold certificates or a
particularly obstreperous prisoner being led to a medieval solitary
confinement cell. They're not pretty, but they're _solid_.

Jack Ravenhurst went into her own room after flashing me a rather hurt
smile that was supposed to indicate her disappointment in not being
allowed to go nightclubbing. I gave her a big-brotherly pat on the
shoulder and told her to get plenty of sleep, since we had to be up
bright and early in the morning.

Once inside my own room, I checked over my luggage carefully. It had
been brought there from the spaceport, where I'd checked it before
going to Ravenhurst's Raven's Rest, on orders from Ravenhurst himself.
This was one of several rooms that Ravenhurst kept permanently rented
for his own uses, and I knew that Jack kept a complete wardrobe in her
own rooms.

There were no bugs in my luggage--neither sound nor sight spying
devices of any kind. Not that I would have worried if there had been;
I just wanted to see if anyone was crude enough to try that method of
smuggling a bug into the apartment.

The door chime pinged solemnly.

I took a peek through the door camera and saw a man in a bellboy's
uniform, holding a large traveling case. I recognized the face, so I
let him in.

"The rest of your luggage, sir," he said with a straight face.

"Thank you very much," I told him. I handed him a tip, and he popped
off.

This stuff was special equipment that I hadn't wanted Ravenhurst or
anybody else to get his paws into.

I opened it carefully with the special key, slid a hand under the
clothing that lay on top for camouflage, and palmed the little
detector I needed. Then I went around the room, whistling gently to
myself.

The nice thing about an all-metal room is that it's impossible to hide
a self-contained bug in it that will be of any use. A small, concealed
broadcaster can't broadcast any farther than the walls, so any bug has
to have wires leading out of the room.

I didn't find a thing. Either Ravenhurst kept the room clean or
somebody was using more sophisticated bugs than any I knew about. I
opened the traveling case again and took out one of my favorite
gadgets. It's a simple thing, really: a noise generator. But the noise
it generates is non-random noise. Against a background of "white,"
purely random noise, it is possible to pick out a conversation, even
if the conversation is below the noise level, simply because
conversation is patterned. But this little generator of mine was
non-random. It was the multiple recording of ten thousand different
conversations, all meaningless, against a background of "white" noise.
Try that one on your differential analyzers.

By the time I got through, nobody could tap a dialogue in that room,
barring, as I said, bugs more sophisticated than any the United
Nations knew about.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then I went over and tapped on the communicating door between my room
and Jack Ravenhurst's. There was no answer.

I said, "Jack, I'm coming in. I have a key."

She said, "Go away. I'm not dressed. I'm going to bed."

"Grab something quick," I told her. "I'm coming in."

I keyed open the door.

She was no more dressed for bed than I was, unless she made a habit of
sleeping in her best evening togs. Anger blazed in her eyes for a
second, then that faded, and she tried to look all sweetness and
light.

"I was trying on some new clothes," she said innocently.

A lot of people might have believed her. The emotional field she threw
out, encouraging utter belief in her every word, was as powerful as
any I'd ever felt. I just let it wash past me and said: "Come into my
room for a few minutes, Jack; I want to talk to you."

I didn't put any particular emphasis into it. I don't have to. She
came.

Once we were both inside my shielded room with the walls vibrating
with ten thousand voices and a hush area in the center, I said
patiently, "Jack, I personally don't care where you go or what you do.
Tomorrow, you can do your vanishing act and have yourself a ball, for
all I care. But there are certain things that have to be done first.
Now, sit down and listen."

She sat down, her eyes wide. Evidently, nobody had ever beaten her at
her own game before.

"Tonight, you'll stay here and get some sleep. Tomorrow, we go for a
tour of Viking, first thing in the morning. Tomorrow afternoon, as
soon as I think the time is ripe, you can sneak off. I'll show you how
to change your appearance so you won't be recognized. You can have all
the fun you want for twenty-four hours. I, of course, will be hunting
high and low for you, but I won't find you until I have finished my
investigation.

"On the other hand, I want to know where you are at all times, so that
I can get in touch with you if I need you. So, no matter where you
are, you'll keep in touch by phoning BANning 6226 every time you
change location. Got that number?"

She nodded. "BANning 6226," she repeated.

"Fine. Now, Brock's agents will be watching you, so I'll have to
figure out a way to get you away from them, but that won't be too
hard. I'll let you know at the proper time. Meanwhile, get back in
there, get ready for bed, and get some sleep. You'll need it. Move."

She nodded rather dazedly, got up, and went to the door. She turned,
said goodnight in a low, puzzled voice, and closed the door.

Half an hour later, I quietly sneaked into her room just to check. She
was sound asleep in bed. I went back to my own room, and got some sack
time myself.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's a pleasure to have you here again, Miss Ravenhurst," said Chief
Engineer Midguard. "Anything in particular you want to see this time?"
He said it as though he actually enjoyed taking the boss' teenage
daughter through a spacecraft plant.

Maybe he did, at that. He was a paunchy, graying man in his sixties,
who had probably been a rather handsome lady-killer for the first
half-century of his life, but he was approaching middle age now, which
has a predictable effect on the telly-idol type.

Jack Ravenhurst was at her regal best, with the kind of _noblesse
oblige_ that would bring worshipful gratitude to the heart of any
underling. "Oh, just a quick run-through on whatever you think would
be interesting, Mr. Midguard; I don't want to take up too much of your
time."

Midguard allowed as how he had a few interesting things to show her,
and the party, which also included the watchful and taciturn Colonel
Brock, began to make the rounds of the Viking plant.

There were three ships under construction at the time: two cargo
vessels and a good-sized passenger job. Midguard seemed to think that
every step of spacecraft construction was utterly fascinating--for
which, bully for him--but it was pretty much of a drag as far as I was
concerned. It took three hours.

Finally, he said, "Would you like to see the McGuire-7?"

Why, yes, of course she would. So we toddled off to the new ship while
Midguard kept up a steady line of patter.

"We think we have all the computer errors out of this one, Miss
Ravenhurst. A matter of new controls and safety devices. We feel that
the trouble with the first six machines was that they were designed to
be operated by voice orders by any qualified human operator. The
trouble is that they had no way of telling just who was qualified. The
brains are perfectly capable of distinguishing one individual from
another, but they can't tell whether a given individual is a space
pilot or a janitor. In fact--"

I marked the salient points in his speech. The MG-YR-7 would be
strictly a one-man ship. It had a built-in dog attitude--friendly
toward all humans, but loyal only to its master. Of course, it was
likely that the ship would outlast its master, so its loyalties could
be changed, but only by the use of special switching keys.

The robotics boys still weren't sure why the first six had gone
insane, but they were fairly certain that the primary cause was the
matter of too many masters. The brilliant biophysicist, Asenion, who
promulgated the Three Laws of Robotics in the last century, had shown
in his writings that they were unattainable ideals--that they only
told what a perfect robot _should_ be, not what a robot actually was.

[Illustration]

The First Law, for instance, would forbid a robot to harm a human
being, either by action or inaction. But, as Asenion showed, a robot
could be faced with a situation which allowed for only two possible
decisions, both of which required that a human being be harmed. In
such a case, the robot goes insane.

I found myself speculating what sort of situation, what sort of
Asenion paradox, had confronted those first six ships. And whether it
had been by accident or design. Not that the McGuire robots had been
built in strict accord with the Laws of Robotics; that was impossible
on the face of it. But no matter how a perfectly logical machine is
built, the human mind can figure out a way to goof it up because the
human mind is capable of transcending logic.

       *       *       *       *       *

The McGuire ship was a little beauty. A nice, sleek, needle, capable
of atmospheric as well as spatial navigation, with a mirror-polished,
beryl-blue surface all over the sixty-five feet of her--or
his?--length.

It was standing upright on the surface of the planetoid, a shining
needle in the shifting sunlight, limned against the star-filled
darkness of space. We looked at it through the transparent viewport,
and then took the flexible tube that led to the air lock of the ship.

The ship was just as beautiful inside as it was outside. Neat,
compact, and efficient. The control room--if such it could be
called--was like no control room I'd ever seen before. Just an
acceleration couch and observation instruments. Midguard explained
that it wasn't necessary to be a pilot to run the ship; any person who
knew a smattering of astronavigation could get to his destination by
simply telling the ship what he wanted to do.

Jack Ravenhurst took in the whole thing with wide-eyed interest.

"Is the brain activated, Mr. Midguard?" she asked.
