
Flannery frowned, and then shrugged. "It's no secret I need a good man
on Throm, and you're the logical candidate, if I can pound some facts
into your head. I've found that sending an Earthman they know as a
competent enemy works wonders. Not at first--there's hostility for a
while--but in the long run it gives them a new slant on us."

"Then you'd better get an Earthman," Duke snapped. "You're talking to a
citizen of Meloa! By choice!"

"I hadn't finished my explanation," Flannery reminded.

Duke snorted. "I was brought up on explanations. I heard men spouting
about taming the aliens when I first learned to talk--as if they were
wild animals. I read articles on how the Clovisem and those things from
Sugfarth needed kindness. It's the same guff I heard about how to
handle lions. But the men doing the talking weren't in the ring; and I
noticed the ringmaster carried a whip and gun. He knew the beasts. I
know the aliens of Throm."

"From fighting them? From hating them? Or from being more afraid of
them than you think Earth is, captain? I've talked to more aliens than
you've ever seen."

"And the Roman diplomats laughed at the soldiers who told them the
Goths were getting ready to sack Rome."

Flannery stared at him in sudden amusement. "We aren't in an Empire
period, O'Neill. But you might look up what the Romans did to conquered
people during the Republic, when Rome was still growing. Captain, I'm
not underrating the aliens!"

"Tame aliens! Or ones faking tameness. You've seen them smiling, maybe.
I saw the other side."

The old man sighed heavily and reached for his shirt. He began
unbuttoning it and pulling it over his head. "You've got a nice
prosthetic hand," he said. "Now take a look at some real handiwork!"

There was a strap affair around his shoulders, with a set of
complicated electronic controls slipped into the muscle fibers. From
them, both arms hung loose, unattached at the shoulder blades. Further
down, another affair of webbing went around his waist.

"Only one leg is false," he explained, "but the decorations are real.
They came from a highly skilled torturer. I've had my experience with
aliens. Clovisem, if you're curious. I was the second in command on
Djamboula's volunteer raid, forty years ago."

Duke dropped his eyes from the scars. For a second, he groped for words
of apology. Then the cold, frozen section of his brain swallowed the
emotions. "I've seen a woman with a prosthetic soul," he said bitterly.
"Only she didn't turn yellow because of what the aliens did!"

Red spots shot onto Flannery's cheeks and one of the artificial arms
jerked back as savagely as a real one. He hesitated, then reached for
his shirt. "O.K., squawman!"

The word had no meaning for Duke, though he knew it was an insult. But
he couldn't respond to it. He fumbled through his memories, trying to
place it. Something about Indians--

Flannery began buttoning his pants over the shirt. "I'm out of bounds,
captain," he said more quietly. "I hope you don't know the prejudices
behind that crack. But you win. If you ever want the rest of the
explanation, look me up."

He closed the door behind him softly and went striding evenly up the
passage.

Duke frowned after him. The talk had gotten under his skin. If there
were things he didn't know--

Then he swore at himself. There was plenty he didn't know. But the
carefully developed indoctrination propaganda of the top Earth
psychologists wasn't the answer he wanted.

He'd have to make his stay on Earth shorter than he'd planned. If they
could get to a man who had served under Djamboula and convince him that
Clovisem were nice house pets, it was little wonder they could wrap the
rest of Earth around their psychological fingers.

Too bad their psychology wasn't adjusted to aliens!




VI


Barth Nevesh was nearly seven feet tall, and his cat-shaped ears stuck
up another four inches above his head. Even among the people of Kel he
was a big man, but to the representatives of the other humanoid worlds
of the Federation, he seemed a giant. The thick furs he wore against
the heavy chill of the room added to his apparent size, and the horns
growing from his shoulders lifted his robes until he seemed to have no
neck.

Now he stood up, driving his heavy fist down against the big wooden
table. "The question is, do we have the answer or not?" he roared. "You
say we do. Logic says we do. Then let's act on it!"

The elfin figure of Lemillulot straightened up at the other end of the
table. "Not so fast, commander. Nobody questions the power of your
fleet. Nobody doubts that we have the only possible answer to the
aliens that Earth is helping to take over our universe--strength
through unity. But is it as good as it can be?"

"How better?" Barth roared again. "Every world in this alien pocket has
been building its strength since the Earthmen's ships first reached
here and showed us space travel was possible. We've seen the stinking
aliens get the same ships. But now we've got something they can't
resist--a Federation, in spite of all Earth could do to stop us. If all
our fleets strike at once, no alien world can resist--and we can stop
merely holding them back. Wipe them out, one by one, I say! The only
good alien is a dead alien!"

There was a lot of talk--more than Barth usually heard or contributed
in a month. Lemillulot was the focus of most of it. The little man
would never be satisfied. He wanted all the humanoid worlds organized,
and by now it was plain that Earth's influence would be too strong
outside of their own section.

Their accomplishments were already enough. United as they were, the
Federation was clearly invincible. Their fleets were at full size and
the crews were thoroughly trained. No other time would be better.

There had already been a stir of ship-building on the alien worlds,
since the first word of the Federation had somehow leaked out. The
Federation position was as good as it would ever be--and with eleven
fleets working together, nothing better was needed.

"Knock them down with the long shells, haze them to base with
interceptors, and then rip their worlds with planet bombs," Barth
repeated his plans. "We can do it in six hours for a planet--we can
start at the strongest, Neflis, and work down through the weakest, to
make up for our losses. And if the Earth forces start moving in to
rebuild them--well, I've been thinking the Federation could use a
little more wealth and power!"

"Humanoids don't attack humanoids," Lemillulot protested.

The snarling, dog face of Sra from Chumkt opened in a grin, and his sly
voice held a hint of a chuckle. "Or so Earth keeps preaching. But
Earthmen aren't humanoids. They're humans!"

He laughed softly at his own wit. There were rumbles of uncertainty,
but Barth saw that the seed had taken root. If they kept working
together, he and Sra could force it to ripen soon enough.

"That can wait," Barth decided. "The question is, do we attack Neflis,
and when? I say now!"

                    *      *      *      *      *

It took an hour more for the decision. But there would be only one
answer, and the final vote was unanimous. The fleets would take off
from their home worlds and rendezvous near the barren sun; from there,
they would proceed in a group, under the control of Barth, toward the
alien world of Neflis.

The commander checked his chronometer as the delegates went to send
their coded reports to their home worlds. He had the longest distance
to lead his fleet, and there was no time for delay.

Outside, the harsh snow crackled under his feet, and a layer of storm
clouds cut off the wan heat of Kel's sun. He drew in a deep breath,
watching the swirl of white as he exhaled. It was a good world--a world
to build men. It was the world from which a leader should come.

The fleet would be all his within a day. And for a time, it would be
busy at the work of wiping out the nearby aliens. After that--well,
there were other aliens further out toward the last frontiers of
exploration. With care, the fleet could be kept busy for years.

Barth was remembering his histories, and the armies that had been swept
together. In a few years, fighting men began to think of themselves as
a people apart, and loyalty to their birthplace gave way to loyalty to
their leader. Five years should be enough. Then there could be more
than a Federation; there could be the empire among the worlds that had
been his lifelong dream.

But first, there was Earth. He snorted to himself as he reached the
ships of his fleet. Missionaries! Spreading their soft fear through the
universe. In five years, his fleet should be ready for ten times the
power of any single planet--including Earth.

Sra would be the only problem in his way. But that could be met later.
For the moment, the man from Chumkt was useful.

Barth strode up the ramp of his flagship, shouting out to his men as he
went. There was no need of signals. They had been primed and waiting
for days, ready to follow him up.

He dropped to the control seat, staring at the little lights that would
tell him of their progress. "Up ship!" he shouted, and from the metal
halls and caverns of the ship other voices echoed his cry.

The _Wind Dragon_ leaped upwards sharply. Behind, as the red lights
showed, four hundred others charged into the sky and the open space
beyond. Barth sat at the great screen, watching as they drew on
steadily toward the rendezvous, mulling over his plans.

They were three hours out from Kel when he turned the control over to
his lieutenant and went below, where his table was laden with the
smoking cheer of good green meat and ale. With a sigh of contentment,
he threw back his outer robe and prepared to forget everything until he
had dined.

He was humming hoarsely to himself as he cut a piece of the meat and
stuck it on his left shoulder horn, within reach of his teeth. Maybe a
little of the baked fish would blend well--

The emergency drum blasted through the ship as he lifted the knife.
Swearing and tearing at the flesh near his mouth, he leaped up and
forward toward the control room. He heard voices shouting, something
about a fleet. Then he was at the screens where he could see for
himself.

Five million miles ahead, another fleet was assembled, where none
should be from any of the Federation worlds! His eyes swept sideways
across the screen, estimating the number. It was impossible. There
weren't a quarter of that number in the fleet of any world, humanoid or
alien!

Barth flipped on the microresolver, twisting the wheel that sent it
racing across the path of the fleet ahead. His eyes confirmed what his
mind had already recognized.

The aliens had their own federation. There were ships of every type
there, grouped in units. Thirteen alien worlds were combined against
the Outer Federation.

For a breath he hesitated, ready to turn back and defend Kel while
there was time. But it would never work. One fleet would never be
enough to defend the planet against the combined aliens.

"Cluster!" he barked into the communicator. "Out rams and up speed.
Prepare for breakthrough!"

If they could hit the aliens at full drive and cut through the weaker
center, they could still rendezvous with the other fleets. The combined
strength might be enough. And the gods help Kel if the aliens refused
to follow him!
