
It wasn't a hard blow, but an upsetting one. Fowler Smythe grinned at
him from where he was sitting in one of the leather divans. "Sit down
and shut up, Sime," he suggested coolly.

Simonetti sagged with defeat. "Look, Rose," he gasped. "I want out. Bad
enough that our losses can't be stopped by this creep Smythe. Now you
drag in another TK. Buy me out!"

"What's a business worth that's losing its shirt?" Rose sneered. "We
were in clover, you fool, till this cross-roader got to us. This is our
only chance to get even."

That finished Simonetti. He went back to his desk and slumped against
it, scowling at the points of his handtooled boots.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rose looked over at me. "Let's make sense," he said quietly. "We watched
you on the TV monitor from the time you came in."

"Sure," I said.

"What about it?" he demanded.

I shrugged. "I had my way with the dice, Peno. I dropped nine yards as
fast as I could, then won it back. The spots came up for me every single
roll but two, when I had my eye on something else."

He snickered. "We saw her," he said.

"How about it, Fowler?" I asked my Lodge Brother. "Was a worker tipping
the dice tonight?"

"I never felt it," he said. "But the table had dropped nearly forty
grand during the shift, which was about over when you started to play.
He's too good for me, Wally."

"But you felt _my_ lifts," I protested. "You called 'TK' on the table."

Smythe shrugged and took off his glasses. "I thought I felt you tipping
when you first came to the layout," he said, waving them around. I
nodded confirmation. "But it was smooth work, and I could hardly be
sure. Most of these maverick TK's strong-arm the dice, and they skid
across the layout with their spots up. You're way ahead of that--you
don't touch them till the final few tumbles. And then, you were losing,
and I couldn't see that the table was being hit."

"I thought it was the smart move." I explained. "I was still
controlling the dice, and if there'd been a cross-roader working, I
should have felt him skidding them."

Smythe nodded. "Of course," he added. "I could feel you more clearly
after you got the dice, and later, while that scarecrow with you was
handling your chips. You were building a stack. So I fingered you."

"Careful," I said sourly. "You're talking about the woman I love."

There was a strained moment of silence, and then they all laughed. She'd
been a sight, all right.

Simonetti came back alive with that one. His husky voice cut in on the
laughter. "Where does that bag fit?" he demanded.

"No idea," I said truthfully. "A random factor. I don't think she fits."

"_Something_ has to fit!" he yelled in his oversized whisper. "How about
the way our losses follow Curley Smythe around from table to table?"

This was something. "The table you watch is the one that gets hit?" I
asked Smythe.

He blushed, clear to the top of his bald head. "A subtle, nasty
operator," he said gruffly. "And he's had the gall to stick it in me
pretty badly, Wally. What Sime says is true."

Well, this we wouldn't stand for. I didn't give a care if every gambling
house in Nevada went broke. But Smythe was in the Lodge. And it finally
made sense that the Lodge had sent me to bail him out. I gave old
Maragon my mental apology. The Grand Master wouldn't stand still for
_anybody's_ making a fool out of the Lodge. Still: "Nobody that good is
out of captivity," I snapped. "I don't believe it. It's not TK that's
robbing you."

"Oh, ridiculous," Rose said, showing his teeth. "Gambling is our
business, Lefty. Don't you think we could spot any of the ordinary kinds
of cross-roading? This is TK, and it has real voltage. We can't spot it.
We've got to have Psi power do it for us."

"Maybe," I agreed. "But no TK can do it if Smythe can't. Have you tried
a PC?"

Simonetti grabbed a piece of the heavens in rage. "No!" he yelled in his
loud whisper. "None of your crystal-ball witches in here!"

I knew how he felt. PC's give me the colly-wobbles, too.

"What's the matter with precognition?" I asked him. "If this crook has
got you stuck, Rose is right. Only Psi force will get you out of this
jam. If you know in advance where this operator is going to hit you, you
can nail him. There's a dozen techniques."

Peno Rose looked at me from under lowered brows. "Are _you_ a PC,
Lefty?" he asked me.

"No," I said shortly. The Lodge had proved that several times, in spite
of my strong feelings that I had flashes of precognition. Why should I
resent not having PC? How many Psi personalities have more than one
power? Not many. And as for precognition, as Simonetti said, more than
their fair share is possessed by wild-looking women. Like Sniffles, I
thought suddenly.

"Well," Rose said, turning back to his partner. "Let Sime and me talk it
over. Maybe we should get a PC."

"Nuts," Simonetti told him.

"I'll think it over, too," I said. "See you tomorrow." I turned to go.
Simonetti and Smythe followed me out, each for his own reasons, I guess,
leaving Rose behind in the cube of glass on the roof, looking like he
was going to turn belly-up and take a bite out of the PBX on his desk.

       *       *       *       *       *

I wasn't exactly shadowed, but I knew somebody had his eye on me as I
wandered about the crowded casino, looking for Sniffles. As far as I
could make out, she had vamoosed without trying to hustle another
sucker. Her percentage of my winnings had certainly been a
disappointment to her.

At last I went down the ersatz wooden steps into the neon-gashed night
and started across the nearly deserted main drag toward the motel where
I had registered. A powerful turbine howled as a car pulled away from
the curb, perhaps a hundred yards up the way. His lights came on and
snapped up to bright. I had a perfect flash of PC--I _do_ have moments
of it, no matter what the Lodge thinks. The car was going to take a dive
into the fountain pool in front of my motel. But it sure didn't act like
it. I froze in the middle of the road, hearing rubber scream as the
driver floored the throttle and hurled the automobile right at me. He
might as well have been on tracks. There was no place to go--I was in
the middle of a six-lane boulevard, and could never make either curb
before he ran me down.

This is when it pays to be a perceptive. I've talked to many TK's about
how they visualize their lifts. We all conceive of it differently. With
me a real strain is like shining a bright beam of light on the spot
you're lifting.

Be glad, Wally Bupp, I had time to tell myself. Be glad for a mechanical
mind. Where do you lift four thousand pounds of car aimed right at you?
Well, there is a small valve, can't weigh half an ounce, lightly
spring-loaded, that is in the power-steering mechanism. I seared a lift
at it. You know what happened.

The feedback of the power-steering wrenched the wheel from the driver's
hand--it was ten times as strong as he was, dragging its power as it did
from a four-hundred horsepower shaft turning 30,000 rpm. The car
careened and skidded across the curb. It took out a small marble rail
around the fountain pool and dived in, still screaming rubber. The
fountain went over with a crash and then the racket dwindled off in the
shriek of twisted buckets. The turbine had gotten what for in the
collision.

I didn't hang around to see what had happened to the driver. He was just
some heavy who had the job of rubbing me out. But I did seek another
haven. If they knew me that well, I'd never be safe where I had stashed
my suitcase.

There was a 'copter squatting at the Sky Hi's ramp. I jumped for it and
had him drop me toward the outskirts of the town of Lake Tahoe, and then
walked a few blocks, mostly in circles to see if I were being followed,
before darting into a fairly seedy motel a couple blocks off the main
drag.

My room was on the third floor of the flea-bag. Part of the place was
