this world. Fur didn't bring much of a price any more, and he couldn't
get it in as he had when he was younger. His wants were simple, but
there was a certain rock-bottom minimum he had to have. Too, the winters
were starting to bother him a little, the arthritis in his hands was
getting worse every year, times he hardly had the strength in his left
hand, which was the worst, to hold an ax. Another five, ten, years and
it would be the Pioneers' Home for him--if he did not get stove up or
sick sooner and die right here in the cabin, too helpless to cut wood
for the fire. He had helped bury enough others, bed and all when they
didn't come down the river at breakup and somebody had to go up and look
for them, to know it was possible.

The other world was milder, it had game and fur--good fur, too, from the
looks of it, something new that could lick any mutation or synthetic on
the market, and the income tax had still left a few fellows who could
pay through the nose to see their women look nice.

And, the country was new. He'd never thought he'd have a crack at a new
country again, a new, _good_ country. Often, he'd thought how lucky
people had been who were born a hundred and fifty years ago, moving into
an easy, rich country like the Ohio or Kentucky when it was new, instead
of the bitter North.

The Harn would be a nuisance--Ed did not think of it as the Harn, of
course, but just as "they"--but he supposed he could find a way to clean
them out. A man generally could, if varmints got troublesome enough.

And the man in forest-green whipcord, well, he _could_ have been just an
hallucination. Ed did not really believe in hallucinations, but he had
heard about them, and there was always a first time.

Ed sighed, looked at the clock, measured the bottle with his eye--still
better than three quarters full.

All in all, he guessed, he'd leave the door into the other world open.

He put old Tom out and went to bed.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first order of business seemed to be to get better acquainted with
the Harn, and first thing in the morning he set about it. He took the
rabbit out of the live box and tethered it in a spot in the other world
close to the hole, where raw earth had been exposed by a big blowdown,
sweeping the ground afterward to clear it of tracks.

Getting better acquainted with the Harn, though, did not mean he had to
have it come in and crawl in bed with him.

Before going to bed the night before, he had set half a can of snuff to
steep in some water. He loaded a bug gun with this and sprayed the
ground around the hole into the other world. From the reaction
yesterday, he judged the stinging units did not like tobacco juice, and
this should discourage them from coming through.

He checked his bear snares and found three in good enough shape to
satisfy him--the large Harn beast, he suspected, would be about like a
grizzly to hold. Three would hardly be enough for a serious trapping
program. Ed made his own snares from old aircraft control cable, using a
lock of his own devising which slid smoothly and cinched down tight and
permanently. He got out his roll of wire and box of locks and started
making up some more, sitting where he could watch the rabbit he had
staked out.

By the middle of the afternoon the snares were done, but there had been
no action with the rabbit, nor was there for the rest of the day.

In the morning, though, it was gone. There were three new sets of tracks
in the bare spot--two smaller ones, either of which would have fitted
the stinging unit, and what looked like a carrier's. The action was
clear enough. The small things had prowled around the rabbit for some
time, stopping frequently as if uncertain and suspicious. Finally, one
had moved in, with a little flurry of action when it met the rabbit.
Then it had moved back and squatted again.

The big tracks came directly to the rabbit and went right out again.
They were heavy enough to be clear in the grass beyond the bare spot.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ed went back to the cabin and rummaged till he found a pair of
snakeproof pants a Stateside sport had once given him--heavy duck with
an interlining of woven wire. They were heavy and uncomfortable to wear,
and about as useless as wings on a pig in Alaska, where there are no
snakes; but they had been brand-new and expensive when given to him, and
he had put them away, thinking vaguely he might find a use for them some
day. It looked like that day might be now.

He slipped them on, took his rifle and hunting pack, and set out to
follow the animal that had taken the rabbit.

The trail showed well in the morning dew, going straight away along the
hillside as if the thing were headed some place definite. Ed followed
along for a quarter mile or so, then found himself on a fairly well
beaten path, which presently joined another, and then another, till it
was a definitely well used trail. It began to look to him like the thing
might have a den of some sort, and he might be getting pretty close to
it. He left the trail and climbed up into a lone tall tree,
fire-scorched but still struggling for life. From there, he could follow
the trail pretty well with his glasses for a couple of hundred yards
before he lost it. Finally, he settled on a spot under an old burnt
stump as a likely spot for the den.

He focused the glasses carefully and after a few minutes saw a flash of
movement there, as if something had slipped in or out. Nothing else
happened for about an hour. Then the grass along one of the trails began
to wave and a large beast, similar to the one he had shot, trotted into
sight. It slipped in under the stump and disappeared.

For the rest of the morning, nothing went in or out.

There was a very good reason for this, and Ed was it.

       *       *       *       *       *

All night and day after he shot the stinging unit and the carrier unit,
the Harn had stayed in its nest. By the second evening, it was getting
hungry. It ventured out and found a few morsels, but the organized
hunting network it ordinarily maintained had been disrupted, it had lost
track of things, and the pickings were poor. Then it stumbled on the
rabbit Ed had staked out.

Its first impulse was to leave the rabbit strictly alone. In spite of
its early promise, the other world had so far given nothing but trouble.
On the other hand, the rabbit was meat, and very good meat, by the smell
and looks of it....

The Harn kept its observation unit prowling irresolutely around the
target for half the night before it finally gave in to appetite and sent
in a stinger to finish the rabbit off, a carrier to pick it up.

It was still uneasy about this when it noticed Ed near the nest the next
morning, confirming its fears. It promptly broke up the net it had been
re-establishing and pulled all units back in. Maybe if it left him
strictly alone, he might still go on about his business, whatever that
was, and let the Harn get back to its harvesting.

       *       *       *       *       *

By noon, Ed was getting pretty stiff sitting in the tree. He climbed
down and eased over toward the stump, watching where he set his feet. He
was pretty sure the snakeproof pants would stop the stingers, but he saw
no point in putting them to the test until he had to.

About fifty yards away, he got a good view, and it did look like there
might be a sizable hole under the stump. He studied it carefully with
the glasses. There was a smooth-beaten mound in front, and exposed roots
