scientist plunged on. "Sir," he said hoarsely, "we need you. We _will_
need you! I'm a scientist--I know nothing of the problems of ... ah,
community living. Neither does Knox. He's accustomed to major
crises--and solving them by giving orders. But both of us know there'll
come a time when people won't take orders--"

"Absolutely correct," Knox said unexpectedly. "Once we get settled on
Mars, the military takes a back seat. And--I mean this, Lansing--_I'll_
be damn' glad of it. When the people get their towns built they'll need
some gents with the right kind know-how to help them, show them--"

"That's all very interesting, general, but it's not for me."

"Why not?"

Halloran snubbed out his cigarette, looked up at the general and at the
scientist. He smiled briefly. "It's just my job, gentlemen--let's not
discuss the matter any further. You can't make me go."

"We will!" barked Knox. "I told you you were under the jurisdiction of
the Fifth Defense Command and you are. If I want to, I can send a tank
company over here and drag you to those ships!"

"He's right, you know," Lansing said.

Court stood up and took one step toward the general.

"Alfred!" the warden did not lift his voice, but Court stopped. "General
Knox," Halloran went on in a conversational tone, "you're being a bit of
bully, you know, and in this prison we've all been ... ah, conditioned
against bullies." He looked down at his desk and frowned. "However, I'll
admit that your position requires that I elaborate my reasons for
staying here. Well, then. As I see it, your people, your ... ah,
colonists, can help themselves. Most of _my_ people, the inmates here,
can't. A long time ago, gentlemen, I decided I'd spend my life helping
the one man in our society who seemingly can't help himself, the
so-called criminal. I've always felt that society owes a debt to the
criminal ... instead of the other way around."

He hesitated, grinned apologetically at Captain Court. "I'm sermonizing
again, eh, Alfred? But," he shrugged, "if I must get dramatic about it I
can only say that my life's work ends only with my--death."

"It's quite a rough job, you know," Goldsmid remarked. "This is a
maximum security institution. Too many of the inmates have disappointed
the warden. But he keeps trying and we've learned to follow his
example."

"Our psychiatric bunch have done some mighty interesting things," beamed
Slade, "even with cases that looked absolutely hopeless."

"None of them can be saved now," muttered Lansing.

"That is in the hands of God," Goldsmid replied.

"Well," Halloran said gently, "still going to send those tanks after me,
general?"

"Uh ... no ... I won't interfere with a man doing his duty."

Lansing cleared his throat, looked slowly from the somber-faced
clergyman, to the fidgeting medico, to the burly captain, still staring
impassively at the general, to, finally, the quiet, smiling warden.
"Gentlemen," he said slowly, "it occurs to me that the situation hasn't
actually registered on you. The earth is really doomed, you know. This
dust simply won't tolerate organic life. In some way--we have not had
time to discover how--it's self-multiplying, so, as I said, it spreads.
Right now, not a tenth of this entire continent--from the pole down to
the Panama Canal--is capable of supporting any kind of life as we know
it. And that area is diminishing hourly."

"No way of checking it?" Slade asked. His tone was one of idle
curiosity, nothing else.

"No. It's death, gentlemen. As deadly as your ... ah, gallows."

"We use the gas chamber," Halloran corrected him. His mouth twisted.
"More humane, you know."

There was brief quiet, then the warden said, "Well ... now that we've
finished philosophizing, let's get back to the matter at hand. We can
have everyone that's going ready to leave by seven tonight. Will that be
satisfactory?"

"It'll have to be," Knox grunted.

"Thank you." Halloran reached for his phone, then dropped his hands on
his desk. "I'd like to ask you a question," he said. "Perhaps it's
presumptuous, but I'm rather curious about the ... er, last workings of
our government. Tell me, don't you really have room for our inmates? You
haven't told us how many ships you've built. Or how big they are."

Lansing looked at Knox. The general flushed, then stared at the floor.
Lansing shrugged tiredly.

"Oh, we've plenty of room," he sighed. "But ... our orders are to take
only those completely fit to build a new world. We've ... well, we have
practiced a lot of euthanasia lately."

"Judges," murmured Goldsmid.

"If you had come sooner," there was no anger in Halloran's voice,
"couldn't you have selected some of our people, those that I ... all of
us know are ready for rehabilitation--even on another planet?"

"Perhaps. But no one remembered there was a prison nearby."

The warden looked at the rabbi. Goldsmid raised his heavy shoulders in
an ancient Hebraic gesture.

"That was always the trouble, wasn't it, Pete?" Halloran murmured.
"People never remembered the prisons!"

The telephone beside him shrilled loudly, urgently.

       *       *       *       *       *

The inmate mopping the floor of Condemned Row's single corridor slowed
in front of Bert Doyle's cell. Doyle was slated for a ride down the
elevator that night to the death cell behind the gas chamber. At the
moment, he was stretched out on his bunk, listening to the soft voice of
Father Nelson.

"Sorry to interrupt," the inmate said, "but I thought you'd like to know
that all hell's busting loose down in the yard."

Father Nelson looked up.

Doyle, too, looked interested. "A riot?" he asked.

"Yessiree, bob!"

"Nonsense!" snapped the priest. "This prison doesn't have riots!"

"Well, it's sure got one, now. 'Scuse me, Father, but it's the truth.
The men grabbed four or five yard guards and the screws in the towers
don't dare shoot!"

He gave up all pretense of work and stood, leaning on his mop-handle,
his rheumy old eyes glowing with a feverish excitement.
