compounded with water only.

A calcarious earth deprived of its air, or in the state of quick-lime,
greedily absorbs a considerable quantity of water, becomes soluble in
that fluid, and is then said to be slaked; but as soon as it meets with
fixed air, it is supposed to quit the water and join itself to the air,
for which it has a superior attraction, and is therefore restored to its
first state of mildness and insolubility in water.

When slaked lime is mixed with water, the fixed air in the water is
attracted by the lime, and saturates a small portion of it, which then
becomes again incapable of dissolution, but part of the remaining slaked
lime is dissolved and composes lime-water.

If this fluid be exposed to the open air, the particles of quick-lime
which are nearest the surface gradually attract the particles of fixed
air which float in the atmosphere. But at the same time that a particle
of lime is thus saturated with air, it is also restored to its native
state of mildness and insolubility; and as the whole of this change
must happen at the surface, the whole of the lime is successively
collected there under its original form of an insipid calcarious earth,
called the cream or crusts of lime-water.

When quick-lime itself is exposed to the open air, it absorbs the
particles of water and of fixed air which come within its sphere of
attraction, as it meets with the first of these in greatest plenty, the
greatest part of it assumes the form of slaked lime; the rest is
restored to its original state; and if it be exposed for a sufficient
length of time, the whole of it is gradually saturated with air, to
which the water as gradually yields its place.

We have already shown by experiment, that magnesia alba is a compound of
a peculiar earth and fixed air. When this substance is mixed with
lime-water, the lime shews a stronger attraction for fixed air than that
of the earth of magnesia; the air leaves this powder to join itself to
the lime. And as neither the lime when saturated with air, nor the
magnesia when deprived of it, are soluble in water, the lime-water
becomes perfectly pure and insipid, the lime which it contained being
mixed with the magnesia. But if the magnesia be deprived of air by
calcination before it is mixed with the lime-water, this fluid suffers
no alteration.

If quick-lime be mixed with a dissolved alkali, it likeways shews an
attraction for fixed air superior to that of the alkali. It robs this
salt of its air, and thereby becomes mild itself, while the alkali is
consequently rendered more corrosive, or discovers its natural degree of
acrimony or strong attraction for water, and for bodies of the
inflammable, and of the animal and vegetable kind; which attraction was
less perceivable as long as it was saturated with air. And the volatile
alkali when deprived of its air, besides this attraction for various
bodies, discovers likeways its natural degree of volatility, which was
formerly somewhat repressed by the air adhering to it, in the same
manner as it is repressed by the addition of an acid.

This account of lime and alkalis recommended itself by its simplicity,
and by affording an easy solution of many _phaenomena_, but appeared upon
a nearer view to be attended with consequences that were so very new and
extraordinary, as to render suspicious the principles from which they
were drawn.

I resolved however to examine, in a particular manner, such of these
consequences as were the most unavoidable, and found the greatest number
of them might be reduced to the following propositions:

     I. If we only separate a quantity of air from lime and alkalis,
     when we render them caustic they will be found to lose part of
     their weight in the operation, but will saturate the same quantity
     of acid as before, and the saturation will be performed without
     effervescence.

     II. If quick-lime be no other than a calcarious earth deprived of
     its air, and whose attraction for fixed air is stronger than that
     of alkalis, it follows, that, by adding to it a sufficient quantity
     of alkali saturated with air, the lime will recover the whole of
     its air, and be entirely restored to its original weight and
     condition: and it also follows, that the earth separated from
     lime-water by an alkali, is the lime which was dissolved in the
     water now restored to its original mild and insoluble state.

     III. If it be supposed that slaked lime does not contain any parts
     which are more firey, active or subtile than others, and by which
     chiefly it communicates its virtues to water; but that it is an
     uniform compound of lime and water: it follows, that, as part of it
     can be dissolved in water, the whole of it is also capable of being
     dissolved.

     IV. If the acrimony of the caustic alkali does not depend on any
     part of the lime adhering to it, a caustic or soap-ley will
     consequently be found to contain no lime, unless the quantity of
     lime employed in making it were greater than what is just
     sufficient to extract the whole air of the alkali; for then as much
     of the superfluous quick-lime might possibly be dissolved by the
     ley as would be dissolved by pure water, or the ley would contain
     as much lime as lime-water does.

     V. We have shewn in the former experiments, that absorbent earths
     lose their air when they are joined to an acid; but recover it, if
     separated again from that acid, by means of an ordinary alkali: the
     air passing from the alkali to the earth, at the same time that the
     acid passes from the earth to the alkali.

If the caustic alkali therefore be destitute of air, it will separate
magnesia from an acid under the form of a magnesia free of air, or which
will not effervesce with acids; and the same caustic alkali will also
separate a calcarious earth from acids under the form of a calcarious
earth destitute of air, but saturated with water, or under the form of
slaked lime.

These were all necessary conclusions from the above suppositions. Many
of them appeared too improbable to deserve any further attention: some
however, I found upon reflection, were already seconded by experience.
Thus _Hoffman_ has observed, that quick-lime does not effervesce with
spirit of vitriol;[7] and it is well known that the caustic spirit of
urine, or of salt ammoniac, does not emit air, when mixed with acids.
This consideration excited my curiosity, and determined me to inquire
into the truth of them all by way of experiment. I therefore engaged
myself in a set of trials; the history of which is here subjoined. Some
new facts are likeways occasionally mentioned; and here it will be
proper to inform the reader, that I have never mentioned any without
satisfying myself of their truth by experiment, tho' I have sometimes
taken the liberty to neglect describing the experiments when they seemed
sufficiently obvious.

Desiring to know how much of an acid a calcarious earth will absorb, and
what quantity of air is expelled during the dissolution, I saturated two
drams of chalk with diluted spirit of salt, and used the Florentine
flask, as related in a similar experiment upon magnesia. Seven drams and
one grain of the acid finished the dissolution, and the chalk lost two
scruples and eight grains of air.

This experiment was necessary before the following, by which I proposed
to inquire into the truth of the first proposition so far as it relates
to quick-lime.

Two drams of chalk were converted into a perfect quick-lime, and lost
two scruples and twelve grains in the fire. This quick-lime was slaked
or reduced to a milky liquor with an ounce of water, and then dissolved
in the same manner, and with the same acid, as the two drams of chalk in
the preceding experiment. Six drams, two scruples and fourteen grains of
the acid finished the saturation without any sensible effervescence or
loss of weight.

It therefore appears from these experiments, that no air is separated
from quick-lime by an acid, and that chalk saturates nearly the same
quantity of acid after it is converted into quick-lime as before.

With respect to the second proposition, I tried the following
experiments.

A piece of perfect quick-lime made from two drams of chalk, and which
weighed one dram and eight grains, was reduced to a very fine powder,
and thrown into a filtrated mixture of an ounce of a fixed alkaline salt
and two ounces of water. After a slight digestion, the powder being well
washed and dried, weighed one dram and fifty eight grains. It was
similar in every trial to a fine powder of ordinary chalk, and was
therefore saturated with air which must have been furnished by the
alkali.

A dram of pure salt of tartar was dissolved in fourteen pounds of
lime-water, and the powder thereby precipitated, being carefully
collected and dried, weighed one and fifty grains. When exposed to a
violent fire, it was converted into a true quick-lime, and had every
other quality of a calcarious earth.

This experiment was repeated with the volatile alkali, and also with the
fossil or alkali of sea-salt, and exactly with the same event.

The third proposition had less appearance of probability than the
foregoing; but, as an accurate experiment was the only test of its
truth, I reduced eight grains of perfect quick-lime made of chalk, to an
exceedingly subtile powder, by slaking it in two drams of distilled
water boiling hot, and immediately threw the mixture into eighteen
ounces of distilled water in a flask. After shaking it, a light
sediment, which floated thro' the liquor, was allowed to subside and
this, when collected with the greatest care, and dryed, weighed, as
nearly as I could guess, one third of a grain. The water tasted strongly
of the lime, had all the qualities of lime-water, and yielded twelve
grains of precipitate, upon the addition of salt of tartar. In repeating
this experiment, the quantity of sediment was sometimes less than the
above, and sometimes amounted to half a grain. It consisted partly of an
earth which effervesced violently with _aqua fortis_, and partly of an
ochry powder, which would not dissolve in that acid. The ochry powder,
as it usually appears in chalk to the eye, in the form of veins running
thro' its substance, must be considered only as an accidental or foreign
admixture; and, with respect to the minute portion of alkaline earth
which composed the remainder of the sediment, it cannot be supposed to
have been originally different from the rest, and incapable, from its
