"I like it so well, I surrender," Lemson said with a pleased smile. "You
were right all along in pushing him so we'll put him in 'Land' as you
want and I'll at last have you off my back."

"Y'know, Cy, Lorancelli is wrong about the receptorman."

"He didn't exactly say--"

"Oh Zack is the best there is," Herschell interrupted, "but right after
we started recording the Rowe feelie he came in all shook up to see me.
Said the Rowe stuff was recording as if he was actually living the part.
There were no extraneous sublevels at all and that's just never happened
before. It's like Lorancelli says about Rowe dying and the character
coming to life. Zack swears that Rowe just disappears. There isn't a
speck of him that shows on the strip."

"Then Zack should be happy, not having to over-engineer the recording."

"Oh now, it isn't all breeze. There's highlighting and emphasizing
selected perceptics and such. You know Zack's the difference between the
artist and the photographer. Actually Zack's real difficulty is the
battle he has to keep from getting completely sucked in to Rowe's
portrayal while he's recording. Don't misunderstand. He's not
complaining. In fact when I suggested relieving him if the strain was
too much he said if he couldn't do Rowe's feelies I could relieve him
from the payroll. It's that much of a challenge for him. So much so,
he's designed a new receptor adaptor to prevent Rowe's potency from
overpowering him."

"Will there be any trouble in making 'Land'?"

"Yes," Herschell said bleakly as Lemson prepared to hear the worst, "we
need horses. In this atom age I'd like to know where I'm going to get a
couple of divisions of cavalry."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Why you can't even see where they put it," Robina said, fingering
Jason's skull. "Oh, wait, Ah feel a little hard lump right here. Ah'm
right ain't Ah? That's the relay."

"No it ain't," Jason said laughing. "Got that fallin' off a horse
yesterday."

"But why do you have to have one at all? Ah thought you could project
without it."

"Well Ah can, but this makes it better. This picks up all the tiny waves
from mah brain that wouldn't otherwise get recorded. Like the difference
between super high-fi an' ordinary high-fi. It makes the feelie more
real."

"When are you goin' to be in somethin' else besides westerns? Ain't you
ever goin' to get to do some romancin'?"

"Now don't you go lookin' at the wrong end of the hog, Robee. They been
keepin' our bellies filled. Besides this one Ah'm doin' now ain't no
western."

"Then what's all them horses over there for?"

"Confederate cavalry, you melon head. What you think this uniform is
Ah'm wearin'? Fine southern daughter you are!"

"Oh, a civil war feelie! What's it called?"

"... uh ... A Stillness in the Land." Jason smiled, "An' it sure would
make Mr. Lemson happy to know Ah remembered the title. They say it was a
big best seller book. Goin' to cost ten million dollars. Ah play the
lead; Jed Carter, young southern fella. Lots of love an' battles an' the
best thing is Ah don't have to fret about mah accent." Jason took his
sister's arm. "C'mon now if you want to see the set. Ah'll be havin' to
go to work in a few minutes."

       *       *       *       *       *

They passed by one of the receptors and Jason stopped. "Now here's the
machine that picks up an' records what Ah'm thinkin' an' feelin'. The
receptorman wears this gizmo on his head an' cuts in to what Ah'm
feelin' an' he fiddles them dials an' switches an' amplifies weak
signals an' cuts down overpowerin' ones an'--well, Ah don't want to
frazzle you with the technical details; he jus' controls the quality of
the recordin'. He cuts out stuff that don't belong like if Ah should be
kissin' the gal an' somewhere under those passionate thoughts Ah might
wonder when we're goin' to knock off for lunch. Here, slip this headset
on an' Ah'll get Zack to run it so you can feel how it works."

"Don't do anythin' strong," Robina advised.

"Don't worry. Jus' a peaceful bit."

Zack came over at Jason's call and ran the receptor while Jason went
through a few quiet lines with an extra.

"Why it's funny, somehow," Robina said after they removed the headset.
"It jus' didn't seem very good. Ah've felt you better without it,
Jason."

"You didn't get the full projection," Zack explained. "You see, Miss
Rowe, the receptorman has got to be alert. He can't just relax and enjoy
the scene and become the actor like a paying customer. He's got to work,
keeping the perceptics, the feelings coming through in balance. So
there's a circuit, a part of this machine that sort of shields enough of
the operator's mind and keeps it from getting lost in the story while it
runs the receptor and lets the other part live the scene."

"That sounds hard to do," Robina said.

"It takes training and special conditioning but the point is nobody
connected with the production of a feelie ever gets to feel it in all
its original depth as the feeliegoer does. Rushes are run at the lowest
intensity so that the producers and directors can comment and plan
changes as the strips are run. Even with projector intensity set high we
can't totally submerge in the character's identity because that
specially conditioned part of our minds won't submit."

