Just then, past the fringes of a large cloud that the wind was
driving eastward, the moon appeared.  The surface of the sea
glistened under its rays.  That kindly light rekindled our strength.
I held up my head again.  My eyes darted to every point of the horizon.
I spotted the frigate.  It was five miles from us and formed no
more than a dark, barely perceptible mass.  But as for longboats,
not a one in sight!

I tried to call out.  What was the use at such a distance!
My swollen lips wouldn't let a single sound through.  Conseil could
still articulate a few words, and I heard him repeat at intervals:

"Help!  Help!"

Ceasing all movement for an instant, we listened.  And it may have
been a ringing in my ear, from this organ filling with impeded blood,
but it seemed to me that Conseil's shout had received an answer back.

"Did you hear that?"  I muttered.

"Yes, yes!"

And Conseil hurled another desperate plea into space.

This time there could be no mistake!  A human voice had answered us!
Was it the voice of some poor devil left behind in midocean,
some other victim of that collision suffered by our ship?
Or was it one of the frigate's longboats, hailing us out of the gloom?

Conseil made one final effort, and bracing his hands on my shoulders,
while I offered resistance with one supreme exertion, he raised
himself half out of the water, then fell back exhausted.

"What did you see?"

"I saw . . . ," he muttered, "I saw . . . but we mustn't talk . . .
save our strength . . . !"

What had he seen?  Then, lord knows why, the thought of the monster came
into my head for the first time . . . !  But even so, that voice . . . ?
Gone are the days when Jonahs took refuge in the bellies of whales!

Nevertheless, Conseil kept towing me.  Sometimes he looked up,
stared straight ahead, and shouted a request for directions,
which was answered by a voice that was getting closer and closer.
I could barely hear it.  I was at the end of my strength; my fingers
gave out; my hands were no help to me; my mouth opened convulsively,
filling with brine; its coldness ran through me; I raised my head
one last time, then I collapsed. . . .

Just then something hard banged against me.  I clung to it.
Then I felt myself being pulled upward, back to the surface of the water;
my chest caved in, and I fainted. . . .

For certain, I came to quickly, because someone was massaging me
so vigorously it left furrows in my flesh.  I half opened my eyes. . . .

"Conseil!"  I muttered.

"Did master ring for me?"  Conseil replied.

Just then, in the last light of a moon settling on the horizon,
I spotted a face that wasn't Conseil's but which I recognized at once.

"Ned!"  I exclaimed.

"In person, sir, and still after his prize!" the Canadian replied.

"You were thrown overboard after the frigate's collision?"

"Yes, professor, but I was luckier than you, and right away I was
able to set foot on this floating islet."

"Islet?"

"Or in other words, on our gigantic narwhale."

"Explain yourself, Ned."

"It's just that I soon realized why my harpoon got blunted and couldn't
puncture its hide."

"Why, Ned, why?"

"Because, professor, this beast is made of boilerplate steel!"

At this point in my story, I need to get a grip on myself,
reconstruct exactly what I experienced, and make doubly sure
of everything I write.

The Canadian's last words caused a sudden upheaval in my brain.
I swiftly hoisted myself to the summit of this half-submerged creature
or object that was serving as our refuge.  I tested it with my foot.
Obviously it was some hard, impenetrable substance, not the soft
matter that makes up the bodies of our big marine mammals.

But this hard substance could have been a bony carapace, like those
that covered some prehistoric animals, and I might have left it
at that and classified this monster among such amphibious reptiles
as turtles or alligators.

Well, no.  The blackish back supporting me was smooth and polished
with no overlapping scales.  On impact, it gave off a metallic sonority,
and as incredible as this sounds, it seemed, I swear, to be made
of riveted plates.

No doubts were possible!  This animal, this monster, this natural
phenomenon that had puzzled the whole scientific world, that had
muddled and misled the minds of seamen in both hemispheres, was,
there could be no escaping it, an even more astonishing phenomenon--
a phenomenon made by the hand of man.

Even if I had discovered that some fabulous, mythological creature
really existed, it wouldn't have given me such a terrific mental jolt.
It's easy enough to accept that prodigious things can come from
our Creator.  But to find, all at once, right before your eyes,
that the impossible had been mysteriously achieved by man himself:
this staggers the mind!

But there was no question now.  We were stretched out on the back
of some kind of underwater boat that, as far as I could judge,
boasted the shape of an immense steel fish.  Ned Land had clear
views on the issue.  Conseil and I could only line up behind him.

"But then," I said, "does this contraption contain some sort
of locomotive mechanism, and a crew to run it?"

"Apparently," the harpooner replied.  "And yet for the three hours
I've lived on this floating island, it hasn't shown a sign of life."

"This boat hasn't moved at all?"

"No, Professor Aronnax.  It just rides with the waves, but otherwise
it hasn't stirred."

"But we know that it's certainly gifted with great speed.
Now then, since an engine is needed to generate that speed,
and a mechanic to run that engine, I conclude:  we're saved."

"Humph!"  Ned Land put in, his tone denoting reservations.

Just then, as if to take my side in the argument, a bubbling began
astern of this strange submersible--whose drive mechanism was obviously
a propeller--and the boat started to move.  We barely had time to hang
on to its topside, which emerged about eighty centimeters above water.
Fortunately its speed was not excessive.

"So long as it navigates horizontally," Ned Land muttered,
"I've no complaints.  But if it gets the urge to dive, I wouldn't
give $2.00 for my hide!"

The Canadian might have quoted a much lower price.
So it was imperative to make contact with whatever beings were
confined inside the plating of this machine.  I searched its surface
for an opening or a hatch, a "manhole," to use the official term;
but the lines of rivets had been firmly driven into the sheet-iron
joins and were straight and uniform.

Moreover, the moon then disappeared and left us in profound darkness.
We had to wait for daylight to find some way of getting inside
this underwater boat.

So our salvation lay totally in the hands of the mysterious helmsmen
steering this submersible, and if it made a dive, we were done for!
But aside from this occurring, I didn't doubt the possibility
of our making contact with them.  In fact, if they didn't produce
their own air, they inevitably had to make periodic visits
to the surface of the ocean to replenish their oxygen supply.
Hence the need for some opening that put the boat's interior
in contact with the atmosphere.

As for any hope of being rescued by Commander Farragut, that had to be
renounced completely.  We were being swept westward, and I estimate
that our comparatively moderate speed reached twelve miles per hour.
The propeller churned the waves with mathematical regularity,
sometimes emerging above the surface and throwing phosphorescent
spray to great heights.

Near four o'clock in the morning, the submersible picked up speed.
We could barely cope with this dizzying rush, and the waves battered
us at close range.  Fortunately Ned's hands came across a big
mooring ring fastened to the topside of this sheet-iron back,
and we all held on for dear life.

Finally this long night was over.  My imperfect memories won't let me
recall my every impression of it.  A single detail comes back to me.
Several times, during various lulls of wind and sea, I thought I
heard indistinct sounds, a sort of elusive harmony produced by
distant musical chords.  What was the secret behind this underwater
navigating, whose explanation the whole world had sought in vain?
What beings lived inside this strange boat?  What mechanical force
allowed it to move about with such prodigious speed?

Daylight appeared.  The morning mists surrounded us, but they
soon broke up.  I was about to proceed with a careful examination
of the hull, whose topside formed a sort of horizontal platform,
when I felt it sinking little by little.

"Oh, damnation!"  Ned Land shouted, stamping his foot on the resonant
sheet iron.  "Open up there, you antisocial navigators!"

But it was difficult to make yourself heard above the deafening beats
of the propeller.  Fortunately this submerging movement stopped.

From inside the boat, there suddenly came noises of iron fastenings
pushed roughly aside.  One of the steel plates flew up, a man appeared,
gave a bizarre yell, and instantly disappeared.

A few moments later, eight strapping fellows appeared silently,
their faces like masks, and dragged us down into their fearsome machine.







CHAPTER 8



"Mobilis in Mobili"



THIS BRUTALLY EXECUTED capture was carried out with lightning speed.
My companions and I had no time to collect ourselves.  I don't
know how they felt about being shoved inside this aquatic prison,
but as for me, I was shivering all over.  With whom were we dealing?
Surely with some new breed of pirates, exploiting the sea after
their own fashion.

The narrow hatch had barely closed over me when I was surrounded by
profound darkness.  Saturated with the outside light, my eyes couldn't
make out a thing.  I felt my naked feet clinging to the steps of an
iron ladder.  Forcibly seized, Ned Land and Conseil were behind me.
At the foot of the ladder, a door opened and instantly closed behind
us with a loud clang.

We were alone.  Where?  I couldn't say, could barely even imagine.
All was darkness, but such utter darkness that after several minutes,
my eyes were still unable to catch a single one of those hazy gleams
that drift through even the blackest nights.

Meanwhile, furious at these goings on, Ned Land gave free rein
to his indignation.

"Damnation!" he exclaimed.  "These people are about as hospitable
as the savages of New Caledonia!  All that's lacking is for them
to be cannibals!  I wouldn't be surprised if they were, but believe
you me, they won't eat me without my kicking up a protest!"

"Calm yourself, Ned my friend," Conseil replied serenely.
"Don't flare up so quickly!  We aren't in a kettle yet!"

"In a kettle, no," the Canadian shot back, "but in an oven for sure.
It's dark enough for one.  Luckily my Bowie knife hasn't left me,
and I can still see well enough to put it to use.* The first one
of these bandits who lays a hand on me--"

*Author's Note:  A Bowie knife is a wide-bladed dagger that Americans
are forever carrying around.

"Don't be so irritable, Ned," I then told the harpooner,
"and don't ruin things for us with pointless violence.
Who knows whether they might be listening to us?  Instead, let's try
to find out where we are!"

I started moving, groping my way.  After five steps I encountered
an iron wall made of riveted boilerplate.  Then, turning around,
I bumped into a wooden table next to which several stools had been set.
The floor of this prison lay hidden beneath thick, hempen matting
that deadened the sound of footsteps.  Its naked walls didn't reveal
any trace of a door or window.  Going around the opposite way,
Conseil met up with me, and we returned to the middle of this cabin,
which had to be twenty feet long by ten wide.  As for its height,
not even Ned Land, with his great stature, was able to determine it.

Half an hour had already gone by without our situation changing,
when our eyes were suddenly spirited from utter darkness into
blinding light.  Our prison lit up all at once; in other words,
it filled with luminescent matter so intense that at first I
couldn't stand the brightness of it.  From its glare and whiteness,
I recognized the electric glow that had played around this
underwater boat like some magnificent phosphorescent phenomenon.
After involuntarily closing my eyes, I reopened them and saw
that this luminous force came from a frosted half globe curving
out of the cabin's ceiling.

"Finally!  It's light enough to see!"  Ned Land exclaimed, knife in hand,
staying on the defensive.

"Yes," I replied, then ventured the opposite view.  "But as for
our situation, we're still in the dark."




"Master must learn patience," said the emotionless Conseil.

This sudden illumination of our cabin enabled me to examine its
tiniest details.  It contained only a table and five stools.
Its invisible door must have been hermetically sealed.
Not a sound reached our ears.  Everything seemed dead inside this boat.
Was it in motion, or stationary on the surface of the ocean,
or sinking into the depths?  I couldn't tell.

But this luminous globe hadn't been turned on without good reason.
Consequently, I hoped that some crewmen would soon make an appearance.
If you want to consign people to oblivion, you don't light
up their dungeons.

I was not mistaken.  Unlocking noises became audible, a door opened,
and two men appeared.

One was short and stocky, powerfully muscled, broad shouldered,
robust of limbs, the head squat, the hair black and luxuriant,
the mustache heavy, the eyes bright and penetrating, and his
whole personality stamped with that southern-blooded zest that,
in France, typifies the people of Provence.  The philosopher
Diderot has very aptly claimed that a man's bearing is the clue
to his character, and this stocky little man was certainly
a living proof of this claim.  You could sense that his everyday
conversation must have been packed with such vivid figures of
speech as personification, symbolism, and misplaced modifiers.
But I was never in a position to verify this because, around me,
he used only an odd and utterly incomprehensible dialect.

The second stranger deserves a more detailed description.
A disciple of such character-judging anatomists as Gratiolet
or Engel could have read this man's features like an open book.
Without hesitation, I identified his dominant qualities--
self-confidence, since his head reared like a nobleman's above the arc
formed by the lines of his shoulders, and his black eyes gazed
with icy assurance; calmness, since his skin, pale rather than ruddy,
indicated tranquility of blood; energy, shown by the swiftly knitting
muscles of his brow; and finally courage, since his deep breathing
denoted tremendous reserves of vitality.

I might add that this was a man of great pride, that his calm,
firm gaze seemed to reflect thinking on an elevated plane,
and that the harmony of his facial expressions and bodily
movements resulted in an overall effect of unquestionable candor--
according to the findings of physiognomists, those analysts
of facial character.

I felt "involuntarily reassured" in his presence, and this boded
well for our interview.

Whether this individual was thirty-five or fifty years of age,
I could not precisely state.  He was tall, his forehead broad,
his nose straight, his mouth clearly etched, his teeth magnificent,
his hands refined, tapered, and to use a word from palmistry,
highly "psychic," in other words, worthy of serving a lofty
and passionate spirit.  This man was certainly the most wonderful
physical specimen I had ever encountered.  One unusual detail:
his eyes were spaced a little far from each other and could
instantly take in nearly a quarter of the horizon.  This ability--
as I later verified--was strengthened by a range of vision even greater
than Ned Land's. When this stranger focused his gaze on an object,
his eyebrow lines gathered into a frown, his heavy eyelids closed
around his pupils to contract his huge field of vision, and he looked!
What a look--as if he could magnify objects shrinking into the distance;
as if he could probe your very soul; as if he could pierce those sheets
of water so opaque to our eyes and scan the deepest seas . . . !

Wearing caps made of sea-otter fur, and shod in sealskin fishing boots,
these two strangers were dressed in clothing made from some unique
fabric that flattered the figure and allowed great freedom of movement.

The taller of the two--apparently the leader on board--examined us
with the greatest care but without pronouncing a word.  Then, turning to
his companion, he conversed with him in a language I didn't recognize.
It was a sonorous, harmonious, flexible dialect whose vowels seemed
to undergo a highly varied accentuation.

The other replied with a shake of the head and added two or three
utterly incomprehensible words.  Then he seemed to question me
directly with a long stare.

I replied in clear French that I wasn't familiar with his language;
but he didn't seem to understand me, and the situation
grew rather baffling.

"Still, master should tell our story," Conseil said to me.
"Perhaps these gentlemen will grasp a few words of it!"

I tried again, telling the tale of our adventures, clearly articulating
my every syllable, and not leaving out a single detail.  I stated
our names and titles; then, in order, I introduced Professor Aronnax,
his manservant Conseil, and Mr. Ned Land, harpooner.

The man with calm, gentle eyes listened to me serenely,
even courteously, and paid remarkable attention.  But nothing
in his facial expression indicated that he understood my story.
When I finished, he didn't pronounce a single word.

One resource still left was to speak English.  Perhaps they would
be familiar with this nearly universal language.  But I only knew it,
as I did the German language, well enough to read it fluently,
not well enough to speak it correctly.  Here, however, our overriding
need was to make ourselves understood.

"Come on, it's your turn," I told the harpooner.  "Over to you,
Mr. Land.  Pull out of your bag of tricks the best English ever spoken
by an Anglo-Saxon, and try for a more favorable result than mine."

Ned needed no persuading and started our story all over again,
most of which I could follow.  Its content was the same,
but the form differed.  Carried away by his volatile temperament,
the Canadian put great animation into it.  He complained
vehemently about being imprisoned in defiance of his civil rights,
asked by virtue of which law he was hereby detained, invoked writs
of habeas corpus, threatened to press charges against anyone holding
him in illegal custody, ranted, gesticulated, shouted, and finally
conveyed by an expressive gesture that we were dying of hunger.

This was perfectly true, but we had nearly forgotten the fact.

Much to his amazement, the harpooner seemed no more intelligible
than I had been.  Our visitors didn't bat an eye.  Apparently they
were engineers who understood the languages of neither the French
physicist Arago nor the English physicist Faraday.

Thoroughly baffled after vainly exhausting our philological resources,
I no longer knew what tactic to pursue, when Conseil told me:

"If master will authorize me, I'll tell the whole business in German."

"What!  You know German?"  I exclaimed.

"Like most Flemish people, with all due respect to master."

"On the contrary, my respect is due you.  Go to it, my boy."

And Conseil, in his serene voice, described for the third time
the various vicissitudes of our story.  But despite our narrator's
fine accent and stylish turns of phrase, the German language met
with no success.

Finally, as a last resort, I hauled out everything I could
remember from my early schooldays, and I tried to narrate our
adventures in Latin.  Cicero would have plugged his ears and sent
me to the scullery, but somehow I managed to pull through.
With the same negative result.

This last attempt ultimately misfiring, the two strangers exchanged
a few words in their incomprehensible language and withdrew,
not even favoring us with one of those encouraging gestures that are
used in every country in the world.  The door closed again.

"This is outrageous!"  Ned Land shouted, exploding for the
twentieth time.  "I ask you!  We speak French, English, German,
and Latin to these rogues, and neither of them has the decency
to even answer back!"

"Calm down, Ned," I told the seething harpooner.  "Anger won't
get us anywhere."

"But professor," our irascible companion went on, "can't you see
that we could die of hunger in this iron cage?"

"Bah!"  Conseil put in philosophically.  "We can hold out a
good while yet!"

"My friends," I said, "we mustn't despair.  We've gotten out of
tighter spots.  So please do me the favor of waiting a bit before
you form your views on the commander and crew of this boat."

"My views are fully formed," Ned Land shot back.  "They're rogues!"

"Oh good!  And from what country?"

"Roguedom!"

"My gallant Ned, as yet that country isn't clearly marked on maps of
the world, but I admit that the nationality of these two strangers is hard
to make out!  Neither English, French, nor German, that's all we can say.
But I'm tempted to think that the commander and his chief officer
were born in the low latitudes.  There must be southern blood in them.
But as to whether they're Spaniards, Turks, Arabs, or East Indians,
their physical characteristics don't give me enough to go on.
And as for their speech, it's utterly incomprehensible."

"That's the nuisance in not knowing every language," Conseil replied,
"or the drawback in not having one universal language!"

"Which would all go out the window!"  Ned Land replied.
"Don't you see, these people have a language all to themselves,
a language they've invented just to cause despair in decent people
who ask for a little dinner!  Why, in every country on earth,
when you open your mouth, snap your jaws, smack your lips and teeth,
isn't that the world's most understandable message?  From Quebec
to the Tuamotu Islands, from Paris to the Antipodes, doesn't it mean:
I'm hungry, give me a bite to eat!"

"Oh," Conseil put in, "there are some people so unintelligent
by nature . . ."

As he was saying these words, the door opened.  A steward
entered.* He brought us some clothes, jackets and sailor's pants,
made out of a fabric whose nature I didn't recognize.
I hurried to change into them, and my companions followed suit.

*Author's Note:  A steward is a waiter on board a steamer.

Meanwhile our silent steward, perhaps a deaf-mute, set the table
and laid three place settings.

"There's something serious afoot," Conseil said, "and it bodes well."

"Bah!" replied the rancorous harpooner.  "What the devil do you suppose
they eat around here?  Turtle livers, loin of shark, dogfish steaks?"

"We'll soon find out!"  Conseil said.

Overlaid with silver dish covers, various platters had been
neatly positioned on the table cloth, and we sat down to eat.
Assuredly, we were dealing with civilized people, and if it hadn't
been for this electric light flooding over us, I would have thought
we were in the dining room of the Hotel Adelphi in Liverpool,
or the Grand Hotel in Paris.  However, I feel compelled to mention
that bread and wine were totally absent.  The water was fresh and clear,
but it was still water--which wasn't what Ned Land had in mind.
Among the foods we were served, I was able to identify various
daintily dressed fish; but I couldn't make up my mind about certain
otherwise excellent dishes, and I couldn't even tell whether
their contents belonged to the vegetable or the animal kingdom.
As for the tableware, it was elegant and in perfect taste.
Each utensil, spoon, fork, knife, and plate, bore on its reverse
a letter encircled by a Latin motto, and here is its exact duplicate:



MOBILIS IN MOBILI

N



Moving within the moving element!  It was a highly appropriate
motto for this underwater machine, so long as the preposition
in is translated as within and not upon.  The letter N was no doubt
the initial of the name of that mystifying individual in command
beneath the seas!

Ned and Conseil had no time for such musings.  They were wolfing
down their food, and without further ado I did the same.
By now I felt reassured about our fate, and it seemed obvious
that our hosts didn't intend to let us die of starvation.

But all earthly things come to an end, all things must pass,
even the hunger of people who haven't eaten for fifteen hours.
Our appetites appeased, we felt an urgent need for sleep.
A natural reaction after that interminable night of fighting
for our lives.

"Ye gods, I'll sleep soundly," Conseil said.

"Me, I'm out like a light!"  Ned Land replied.

My two companions lay down on the cabin's carpeting and were soon
deep in slumber.

As for me, I gave in less readily to this intense need for sleep.
Too many thoughts had piled up in my mind, too many insoluble
questions had arisen, too many images were keeping my eyelids open!
Where were we?  What strange power was carrying us along?
I felt--or at least I thought I did--the submersible sinking
toward the sea's lower strata.  Intense nightmares besieged me.
In these mysterious marine sanctuaries, I envisioned hosts
of unknown animals, and this underwater boat seemed to be a blood
relation of theirs:  living, breathing, just as fearsome . . . !
Then my mind grew calmer, my imagination melted into hazy drowsiness,
and I soon fell into an uneasy slumber.







CHAPTER 9



The Tantrums of Ned Land



I HAVE NO IDEA how long this slumber lasted; but it must have been
a good while, since we were

completely over our exhaustion.  I was the first one to wake up.
My companions weren't yet stirring and still lay in their corners
like inanimate objects.

I had barely gotten up from my passably hard mattress when I felt
my mind clear, my brain go on the alert.  So I began a careful
reexamination of our cell.

Nothing had changed in its interior arrangements.
The prison was still a prison and its prisoners still prisoners.
But, taking advantage of our slumber, the steward had cleared the table.
Consequently, nothing indicated any forthcoming improvement in
our situation, and I seriously wondered if we were doomed to spend
the rest of our lives in this cage.

This prospect seemed increasingly painful to me because, even though
my brain was clear of its obsessions from the night before,
I was feeling an odd short-windedness in my chest.  It was becoming
hard for me to breathe.  The heavy air was no longer sufficient
for the full play of my lungs.  Although our cell was large,
we obviously had used up most of the oxygen it contained.
In essence, over an hour's time a single human being consumes
all the oxygen found in 100 liters of air, at which point that air
has become charged with a nearly equal amount of carbon dioxide
and is no longer fit for breathing.

So it was now urgent to renew the air in our prison, and no doubt
the air in this whole underwater boat as well.

Here a question popped into my head.  How did the commander of this
aquatic residence go about it?  Did he obtain air using chemical methods,
releasing the oxygen contained in potassium chlorate by heating it,
meanwhile absorbing the carbon dioxide with potassium hydroxide?
If so, he would have to keep up some kind of relationship with
the shore, to come by the materials needed for such an operation.
Did he simply limit himself to storing the air in high-pressure
tanks and then dispense it according to his crew's needs?
Perhaps.  Or, proceeding in a more convenient, more economical,
and consequently more probable fashion, was he satisfied with merely
returning to breathe at the surface of the water like a cetacean,
renewing his oxygen supply every twenty-four hours?  In any event,
whatever his method was, it seemed prudent to me that he use this
method without delay.

In fact, I had already resorted to speeding up my inhalations in order
to extract from the cell what little oxygen it contained, when suddenly
I was refreshed by a current of clean air, scented with a salty aroma.
It had to be a sea breeze, life-giving and charged with iodine!
I opened my mouth wide, and my lungs glutted themselves
on the fresh particles.  At the same time, I felt a swaying,
a rolling of moderate magnitude but definitely noticeable.
This boat, this sheet-iron monster, had obviously just risen to
the surface of the ocean, there to breathe in good whale fashion.
So the ship's mode of ventilation was finally established.

When I had absorbed a chestful of this clean air, I looked
