there to do?" he asked hoarsely. "This was my best chance to draw
attention to the reality of our police state. I have much more to die
for than to live for. This has been my life's work--gathering the facts
and contriving to present them dramatically enough to attract national
attention. My only fear was that they wouldn't come after me, and I
might be written off as a crackpot."

"I regret," she intoned, "that I have but one life to give to my
country!" Then her lip curled. "Very well, brainy, if that's the best
you can think up. Let's make it better yet. How about this for a
headline: _Dr. Long and Lovely Model Murdered by Federal Hoods!_"

"Are you insane?"

She shook her head. "I'm dead serious. I'm sticking right in the line of
fire until you figure out a way to stay alive at a profit."

He argued, pleaded and even lost his temper, pulling her to her feet and
trying to force her out the door. He didn't make it. Somehow his arms
slipped too far around her, and she clamped herself to him in a defiant
embrace. The soft warmth of her body, her sweet breath in his nostrils,
the faint essence of her perfume enveloped him in a befuddling weakness.

Live at a profit? How could a man want to die with Julie Stone in his
arms?

He knew it was supremely idiotic, but the thought of her fabulous form
crumpled and riddled with bullets slashed at the tendons of his resolve,
and he clutched her lips to his with the hunger of the condemned man he
was.

"Julie, Julie! Why did you have to--"

"One bullet, a single bullet will do it now." Her lips peeled back from
her white teeth. "Let's stay this way, darling. That's the way you want
it."

Her low, black sedan nibbled at the 100-mile-per-hour limit on the
Freeway as they crossed the state line. In the back seat, reclining out
of sight, his head pillowed on his brief case full of his documented
case against the Humanist Party, was a very thoughtful Dr. Hubert Long,
recently of Mentioch University.

He had driven until dawn while Julie Stone slept, and now, after a brief
nap, he was waking to some of the realities of the morning.

This flight was utterly absurd. When the federal people discovered he
was not dead they would come after him again and again. All he had done
was involve this lovely woman. Long since he had controlled fear for his
own life, but now he knew the exquisite torment of fearing for the woman
he loved.

The emotion was genuine and no less raging for its swift eruption in the
space of a single evening. Dr. Hubert Long was hopelessly and deeply in
love with Julie Stone.

"Quit worrying," she called back to him. "They couldn't have spotted my
car. I parked it a block from your house, remember?"

"I hope you have a plan," Long muttered. "I certainly don't. Where are
we heading?"

"Florida. To my brother's winter place. You know, I just had a thought.
Tom and I are both on the board of regents of Toppinhout College down
there, and there'll be an opening next quarter in the faculty. A
professorship, in fact."

Long grunted. "No dice. They'll have every political scientist in the
country under scrutiny for years."

"This is the chair of anthropology," she said. "We can change your name,
and after this first excitement of your disappearance dies down--"

"But I don't want it to die down!" he objected.

"I thought we settled that. You've got to stay alive to talk to
important people. Tom and I will round them up secretly, and you can
present your case to them. My brother is the senior Senator, you know,
and he's been itching to bolt the Humanist Party for the last two
terms."

"What can I accomplish in secret conferences? The people are the ones
who must be aroused."

"I know, I know, from a soapbox in Times Square, I suppose. Darling, you
can't accomplish this alone. They've proved they are willing to take the
chance of killing you, so they must be stronger than you think. Your
facts must come to the attention of the right people. Over a period of
