
They walked outside into the cool night air. The lights of the city
obscured most of the stars, but a few still showed, and the moon hung
high above Yawk. He could dimly make out the lights of Spacertown across
the river, and he thought again of Laney and Kanaday and wished Kanaday
could see him now with this beautiful Earther next to him.

"You must get lonely in space," she said after a while.

"I do," he said, trying to keep his voice gentle. "But it's where I
belong. I'm bred for it."

She nodded. "Yes. And any of those so-called men inside would give ten
years of his life to be able to go to space. But yet you say it's
lonely."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Those long rides through the night," he said. "They get you down. You
want to be back among people. So you come back. You come back. And what
do you come back to?"

"I know," she said softly. "I've seen Spacertown."

"Why must it be that way?" he demanded. "Why are Spacers so lucky and
so wretched all at once?"

"Let's not talk about it now," she said.

I'd like to kiss her, he thought. But my face is rough, and I'm rough
and ugly, and she'd push me away. I remember the pretty little Earther
girls who ran laughing away from me when I was thirteen and fourteen,
before I went to space.

"You don't have to be lonely," she said. One of her perfect eyebrows
lifted just a little. "Maybe someday you'll find someone who cares,
Rolf. Someday, maybe."

"Yeah," he said. "Someday, maybe." But he knew it was all wrong. Could
he bring this girl to Spacertown with him? No; she must be merely
playing a game, looking for an evening's diversion. Something new: make
love to a Spacer.

They fell silent and he watched her again, and she watched him. He heard
her breath rising and falling evenly, not at all like his own thick
gasps. After a while he stepped close to her, put his arm around her,
tilted her head into the crook of his elbow, bent, and kissed her.

As he did it, he saw he was botching it just like everything else. He
had come too close, and his heavy boot was pressing on the tip of her
shoe; and he had not quite landed square on her lips. But still, he was
close to her. He was reluctant to break it up, but he felt she was only
half-responding, not giving anything of herself while he had given all.
He drew back a step.

She did not have time to hide the expression of distaste that
involuntarily crossed her face. He watched the expression on her face as
she realized the kiss was over. He watched her silently.

"Someday, maybe," he said. She stared at him, not hiding the fear that
was starting to grow on her face.

He felt a cold chill deep in his stomach, and it grew until it passed
through his throat and into his head.

"Yeah," he said. "Someday, maybe. But not you. Not anyone who's just
playing games. That's all--you want something to tell your friends
about, that's why you volunteered for tonight's assignment. It's all you
can do to keep from laughing at me, but you're sticking to it. I don't
want any of it, hear me? Get away."

She stepped back a pace. "You ugly, clumsy clown. You ape!" Tears began
to spoil the flawless mask of her face. Blinded with anger, he grabbed
roughly for her arm, but she broke away and dashed back inside.

She was trying to collect me, he thought. Her hobby: interesting dates.
She wanted to add me to her collection. An Experience. Calmly he walked
to the end of the veranda and stared off into the night, choking his
rage. He watched the moon making its dead ride across the sky, and
stared at the sprinkling of stars. The night was empty and cold, he
thought, finally. But not more so than I.

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned and looked back through the half-opened window. He saw a girl
who looked almost like her, but was not tall enough and wore a different
dress. Then he spotted her. She was dancing with one of the Conforms, a
frail-looking man a few inches shorter than she, with regular, handsome
features. She laughed at some sly joke, and he laughed with her.

Rolf watched the moon for a moment more, thinking of Laney's warning.
_They just want to make fun of you. Look at the big ape, they'll say._

He knew he had to get out of there immediately. He was a Spacer, and
they were Earthers, and he scorned them for being contemptuous little
dolls, and they laughed at him for being a hulking ape. He was not a
member of their species; he was not part of their world.

He went inside. Kal Quinton came rushing up to him.

"I'm going," Rolf said.

"What? You don't mean that," the little man said. "Why, the party's
scarcely gotten under way, and there are dozens of people who want to
meet you. And you'll miss the big show if you don't stay."

"I've already seen the big show," Rolf told him. "I want out. Now."

"You can't leave now," Quinton said. Rolf thought he saw tears in the
corners of the little man's eyes. "Please don't leave. I've told
everyone you'd be here--you'll disgrace me."

"What do I care? Let me out of here." Rolf started to move toward the
door. Quinton attempted to push him back.

"Just a minute, Rolf. Please!"

"I have to get out," he said. He knocked Quinton out of his way with a
backhand swipe of his arm and dashed down the hall frantically, looking
for the elevator.

       *       *       *       *       *

Laney and Kanaday were sitting up waiting for him when he got back,
early in the morning. He slung himself into a pneumochair and unsealed
his boots, releasing his cramped, tired feet.

"Well," Laney asked. "How was the party?"

"You have fun among the Earthers, Rolf?"

He said nothing.

