jointly claimed by Russian and American suits at the United Nations,
while the United Nations itself was trying to establish a claim. The
Martian expedition was American, but a Russian ship was due to land in
two months. The lost Venusian expedition had been Russian, and the
United States was ready to send a ship there.

After nearly forty years, the Cold War was still going on, but now the
scale had expanded from the global to the interplanetary.

And now, up-and-coming China, defying the Western Powers and arrogantly
ignoring her Soviet allies, had decided to get into the race late and
win it if she could.

And she very likely could, if she could exploit the abilities of James
Ch'ien to the fullest. If Dr. Ch'ien could finish his work, travel to
the stars would no longer be a wild-eyed idea; if he could finish,
spatial velocities would no longer be limited to the confines of the
rocket, nor even to the confines of the velocity of light. Man could go
to the stars.

The United States Federal Government knew--or, at least, the most
responsible officers of that government knew--that Ch'ien's equations
led to interstellar travel, just as Einstein's equations had led to
atomic energy. Normally, the United States would never have allowed Dr.
Ch'ien to attend the International Physicists Conference in Peiping. But
diplomacy has its rules, too.

Ch'ien had published his preliminary work--a series of highly abstruse
and very controversial equations--back in '80. The paper had appeared in
a journal that was circulated only in the United States and was not read
by the majority of mathematical physicists. Like the work of Dr. Fred
Hoyle, thirty years before, it had been laughed at by the majority of
the men in the field. Unlike Hoyle's work, it had never received any
publicity. Ch'ien's paper had remained buried.

In '81, Ch'ien had realized the importance of his work, having carried
it further. He had reported his findings to the proper authorities of
the United States Government, and had convinced that particular branch
of the government that his work had useful validity. But it was too late
to cover up the hints that he had already published.

Dr. James Ch'ien was a friendly, gregarious man. He liked to go to
conventions and discuss his work with his colleagues. He was, in
addition, a man who would never let anything go once he had got hold of
it, unless he was convinced that he was up a blind alley. And, as far as
Dr. Ch'ien was concerned, that took a devil of a lot of convincing.

The United States government was, therefore, faced with a dilemma. If
they let Ch'ien go to the International Conferences, there was the
chance that he would be forced, in some way, to divulge secrets that
were vital to the national defense of the United States. On the other
hand, if they forbade him to go, the Communist governments would suspect
that Ch'ien knew something important, and they would check back on his
previous work and find his publications of 1980. If they did, and
realized the importance of that paper, they might be able to solve the
secret of the interstellar drive.

The United States government had figuratively flipped a coin, and the
result was that Ch'ien was allowed to come and go as he pleased, as
though he were nothing more than just another government physicist.

And now he was in the hands of China.

How much did the Chinese know? Not much, evidently; otherwise they would
never have bothered to go to the trouble of kidnaping Dr. James Ch'ien
and covering the kidnaping so elaborately. They _suspected_, yes: but
they couldn't _know_. They knew that the earlier papers meant something,
but they didn't know what--so they had abducted Ch'ien in the hope that
he would tell them.

James Ch'ien had been in their hands now for two months. How much
information had they extracted by now? Personally, Spencer Candron felt
that they had got nothing. You can force a man to work; you can force
him to tell the truth. But you can _not_ force a man to create against
his will.

Still, even a man's will can be broken, given enough time. If Dr. Ch'ien
weren't rescued soon....

_Tonight_, Candron thought with determination. _I'll get Ch'ien
tonight._ That was what the S.M.M.R. had sent him to do. And that's what
he would--_must_--do.

Ahead of him loomed the walls of the Palace of the Great Chinese
People's Government. Getting past them and into the inner court was an
act that was discouraged as much as possible by the Special Police guard
which had charge of those walls. They were brilliantly lighted and
heavily guarded. If Candron tried to levitate himself over, he'd most
likely be shot down in midair. They might be baffled afterwards, when
they tried to figure out how he had come to be flying around up there,
but that wouldn't help Candron any.

Candron had a better method.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the automobile carrying the People's Minister of Finance, the
Honorable Chou Lung, went through the Gate of the Dog to enter the inner
court of the Palace, none of the four men inside it had any notion that
they were carrying an unwanted guest. How could they? The car was a
small one; its low, streamlined body carried only four people, and there
was no luggage compartment, since the powerful little vehicle was
designed only for maneuvering in a crowded city or for fast, short trips
to nearby towns. There was simply no room for another passenger, and
both the man in the car and the guards who passed it through were so
well aware of that fact that they didn't even bother to think about it.
It never occurred to them that a slight, elderly-looking gentleman might
be hanging beneath the car, floating a few inches off the ground,
holding on with his fingertips, and allowing the car to pull him along
as it moved on into the Palace of the Great Chinese People's Government.

Getting into the subterranean cell where Dr. James Ch'ien was being held
was a different kind of problem. Candron knew the interior of the Palace
by map only, and the map he had studied had been admittedly inadequate.
It took him nearly an hour to get to the right place. Twice, he avoided
a patrolling guard by taking to the air and concealing himself in the
darkness of an overhead balcony. Several other times, he met men in
civilian clothing walking along the narrow walks, and he merely nodded
at them. He looked too old and too well-dressed to be dangerous.

The principle that made it easy was the fact that no one expects a lone
man to break into a heavily guarded prison.

After he had located the building where James Ch'ien was held, he went
high-flying. The building itself was one which contained the living
quarters of several high-ranking officers of the People's Government.
Candron knew he would be conspicuous if he tried to climb up the side of
the building from the outside, but he managed to get into the second
floor without being observed. Then he headed for the elevator shafts.

It took him several minutes to jimmy open the elevator door. His mind
was sensitive enough to sense the nearness of others, so there was no
chance of his being caught red-handed. When he got the door open, he
stepped into the shaft, brought his loathing for the bottom into the
fore, and floated up to the top floor. From there it was a simple matter
to get to the roof, drop down the side, and enter the open window of an
officer's apartment.

He entered a lighted window rather than a darkened one. He wanted to
know what he was getting into. He had his gun ready, just in case, but
there was no sign of anyone in the room he entered. A quick search
showed that the other two rooms were also empty. His mind had told him
that there was no one awake in the apartment, but a sleeping man's mind,
filled with dimmed, chaotic thoughts, blended into the background and
might easily be missed.

[Illustration]

Then Spencer Candron used the telephone, punching the first of the two
code numbers he had been given. A connection was made to the room where
a twenty-four-hour guard kept watch over James Ch'ien via television
pickups hidden in the walls of his prison apartment in the basement.

Candron had listened to recordings of one man's voice for hours, getting
the exact inflection, accent, and usage. Now, he made use of that
practice.

"This is General Soong," he said sharply. "We are sending a Dr. Wan down
to persuade the guest. We will want recordings of all that takes place."


"Yes, sir," said the voice at the other end.
