She drew in her breath sharply. "Your people, then, hold you enslaved?"

He laughed--uneasily. "I'm going home to manage Hamilton Lord; it's
the largest trading company in the Federation. We have exclusive
franchises to develop almost five hundred planets. It's my duty,
Niaga; my responsibility; I can't shirk it."

"Why not--if you wanted to?"

"Because I'm Martin Lord; because I've been trained--No, it's something
I can't explain. You'll just have to take my word for it. Now tell me:
how should I go about negotiating a treaty with your people?"

"You spoke of the government, Martin Lord; I suppose you used the word
in a symbolic sense?"

"Your chieftain; your tribal leader--whatever name you have for them."

       *       *       *       *       *

Her big, dark eyes widened in surprise. "Then you meant actual men? It's
a rather unusual use of the word, isn't it? For us, government is a
synonym for law."

"Of course, but you must have leaders to interpret it and enforce it."

"Enforce a law?" This seemed to amuse her. "How? A law is a statement of
a truth in human relationship; it doesn't have to be enforced. What sane
person would violate a truth? What would you do, Martin Lord, if I told
you we had no government, in your sense of the word?"

"You can't be that primitive, Niaga!"

"Would it be so terribly wrong?"

"That's anarchy. There'd be no question, then, of granting us a trade
franchise; we'd have to set up a trusteeship and let the teachers run your
planet until you had learned the basic processes of social organization."

Niaga turned away from him, her hands twisted together. She said, in a soft
whisper that was flat and emotionless, "We have a council of elders, Martin
Lord. You can make your treaty with them." Then, imperceptibly, her voice
brightened. "It will take a week or more to bring the council together.
And that is all to the good; it will give your people time to visit in
our villages and to get better acquainted with us."

       *       *       *       *       *

Niaga left him, then; she said she would go to the village and send out
the summons for the council. By a roundabout path, Lord returned to the
clearing around the _Ceres_. The forest fascinated him. It was obviously
cultivated like a park, and he was puzzled that a primitive society should
practice such full scale conservation. Normally savages took nature for
granted or warred against it.

He came upon a brown gash torn in a hillside above the stream, a place
where natives were apparently working to build up the bank against
erosion. In contrast to the beauty that surrounded it, the bare earth was
indescribably ugly, like a livid scar in a woman's face. In his mind Lord
saw this scar multiplied a thousand times--no, a million times--when the
machines of the galaxy came to rip out resources for the trade cities.
He envisioned the trade cities that would rise against the horizon, the
clutter of suburban subdivisions choking out the forests; he saw the pall
of industrial smoke that would soil the clean air, the great machines
clattering over asphalt streets.

For the first time he stated the problem honestly, to himself: this world
must be saved exactly as it was. But how? How could Lord continue to
represent Hamilton Lord, Inc., as a reputable trade agent, and at the
same time save Niaga's people from the impact of civilization?

It was sunset when he returned to the _Ceres_. On the clearing the
festivities were still going on, but at a slower pace. Ann Howard was
waiting for Lord at the door of his cabin. She registered her official
disapproval of the revelry, which Lord had expected, and then she added,

"We can't make a treaty with them; these people have no government with
the authority to deal with us."

"You're wrong, Ann; there's a council of elders--"

"I beg to differ, Mr. Lord." Her lips made a flat, grim line against her
teeth. "This afternoon I made a point of talking to every native in the
clearing. Their idea of government is something they call the law of
humanity. Whether it is written down or not, I have no way of knowing;
but certainly they have no such thing as a central authority. This
rather indicates a teacher trusteeship for the planet, I believe."

"You've made a mistake, Ann; I'll have to check for myself."

Lord and Ann Howard moved together through the clearing and he began to
talk to the natives. In each case he elicited the same information that
Ann had given him. The mention of a governing council seemed to amuse the
savages. Lord and Ann were still conducting their puzzling inquest when
Niaga returned from the village. She said that the council had been
called and would meet within a week.

"There seems to be some difference of opinion," Ann told her coldly,
"between you and your people."

"Yes," Lord added uncertainly, "I've been asking about the council and--"

"But you didn't phrase your question clearly," Niaga put in smoothly.
"We're not quite used to using your words yet with your definitions."
To make her point, she called the same natives whom Ann and Lord had
questioned, and this time, without exception, they reversed their
testimony. Lord was willing to believe the language had caused the
difficulty. Niaga's people were entirely incapable of deception; what
reason would they have had?

       *       *       *       *       *

From that hour, the clearing was never altogether free of native guests.
They deluged Lord's crew with kindness and entertainment. Lord never left
the ship, day or night, without having Niaga slip up beside him and put
her arm through his. Because Ann Howard had made her objections so clear,
the native women, in an effort to please the teacher, had taken to wearing
more clothing than they were accustomed to. But they rejected the sack-like
plastics which Ann dispensed in the schoolroom and put on the mist-like,
pastel-colored netting which they used normally to decorate their homes.
If anything, the addition of clothing made the women more attractive
than ever.

The scientists among Lord's men analyzed the planetary resources and found
the planet unbelievably rich in metals; the botanists determined that the
seeds for the exotic fruits and flowers were exportable. All told, Niaga's
world could develop into the richest franchise in the Federation.

Niaga took Lord to visit the villages which were close to the landing
site. Each town was exactly like its neighbors, a tiny cluster of small,
yellow-walled, flat-roofed houses nestled among the tall trees close to
a cleared farmland which was worked co-operatively by everyone in the
village. No single town was large, yet judging from the number that he
saw, Lord estimated the planetary population in the billions.

Continuously Niaga tried to persuade him to stay and build a colony in
