
By and by he pulled the stalks, and dried the leaves. Some of them he
pressed into cakes of tobacco; some he rolled into cigars; and some he
ground into snuff.

If you ask what tobacco is good for, the best answer will be, to tell
you what it will do to a man or boy who uses it, and then let you answer
the question for yourselves.

Tobacco contains something called nicotine (n[)i]k'o t[)i]n). This is a
strong poison. One drop of it is enough to kill a dog. In one cigar
there is enough, if taken pure, to kill two men.

[Illustration]

Even to work upon tobacco, makes people pale and sickly. Once I went
into a snuff mill, and the man who had the care of it showed me how the
work was done.

The mill stood in a pretty place, beside a little stream which turned
the mill-wheel. Tall trees bent over it, and a fresh breeze was blowing
through the open windows. Yet the smell of the tobacco was so strong
that I had to go to the door many times, for a breath of pure air.

I asked the man if it did not make him sick to work there.

He said: "It made me very sick for the first few weeks. Then I began to
get used to it, and now I don't mind it."

He was like the boys who try to learn to smoke. It almost always makes
them sick at first; but they think it will be manly to keep on. At last,
they get used to it.

The sickness is really the way in which the boy's body is trying to say
to him: "There is danger here; you are playing with poison. Let me stop
you before great harm is done."

Perhaps you will say: "I have seen men smoke cigars, even four or five
in a day, and it didn't kill them."

It did not kill them, because they did not swallow the nicotine. They
only drew in a little with the breath. But taking a little poison in
this way, day after day, can not be safe, or really helpful to any one.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. What did the farmer plant instead of corn,
          wheat, and potatoes?

          2. What was done with the tobacco leaves?

          3. What is the name of the poison which is in
          tobacco?

          4. How much of it is needed to kill a dog?

          5. What harm can the nicotine in one cigar do, if
          taken pure?

          6. Tell the story of the visit to the snuff mill.

          7. Why are boys made sick by their first use of
          tobacco?

          8. Why does not smoking a cigar kill a man?

          9. What is said about a little poison?




CHAPTER IX.

OPIUM.


[Illustration: A]LCOHOL and tobacco are called narcotics (nar
k[)o]t'iks). This means that they have the power of putting the nerves
to sleep. Opium ([=o]'p[)i] [)u]m) is another narcotic.

It is a poison made from the juice of poppies, and is used in medicines.

Opium is put into soothing-syrups (s[)i]r'[)u]ps), and these are
sometimes given to babies to keep them from crying. They do this by
injuring the tender nerves and poisoning the little body.

How can any one give a baby opium to save taking patient care of it?

Surely the mothers would not do it, if they knew that this
soothing-syrup that appears like a friend, coming to quiet and comfort
the baby, is really an enemy.

[Illustration: _Don't give soothing-syrup to children._]

Sometimes, a child no older than some of you are, is left at home with
the care of a baby brother or sister; so it is best that you should know
about this dangerous enemy, and never be tempted to quiet the baby by
giving him a poison, instead of taking your best and kindest care of
him.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. What is a narcotic?

          2. Name three narcotics?

          3. From what is opium made?

          4. For what is it used?

          5. Why is soothing-syrup dangerous?




CHAPTER X.

WHAT ARE ORGANS?


[Illustration: A]N organ is a part of the body which has some special
work to do. The eye is the organ of sight. The stomach (st[)u]m'[)a]k)
is an organ which takes care of the food we eat.


THE TEETH.

[Illustration: _Different kinds of teeth._]

Your teeth do not look alike, since they must do different kinds of
work. The front ones cut, the back ones grind.

They are made of a kind of bone covered with a hard smooth enamel ([)e]n
[)a]m'el). If the enamel is broken, the teeth soon decay and ache, for
each tooth is furnished with a nerve that very quickly feels pain.


CARE OF THE TEETH.

Cracking nuts with the teeth, or even biting thread, is apt to break the
enamel; and when once broken, you will wish in vain to have it mended.
The dentist can fill a hole in the tooth; but he can not cover the tooth
with new enamel.

Bits of food should be carefully picked from between the teeth with a
tooth-pick of quill or wood, never with a pin or other hard and sharp
thing which might break the enamel.

The teeth must also be well brushed. Nothing but perfect cleanliness
will keep them in good order. Always brush them before breakfast. Your
breakfast will taste all the better for it. Brush them at night before
you go to bed, lest some food should be decaying in your mouth during
the night.

Take care of these cutters and grinders, that they may not decay, and so
be unable to do their work well.


THE CHEST AND ABDOMEN.

You have learned about the twenty-four little bones in the spine, and
the ribs that curve around from the spine to the front, or breast-bone.

These bones, with the shoulder-blades and the collar-bones, form a bony
case or box.

In it are some of the most useful organs of the body.

This box is divided across the middle by a strong muscle, so that we may
say it is two stories high.

The upper room is called the chest; the lower one, the abdomen ([)a]b
d[=o]'m[)e]n).

In the chest, are the heart and the lungs.

In the abdomen, are the stomach, the liver, and some other organs.


THE STOMACH.

The stomach is a strong bag, as wonderful a bag as could be made, you
will say, when I tell you what it can do.

The outside is made of muscles; the lining prepares a juice called
gastric (g[)a]s'tr[)i]k) juice, and keeps it always ready for use.

Now, what would you think if a man could put into a bag, beef, and
apples, and potatoes, and bread and milk, and sugar, and salt, tie up
the bag and lay it away on a shelf for a few hours, and then show you
that the beef had disappeared, so had the apples, so had the potatoes,
the bread and milk, sugar, and salt, and the bag was filled only with a
thin, grayish fluid? Would you not call it a magical bag?

Now, your stomach and mine are just such magical bags.

We put in our breakfasts, dinners, and suppers; and, after a few hours,
they are changed. The gastric juice has been mixed with them. The strong
muscles that form the outside of the stomach have been squeezing the
food, rolling it about, and mixing it together, until it has all been
changed to a thin, grayish fluid.


HOW DOES ANYBODY KNOW THIS?

A soldier was once shot in the side in such a way that when the wound
healed, it left an opening with a piece of loose skin over it, like a
little door leading into his stomach.

A doctor who wished to learn about the stomach, hired him for a servant
and used to study him every day.

He would push aside the little flap of skin and put into the stomach any
kind of food that he pleased, and then watch to see what happened to it.

In this way, he learned a great deal and wrote it down, so that other
people might know, too. In other ways, also, which it would take too
long to tell you here, doctors have learned how these magical food-bags
take care of our food.


WHY DOES THE FOOD NEED TO BE CHANGED?

Your mamma tells you sometimes at breakfast that you must eat oat-meal
and milk to make you grow into a big man or woman.

Did you ever wonder what part of you is made of oat-meal, or what part
of milk?

That stout little arm does not look like oat-meal; those rosy cheeks do
not look like milk.

If our food is to make stout arms and rosy cheeks, strong bodies and
busy brains, it must first be changed into a form in which it can get to
each part and feed it.

When the food in the stomach is mixed and prepared, it is ready to be
sent through the body; some is carried to the bones, some to the
muscles, some to the nerves and brain, some to the skin, and some even
to the finger nails, the hair, and the eyes. Each part needs to be fed
in order to grow.


WHY DO PEOPLE WHO ARE NOT GROWING NEED FOOD?

Children need each day to make larger and larger bones, larger muscles,
and a larger skin to cover the larger body.

Every day, each part is also wearing out a little, and needing to be
mended by some new food. People who have grown up, need their food for
this work of mending.


CARE OF THE STOMACH.

One way to take care of the stomach is to give it only its own work to
do. The teeth must first do their work faithfully.

The stomach must have rest, too. I have seen some children who want to
make their poor stomachs work all the time. They are always eating
apples, or candy, or something, so that their stomachs have no chance to
rest. If the stomach does not rest, it will wear out the same as a
machine would.

The stomach can not work well, unless it is quite warm. If a person
pours ice-water into his stomach as he eats, just as the food is
beginning to change into the gray fluid of which you have learned, the
work stops until the stomach gets warm again.


ALCOHOL AND THE STOMACH.

You remember about the man who had the little door to his stomach.
Sometimes, the doctor put in wine, cider, brandy, or some drink that
contained alcohol, to see what it would do. It was carried away very
quickly; but during the little time it stayed, it did nothing but harm.

It injured the gastric juice, so that it could not mix with the food.

If the doctor had put in more alcohol, day after day, as one does who
drinks liquor, sores would perhaps have come on the delicate lining of
the stomach. Sometimes the stomach is so hurt by alcohol, that the
drinker dies. If the stomach can not do its work well, the whole body
must suffer from want of the good food it needs.[C]


TOBACCO AND THE MOUTH.

The saliva in the mouth helps to prepare the food, before it goes into
the stomach. Tobacco makes the mouth very dry, and more saliva has to
flow out to moisten it.

But tobacco juice is mixed with the saliva, and that must not be
swallowed. It must be spit out, and with it is sent the saliva that was
needed to help prepare the food.

Tobacco discolors the teeth, makes bad sores in the mouth, and often
causes a disease of the throat.

You can tell where some people have been, by the neatness and comfort
they leave after them.

You can tell where the tobacco-user has been, by the dirty floor, and
street, and the air made unfit to breathe, because of the smoke and
strong, bad smell of old tobacco from his pipe and cigar and from his
breath and clothes.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. What are organs?

          2. What work do the front teeth do? the back
          teeth?

          3. What are the teeth made of?

          4. What causes the toothache?

          5. How is the enamel often broken?

          6. Why should a tooth-pick be used?

          7. Why should the teeth be well brushed?

          8. When should they be brushed?

          9. What bones form a case or box?

          10. What is the upper room of this box called? the
          lower room?

          11. What organs are in the chest? the abdomen?

          12. What is the stomach?

          13. What does its lining do?

          14. What do the stomach and the gastric juice do
          to the food we have eaten?

          15. How did anybody find out what the stomach
          could do?
