
"Ah--two young heroes," Ledman said acidly. "How sad. I could almost
feel sorry for you. Almost."

"Just what is it you're after?" I said, stalling, stalling.

"Atomics cost me my legs," he said. "You remember the Sadlerville
Blast?" he asked.

"Of course." And I did, too. I'd never forget it. No one would. How
could I forget that great accident--killing hundreds, injuring thousands
more, sterilizing forty miles of Mississippi land--when the Sadlerville
pile went up?

"I was there on business at the time," Ledman said. "I represented
Ledman Atomics. I was there to sign a new contract for my company. You
know who I am, now?"

I nodded.

"I was fairly well shielded when it happened. I never got the contract,
but I got a good dose of radiation instead. Not enough to kill me," he
said. "Just enough to necessitate the removal of--" he indicated the
empty space at his thighs. "So I got off lightly." He gestured at the
wheelchair blanket.

I still didn't understand. "But why kill us Geigs? _We_ had nothing to
do with it."

"You're just in this by accident," he said. "You see, after the
explosion and the amputation, my fellow-members on the board of Ledman
Atomics decided that a semi-basket case like myself was a poor risk as
Head of the Board, and they took my company away. All quite legal, I
assure you. They left me almost a pauper!" Then he snapped the punchline
at me.

"They renamed Ledman Atomics. Who did you say you worked for?"

I began, "Uran--"

"Don't bother. A more inventive title than Ledman Atomics, but not
quite as much heart, wouldn't you say?" He grinned. "I saved for years;
then I came to Mars, lost myself, built this Dome, and swore to get
even. There's not a great deal of uranium on this planet, but enough to
keep me in a style to which, unfortunately, I'm no longer accustomed."

       *       *       *       *       *

He consulted his wrist watch. "Time for my injection." He pulled out the
tanglegun and sprayed us again, just to make doubly certain. "That's
another little souvenir of Sadlerville. I'm short on red blood
corpuscles."

He rolled over to a wall table and fumbled in a container among a pile
of hypodermics. "There are other injections, too. Adrenalin, insulin.
Others. The Blast turned me into a walking pin-cushion. But I'll pay it
all back," he said. He plunged the needle into his arm.

My eyes widened. It was too nightmarish to be real. I wasn't seriously
worried about his threat to wipe out the entire Geig Corps, since it was
unlikely that one man in a wheelchair could pick us all off. No, it
wasn't the threat that disturbed me, so much as the whole concept, so
strange to me, that the human mind could be as warped and twisted as
Ledman's.

I saw the horror on Val's face, and I knew she felt the same way I did.

"Do you really think you can succeed?" I taunted him. "Really think you
can kill every Earthman on Mars? Of all the insane, cockeyed--"

Val's quick, worried head-shake cut me off. But Ledman had felt my
words, all right.

"Yes! I'll get even with every one of you for taking away my legs! If we
hadn't meddled with the atom in the first place, I'd be as tall and
powerful as you, today--instead of a useless cripple in a wheelchair."

"You're sick, Gregory Ledman," Val said quietly. "You've conceived an
impossible scheme of revenge and now you're taking it out on innocent
people who've done nothing, nothing at all to you. That's not sane!"

His eyes blazed. "Who are you to talk of sanity?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Uneasily I caught Val's glance from a corner of my eye. Sweat was
rolling down her smooth forehead faster than the auto-wiper could swab
it away.

"Why don't you do something? What are you waiting for, Ron?"

"Easy, baby," I said. I knew what our ace in the hole was. But I had to
get Ledman within reach of me first.

"Enough," he said. "I'm going to turn you loose outside, right after--"

"_Get sick!_" I hissed to Val, low. She began immediately to cough
violently, emitting harsh, choking sobs. "Can't breathe!" She began to
yell, writhing in her bonds.

That did it. Ledman hadn't much humanity left in him, but there was a
little. He lowered the blaster a bit and wheeled one-hand over to see
what was wrong with Val. She continued to retch and moan most horribly.
It almost convinced me. I saw Val's pale, frightened face turn to me.

He approached and peered down at her. He opened his mouth to say
something, and at that moment I snapped my leg up hard, tearing the
