
Despite the weakness of her voice, the fear in it rang out loudly. He
tried to laugh and told her he was perfectly fine, except for worry
about her. He made up a story about lying on his bunk, sipping a cool
lemonade and listening to soft music, trying to calm his nerves over the
prospect of becoming a new father and wondering where he would get the
cigars to distribute to the boys.

But she wouldn't believe him. She insisted that he tell her the truth,
pleading with him, crying out her love and her fear and her need. At
last he told her of the crash, speaking lightly, pointing out that the
patrol ship would be back with daylight and all would be well. He didn't
mention the fact that he had no body below the neck, but he knew she
knew it was worse than he described.

Then she was gone again, for so long a time he thought the operation had
started. But the wind still blew raggedly in his ears, and she came
back, slowly, but with new vibrancy in her voice. "Andy, you dope," she
whispered with a brave attempt at sprightliness. "Why didn't
you--tell--me--sooner?" She was gasping, but hurried on. "I can tell the
doctor, and he can telephone somebody and they can use the radio and
tell the patrol where you are. Oh! Andy--where are you--? Hurry--"

She was going again, and as quickly as he could he told her of the river
and the jungle, and where approximately the ship had been just before
the crash. Then she was gone and he closed his eyes and let the waves of
near-hysterical relief wash over him. He was exhausted, the strain of
long concentration had drained his strength, but he could almost feel
the nerve ends in his dead body tingling with the exhilaration that sang
in his mind. It was the miracle he hadn't dared pray for. It would be
the greatest miracle ever performed, and he had almost lost it, almost
killed it, almost thrown it away. But Elsie-- He prayed feverishly now,
thanking, thanking, and praying for the miracle to really happen and for
Elsie and his son to be all right.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then the wind was roaring blackly in his ears and the wind was turning
into a shrieking demon and above it he could hear her wild scream: "They
don't believe me! They say I'm delirious. Andy! They're coming with
something to put me to sleep. They don't believe me, Andy ..."

It ended. The wind stopped abruptly with her voice. The only things Andy
Larson could hear were the blood pounding in his head and the grating of
insects singing their last to the approaching dawn. It was all over, and
he closed his eyes to the lightening sky. It was all over, the miracle
was dead, the miracle never was, he was dead, he never was. Elsie-- He
rocked his head back and forth, wanting to cry, to curse and shout out
his hatred of life. But nothing would come out, nothing was left.

It was all over. He lay under his memorial, a junk pile of twisted
metal, inching his way toward death, the abortion of an abortive
miracle, alone, tearless, wifeless, sonless, helpless.

A faint hum drifted to his ears. He looked up, wondering that the dawn
had come so soon. The sky was brilliant with light, but still he could
not see the patrol ship, knew that it couldn't see him, no matter how
close the hum got.

The hum came closer and closer, grew louder, and then he heard her soft
laugh and the hum faded away.

"Andy? Aren't you coming?"

He stared at the sky, his eyes bulging, his tongue swollen in his
throat. He couldn't see anything, the light was so bright. He thought he
must be dreaming--he had heard that people had strange visions when they
were dying. But her voice sounded so real.

"Don't worry, honey," she said softly. "Everything is all right now.
Come on, we're waiting."

He strained his eyes to see, and the phrase _we're waiting_ struck him
just as the other voice let out a cry.

"What--?" he mumbled, stupidly, happily, afraid to believe.

She laughed again, and little pieces of glittering silver tinkled
