dear! I'll bet it's for me. Isn't it, David? Isn't it for me?"

He shook his head in almost desperate regret. "I'm ... I'm afraid not,
uh--" Snorer. "It's about something else, Leonora."

"Oh." She came around the chair, and he furtively wiped his cheek with
a hasty hand. She sat down facing him, smiling with entreaty. "Would you
read it to me anyway, David? Please, dear?"

"Well, it's not ... not finished yet--not right."

"You don't have to, David. It's not important. Not really." She sighed
deeply.

He picked up the notebook, his breath cold in his constricted throat.
"All right," he said, the words coming out huskily, "I'll read it. But
it's not finished yet."

"If you don't want to--"

       *       *       *       *       *

He began to read hurriedly, his eyes locked on the notebook, his voice a
suppressed hoarse, spasmodic whisper.

    "_Such citadels of our kind's own
    As fortify no peace._

    "_No wall can offer shelter,
    No roof can shield from pain.
    We cannot rest; we are the damned;
    We must go forth again._

    "_Unnumbered we must--_"

"David, are you sure about those last lines?" She smiled apologetically.
"I know I'm old-fashioned, but couldn't you change that? It seems so ...
so harsh. And I think you may have unconsciously borrowed it from
someone else. I can't help thinking I've heard it before, somewhere?
Don't you think so?"

"I don't know, dear. You may be right about that word, but it doesn't
really matter, does it? I mean, I'm not going to try to get it
published, or anything."

"_I_ know, dear, but still--"

He was looking at her desperately.

"I'm sorry, dear!" she said contritely. "Please go on. Don't pay any
attention to my stupid comments."

"They're not stupid--"

"Please, dear. Go on."

His fingers clamped on the edge of the notebook.

    "_Unnumbered we must wander,
    Break, and bleed, and die.
    Implacable as ocean,
    Our tide must drown the sky._

    "_What is our expiation,
    For what primeval crime,
    That we must go on marching
    Until the crash of time?_

    "_What hand has shaped so cruelly?
    What whim has cast such fate?
    Where is, in our creation,
    The botch that makes us great?_"

"Oh, that's good, darling! That's very good. I'm proud of you, David."

"I think it stinks," he said evenly, "but, anyway, there are two more
verses."

"_David!_"

Grimly, he spat out the last eight lines.

    "_Why are we ever gimleted
    By empire's irony?
    Is discontent the cancered price
    Of Earthman's galaxy?_"

Leonora, recoiling from his cold fury, was a shaking pair of shoulders
and a mass of lank hair supported by her hands on her face while she
sobbed.

    "_Are our souls so much perverted?
    Can we not relent?
    Or are the stars the madman's cost
    For his inborn discontent?_

"Good night, Leonora."


VI.

The light flickered on Marlowe's interphone.

"Good morning, Mr. Secretary."

"Good morning, Mary. What's up?"

"Harrison's being deported from Dovenil, sir. There's a civil crime
charged against him. Quite a serious one."

Marlowe's eyebrows went up. "How much have we got on it?"

"Not too much, sir. Harrison's report hasn't come in yet. But the
story's on the news broadcasts now, sir. We haven't been asked to
comment yet, but Emigration has been called by several news outlets, and
the Ministry for Education just called here and inquired whether it
would be all right to publish a general statement of their exchange
students' careful instructions against violating local customs."

Marlowe's glance brooded down on the mass of papers piled in the tray of
his IN box. "Give me a tape of a typical broadcast," he said at last.
"Hold everything else. Present explanation to all news outlets: None
now, statement forthcoming after preliminary investigation later in the
day. The Ministry regrets this incident deeply, and will try to settle
matters as soon and as amicably as possible, et cetera, et cetera.
O.K.?"

"Yes, sir."

He swung his chair around to face the screen let into a side wall, and
colors began to flicker and run in the field almost immediately. They
steadied and sharpened, and the broadcast tape began to roll.

    Dateline: Dovenil, Sector Three, Day 183, 2417 GST. Your Topical
    News reporter on this small planet at the Union's rim was unable
    today to locate for comment any of the high officials of this alien
    civilization directly concerned with the order for the deportation
    of exchange student-observer Hubert Harrison, charged with theft and
    violent assault on the person of a Dovenilid citizen. Union citizen
    Harrison was unavailable for comment at this time, but Topical News
    will present his views and such other clues when more ensues.

Marlowe grunted. Journalese was getting out of hand again. That last
rhyming sentence was sure to stick in the audience's brains. It might be
only another advertising gimmick, but if they started doing it with the
body of the news itself, it might be well to feed Topical enough false
leads to destroy what little reputation for comprehensibility they had
left.

[Illustration]

He touched his interphone switch.

"Uh ... Mary, what was the hooper on that broadcast?"

"Under one per cent, sir."

Which meant that, so far, the Body Politic hadn't reacted.

"Thank you. Is there anything else coming in?"

"Not at the moment, sir."

"What's--" Cabbage. "What's Dalish ud Klavan doing?"

"His residence is the Solar Hostel, sir. The management reports that he
is still in his room, and has not reserved space on any form of
long-distance transportation. He has not contacted us, either, and there
is a strong probability that he may still be unaware of what's
happened."
