approach the wrecks. Doctor, are you satisfied now that Miss Mines's
outworld biotic check was correct?"

"The analysis appears to be fairly accurate," Dr. Egavine acknowledged,
"and all detectable trouble sources are covered by the selected Fleet
serum."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dasinger said, "We'll prepare for an immediate landing then. There'll be
less than an hour of daylight left on the ground, but the night's so
short we'll disregard that factor." He switched off the connection to
Egavine's cabin, turned to Duomart. "Now our wrist communicators, you
say, have a five-mile range?"

"A little over five."

"Then," Dasinger said, "we'll keep you and the Cat stationed at an exact
five-mile altitude ninety-five per cent of the time we spend on the
planet. If the Spy arrives while you're up there, how much time will we
have to clear out?"

She shrugged. "That depends of course on how they arrive. My detectors
can pick the Spy up in space before their detectors can make out the Cat
against the planet. If we spot them as they're heading in, we'll have
around fifteen minutes.

"But if they show up on the horizon in atmosphere, or surface her out of
subspace, that's something else. If I don't move instantly then, they'll
have me bracketed ... and BLOOIE!"

Dasinger said, "Then those are the possibilities you'll have to watch
for. Think you could draw the Spy far enough away in a chase to be able
to come back for us?"

"They wouldn't follow me that far," Duomart said. "They know the Cat can
outrun them easily once she's really stretched out, so if they can't
nail her in the first few minutes they'll come back to look around for
what we were interested in here." She added, "And if I _don't_ let the
Cat go all out but just keep a little ahead of them, they'll know that
I'm trying to draw them away from something."

Dasinger nodded. "In that case we'll each be on our own, and your job
will be to keep right on going and get the information as quickly as
possible to the Kyth detective agency in Orado. The agency will take the
matter from there."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Mines looked at him. "Aren't you sort of likely to be dead before
the agency can do anything about the situation?"

"I'll try to avoid it," Dasinger said. "Now, we've assumed the worst as
far as the Spy is concerned. But things might also go wrong downstairs.
Say I lose control of the group, or we all get hit down there by
whatever hit the previous landing parties and it turns out that kwil's
no good for it. It's understood that in any such event you again head
the Cat immediately for the Hub and get the word to the agency. Right?"

Duomart nodded.

He brought a flat case of medical hypodermics out of his pocket, and
opened it.

"Going to take your shot of kwil before we land?" Miss Mines asked.

"No. I want you to keep one of these needles on hand, at least until we
find out what the problem is. It'll knock you out if you have to take
it, but it might also keep you alive. I'm waiting myself to see if it's
necessary to go on kwil. The hallucinations I get from the stuff
afterwards could hit me while we're in the middle of some critical
activity or other, and that mightn't be so good." He closed the case
again, put it away. "I think we've covered everything. If you'll check
the view plate, something--or somebody--has come out from under the
trees near the column of smoke. And unless I'm mistaken it's a human
being."

Duomart slipped the kwil needle he'd given her into a drawer of the
instrument console. "I don't think you're mistaken," she said. "I've
been watching him for the last thirty seconds."

"It is a man?"

"Pretty sure of it. He moves like one."

Dasinger stood up. "I'll go talk with Egavine then. I had a job in mind
for him and his hypno sprays if we happened to run into human
survivors."

"Shall I put the ship down next to this one?"

"No. Land around five hundred yards to the north, in the middle of that
big stretch of open ground. That should keep us out of ambushes. Better
keep clear of the airspace immediately around the wrecks as you go
down."

Duomart looked at him. "Darn right I'll keep clear of that area!"

Dasinger grinned. "Something about the scout?"

"Sure. No visible reason at all why the scout should have settled hard
enough to buckle a drive. Handing was a good pilot."

"Hm-m-m." Dasinger rubbed his chin. "Well, I've been wondering. The
Dosey Asteroids raiders are supposed to have used an unknown type of
antipersonnel weapon in their attack on the station, you know. Nothing
in sight on their wreck that might be, say, an automatic gun but ...
well, just move in carefully and stay ready to haul away very fast at
the first hint of trouble!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The Mooncat slid slowly down through the air near the point where the
man stood in open ground, a hundred yards from the clump of trees out of
which smoke still billowed thickly upwards. The man watched the
speedboat's descent quietly, making no further attempt to attract the
attention of those on board to himself.

Duomart had said that the man was not a member of Handing's lost crew
but a stranger. He was therefore one of the Dosey Asteroids raiders.

Putting down her two land legs, the Mooncat touched the open hillside a
little over a quarter of a mile from the woods, stood straddled and
rakish, nose high. The storeroom lock opened, and a slender ramp slid
out. Quist showed in the lock, dumped two portable shelters to the
ground, came scrambling nimbly down the ramp. Dr. Egavine followed, more
cautiously, the two handcuffed Fleetmen behind him. Dasinger came out
last, glancing over at the castaway who had started across the slope
towards the ship.

"Everyone's out," he told his wrist communicator. "Take her up."

The ramp snaked soundlessly back into the lock, the lock snapped shut
and the Mooncat lifted smoothly and quickly from the ground. Liu Taunus
glanced after the rising speedboat, looked at Calat, and spoke loudly
and emphatically in Fleetlingue for a few seconds, his broad face
without expression. Dasinger said, "All right, Quist, break out the
shelter."

When the shelter was assembled, Dasinger motioned the Fleetmen towards
the door with his thumb. "Inside, boys!" he said. "Quist, lock the
shelter behind them and stay on guard here. Come on, doctor. We'll meet
our friend halfway...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The castaway approached unhurriedly, walking with a long, easy stride,
the bird thing on his shoulder craning its neck to peer at the strangers
with round yellow eyes. The man was big and rangy, probably less heavy
by thirty pounds than Liu Taunus, but in perfect physical condition. The
face was strong and intelligent, smiling elatedly now.

"I'd nearly stopped hoping this day would arrive!" he said in
translingue. "May I ask who you are?"

"An exploration group." Dasinger gripped the extended hand, shook it, as
Dr. Egavine's right hand went casually to his coat lapel. "We noticed
the two wrecked ships down by the lake," Dasinger explained, "then saw
your smoke signal. Your name?"

"Graylock. Once chief engineer of the Antares, out of Vanadia on
Aruaque." Graylock turned, still smiling, towards Egavine.

Egavine smiled as pleasantly.

"Graylock," he observed, "you feel, and will continue to feel, that this
is the conversation you planned to conduct with us, that everything is
going exactly in accordance with your wishes." He turned his head to
Dasinger, inquired, "Would you prefer to question him yourself,
Dasinger?"

Dasinger hesitated, startled; but Graylock's expression did not change.
Dasinger shook his head. "Very smooth, doctor!" he commented. "No, go
ahead. You're obviously the expert here."

"Very well ... Graylock," Dr. Egavine resumed, "you will cooperate with
me fully and to the best of your ability now, knowing that I am both
your master and friend. Are any of the other men who came here on those
two ships down by the water still alive?"

There was complete stillness for a second or two. Then Graylock's face
began to work unpleasantly, all color draining from it. He said harshly,
"No. But I ... I don't ..." He stammered incomprehensibly, went silent
again, his expression wooden and set.

"Graylock," Egavine continued to probe, "you can remember everything
now, and you are not afraid. Tell me what happened to the other men."

Sweat covered the castaway's ashen face. His mouth twisted in agonized,
silent grimaces again. The bird thing leaped from his shoulder with a
small purring sound, fluttered softly away.

Dr. Egavine repeated, "You are not afraid. You can remember. What
happened to them? How did they die?"

And abruptly the big man's face smoothed out. He looked from Egavine to
Dasinger and back with an air of brief puzzlement, then explained
conversationally, "Why, Hovig's generator killed many of us as we ran
away from the Antares. Some reached the edges of the circle with me, and
I killed them later."

Dr. Egavine flicked another glance towards Dasinger but did not pause.

"And the crew of the second ship?" he asked.

"Those two. They had things I needed, and naturally I didn't want them
alive here."

"Is Hovig's generator still on the Antares?"

"Yes."

"How does the generator kill?"

Sweat suddenly started out on Graylock's face again, but now he seemed
unaware of any accompanying emotions. He said, "It kills by fear, of
course...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The story of the Dosey Asteroids raider and of Hovig's fear generators
unfolded quickly from there. Hovig had developed his machines for the
single purpose of robbing the Dosey Asteroids Shipping Station. The plan
then had been to have the Antares cruise in uncharted space with the
looted star hyacinths for at least two years, finally to approach the
area of the Federation from a sector far removed from the Dosey system.
That precaution resulted in disaster for Hovig. Chief Engineer Graylock
had time to consider that his share in the profits of the raid would be
relatively insignificant, and that there was a possibility of increasing
it.

Graylock and his friends attacked their shipmates as the raider was
touching down to the surface of an uncharted world to replenish its
water supply. The attack succeeded but Hovig, fatally wounded, took a
terrible revenge on the mutineers. He contrived to set off one of his
grisly devices, and to all intents and purposes everyone still alive on
board the Antares immediately went insane with fear. The ship crashed
out of control at the edge of a lake. Somebody had opened a lock and a
number of the frantic crew plunged from the ramp and fell to their death
on the rocks below. Those who reached the foot of the ramp fled
frenziedly from the wreck, the effects of Hovig's machine pursuing them
