parenchyma. It's slower, but just as fatal. This fellow was lucky. He
apparently stayed out of here until he was almost dead. Probably he's
had the disease for about a week. If he'd have come in early, we could
have kept him alive for maybe a month. The end, however, would have been
the same."

"It's a terrible thing," Mary said faintly.

"You'll get used to it. We get one or two every day." He shrugged.
"There's nothing here that's interesting," he said as he released the
clamps and tilted the table. For what seemed to Mary an interminable
time, the cadaver clung to the polished steel. Then abruptly it slid off
the shining surface and disappeared through the square hole in the
floor. "We'll clean up now," Kramer said as he placed the instruments in
the autoclave, closed the door and locked it, and pressed three buttons
on the console.

From jets embedded in the walls a fine spray filled the room with fog.

"Germicide," Kramer said. "Later there'll be steam. That's all for
now. Do you want to go?"

Mary nodded.

"If you feel a little rocky there's a bottle of Scotch in my desk. I'll
split a drink with you when we get out of here."

"Thanks," Mary said. "I think I could use one."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Barton! Where is the MacNeal stain!" Kramer's voice came from the lab.
"I left it on the sink and it's gone!"

"It's with the other blood stains and reagents. Second drawer from the
right in the big cabinet. There's a label on the drawer," Mary called
from the office. "If you can wait until I finish filing these papers,
I'll come in and help you."

"I wish you would," Kramer's voice was faintly exasperated. "Ever since
you've organized my lab I can't find anything."

"You just have a disorderly mind," Mary said, as she slipped the last
paper into its proper folder and closed the file. "I'll be with you in a
minute."

"I don't dare lose you," Kramer said as Mary came into the lab. "You've
made yourself indispensable. It'd take me six months to undo what you've
done in one. Not that I mind," he amended, "but I was used to things the
way they were." He looked around the orderly laboratory with a mixture
of pride and annoyance. "Things are so neat they're almost painful."

"You look more like a pathologist should," Mary said as she deftly
removed the tray of blood slides from in front of him and began to run
the stains. "It's my job to keep you free to think."

"Whose brilliant idea is that? Yours?"

"No--the Director's. He told me what my duties were when I came here.
And I think he's right. You should be using your brain rather than
fooling around with blood stains and sectioning tissues."

"But I like to do things like that," Kramer protested. "It's relaxing."

"What right have you to relax," Mary said. "Outside, people are dying by
the thousands and you want to relax. Have you looked at the latest
mortality reports?"

"No--"

"You should. The WHO estimates that nearly two billion people have died
since Thurston's Disease first appeared in epidemic proportions. That's
two out of three. And more are dying every day. Yet you want to relax."

"I know," Kramer said, "but what can we do about it. We're working but
we're getting no results."

"You might use that brain of yours," Mary said bitterly. "You're
supposed to be a scientist. You have facts. Can't you put them
together?"

"I don't know." He shrugged, "I've been working on this problem longer
than you think. I come down here at night--"

"I know. I clean up after you."

"I haven't gotten anywhere. Sure, we can isolate the virus. It grows
nicely on monkey lung cells. But that doesn't help. The thing has no
apparent antigenicity. It parasitizes, but it doesn't trigger any immune
reaction. We can kill it, but the strength of the germicide is too great
for living tissue to tolerate."

"Some people seem to be immune."

"Sure they do--but why?"

"Don't ask me. I'm not the scientist."

"Play like one," Kramer growled. "Here are the facts. The disease
attacks people of all races and ages. So far every one who is attacked
dies. Adult Europeans and Americans appear to be somewhat more resistant
than others on a population basis. Somewhere around sixty per cent of
them are still alive, but it's wiped out better than eighty per cent of
some groups. Children get it worse. Right now I doubt if one per cent of
the children born during the past ten years are still alive."

"It's awful!" Mary said.

"It's worse than that. It's extinction. Without kids the race will die
out." Kramer rubbed his forehead.

"Have you any ideas?"

"Children have less resistance," Kramer replied. "An adult gets exposed
to a number of diseases to which he builds an immunity. Possibly one of
these has a cross immunity against Thurston's virus."

"Then why don't you work on that line?" Mary asked.

"Just what do you think I've been doing? That idea was put out months
ago, and everyone has been taking a crack at it. There are twenty-four
laboratories working full time on that facet and God knows how many more
working part time like we are. I've screened a dozen common diseases,
including the six varieties of the common cold virus. All, incidentally,
were negative."

"Well--are you going to keep on with it?"

"I have to." Kramer rubbed his eyes. "It won't let me sleep. I'm sure
