He stopped, cocked a wary eye at the other officer. "Don't look at me
that way, man."

The captain had been staring hard at Lance. Now, he began shaking his
head back and forth, slowly and sadly.

"What's that supposed to mean?" Lance asked.

"It means Colonel Sagen doesn't have a daughter."

Lance snorted. "Don't tell me that. I'm engaged to her."

"Sorry, major. I've been around the colonel and his wife since I was a
kid. He got me the appointment to the Academy. They've never had any
children of their own."

"Why, you--" Lance reached through the bars and grabbed the captain by
his shirt collar, jerking him against the bars. "It's a lie! A
conspiracy! Maybe you think I'm nuts. But I'm not!" He commenced
pummeling the captain with his free fist. Then he thought of something
better. He snatched the captain's gun from his holster and leveled it.

[Illustration]

"I'm getting out of here," Lance announced. "Open up this door--or take
the consequences!"

The captain, his face ashy white, submitted and unlocked the cell door.
Lance stepped out, got behind the officer, and prodded him into the
cell. Tearing a sheet into strips, he tied the man to the cot and gagged
him. It took a very short time.

Then, he softly padded down the hallway. He caught the sergeant of the
guard napping in his chair. In a moment, the sergeant, too, was trussed
up, gagged, and whisked into a spare cell. Lance then tucked the
captain's pistol inside his shirt and ventured outside.

It was a moonlit night. A patrol jeep was parked on the drive, begging
to be commandeered. Lance hopped in. There was something he had to find
out for himself, and only one way to do it: Go to the place where they
kept the answers.

Wheeling the jeep along the military street fast as he dared, Lance
headed for the base housing area. Colonel Sagen's trim two-story brick
residence was where he hoped to pay a call. He knew the route by heart.
He'd been a guest there often enough.

The colonel's driveway was empty of cars, he was happy to notice, when
he reached the house. He parked, sprinted up to the porch, and knocked
on the door.

Presently, footsteps sounded inside and the door opened a few inches.
But it was not Carolyn whom Lance saw peeping out at him. It was another
woman, older. He recognized Mrs. Sagen.

Lance was blunt. "I've got to see Carolyn, and I haven't much time.
You'd better let me in."

An apprehensive, almost shocked expression briefly flitted across the
face of Carolyn's mother. It was as if she had never set eyes on Lance
Cooper before. Even the gold oak leaves on his shoulders seemed to
reassure her but slightly. She kept the door chain in place between
them.

"I'm sorry, major. I'm not sure that I understand you."

"Don't malarky me, please. You know who I am and who I want. Carolyn,
your daughter."

"Oh," said Mrs. Sagen. It was said in a way that revealed nothing.

"Look," said Lance, impatiently. "You do have a daughter. I've dated
her. So, all right," he waved his hands, "she's been spirited away for
some reason. I still think I've got a right to know why."

"Oh, my!" said Mrs. Sagen, and her hand flew to her face. "You must be
that scout-ship pilot who showed up yesterday. The one who--"

"Yeh, the one everybody figures for psycho. But I'm not, Mrs. Sagen. You
know I'm not." Lance took a deep breath. "Can I come in? I just want
some facts. After all, this crazy farce can't go on forever."

The colonel's wife still looked doubtful, but Lance Cooper had a way of
pressing a point hard when his interests were at stake. He began talking
rapidly and convincingly.

He got in.

       *       *       *       *       *

The light indoors was better. Lance's eyes squinted, as they adjusted
from the gloom of the porch. Somehow, Mrs. Sagen didn't look quite as he
remembered. Her hair was much darker now; he was sure of that. Maybe she
had dyed it. Yet her features were certainly harder and bonier. More
like a replica of her husband's. And her breath smelled alcoholic. Could
a mere month have made that much difference?

The house had been refurnished too, Lance noticed. The living-room decor
was more severe and functional. And the pictures on the wall were
garish. Not Mrs. Sagen's type, at all.

_Hey, wait a minute!_ he told himself; _speaking of pictures_--his
glance skipped to the far corner of the room. A triptych of photos of
Carolyn had always been on display on the mantelpiece. _They would prove
that--_

Lance's jaw dropped.

The photos had been removed.

"Can I get you anything?" Mrs. Sagen inquired. A little nervously, Lance
thought. "A cup of coffee?"

"No, thanks. I'd rather hear about Carolyn."

"Coffee won't take a minute. I was just making some fresh in the
kitchen."

Lance shrugged. "Well, O.K., if you've already got it ready."

Mrs. Sagen's mouth managed a fleeting smile; then she disappeared
through a swinging door. Lance sat down in a wrought-iron chair. Finding
it not comfortable, he sprang back to his feet and paced the floor.
There sure was something wrong about the colonel's house. Something very
oddly wrong. But he couldn't quite put his finger on it.

Suddenly, his quickened hearing caught the faint murmur of a human
voice. Was it Carolyn? The talk seemed to be issuing from the
kitchen--where her mother had gone. Lance tiptoed across the room,
pushed the door slightly open.

Mrs. Sagen was on the phone. Her voice was excited; she was obviously
straining to keep it at a low level. "I'm telling you, he's here! Right
in our living room. And he insists I know somebody named Carolyn ...
Yes, that's right. But do hurry ... Please. He's acting much odder than
the others did."

Lance had eavesdropped enough. He turned away, glided rapidly out the
front door and into the night.

Where should he go next? The jeep would serve to hustle him around the
base for a while--but eventually he would be chased down and recaptured.
And as for crashing any of the exit gates and thus attaining to greater
freedom, he knew they would all be barricaded and heavily manned by now.

Lance was still burning over Mrs. Sagen's double-cross. Did he want
coffee? she had asked. _Coffee!_ his mind repeated, disgusted. What he
needed was something stronger. A good stiff drink.

That was it! The Officers Club. Casey would be on duty at this hour.
Lance would ask him to mix him a double for old times' sake. Then, he'd
meekly surrender and quietly go crazy in his cell, until the
headshrinker came and confirmed it for real.

       *       *       *       *       *

The pilot got back in the jeep and drove on. When he reached the Club,
he wheeled the vehicle around to a rear entrance where bushes made the
grounds shadier. Parking, he got out, strolled into the building as
sneakily as if he'd been an inspector-general paying a surprise call
from out of Space Service Headquarters.

Few officers lounged about. Most were at tables and engrossed in their
own imbibing. Lance strode up to the bar, perched himself on a high
stool. Casey, whose hair was red as a Martian desert, was rinsing
glasses. He stopped at his task and came over, wiping the counter with a
wet towel. "What'll it be, major?"

"One of your Specials, Casey, my friend."

"Beg pardon?"

"You know--one of your Casey Specials. Where you start off with half a
glass of Irish whisky, add a dash or two of absinthe, a drop of--"

"I don't stock no absinthe, major." Casey's freckled face was abruptly
hostile. "You know that. It's against regulations."

Lance fought down a tremor. Everybody was in on it. Everybody. He
compromised for a minute: "Give me a slug of Teacher's on the rocks,
then."

Casey measured out the drink for him.

Lance downed it. His hand gripped the edge of the bar. "Casey, do you
know me?"

He watched Casey study him. The thick reddish eyebrows knit. "It's a
pretty big base, major. Lots of faces. Sometimes, I kind of forget the
names."

Lance's blood pressure gave a spurt. "I'm Major Lance Cooper! Hell,
you've rung up my chits often enough!"

And his mind added: _How could you forget?_
