laws.

I will conclude this lecture with a few remarks on the nature and
properties of the _radical axis_. This name was first given, I believe,
by M. Gaultier, of Tours, and for a full account of its nature I refer
you to the _Journal de l'Ecole Polytechnique_, xvi., 1813. The radical
axis of two circles is the line perpendicular to the line joining the
centres, from any point of which the tangents to the circles are equal.
Let us suppose that one circle becomes a point, and that this point is
situated on the circumference of the first circle. What is the result?
The radical axis becomes the tangent to the circle. Hence we may
conclude that in a social system of monarchical government the radical
axis is perpendicular to the line attaching the individual with the
monarch. Therefore we may conclude that the radical axis indicates a
tendency of particles, or individuals, to fly off at a tangent, at right
angles to the connecting-link between the individual and the king. When
any motion takes place, this is evident, and this tendency is called
centrifugal force. Sad is it for the State when this force is called
into play, and the radical axis is a standing menace to the stability of
States and nations. The only way to counteract its baneful, disturbing
influence is to increase the attraction of the monarch on the
individual, which nullifies the former force, and prevents further
mischief. This is the method which nature itself adopts in the motions
of the planetary worlds; the attraction of the sun prevents any
disturbance which might be caused in the course of the planets by the
action of centrifugal force, and nature suggests this plan for our
adoption. Increase the attraction of the Throne; rigidly connect each
individual by the strong chords of affection, advantage and utility with
the ruling power; and then, though the radical axis may be there, it
will cease to indicate any motion along it, it will not prevail over the
counteracting influence of loyalty, and the stability of the social
system and the happiness of the individuals will be the results.

                 'I would serve my King,
    Serve him with all my fortune here at home,
    And serve him with my person in the wars;
    Watch for him, fight for him, bleed for him, die for him,
    As every true-born subject ought.'

This, most noble professors, is the language of true patriotic loyalty.
Let the monarch be loved and loving, let the laws be just and equal,
happy will be the people, prosperous the realm. There are those who
counsel different things, and preach sedition and the breaking-up of
laws; but those who advocate such doctrines lack that judicial
mathematical training which we, students and professors of Girtham
College, have acquired. If polemical mathematics, the science of the
future, should become more widely studied; if its results were
disseminated far and wide; above all, if the proper position which women
ought to occupy in the counsels of the nation were assigned to them, we
should hear less of these wild schemes and foolish theories, and the
influence of women would tend greatly to promote the stability and
security of the State.

Why, let me ask, should woman be excluded from that position which is so
justly hers? from those duties which she can discharge so faithfully? It
has been said that if we wish to know the political and moral condition
of a State, we must ask what rank women hold in it. We are told that
women have more strength in their looks than men have in their laws.
Why, then, do men debar her from those fields of occupation wherein she
may labour for the nation's good, and use her influence, which they
acknowledge to be great, in those callings wherein she may most easily
benefit the State, and the country she so ardently loves?

At some future time I hope to speak more fully on this subject; and in
concluding this lecture, I will remark that English politics need a
leavening influence which will counteract the evil tendencies and
corrupt theories which, in spite of our advantageous social system, at
present exist; and this leavening influence will be best produced by
the admission of those into the counsels of the nation who are
acknowledged to have a benign and healthy influence--the women of
England. Let women have their proper share in the government of the
country, and I have no fear lest we shall preserve our elliptical
constitution, and all the advantages which we at present enjoy.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Editorial Note.]--In the bundle of papers which contained the foregoing
lectures, some letters of great interest were found, which show that the
fame of the learned Lady Professor of Girtham College had already gone
abroad, and attracted the attention of the leading statesmen of the day.
It is to be regretted that the answers to these letters are not
forthcoming, as it might be proved from them that the science of
polemical mathematics has already influenced the minds of our
legislators in their conduct of affairs at home and abroad. The
following letter is of unique interest, and may be taken as evidence of
the favourable impression which this new science has made on the mind of
one of our greatest thinkers and statesmen:


                    Downing Street,
                            May, 18--

My dear Lady Professor,--The report of the amazing results of your
scientific researches has reached me, and I congratulate you most
heartily on the originality and acumen which you have displayed in your
investigations. A new light has dawned upon our country. Instead of
groping in the darkness of political warfare, ensnared by party ties and
jealousies, the statesmen of the future will be able to calculate and
determine the correct course with mathematical precision and perfect
accuracy. No one can dispute the truth of a proposition in Euclid, or
the genuineness of Newton's laws; and if your method enables men to
calculate and determine the correct political course of action, to solve
political problems as easily as exponential equations, why--then adieu
to the bickerings of party, the querulous complaints of the Opposition!
Nay, joy to the Ministry! There will be no Opposition! Our statesmen
will be able to guide the great ship of the State by means of charts
which know no error; and they will resemble an association of savants
met together to determine the exact moment of the transit of Venus, or
to examine the degree of density of a comet's tail.

This condition of Parliamentary procedure is much to be desired; you
have shown how such an ideal state of things may be obtained. In the
name of the Government I thank you for your endeavours on behalf of your
country's welfare, and look forward to a further development of your
admirably conceived system. As in the domain of ordinary science there
are complex questions which defy the acumen of the philosopher; so in
polemical science there may be questions which present the same
difficulties and complications. But as the first are daily yielding
before the persevering attacks of the mathematician, so I doubt not
polemical science will soon overcome the various problems which may
arise.

But it is mainly on my own account that I venture to address you. I
desire to consult you with regard to certain matters--political
complications--which have recently occupied the attention of Her
Majesty's Ministers. By the help of your new science, can you aid us
in our deliberations? Of course, I am writing to you in _strict
confidence_, and beg that you will keep this communication profoundly
secret. I fear that would be a hard task for many of your sex, who do
not possess your knowledge and powers of mind; but I have great
confidence in your discretion.

These are the problems which are presented to us for solution:

1. Some members of the Cabinet are secretly in favour of Protection, and
the country is rather stirred by the question. Can you, from your
knowledge of the contact of curves and nations, help us to determine
what course we ought to take with regard to Spain, for example? Are the
principles of Adam Smith mathematically correct?

2. I observe that England is represented mathematically by an ellipse.
Are we right in assuming that Ireland is a portion of that ellipse? Or,
on the other hand, in our chart of nations, must we describe that
troublesome country as a rotating parabola, or complex figure,
altogether outside our more favoured State?

3. Do you consider, from your minute observation of our social system,
that the form of our elliptical government is gradually undergoing a
change, and that a revolutionary parabolic tendency is observable in the
action of individual particles?

4. Is it not possible that the differences in the policy of the various
nations of Europe; the difficulties which beset the carrying out of
international law; the jealousies, quarrels, and rivalries of States
might disappear, if the same form of government (_i.e._, elliptical)
were adopted in each?

If you will kindly favour Her Majesty's Ministers with your opinion on
these questions, they will owe you a debt of gratitude, which they, as
representatives of the nation, will do their utmost to repay.

With every good wish for your further success in the regions of
polemical science,

          I beg to remain,
              My dear Lady Professor,
                  Your faithful servant,
                        +----------------------+
                        |                      |
                        |         [4]          |
                        |                      |
                        +----------------------+


[Editorial Note.]--The next letter is not of quite the same pleasing
nature as the foregoing, and shows that it is impossible to please
everyone, even if that happy consummation were desirable. This letter
was evidently called forth by some remarks which the learned Lady
Professor had made in her third lecture with reference to eccentricity
in dress. Our readers will recollect that the professor pointed out that
an extravagant 'bloomer' costume--half male, half female--was no more a
sign of genius than aesthetic dresses, always betokened the artist.[5]
This latter statement evidently gave great offence to the members of a
society which called itself the 'Aesthetic and Dress Improvement
Association,' and the following letter is the result of one of their
solemn conclaves:


                    Oscar Villa, South Kensington,
                            June, 18--.

The Secretary of the Aesthetic and Dress Improvement Association presents
his compliments to the Lady Professor of Girtham College, and begs to
contradict emphatically her statements with regard to a subject upon
which she is evidently in entire and lamentable ignorance, and to
protest against her aspersions upon the artistic studies of this and
kindred societies. He begs to state that true aesthetes are _not_
eccentric (they leave that to lady professors and her Philistine
followers); that to dress becomingly is one of the principal objects of
life, and that true greatness is achieved as much by the study of the
art of dress as by any other noble pursuit or graceful accomplishment.
Are not Horatio Postlethwaite, Leonara Saffronia Gillan, Vandyke
Smithson entitled to greatness? And yet their laurels have been won
solely by the art of dress. Perhaps the lady professor has never read
'Sartor Resartus'! In conclusion, he would ask the Lady Professor to
refrain from casting obloquy upon the work of the Association which he
has the honour to represent; to prevail upon her pupils to abandon the
unfeminine attire which some of them have assumed, contrary to the first
principles of art; to array themselves in flowing robes of sage-green
and other choice colours (patterns enclosed), and to study art, instead
of absurd mathematics, which no one can understand, and do no one any
good.

     (Approved by the Committee of the Aesthetic and Dress
      Improvement Association.)
      June, 18--.


[Editorial Note.]--The next letter, written by a pupil of the Lady
Professor, requires no explanation, and speaks for itself.


                    Jesus College, Cambridge,
                            March, 18--.

My dear Tutor,

You will be glad to hear that after superhuman exertions I have at last
succeeded in passing my Little-go, and I am eternally grateful to you
for all you have done for me. I should never have got through if it had
not been for you. All the coaches in Cambridge would never have managed
it, but you drove me through in a canter. And why? I never could make up
my mind to work for them; but when I coached with you, you made me like
it. I almost revelled in the Binomial when you wrote it out for me; and
then I could not help listening to you; and you looked so grieved when I
would not learn, and made me feel such a brute; so somehow or other you
drove some mathematics into my head, and I pulled through. By-the-bye, I
think you must have tried the 'brain wave' dodge with the examiners, as
five out of the six propositions in Euclid, which you told me to get up
specially, were set! I wish I could read people's thoughts; can you read
mine? If I were a Don, or a Fellow, or something, I would advise the
University to have some lady professors like you to teach the men,
instead of some of these sleepy old tutors. It would be a great
improvement, and I am sure we should get through a great deal more work.

They have given me a place in the Jesus Eight, which I shall take now
that I am released from your professorial ban, and have time for rowing.
But I don't half like giving up mathematics. You see, I have grown fond
of the study. Do you think you could make a wrangler of me? At any rate,
I should like to come to your lectures again. May I?

                    Your Grateful Pupil.
                         *     *     *


  [4] It is to be regretted that this letter has evidently fallen
      into the hands of some autograph collector, who has ruthlessly
      cut off the signature; but the reader will easily determine,
      after careful perusal of the document, from whose pen it emanated.

  [5] Cf. page 36.




PAPER V.

A LECTURE UPON SOCIAL FORCES, WITH SOME ACCOUNT OF POLEMICAL KINEMATICS.


Most noble Professors and Students of Girtham College,--Since last 'I
wandered 'twixt the pole and heavenly hinges, 'mongst encentricals,
centres, concentricks, circles, and epicycles,' like the great
Albumazar, and found them full of life and wisdom for the guidance of
our States and laws, I have turned my attention to the Applied
Mathematics, in order to determine what other truths this shaft may
yield.

The strength of all sciences, according to Bacon, consists in their
