these last days it took woman's love and devotion to sustain man.

Now Omega gazed around on the abode of death with an expression of
disdain. He challenged it and dared it to do its worst. Life still
triumphed, for he had Thalma and Alpha was coming soon. He would not
surrender. He would fight the dark forces of death--even that horrible
monster down there in the lake--and conquer them all. He would again
'gardenize' the world. The stubborn power of hope, that heritage from
his atavistic ancestors, was surging through his blood.

"We will change all this," he went on, waving his hand toward the far
rim of the sky. "We are still masters of life. But now let us descend,"
he added in answer to her approving smile.

So saying again hand in hand they stepped off into space and floated
easily down toward their last home.

Omega knew that his first important task was to get rid of the beast.
The fear-haunted expression in Thalma's eyes brooked no delay.
Accordingly they went to the ship, and each taking a small sack they
filled them with depth bombs. Thus armed they floated out over the lake
in quest of their enemy. But although quite shallow the water was opaque
for the most part being discolored by vegetable matter stirred up by the
monster, and the transparent portions were too deep for them to see
bottom. Long and carefully they searched at a safe distance above the
water, but no sight of the beast could be seen. Then hoping that a
chance shot might reach and destroy him they passed to and fro over the
lake's center and dropped their bombs. Great columns of water were sent
high in air deluging them with spray. That was all. Still, they had no
way of knowing whether a bomb had struck home. In spots the water was so
violently agitated as to suggest that the monster writhed in a death
struggle. But at last all became as quiet as before.

       *       *       *       *       *

It now occurred to Omega to surround the lake with an invisible wall of
electricity of such power as to electrocute the beast should he attempt
to go over or through it. This was accomplished by increasing the power
of his motors and by automatic controls projecting a high voltage
potential through the air around the lake. And then in addition to other
protective appliances already installed Omega put a similar wall about
the cottage, much to Thalma's relief and delight.

One night they had retired early, Thalma being weary and her time but a
few weeks away. To the sweet strain of music which had been in the air
for ages, they soon fell asleep. How long he had slept Omega could never
guess, but he was awakened suddenly. He sat up bewildered and stared
into the darkness, because for some reason all lamps were out. And then
he became aware of a peculiar sound coming from afar. It was a queer
noise combining the roar of the surf upon a rock-bound coast, the sigh
of the night wind through a forest and the rumble of thunder. Suddenly
it seemed to him that earth and cottage were trembling, and the walls of
the room swayed and buckled as though smitten by a great wind.

Frantically he rubbed his eyes, convinced that it was all a dream. But
the noise drew nearer, thundered in his ears. In terror he got to his
feet, tried to cry out. The words froze on his lips, for just then the
wall before him crashed in as though struck by an avalanche. Then came a
grinding, splitting jumble of sounds, the solid ground shook under the
passage of some mighty force which increased for a moment followed by a
piercing scream.

Frozen with horror Omega stared around the wrecked room whose tottering
walls seemed about to fall upon him. Where was Thalma? In a frenzy he
stared into the darkness, felt over the couch. She was gone!

In some way he got outside and there in the direction of the lake he saw
the monster, its great bulk looming high above the ground, its head
swaying with the swing of its legs as it lumbered along. And, merciful
God--held in the grip of the monster's jaws was Thalma!

The awful sight galvanized Omega to action. With a hoarse scream he
launched himself at the beast, passed rapidly through the air above the
monster and reached out for his wife. Scream after scream rent the still
air as he pressed forward and the beast lurched on in its haste to reach
the lake with its prey. But now Omega was close to his beloved, and he
reached out to grasp her as once more he screamed right into the ears of
his enemy. Then perhaps in sheer terror at the audacity of man, the
great jaws of the monster relaxed and Thalma fell limp and unconscious
to the ground.

As the beast lumbered on Omega knelt by her side.

"Thank God," he breathed, "she lives!"

Then he took her in his arms and turned back to the ruined home just as
a great splash informed him that once more the monster had entered his
element to challenge them for its possession.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thalma soon revived, but she clung to Omega and gazed about fearfully.
How she had wandered out of doors and had been snapped up by the beast
she could not tell, but Omega said that she must have been walking in
her sleep. They went at once to the ship and there spent the remainder
of the night.

Every light, including those about the Mirror, had been extinguished by
the beast breaking the circuit. Yet it appeared that the latter's
passage through the electric wall had caused no harm. Omega explained
that likely its bony scales had acted as an insulator against the action
of the invisible wall.

While the cottage was being repaired they remained on the ship. But
despite their recent harrowing experience, they went back to the cottage
when the repairs were complete. It was more home-like than the ship, and
Thalma had learned to love it, for it was to be the cradle of a new
race. But before they again took up their residence there Omega had
erected a high fence around the cottage yard. This fence was built of
heavy cables securely fastened to huge posts, and each cable carried an
electric charge of 75,000 volts. Omega was confident that the beast
could never break through. His confidence was shared by Thalma, but as
an additional precaution she suggested that Omega place a similar fence
about the lake. He did so, and when the last cable was in place they
stood back and surveyed the work with satisfaction.

"We have him now," exulted Omega. "He can never leave the lake alive,
much less reach the cottage. Despite his tough armor of scales this high
potential will penetrate to his vitals."

"It is well," said Thalma as they turned away.

As they neared the cottage they knew that a crisis was at hand.
Forgetting the dead world about them and subduing the fears that
sometimes clutched their hearts, they lived in the joy of anticipation
and made ready for the advent of a new soul.

Night came down moonless and dark save for the light of the stars. In
the recesses of the rocks and in the bottoms of the valleys intense
darkness held sway. But the grounds and the home of Omega and Thalma
were ablaze with a thousand lamps, and on the near-by hillsides giant
searchlights, which seemed to have no basis, which were born in the
bosom of the air and blazed without visible cause, shot their rays into
the sky for miles. Yet the powerful lights about the cottage were so
tinted as to be restful to the eye. Thus silent and with clock-like
regularity the agents of Omega performed their functions. Man had
mastered all the elements of life. All were his friends and servants,
and none was his master save one--death.

In a perfect setting and exactly at the time set for the event Alpha
came into the world, the child thrived from its first intake of earth's
air.

Three weeks from birth Alpha partook of solid food in tablet form drawn
chiefly from gaseous sources. At two months his speech was perfect, and
at six months his education began. By glandular control Omega nurtured
both his body and his mind and developed them rapidly. Small wonder that
this child--the last to grace and bless the world--became his parent's
only joy and hope. They guarded him from all dangers, instructed him in
the great part he was to play in the world's future and set about to
conserve that element on which all depended--the waters of the lake.

       *       *       *       *       *

But during all these long, hot days and frigid nights, the close
proximity of the monster cast a shadow over their souls, marred their
happiness by day and terrorized their dreams by night. Often, when the
sun beat down upon the lake, they saw his hideous head rise high above
the water and regard them with baleful eyes. Twice while at play Alpha
had seen him and had run screaming to the protection of his mother, who
had great difficulty in persuading him that there was no danger. This
seemed to be true, for the monster made no attempt to force the fence.
Endowed with more than the cunning of its remote progenitors, it seemed
to realize that it was trapped. Many nights Omega and Thalma, armed with
their ray guns and other implements of destruction, watched for the
beast to attempt to come on land. Sometimes he would raise his head and
look at them so long and steadily that icy chills ran along their spines
and their hands shook so that they could not sight their weapons and
therefore shot wild. Then the head would sink out of sight again.

Secure as they felt against his horrible presence it finally began to
sap their courage. Besides, the lake fascinated Alpha, now but three
years old but large and strong. He loved to wander by its shore and
dabble in the water, but so long as the beast remained, an ever present
danger was in this play. Besides there was the fear that he might escape
the watchfulness of his parents and come in contact with one of the high
tension cables.

And then Omega determined to try another plan--he would electrically
charge the water of the lake. He hoped that this would reach the monster
in his watery lair and kill him instantly. So he constructed two giant
magnets and placed one on each end of the lake. Then harnessing all the
electrical energy at his command he sent a tremendous current through
the water with high potential, alternating it at ten second intervals
