
Mayhem didn't answer. It would be many moments yet before he could
adjust to this new, unexpected situation. But in a way, he thought, it
would be a boon. If he were co-inhabiting the body of a living man who
belonged on the _Glory of the Galaxy_, there was no need to reveal his
identity as Johnny Mayhem to anyone but his host....

       *       *       *       *       *

"I tell ya," Technician First Class Ackerman Boone shouted, "the
refrigeration unit's gone on the blink. You can't feel it yet, but I
ought to know. I got the refrigs working full strength and we gained a
couple of degrees heat. Either she's on the blink or we're too close to
the sun, I tell you!"

Ackerman Boone was a big man, a veteran spacer with a squat, very strong
body and arms like an orangutan. Under normal circumstances he was a
very fine spacer and a good addition to any crew, but he bore an
unreasonable grudge against the officer corps and would go out of his
way to make them look bad in the eyes of the other enlisted men. A large
crowd had gathered in the hammock-hung crew quarters of the _Glory of
the Galaxy_ as Boone went on in his deep, booming voice: "So I asked the
skipper of the watch, I did. He got shifty-eyed, like they always do.
You know. He wasn't talking, but sure as my name's Ackerman Boone,
something's wrong."

"What do you think it is, Acky?" one of the younger men asked.

"Well, I tell ya this: I know what it _isn't_. I checked out the refrigs
three times, see, and came up with nothing. The refrigs are in jig
order, and if I know it then you know it. So, if the refrigs are in jig
order, there's only one thing it can be: we're getting too near the
sun!" Boone clamped his mouth shut and stood with thick, muscular arms
crossed over his barrel chest.

       *       *       *       *       *

A young technician third class said in a strident voice, "You mean you
think maybe we're plunging into the sun, Acky?"

"Well, now, I didn't say that. Did I, boy? But we _are_ too close and if
we are too close there's got to be a reason for it. If we stay too close
too long, O.K. Then we're plunging into the sun. Right now, I dunno."

They all asked Ackerman Boone, who was an unofficial leader among them,
what he was going to do. He rubbed his big fingers against the thick
stubble of beard on his jaw and you could hear the rasping sound it
made. Then he said, "Nothing, until we find out for sure. But I got a
hunch the officers are trying to pull the wool over the eyes of them
politicians we got on board. That's all right with me, men. If they want
to, they got their reasons. But I tell ya this: they ain't going to pull
any wool over Acky Boone's eyes, and that's a fact."

Just then the squawk box called: "Now hear this! Now hear this! Tech/1
Ackerman Boone to Exec's office. Tech/1 Boone to Exec."

"You see?" Boone said, smiling grimly. As yet, no one saw. His face
still set in a grim smile, Ackerman Boone headed above decks.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That, Mr. President," Vice Admiral T. Shawnley Stapleton said gravely,
"is the problem. We would have come to you sooner, sir, but frankly--"

"I know it, Admiral," the President said quietly. "I could not have
helped you in any way. There was no sense telling me."

"We have one chance, sir, and one only. It's irregular and it will
probably knock the hell out of the _Glory of the Galaxy_, but it may
save our lives. If we throw the ship suddenly into subspace we could
pass right through the sun's position and--"

"I'm no scientist, Admiral, but wouldn't that put tremendous stress not
only on the ship but on all of us aboard?"

"It would, sir. I won't keep anything from you, of course. We'd all be
subjected to a force of twenty-some gravities for a period of several
seconds. Here aboard the _Glory_, we don't have adequate G-equipment.
It's something like the old days of air flight, sir: as soon as
airplanes became reasonably safe, passenger ships didn't bother to carry
parachutes. Result over a period of fifty years: thousands of lives
lost. We'd all be bruised and battered, sir. Bones would be broken.
There might be a few deaths. But I see no other way out, sir."

"Then there was no need to check with me at all, I assure you, Admiral
Stapleton. Do whatever you think is best, sir."

The Admiral nodded gravely. "Thank you, Mr. President. I will say this,
though: we will wait for a miracle."

"I'm afraid I don't follow you."

"Well, I don't expect a miracle, but the switchover to subspace so
suddenly is bound to be dangerous. Therefore, we'll wait until the last
possible moment. It will grow uncomfortably warm, let me warn you, but
as long as the subspace drive is in good working order--"

"I see what you mean, Admiral. You have a free hand, sir; let me repeat
that. I will not interfere in any way and I have the utmost confidence
in you." The President mopped his brow with an already damp
handkerchief. It _was_ growing warm, come to think of it. Uncomfortably
warm.

As if everyone aboard the _Glory of the Galaxy_ was slowly being broiled
alive....

       *       *       *       *       *

Ackerman Boone entered the crew quarters with the same smile still on
his lips. At first he said nothing, but his silence drew the men like a
magnet draws iron filings. When they had all clustered about him he
spoke.

"The Exec not only chewed my ears off," he boomed. "He all but spit them
in my face! I was right, men. He admitted it to me after he saw how he
couldn't get away with anything in front of Ackerman Boone. Men, we're
heading on collision course with the sun!"

A shocked silence greeted his words and Ackerman Boone, instinctively a
born speaker, paused dramatically to allow each man the private horror
of his own thoughts for a few moments. Then he continued: "The Admiral
figures we have one chance to get out of this alive, men. He figures--"

"What is it, Acky?"

"What will he do?"

"How will the Admiral get us out of this?"

Ackerman Boone spat on the polished, gleaming floor of the crew
quarters. "He'll never get us out alive, let me tell you. He wants to
shift us into subspace at the last possible minute. Suddenly. Like
this--" and Ackerman Boone snapped his fingers.

"There'd be a ship full of broken bones!" someone protested. "We can't
do a thing like that."

"He'll kill us all!" a very young T/3 cried hysterically.

"Not if I can help it, he won't," shouted Ackerman Boone. "Listen, men.
This ain't a question of discipline. It's a question of living or dying
and I tell you that's more important than doing it like the book says or
discipline or anything like that. We got a chance, all right: but it
ain't what the Admiral thinks it is. We ought to abandon the _Glory_ to
her place in the sun and scram out of here in the lifeboats--every last
person aboard ship."

"But will they have enough power to get out of the sun's gravitational
pull?" someone asked.

