
"This what?" she said.

"You know," I said. "Color TV like a picture you hang on a wall."

All the color faded from her face. Her eyes went past me, staring. I
turned in the direction she was staring, and on the wall above the
plateglass front of the cafe was a picture.

That is, there was a picture frame and a pair of dark glasses that took
up most of the picture, with the lower part of a forehead and the upper
part of a nose. I had noticed it once while I was eating and had assumed
it was a display ad for sun glasses. Now I looked at it more closely,
but could detect no movement in it. It still looked like an ad for sun
glasses.

"I don't know what you're talking about," I heard the waitress say, her
voice edged with fear.

"Huh?" I said, turning my head back to look at her. "Oh. Well, never
mind."

I left the cafe with every outward appearance of casual innocence; but
inside I was beginning to realize for the first time the possibilities
and the danger that could lie in the use of this new TV development.

That had been a Big-Brother-is-Watching-you setup back there in the
cafe, except that it had been a girl instead of a man, judging from the
style of sun glasses and the smoothness of the nose and forehead.

I had wondered about the broadcasting end of things. Now I knew. That
had been the TV "eye," and somewhere there was a framed picture hanging
on the wall, bringing in everything that took place in the cafe,
including everything that was said. Everything _I_ had said, too. It was
an ominous feeling.

Aunt Matilda had almost had a stroke trying to get me out of town. Now I
knew why. She was caught in this thing and wanted to save me. Four days
ago she had probably not fully realized the potentiality for evil of the
invention, but by the time I showed up she knew it.

Well, she was right. This was not something for me to tackle. I would
keep up my appearance of not suspecting anything, and catch that train
Aunt Matilda wanted me to catch.

       *       *       *       *       *

From way out in the country came the whistle of the approaching milk
run, the train that would take me back to Chicago. In Chicago I would go
to the F.B.I, and tell them the whole thing. They wouldn't believe me,
of course, but they would investigate. If the thing hadn't spread any
farther than Sumac it would be a simple matter to stop it.

I'd hurry back to the cafe and get my suitcase and tell the waitress
I'd decided to catch the train after all.

I turned around.

Only I didn't turn around.

That's as nearly as I can describe it. I did turn around. I know I did.
But the town turned around with me, and the sun and the clouds and the
countryside. So maybe I only thought I turned around.

When I tried to stop walking it was different. I simply could not stop
walking. Nothing was in control of my mind. It was more like stepping on
the brakes and the brakes not responding.

I gave up trying, more curious about what was happening than alarmed. I
walked two blocks along Main Street. Ahead of me I saw a sign. It was
the only new sign I had seen in Sumac. In ornate Neon script it said,
"PORTRAITS by Lana."

       *       *       *       *       *

I don't know whether my feet took me inside independently of my mind or
not, because I was sure that this was the place and I wanted to go in
anyway.

Not much had been done to modernize the interior of the shop. I
remembered that the last time I had been here it had been a stamp
collector headquarters run by Mr. Mason and his wife. The counter was
still there, but instead of stamp displays it held a variety of standard
portraits such as you can see in any portrait studio. None of the TV
portraits were on display here.

The same bell that used to tinkle when I came into the stamp store
tinkled in back of the partition when I came in. A moment later the
curtain in the doorway of the partition parted, and a girl came out.

How can I describe her? In appearance she was anyone of a thousand
smartly dressed brunettes that wait on you in quality photograph
studios, and yet she wasn't. She was as much above that in cut as the
average smartly dressed girl is above a female alcoholic after a ten-day
drunk. She was perfect. Too perfect. She was the type of girl a man
would dream of meeting some day, but if he ever did he would run like
hell because he could never hope to live up to such perfection.

"You have come to have your portrait taken?" she asked. "I am Lana."

"I thought you already had my portrait," I said. "Didn't you get it from
that eye in the hotel cafe?"

"It's not the same thing," Lana said. "Through an eye you remain a
variable in the Mantram complex. It takes the camera to fix you, so that
you are an iconic invariant in the Mantram." She smiled and half turned
toward the curtain she had come through. "Would you step this way,
please?" she invited.

"How much will it cost?" I said, not moving.

"Nothing, of course!" Lana said. "Terrestrial money is of no use to me
since you have nothing I would care to buy. And don't be alarmed. No
harm will come to you, or anyone else." A fleeting expression of concern
came over her. "I realize that many of the people of Sumac are quite
alarmed, but that is to be expected of a people uneducated enough to
still be superstitious."

I went past her through the curtain. Behind the partition I expected to
see out-of-this-world scientific equipment stacked to the ceiling.
Instead, there was only a portrait camera on a tripod. It had a long
