"You have complete freedom of the ship, to come and go as you please at
any time. You are now considered part of our own population, and we both
have the same interests. We hope you enjoy it."

       *       *       *       *       *

For a moment Morquil gazed into the faces of the small gathering of
people, then slowly walked from the room. There was complete silence,
broken occasionally by a sigh as some thought of home exerted itself. An
hour passed and they still had not moved. Each seemed to be waiting for
one of the others to break the silence.

Finally Dick got to his feet. His words came slow, as if carefully
weighed before using; the others listened intently.

"I know what each of you must be thinking; because I've been thinking
the same thoughts. We are all in the same boat, without chance of
leaving--headed for _Jupiter_! We have seen the last of the world where
we were born. Either we take up our lives in this new existence, or die
out here in space--destroying Morquil's race as well as ourselves.

"He says they can not survive without our aid. Our own world did not
need us, or give us much for our efforts. If it had we would not be on
this strange space ship. Morquil hired only people who were willing to
leave their homes and friends--and we _applied_ for the work. There
really is not much that we can complain about.

"For one, I intend to do all that I can to make our future home the
greatest civilization in the universe. Perhaps in the future years it
will be possible for us to pay a short visit to our former planet.
Perhaps our children will follow in our footsteps; enjoying greater
honor, comfort, and luxury than they could possibly have had in our own
world. I received little from my fellow men, and have _already_ received
more from Morquil than I ever had before."

As Dick sat down, John McCarthy's voice boomed out. "I'll follow Dick!
He's the boss of this party, and if he's satisfied, I am. _Boy!_ We sure
do go places when we get started!"

The general laugh broke the tension, and each one spoke after a little
hesitation. Each man slowly grasped the gigantic task that was facing
them, and felt honored as a result.

It was a new world, farther advanced than their former habitation--which
needed _them_ to care for it. It was a big bite to chew--but they would
do it!

Dick remained in his chair long after the others had gone to their
cabins. His mind dwelled on the complete happiness and satisfaction that
lighted Morquil's face, when informed of their decision. In that moment
he was repaid for a lifetime in a strange world, amongst alien people.
His return to Jupiter would be triumphal, with the earth people as his
friends; come to save his race from extinction!

Barrow's mind wandered on, to the gigantic task that faced them. His
would be the greatest responsibility, as head of all the domes. The
other men would have a single city to care for. The thought of McCarthy
as his assistant was comforting; he would be a great help.

The strange race of beings were putting every trust in the
earthmen--putting themselves at the mercy of the seven strangers--and
Dick knew the men would _earn_ that faith!

He jumped when a hand touched his shoulder.

"Dick, won't you take your wife to her room--she feels sleepy!"




CHAPTER V

_Voyaging to Another World_


During each waking period, Barrow spent many hours in the room with the
miniature domes. They were beautiful models, which could be opened or
moved as desired, by small levers on the foundation. Wires as fine as
hairs were strung from one spot to another, while metal the size of
thread represented heavy cables.

Slowly, an understanding of the strange civilization formed in Dick's
mind, and he drew sectional maps of the location of all mechanical
equipment. Other maps pictured the streets, so that it would be easy to
reach any desired destination. When this was done, Morquil sent one of
his men down to make as many copies as desired. Each engineer was to
have a complete set.

The earthmen had learned to keep track of the time according to the
system on the ship. Each "lix" included the time spent in sleep as well
as one waking period. It was twenty-seven hours in length, but they all
thought of it as a day.

Each lix was divided into thirty-six "migs." Each mig being just
forty-five minutes in length. They were able to keep track of each mig,
by their watches, although the time pieces were useless for any other
purpose.

One lix, Dick returned the friendly smile of a member of the crew, and
to his amazement the man spoke. "Chickiboo." For a moment Barrow was
stumped, then realized that it must be a greeting.

When he was greeted the same way, by a second and then a third man, he
tried to imitate the words. The man from Jupiter was so pleased that he
almost danced, then spoke again. "Gootmording."

Dick's jaw almost dropped open; the man was trying to speak _English_!

Suddenly Barrow laughed. Morquil had been instructing his crew in the
strange language, as well as telling them to greet the earthmen in their
own tongue. He must speak about holding classes to learn the language.
They would have to understand it, and the sooner they started the easier
it would be.

The following lix, Dick stopped on the ramp to the machinery hold to
listen. McCarthy was humming the tune of a song that had been the rage
at home, but the words were "chicki-boo--chicki-boo--chicki-boo."

Barrow smiled as he approached, but the big Irishman didn't realize the
reason. He was almost bursting with news.

"I've got it, Dick! I've found the key! Don't laugh, but I've discovered
the working principle of this little machine, and it will lead to the
secret of all others. In a month I'll know how this crate runs."

"Don't worry, I'm not laughing, John. I think it's great that you've got
this far. I only wish the others would show as much interest. Not one of
them has been down here for more than a few minutes, and they know
little more than when we started."

"Aw! Don't take it that way, Dick. It isn't their fault. Didn't you ever
see their _wives_? Those women won't let the men out of their sight for
three minutes. Your wife and mine are different--they _trust_ us! If we
tell 'em the ship's okay, it's okay; but _them_--say, they can't tell
their wives anything. The women in their families do _all_ of the
talking."

Dick laughed, but knew that it was close to the truth. The other men in
the party _were_ tied to their wives' apron strings. Aside from Dolores
and Eileen McCarthy, none of the women trusted the space ship. They were
afraid it might fly to pieces at any moment, although they had overcome
their fear enough to find means of entertainment.

Small devices in the cabin showed miniature movies, with words in the
tongue of the dome cities. Discovering this created desire to understand
the language, and they eagerly attended the classes.

One lix Dick found Jerold Brown examining a piece of machinery. A few
lix later Andrew Smith had joined him. Soon every earthman was spending
his time in the machinery hold, with McCarthy acting as instructor. He
would accept no excuse for being late at his classes--and they all
arrived on time!

       *       *       *       *       *

Weeks slipped by as the ship drove on through space. The earthmen
learned to admire the men from Jupiter for their constant good-nature,
although they were slightly childish.

The crew of engineers were slowly learning the rudiments of Jupiter's
science. Barrow through his study of the domes, and McCarthy through
study of the machines, far surpassed the others. At times both men spent
hours in the model room, at others Dick examined the machines beside the
Irishman. They compared notes until each knew the other's findings.

Dick took all the men into the model room once every third lix, and
spent four hours instructing them in the civilization. Each man had his
own set of maps, and marked down facts about his future location. Dick
copied their notes on a large map, that covered all the cities. They
used numbers to signify different mechanisms, to make it easier to
describe equipment that was duplicated in more than one dome.

In a month they were able to carry on light conversation, and from then
on mastery of the language was faster. The women far surpassed the men,
due to desire for entertainment.

When he was able to question the crew, Dick received a terrible shock.
_They knew less about the ship's operation than his own men!_ They
didn't understand their own equipment!

The people of the domes were content to enjoy the mechanical wonders of
their ancestors--without bothering about how they ran. They used
equipment for every purpose, without the slightest interest in why it
worked. The earthmen suddenly realized what a gigantic task they faced.
_Seven men_--to rebuild a civilization!

The men at the controls knew what reaction would take place by movement
of a lever, but _didn't understand why_! Dick became slightly worried
about reaching their destination--it was beyond all reason. Earthmen
wouldn't have attempted to operate equipment they knew nothing about, by
movement of controls to obtain the proper action.

It was no wonder these people had found it necessary to find engineers
to run their machines!

Months slipped by as the ship moved steadily toward the giant planet.
Every piece of equipment seemed to be the answer to perfection. This
voyage had taught them more about mechanics than was covered in a
complete engineering course on earth. It was of a far different kind,
with gravity the basis of all operation. Even the space ship employed
some of the same power, drawn from the nearest heavy body, then
amplified until it reached enormous proportions.[1]

Peter Yarbro was a practical chemist, and spent many hours trying to
analyze the fuel. It was highly inflammable, yet could stand terrific
compression without effect. When it was allowed to expand again, it
reached the flash point immediately, creating enormous amounts of heavy
gas. He believed it might be duplicated from crude oil, properly
refined.

When Dick learned that there was a history of the space ship, in the
metal books, his curiosity was aroused. He could read the language of
the domes slightly, but not enough to study the intricate explanations.
It was through these books that the dome men had learned to control the
ship, and set the course for any desired planet.

Morquil's aid was enlisted, to translate the text, and he learned some
amazing facts. A description of the fuel was given, but the base for
manufacture was unknown, being of natural origin on Jupiter. As Morquil
read farther and explained sections that Dick couldn't understand, the
earthman felt uneasy.

The crew had abandoned all hope of returning to their home planet, the
first time they started from the earth. They didn't understand what it
meant to feel responsible for equipment. They manufactured enough fuel
for two trips, according to the rating of consumption in the books--but
Dick wondered?

The tanks were filled to capacity before the first trip, and hadn't been
tested since. The happy dome people didn't consider that their ancestors
might have been mistaken, or that actual operation might vary from the
original plan.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the first time in twenty years, the gauges were examined. Barrow and
McCarthy crawled through the dust-coated passage beneath the floor of
the machinery hold. They found a light switch, but the bulbs were so
dust-coated that only a faint glow shed on the surrounding metal. They
sneezed and coughed, as the dust-laden air filled their lungs.

"Darned if you don't get the craziest ideas, Dick. What good will it do
to know how much 'ship juice' there is, anyway? We can't _make_ it! This
hole wasn't built for self-respecting men to crawl through."

"I don't know, John, but this trip may not be as easy as it appears.
They've been driving at full force for months, when it seems to me that
less power might carry us when we're not within the pull of some planet.
I want to make _sure_ that there's plenty of fuel. According to the
books, the designers didn't expect the ship to be driven this hard."

John did a little cussing when they located the gauges, and found them
so thick with grime that they had to be cleaned. He headed back through
the dust for a cloth, with Dick's laugh following. "Alright, alright,
but don't rub it in. Just because you happened to be in front of me, and
there isn't room to pass, don't give you the right to laugh. Some day
you'll be eating your share of dust, and will _I_ laugh! I bet that the
domes are _all_ a mess."

Dick wrote down the reading of each gauge, as John cleaned the surfaces.
He couldn't understand the strange numerals, and had to go over them
with Morquil. Both men breathed a sigh of relief as they crawled back
through the floor of the hold, and dropped the trap door in place.

