communicate something to him. How could it, thought the professor, when
he had no mouth. The desire to communicate an idea to him became more
insistent. The suggestion of the machine man's question was in his mind.
Telepathy, thought he.

The creature was asking about the place whence he had come. He didn't
know; his mind was in such a turmoil of thoughts and conflicting ideas.
He allowed himself to be led to a window where the machine with waving
tentacle pointed towards an object outside. It was a queer sensation to
be walking on the four metal legs. He looked from the window and he saw
that which caused him to nearly drop over, so astounded was he.

The professor found himself gazing out from the boundless depths of
space across the cosmic void to where a huge planet lay quiet. Now he
was sure it was an illusion which made his mind and sight behave so
queerly. He was troubled by a very strange dream. Carefully he examined
the topography of the gigantic globe which rested off in the distance.
At the same time he could see back of him the concourse of mechanical
creatures crowding up behind him, and he was aware of a telepathic
conversation which was being carried on behind him--or just before him.
Which was it now? Eyes extended all the way around his head, while there
existed no difference on any of the four sides of his cubed body. His
mechanical legs were capable of moving in any of four given directions
with perfect ease, he discovered.

The planet was not the earth--of that he was sure. None of the familiar
continents lay before his eyes. And then he saw the great dull red ball
of the dying sun. That was not the sun of his earth. It had been a great
deal more brilliant.

"Did you come from that planet?" came the thought impulse from the
mechanism by his side.

"No," he returned.

He then allowed the machine men--for he assumed that they were machine
men, and he reasoned that, somehow or other they had by some marvelous
transformation made him over just as they were--to lead him through the
craft of which he now took notice for the first time. It was an
interplanetary flyer, or space ship, he firmly believed.

25X-987 now took him to the compartment which they had removed him to
from the strange container they had found wandering in the vicinity of
the nearby world. There they showed him the long cylinder.

"It's my rocket satellite!" exclaimed Professor Jameson to himself,
though in reality every one of the machine men received his thoughts
plainly. "What is it doing here?"

"We found your dead body within it," answered 25X-987. "Your brain was
removed to the machine after having been stimulated into activity once
more. Your carcass was thrown away."

Professor Jameson just stood dumfounded by the words of the machine man.

"So I did die!" exclaimed the professor. "And my body was placed within
the rocket to remain in everlasting preservation until the end of all
earthly time! Success! I have now attained unrivaled success!"

He then turned to the machine man.

"How long have I been that way?" he asked excitedly.

"How should we know?" replied the Zorome. "We picked up your rocket only
a short time ago, which, according to your computation, would be less
than a day. This is our first visit to your planetary system and we
chanced upon your rocket. So it is a satellite? We didn't watch it long
enough to discover whether or not it was a satellite. At first we
thought it to be another traveling space craft, but when it refused to
answer our signals we investigated."

"And so that was the earth at which I looked," mused the professor. "No
wonder I didn't recognize it. The topography has changed so much. How
different the sun appears--it must have been over a million years ago
when I died!"

"Many millions," corrected 25X-987. "Suns of such size as this one do
not cool in so short a time as you suggest."

Professor Jameson, in spite of all his amazing computations before his
death, was staggered by the reality.

"Who are you?" he suddenly asked.

"We are the Zoromes from Zor, a planet of a sun far across the
Universe."

25X-987 then went on to tell Professor Jameson something about how the
Zoromes had attained their high stage of development and had instantly
put a stop to all birth, evolution and death of their people, by
becoming machine men.




CHAPTER IV

_The Dying World_


"And now tell us of yourself," said 25X-987, "and about your world."

Professor Jameson, noted in college as a lecturer of no mean ability and
perfectly capable of relating intelligently to them the story of the
earth's history, evolution and march of events following the birth of
civilization up until the time when he died, began his story. The mental
speech hampered him for a time, but he soon became accustomed to it so
as to use it easily, and he found it preferable to vocal speech after a
while. The Zoromes listened interestedly to the long account until
Professor Jameson had finished.

"My nephew," concluded the professor, "evidently obeyed my instructions
and placed my body in the rocket I had built, shooting it out into space
where I became the satellite of the earth for these many millions of
years."

"Do you really want to know how long you were dead before we found you?"
asked 25X-987. "It would be interesting to find out."

"Yes, I should like very much to know," replied the professor.

"Our greatest mathematician, 459C-79, will tell it to you." The
mathematician stepped forward. Upon one side of his cube were many
buttons arranged in long columns and squares.

"What is your unit of measuring?" he asked.

"A mile."

"How many times more is a mile than is the length of your rocket
satellite?"

"My rocket is fifteen feet long. A mile is five thousand two hundred and
eighty feet."

The mathematician depressed a few buttons.

"How far, or how many miles from the sun was your planet at that time?"

"Ninety-three million miles," was the reply.

"And your world's satellite--which you call moon from your
planet--earth?"

"Two hundred and forty thousand miles."

"And your rocket?"

