through a prodigious thickness of the earth's atmosphere, and in this
long journey through hundreds of miles of air they have become tinged
with a ruddy or copper-like hue. Nor is this property of our atmosphere
an unfamiliar one. The sun both at sunrise and at sunset glows with a
light which is much more ruddy than the beams it dispenses at noonday.
But at sunset or at sunrise the rays which reach our eyes have much more
of our atmosphere to penetrate than they have at noon, and accordingly
the atmosphere imparts to them that ruddy colour so characteristic and
often so lovely. If the spectrum of the sun when close to the horizon is
examined it is seen to be filled with numerous dark lines and bands
situated chiefly towards the blue and violet end. These are caused by
the increased absorption which the light suffers in the atmosphere, and
give rise to the preponderating red light on the sun under such
conditions. In the case of the eclipsed moon, the sunbeams have to take
an atmospheric journey more than double as long as that at sunrise or
sunset, and hence the ruddy glow of the eclipsed moon may be accounted
for.

The almanacs give the full particulars of each eclipse that happens in
the corresponding year. These predictions are reliable, because
astronomers have been carefully observing the moon for ages, and have
learned from these observations not only how the moon moves at present,
but also how it will move for ages to come. The actual calculations are
so complicated that we cannot here discuss them. There is, however, one
leading principle about eclipses which is so simple that we must refer
to it. The eclipses occurring this year have no very obvious relation
to the eclipses that occurred last year, or to those that will occur
next year. Yet, when we take a more extended view of the sequence of
these phenomena, a very definite principle becomes manifest. If we
observe all the eclipses in a period of eighteen years, or nineteen
years, then we can predict, with at least an approximation to the truth,
all the future eclipses for many years. It is only necessary to
recollect that in 6,585-1/3 days after one eclipse a nearly similar
eclipse follows. For instance, a beautiful eclipse of the moon occurred
on the 5th of December, 1881. If we count back 6,585 days from that
date, or, that is, eighteen years and eleven days, we come to November
24th, 1863, and a similar eclipse of the moon took place then. Again,
there were four eclipses in the year 1881. If we add 6,585-1/3 days to
the date of each eclipse, it will give the dates of all the four
eclipses in the year 1899. It was this rule which enabled the ancient
astronomers to predict the recurrence of eclipses, at a time when the
motions of the moon were not understood nearly so well as they now are.

During a long voyage, and perhaps in critical circumstances, the moon
will often render invaluable information to the sailor. To navigate a
ship, suppose from Liverpool to China, the captain must frequently
determine the precise position which his ship then occupies. If he could
not do this, he would never find his way across the trackless ocean.
Observations of the sun give him his latitude and tell him his local
time, but the captain further requires to know the Greenwich time before
he can place his finger at a point of the chart and say, "My ship is
here." To ascertain the Greenwich time the ship carries a chronometer
which has been carefully rated before starting, and, as a precaution,
two or three chronometers are usually provided to guard against the risk
of error. An unknown error of a minute in the chronometer might perhaps
lead the vessel fifteen miles from its proper course.

[Illustration: PLATE VI.

CHART OF THE MOON'S SURFACE.]

[Illustration: Fig. 27.--Key to Chart of the Moon (Plate VI.).]

It is important to have the means of testing the chronometers during the
progress of the voyage; and it would be a great convenience if every
captain, when he wished, could actually consult some infallible standard
of Greenwich time. We want, in fact, a Greenwich clock which may be
visible over the whole globe. There is such a clock; and, like any other
clock, it has a face on which certain marks are made, and a hand which
travels round that face. The great clock at Westminster shrinks into
insignificance when compared with the mighty clock which the captain
uses for setting his chronometer. The face of this stupendous dial is
the face of the heavens. The numbers engraved on the face of a clock are
replaced by the twinkling stars; while the hand which moves over the
dial is the beautiful moon herself. When the captain desires to test
his chronometer, he measures the distance of the moon from a
neighbouring star. For example, he may see that the moon is three
degrees from the star Regulus. In the Nautical Almanac he finds the
Greenwich time at which the moon was three degrees from Regulus.
Comparing this with the indications of the chronometer, he finds the
required correction.

There is one widely-credited myth about the moon which must be regarded
as devoid of foundation. The idea that our satellite and the weather
bear some relation has no doubt been entertained by high authority, and
appears to be an article in the belief of many an excellent mariner.
Careful comparison between the state of the weather and the phases of
the moon has, however, quite discredited the notion that any connection
of the kind does really exist.

We often notice large blank spaces on maps of Africa and of Australia
which indicate our ignorance of parts of the interior of those great
continents. We can find no such blank spaces in the map of the moon.
Astronomers know the surface of the moon better than geographers know
the interior of Africa. Every spot on the face of the moon which is as
large as an English parish has been mapped, and all the more important
objects have been named.

A general map of the moon is shown in Plate VI. It has been based upon
drawings made with small telescopes, and it gives an entire view of that
side of our satellite which is presented towards us. The moon is shown
as it appears in an astronomical telescope, which inverts everything, so
that the south is at the top and the north at the bottom (to show
objects upright a telescope requires an additional pair of lenses in the
eye-piece, and as this diminishes the amount of light reaching the eye
they are dispensed with in astronomical telescopes). We can see on the
map some of the characteristic features of lunar scenery. Those dark
regions so conspicuous in the ordinary full moon are easily recognised
on the map. They were thought to be seas by astronomers before the days
of telescopes, and indeed the name "Mare" is still retained, though it
is obvious that they contain no water at present. The map also shows
certain ridges or elevated portions, and when we apply measurement to
these objects we learn that they must be mighty mountain ranges. But the
most striking features on the moon are those ring-like objects which are
scattered over the surface in profusion. These are known as the lunar
craters.

To facilitate reference to the chief points of interest we have arranged
an index map (Fig. 27) which will give a clue to the names of the
several objects depicted upon the plate. The so-called seas are
represented by capital letters; so that A is the Mare Crisium, and H the
Oceanus Procellarum. The ranges of mountains are indicated by small
letters; thus a on the index is the site of the so-called Caucasus
mountains, and similarly the Apennines are denoted by _c_. The numerous
craters are distinguished by numbers; for example, the feature on the
map corresponding to 20 on the index is the crater designated Ptolemy.

  A. Mare Crisium.
  B. Mare Foecunditatis.
  C. Mare Tranquillitatis.
  D. Mare Serenitatis.
  E. Mare Imbrium.
  F. Sinus Iridum.
  G. Mare Vaporum.
  H. Oceanus Procellarum.
  I. Mare Humorum.
  J. Mare Nubium.
  K. Mare Nectaris.

  _a._ Caucasus.
  _b._ Alps.
  _c._ Apennines.
  _d._ Carpathians.
  _f._ Cordilleras & D'Alembert mountains.
  _g._ Rook mountains.
  _h._ Doerfel mountains.
  _i._ Leibnitz mountains.

  1. Posidonius.
  2. Linne.
  3. Aristotle.
  4. Great Valley of the Alps.
  5. Aristillus.
  6. Autolycus.
  7. Archimedes.
  8. Plato.
  9. Eratosthenes.
  10. Copernicus.
  11. Kepler.
  12. Aristarchus.
  13. Grimaldi.
  14. Gassendi.
  15. Schickard.
  16. Wargentin.
  17. Clavius.
  18. Tycho.
  19. Alphonsus.
  20. Ptolemy.
  21. Catharina.
  22. Cyrillus.
  23. Theophilus.
  24. Petavius.
  25. Hyginus.
  26. Triesnecker.

In every geographical atlas there is a map showing the two hemispheres
of the earth, the eastern and the western. In the case of the moon we
can only give a map of one hemisphere, for the simple reason that the
moon always turns the same side towards us, and accordingly we never get
a view of the other side. This is caused by the interesting circumstance
that the moon takes exactly the same time to turn once round its own
axis as it takes to go once round the earth. The rotation is, however,
performed with uniform speed, while the moon does not move in its orbit
with a perfectly uniform velocity (_see_ Chapter IV.). The consequence
is that we now get a slight glimpse round the east limb, and now a
similar glimpse round the west limb, as if the moon were shaking its
head very gently at us. But it is only an insignificant margin of the
far side of the moon which this _libration_ permits us to examine.

Lunar objects are well suited for observation when the sunlight falls
upon them in such a manner as to exhibit strongly contrasted lights and
shadows. It is impossible to observe the moon satisfactorily when it is
full, for then no conspicuous shadows are cast. The most opportune
moment for seeing any particular lunar object is when it lies just at
the illuminated side of the boundary between light and shade, for then
the features are brought out with exquisite distinctness.

Plate VII.[7] gives an illustration of lunar scenery, the object
represented being known to astronomers by the name of Triesnecker. The
district included is only a very small fraction of the entire surface of
the moon, yet the actual area is very considerable, embracing as it does
many hundreds of square miles. We see in it various ranges of lunar
mountains, while the central object in the picture is one of those
remarkable lunar craters which we meet with so frequently in every lunar
landscape. This crater is about twenty miles in diameter, and it has a
lofty mountain in the centre, the peak of which is just illuminated by
the rising sun in that phase of our satellite which is represented in
the picture.

A typical view of a lunar crater is shown in Plate VIII. This is, no
doubt, a somewhat imaginary sketch. The point of view from which the
artist is supposed to have taken the picture is one quite unattainable
by terrestrial astronomers, yet there can be little doubt that it is a
fair representation of objects on the moon. We should, however,
recollect the scale on which it is drawn. The vast crater must be many
miles across, and the mountain at its centre must be thousands of feet
high. The telescope will, even at its best, only show the moon as well
as we could see it with the unaided eye if it were 250 miles away
instead of being 240,000. We must not, therefore, expect to see any
details on the moon even with the finest telescopes, unless they were
coarse enough to be visible at a distance of 250 miles. England from
such a point of view would only show London as a coloured spot, in
contrast with the general surface of the country.

We return, however, from a somewhat fancy sketch to a more prosaic
examination of what the telescope does actually reveal. Plate IX.
represents the large crater Plato, so well known to everyone who uses a
telescope. The floor of this remarkable object is nearly flat, and the
central mountain, so often seen in other craters, is entirely wanting.
We describe it more fully in the general list of lunar objects.

The mountain peaks on the moon throw long, well-defined shadows,
characterised by a sharpness which we do not find in the shadows of
terrestrial objects. The difference between the two cases arises from
the absence of air from the moon. Our atmosphere diffuses a certain
amount of light, which mitigates the blackness of terrestrial shadows
and tends to soften their outline. No such influences are at work on the
moon, and the sharpness of the shadows is taken advantage of in our
attempts to measure the heights of the lunar mountains.

It is often easy to compute the altitude of a church steeple, a lofty
chimney, or any similar object, from the length of its shadow. The
simplest and the most accurate process is to measure at noon the number
of feet from the base of the object to the end of the shadow. The
elevation of the sun at noon on the day in question can be obtained from
the almanac, and then the height of the object follows by a simple
calculation. Indeed, if the observations can be made either on the 6th
of April or the 6th of September, at or near the latitude of London,
then calculations would be unnecessary. The noonday length of the shadow
on either of the dates named is equal to the altitude of the object. In
summer the length of the noontide shadow is less than the altitude; in
winter the length of the shadow exceeds the altitude. At sunrise or
sunset the shadows are, of course, much longer than at noon, and it is
shadows of this kind that we observe on the moon. The necessary
measurements are made by that indispensable adjunct to the equatorial
telescope known as the _micrometer_.

This word denotes an instrument for measuring _small_ distances. In one
sense the term is not a happy one. The objects to which the astronomer
applies the micrometer are usually anything but small. They are
generally of the most transcendent dimensions, far exceeding the moon or
the sun, or even our whole system. Still, the name is not altogether
inappropriate, for, vast though the objects may be, they generally seem
minute, even in the telescope, on account of their great distance.

We require for such measurements an instrument capable of the greatest
nicety. Here, again, we invoke the aid of the spider, to whose
assistance in another department we have already referred. In the filar
micrometer two spider lines are parallel, and one intersects them at
right angles. One or both of the parallel lines can be moved by means of
screws, the threads of which have been shaped by consummate workmanship.
The distance through which the line has been moved is accurately
indicated by noting the number of revolutions and parts of a revolution
of the screw. Suppose the two lines be first brought into coincidence,
and then separated until the apparent length of the shadow of the
mountain on the moon is equal to the distance between the lines: we then
know the number of revolutions of the micrometer screw which is
equivalent to the length of the shadow. The number of miles on the moon
which correspond to one revolution of the screw has been previously
ascertained by other observations, and hence the length of the shadow
can be determined. The elevation of the sun, as it would have appeared
to an observer at this point of the moon, at the moment when the
measures were being made, is also obtainable, and hence the actual
elevation of the mountain can be calculated. By measurements of this
kind the altitudes of other lunar objects, such, for example, as the
height of the rampart surrounding a circular-walled plane, can be
determined.

The beauty and interest of the moon as a telescopic object induces us to
give to the student a somewhat detailed account of the more remarkable
features which it presents. Most of the objects we are to describe can
be effectively exhibited with very moderate telescopic power. It is,
however, to be remembered that all of them cannot be well seen at one
time. The region most distinctly shown is the boundary between light and
darkness. The student will, therefore, select for observation such
objects as may happen to lie near that boundary at the time when he is
observing.

1. _Posidonius._--The diameter of this large crater is nearly 60 miles.
Although its surrounding wall is comparatively slender, it is so
distinctly marked as to make the object very conspicuous. As so
frequently happens in lunar volcanoes, the bottom of the crater is below
the level of the surrounding plain, in the present instance to the
extent of nearly 2,500 feet.

2. _Linne._--This small crater lies in the Mare Serenitatis. About sixty
years ago it was described as being about 6-1/2 miles in diameter, and
seems to have been sufficiently conspicuous. In 1866 Schmidt, of Athens,
announced that the crater had disappeared. Since then an exceedingly
small shallow depression has been visible, but the whole object is now
very inconsiderable. This seems to be the most clearly attested case of
change in a lunar object. Apparently the walls of the crater have
tumbled into the interior and partly filled it up, but many astronomers
doubt that a change has really taken place, as Schroeter, a Hanoverian
observer at the end of the eighteenth century, appears not to have seen
any conspicuous crater in the place, though it must be admitted that
his observations are rather incomplete. To give some idea of Schmidt's
amazing industry in lunar researches, it may be mentioned that in six
years he made nearly 57,000 individual settings of his micrometer in the
measurement of lunar altitudes. His great chart of the mountains in the
moon is based on no less than 2,731 drawings and sketches, if those are
counted twice that may have been used for two divisions of the map.

3. _Aristotle._--This great philosopher's name has been attached to a
grand crater 50 miles in diameter, the interior of which, although very
hilly, shows no decidedly marked central cone. But the lofty wall of the
crater, exceeding 10,500 feet in height, overshadows the floor so
continuously that its features are never seen to advantage.

4. _The Great Valley of the Alps._--A wonderfully straight valley, with
a width ranging from 3-1/2 to 6 miles, runs right through the lunar
Alps. It is, according to Maedler, at least 11,500 feet deep, and over 80
miles in length. A few low ridges which are parallel to the sides of the
valley may possibly be the result of landslips.

5. _Aristillus._--Under favourable conditions Lord Rosse's great
telescope has shown the exterior of this magnificent crater to be scored
with deep gullies radiating from its centre. Aristillus is about 34
miles wide and 10,000 feet in depth.

6. _Autolycus_ is somewhat smaller than the foregoing, to which it forms
a companion in accordance with what Maedler thought a well-defined
relation amongst lunar craters, by which they frequently occurred in
pairs, with the smaller one more usually to the south. Towards the edge
this arrangement is generally rather apparent than real, and is merely a
result of foreshortening.

7. _Archimedes._--This large plain, about 50 miles in diameter, has its
vast smooth interior divided by unequally bright streaks into seven
distinct zones, running east and west. There is no central mountain or
other obvious internal sign of former activity, but its irregular wall
rises into abrupt towers, and is marked outside by decided terraces.

[Illustration: PLATE B.

PORTION OF THE MOON.

(ALPS, ARCHIMEDES, APENNINES.)

_Messrs. Loewy & Puiseux_.]

8. _Plato._--We have already referred to this extensive circular plain,
which is noticeable with the smallest telescope. The average height of
the rampart is about 3,800 feet on the eastern side; the western side is
somewhat lower, but there is one peak rising to the height of nearly
7,300 feet. The plain girdled by this vast rampart is of ample
proportions. It is a somewhat irregular circle, about 60 miles in
diameter, and containing an area of 2,700 square miles. On its floor the
shadows of the western wall are shown in Plate IX., as are also three of
the small craters, of which a large number have been detected by
persevering observers. The narrow sharp line leading from the crater to
the left is one of those remarkable "clefts" which traverse the moon in
so many directions. Another may be seen further to the left. Above Plato
are several detached mountains, the loftiest of which is Pico, about
8,000 feet in height. Its long and pointed shadow would at first sight
lead one to suppose that it must be very steep; but Schmidt, who
specially studied the inclinations of the lunar slopes, is of opinion
that it cannot be nearly so steep as many of the Swiss mountains that
are frequently ascended. As many as thirty minute craters have been
carefully observed on the floor of Plato, and variations have been
thought by Mr. W.H. Pickering to be perceptible.

9. _Eratosthenes._--This profound crater, upwards of 37 miles in
diameter, lies at the end of the gigantic range of the Apennines. Not
improbably, Eratosthenes once formed the volcanic vent for the
stupendous forces that elevated the comparatively craterless peaks of
these great mountains.

10. _Copernicus._--Of all the lunar craters this is one of the grandest
and best known. The region to the west is dotted over with innumerable
minute craterlets. It has a central many-peaked mountain about 2,400
feet in height. There is good reason to believe that the terracing shown
in its interior is mainly due to the repeated alternate rise, partial
congelation, and subsequent retreat of a vast sea of lava. At full moon
the crater of Copernicus is seen to be surrounded by radiating streaks.

11. _Kepler._--Although the internal depth of this crater is scarcely
less than 10,000 feet, it has but a very low surrounding wall, which is
remarkable for being covered with the same glistening substance that
also forms a system of bright rays not unlike those surrounding the last
object.

12. _Aristarchus_ is the most brilliant of the lunar craters, being
specially vivid with a low power in a large telescope. So bright is it,
indeed, that it has often been seen on the dark side just after new
moon, and has thus given rise to marvellous stories of active lunar
volcanoes. To the south-east lies another smaller crater, Herodotus,
north of which is a narrow, deep valley, nowhere more than 2-1/2 miles
broad, which makes a remarkable zigzag. It is one of the largest of the
lunar "clefts."

13. _Grimaldi_ calls for notice as the darkest object of its size in the
moon. Under very exceptional circumstances it has been seen with the
naked eye, and as its area has been estimated at nearly 14,000 square
miles, it gives an idea of how little unaided vision can discern in the
moon; it must, however, be added that we always see Grimaldi
considerably foreshortened.

14. The great crater _Gassendi_ has been very frequently mapped on
account of its elaborate system of "clefts." At its northern end it
communicates with a smaller but much deeper crater, that is often filled
with black shadow after the whole floor of Gassendi has been
illuminated.

15. _Schickard_ is one of the largest walled plains on the moon, about
134 miles in breadth. Within its vast expanse Maedler detected 23 minor
craters. With regard to this object Chacornac pointed out that, owing to
the curvature of the surface of the moon, a spectator at the centre of
the floor "would think himself in a boundless desert," because the
surrounding wall, although in one place nearly 10,000 feet high, would
lie entirely beneath his horizon.

16. Close to the foregoing is _Wargentin_. There can be little doubt
that this is really a huge crater almost filled with congealed lava, as
there is scarcely any fall towards the interior.

17. _Clavius._--Near the 60th parallel of lunar south latitude lies
this enormous enclosure, the area of which is not less than 16,500
square miles. Both in its interior and on its walls are many peaks and
secondary craters. The telescopic view of a sunrise upon the surface of
Clavius is truly said by Maedler to be indescribably magnificent. One of
the peaks rises to a height of 24,000 feet above the bottom of one of
the included craters. Maedler even expressed the opinion that in this
wild neighbourhood there are craters so profound that no ray of sunlight
ever penetrated their lowest depths, while, as if in compensation, there
are peaks whose summits enjoy a mean day almost twice as long as their
night.

18. If the full moon be viewed through an opera-glass or any small
hand-telescope, one crater is immediately seen to be conspicuous beyond
all others, by reason of the brilliant rays or streaks that radiate from
it. This is the majestic _Tycho_, 17,000 feet in depth and 50 miles in
diameter (Plate X.). A peak 6,000 feet in height rises in the centre of
its floor, while a series of terraces diversity its interior slopes; but
it is the mysterious bright rays that chiefly surprise us. When the sun
rises on Tycho, these streaks are utterly invisible; indeed, the whole
object is then so obscure that it requires a practised eye to recognise
Tycho amidst its mountainous surroundings. But as soon as the sun has
attained a height of about 30 deg. above its horizon, the rays emerge from
their obscurity and gradually increase in brightness until the moon
becomes full, when they are the most conspicuous objects on her surface.
They vary in length, from a few hundred miles to two or, in one
instance, nearly three thousand miles. They extend indifferently across
vast plains, into the deepest craters, or over the loftiest elevations.
We know of nothing on our earth to which they can be compared. As these
rays are only seen about the time of full moon, their visibility
obviously depends on the light falling more or less closely in the line
of sight, quite regardless of the inclination of the surfaces, mountains
or valleys, on which they appear. Each small portion of the surface of
the streak must therefore be of a form which is symmetrical to the
spectator from whatever point it is seen. The sphere alone appears to
fulfil this condition, and Professor Copeland therefore suggests that
the material constituting the surface of the streak must be made up of a
large number of more or less completely spherical globules. The streaks
must represent parts of the lunar surface either pitted with minute
cavities of spherical figure, or strewn over with minute transparent
spheres.[8]

Near the centre of the moon's disc is a fine range of ring plains fully
open to our view under all illuminations. Of these, two may be
mentioned--_Alphonsus_ (19), the floor of which is strangely
characterised by two bright and several dark markings which cannot be
explained by irregularities in the surface.--_Ptolemy_ (20). Besides
several small enclosed craters, its floor is crossed by numerous low
ridges, visible when the sun is rising or setting.

21, 22, 23.--When the moon is five or six days old this beautiful group
of three craters will be favourably placed for observation. They are
named _Catharina_, _Cyrillus_, and _Theophilus_. Catharina, the most
southerly of the group, is more than 16,000 feet deep, and connected
with Cyrillus by a wide valley; but between Cyrillus and Theophilus
there is no such connection. Indeed, Cyrillus looks as if its huge
surrounding ramparts, as high as Mont Blanc, had been completely
finished before the volcanic forces commenced the formation of
Theophilus, the rampart of which encroaches considerably on its older
neighbour. Theophilus stands as a well-defined circular crater about 64
miles in diameter, with an internal depth of 14,000 to 18,000 feet, and
a beautiful central group of mountains, one-third of that height, on its
floor. Although Theophilus is the deepest crater we can see in the moon,
it has suffered little or no deformation from secondary eruptions, while
the floor and wall of Catharina show complete sequences of lesser
craters of various sizes that have broken in upon and partly destroyed
each other. In the spring of the year, when the moon is somewhat before
the first quarter, this instructive group of extinct volcanoes can be
seen to great advantage at a convenient hour in the evening.

[Illustration: PLATE VII.

TRIESNECKER.

(AFTER NASMYTH.)]

24. _Petavius_ is remarkable not only for its great size, but also for
the rare feature of having a double rampart. It is a beautiful object
soon after new moon, or just after full moon, but disappears absolutely
when the sun is more than 45 deg. above its horizon. The crater floor is
remarkably convex, culminating in a central group of hills intersected
by a deep cleft.

25. _Hyginus_ is a small crater near the centre of the moon's disc. One
of the largest of the lunar chasms passes right through it, making an
abrupt turn as it does so.

26. _Triesnecker._--This fine crater has been already described, but is
again alluded to in order to draw attention to the elaborate system of
chasms so conspicuously shown in Plate VII. That these chasms are
depressions is abundantly evident by the shadows inside. Very often
their margins are appreciably raised. They seem to be fractures in the
moon's surface.

Of the various mountains that are occasionally seen as projections on
the actual edge of the moon, those called after Leibnitz (_i_) seem to
be the highest. Schmidt found the highest peak to be upwards of 41,900
feet above a neighbouring valley. In comparing these altitudes with
those of mountains on our earth, we must for the latter add the depth of
the sea to the height of the land. Reckoned in this way, our highest
mountains are still higher than any we know of in the moon.

We must now discuss the important question as to the origin of these
remarkable features on the surface of the moon. We shall admit at the
outset that our evidence on this subject is only indirect. To establish
by unimpeachable evidence the volcanic origin of the remarkable lunar
craters, it would seem almost necessary that volcanic outbursts should
have been witnessed on the moon, and that such outbursts should have
been seen to result in the formation of the well-known ring, with or
without the mountain rising from the centre. To say that nothing of the
kind has ever been witnessed would be rather too emphatic a statement.
On certain occasions careful observers have reported the occurrence of
minute local changes on the moon. As we have already remarked, a crater
named Linne, of dimensions respectable, no doubt, to a lunar inhabitant,
but forming a very inconsiderable telescopic object, was thought to have
undergone some change. On another occasion a minute crater was thought
to have arisen near the well-known object named Hyginus. The mere
enumeration of such instances gives real emphasis to the statement that
there is at the present time no appreciable source of disturbance of the
moon's surface. Even were these trifling cases of suspected change
really established--and this is perhaps rather farther than many
astronomers would be willing to go--they are still insignificant when
compared with the mighty phenomena that gave rise to the host of great
craters which cover so large a portion of the moon's surface.

We are led inevitably to the conclusion that our satellite must have
once possessed much greater activity than it now displays. We can also
give a reasonable, or, at all events, a plausible, explanation of the
cessation of that activity in recent times. Let us glance at two other
bodies of our system, the earth and the sun, and compare them with the
moon. Of the three bodies, the sun is enormously the largest, while the
moon is much less than the earth. We have also seen that though the sun
must have a very high temperature, there can be no doubt that it is
gradually parting with its heat. The surface of the earth, formed as it
is of solid rocks and clay, or covered in great part by the vast expanse
of ocean, bears but few obvious traces of a high temperature.
Nevertheless, it is highly probable from ordinary volcanic phenomena
that the interior of the earth still possesses a temperature of
incandescence.

A large body when heated takes a longer time to cool than does a small
body raised to the same temperature. A large iron casting will take days
to cool; a small casting will become cold in a few hours. Whatever may
have been the original source of heat in our system--a question which
we are not now discussing--it seems demonstrable that the different
bodies were all originally heated, and have now for ages been gradually
cooling. The sun is so vast that he has not yet had time to cool; the
earth, of intermediate bulk, has become cold on the outside, while still
retaining vast stores of internal heat; while the moon, the smallest
body of all, has lost its heat to such an extent that changes of
importance on its surface can no longer be originated by internal fires.

We are thus led to refer the origin of the lunar craters to some ancient
epoch in the moon's history. We have no moans of knowing the remoteness
of that epoch, but it is reasonable to surmise that the antiquity of the
lunar volcanoes must be extremely great. At the time when the moon was
sufficiently heated to originate those convulsions, of which the mighty
craters are the survivals, the earth must also have been much hotter
than it is at present. When the moon possessed sufficient heat for its
volcanoes to be active, the earth was probably so hot that life was
impossible on its surface. This supposition would point to an antiquity
for the lunar craters far too great to be estimated by the centuries and
the thousands of years which are adequate for such periods as those with
which the history of human events is concerned. It seems not unlikely
that millions of years may have elapsed since the mighty craters of
Plato or of Copernicus consolidated into their present form.

We shall now attempt to account for the formation of the lunar craters.
The most probable views on the subject seem to be those which have been
set forth by Mr. Nasmyth, though it must be admitted that his doctrines
are by no means free from difficulty. According to his theory we can
explain how the rampart around the lunar crater has been formed, and how
the great mountain arose which so often adorns the centre of the plain.
The view in Fig. 28 contains an imaginary sketch of a volcanic vent on
the moon in the days when the craters were active. The eruption is here
shown in the fulness of its energy, when the internal forces are hurling
forth ashes or stones which fall at a considerable distance from the
vent. The materials thus accumulated constitute the rampart surrounding
the crater.

The second picture (Fig. 29) depicts the crater in a later stage of its
history. The prodigious explosive power has now been exhausted, and has
perhaps been intermitted for some time. Again, the volcano bursts into
activity, but this time with only a small part of its original energy. A
comparatively feeble eruption now issues from the same vent, deposits
materials close around the orifice, and raises a mountain in the centre.
Finally, when the activity has subsided, and the volcano is silent and
still, we find the evidence of the early energy testified to by the
rampart which surrounds the ancient crater, and by the mountain which
adorns the interior. The flat floor which is found in some of the
craters may not improbably have arisen from an outflow of lava which has
afterwards consolidated. Subsequent outbreaks have also occurred in many
cases.

One of the principal difficulties attending this method of accounting
for the structure of a crater arises from the great size which some of
these objects attain. There are ancient volcanoes on the moon forty or
fifty miles in diameter; indeed, there is one well-formed ring, with a
mountain rising in the centre, the diameter of which is no less than
seventy-eight miles (Petavius). It seems difficult to conceive how a
blowing cone at the centre could convey the materials to such a distance
as the thirty-nine miles between the centre of Petavius and the rampart.
The explanation is, however, facilitated when it is borne in mind that
the force of gravitation is much less on the moon than on the earth.

[Illustration: PLATE VIII.

A NORMAL LUNAR CRATER.]

[Illustration: Fig. 28.--Volcano in Activity.]

[Illustration: Fig. 29.--Subsequent Feeble Activity.]

Have we not already seen that our satellite is so much smaller than the
earth that eighty moons rolled into one would not weigh as much as the
earth? On the earth an ounce weighs an ounce and a pound weighs a pound;
but a weight of six ounces here would only weigh one ounce on the moon,
and a weight of six pounds here would only weigh one pound on the moon.
A labourer who can carry one sack of corn on the earth could, with the
same exertion, carry six sacks of corn on the moon. A cricketer who can
throw a ball 100 yards on the earth could with precisely the same
exertion throw the same ball 600 yards on the moon. Hiawatha could shoot
ten arrows into the air one after the other before the first reached
the ground; on the moon he might have emptied his whole quiver. The
volcano, which on the moon drove projectiles to the distance of
thirty-nine miles, need only possess the same explosive power as would
have been sufficient to drive the missiles six or seven miles on the
earth. A modern cannon properly elevated would easily achieve this feat.

[Illustration: Fig. 30.--Formation of the Level Floor by Lava.]

It must also be borne in mind that there are innumerable craters on the
moon of the same general type but of the most varied dimensions; from a
tiny telescopic object two or three miles in diameter, we can point out
gradually ascending stages until we reach the mighty Petavius just
considered. With regard to the smaller craters, there is obviously
little or no difficulty in attributing to them a volcanic origin, and as
the continuity from the smallest to the largest craters is unbroken, it
seems quite reasonable to suppose that even the greatest has arisen in
the same way.

It should, however, be remarked that some lunar features might be
explained by actions from without rather than from within. Mr. G.K.
Gilbert has marshalled the evidence in support of the belief that lunar
sculptures arise from the impact of bodies falling on the moon. The Mare
Imbrium, according to this view, has been the seat of a collision to
which the surrounding lunar scenery is due. Mr. Gilbert explains the
furrows as hewn out by mighty projectiles moving with such velocities as
meteors possess.

The lunar landscapes are excessively weird and rugged. They always
remind us of sterile deserts, and we cannot fail to notice the absence
of grassy plains or green forests such as we are familiar with on our
globe. In some respects the moon is not very differently circumstanced
from the earth. Like it, the moon has the pleasing alternations of day
and night, though the day in the moon is as long as twenty-nine of our
days, and the night of the moon is as long as twenty-nine of our nights.
We are warmed by the rays of the sun; so, too, is the moon; but,
