You're supposed to send the answers in and whoever has good answers gets
to take a tougher test and whoever does good on that test gets the job.
Probably selling neckties on the corner or something."

"No kiddin'. That what it says?"

"Just says 'handsome rewards,' but that's probably close to it."

"You gonna send it in?" Willy asked.

"Naw, I just fill 'em out for fun, like I said. Can you imagine me
peddling neckties on the corner?"

"Then how d'ya know if you got the right answers?"

"Hell, I know the answers," Freddy bragged. "Like I said, this is just
exercise. Mental gymnastics. Like this last one; it was pretty tough
compared to most of them. Had some questions about things I hadn't even
thought about since college, things I'd forgotten I knew. What good's an
education if you forget what things you know?"

"That's why I never bothered," Willy agreed. "'Cause I never could
remember things so good."

"No, Willy. You've got it all wrong. I still know it, I just didn't know
I know it."

"Aw, Freddy," Willy said unhappily. "You're pullin' my leg again!"

"Suit yourself," Freddy smiled. "Hold down the bench for me, O.K.? I'll
be right back."

Willy watched Freddy until he went into the little brick building in the
center of the park, and then grabbed Freddy's newspaper and scampered
over to Oscar's bench.

"Hey, you know how Freddy's always talkin' big about how much he knows,"
Willy said breathlessly. "I got an idea how to call his bluff. He filled
out one of these tests and says he knows all the answers. Let's send
it in and see if he's as smart as he says!"

"Yeh! That's great, Willy!" Then Oscar's face darkened. "Wonder where we
can steal a stamp?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"That was a pretty good idea of mine, about advertising in the paper,
wasn't it, Mr. Jones?" Dwindle, America's Number One Personnel
Specialist, asked his surly assistant.

"Yes, Dwindle."

Jones stared gloomily out the fourteenth story window into the park,
where the local bums were loafing and sleeping and feeding peanuts to
the pigeons. He was nauseated with the prospect of having to address his
new boss as "Mr. Dwindle," and was toying with the idea of abandoning
his specialty completely to join the ranks of the happy, carefree
unemployed. He watched as two uniformed policemen approached one of the
less wholesome-appearing characters.

"No, I don't suppose I could tolerate being in and out of jail every
week on a vagrancy charge," he told himself. But then he smiled bitterly
as he thought of the strange parallel between the policemen arresting
the bum and other officials, elsewhere in the United States, tapping
respectable citizens on the shoulder at this very moment.

"Dwindle, do you really think it was wise to issue warrants to arrest
all those persons who scored perfect on the first test? How many did you
say there were?"

"Only a hundred or so," Dwindle smiled sweetly. "And besides, they're
not being arrested. General Marcher explained to you that they are being
drafted into the service of the government. Honestly, sometimes I think
you worry too much."

Jones turned back to the window, brooding over Dwindle's transformation.
"Maybe so," he sighed, watching the newly-arrested vagrant pointing an
accusing finger toward one of the other bums.

       *       *       *       *       *

Willy strained and twisted, trying to reclaim his arm from the
policeman's grip.

"Honest, you guys. I didn't know it was against the law. Aw, I figgered
it was against the rules mebbe to send in somebody else's answers, but
we wuz only makin' a joke, Oscar 'n' me. Oscar's the one who actual put
it in the mailbox and stole the stamp! I bet he's the one you're after!"

"Now calm down, Willy," the beefy policeman coaxed. "No one's broken any
law. Nobody's under arrest. We just want to chat a minute with whoever
it was filled out that test."

"Yeh, Willy," the second policeman broke in, "if you didn't do it, and I
believe you when you say you didn't, then who did?"

"What's it to ya?" Willy asked, his mouth twitching nervously.

The first policeman glanced at the second and then back at Willy. "Well,
it's like this, Willy," he said. "Whoever filled out those answers got
every one of them right. The people who run the contest want to meet
the guy, see? And they asked us to help find him because we know you
people better than anyone else does. See? That's all!"

"Yeh," said the second. "That's all. Now who did it?"

Willy stood with his jaw drooping for a moment. "You mean he got ever'
last one of 'em right?" he asked. "Freddy was always braggin' about his
brains, but me 'n' Oscar figgered he was makin' most of it up."

"Freddy who? Freddy the Fish you mean?"
