succeeded by increasing absorption by its compression in the manner of a
bandage. A solution of metallic salts, as white vitriol, sixty grains to a
pint; or an infusion of oak-bark may be injected into the vagina. Cold
bath.

8. _Gonorrhoea frigida._ Cold gleet. Where the gleet is thin and pellucid,
it must arise from the want of absorption of the membranes of the urethra,
rather than from an increased secretion from them. This I suppose to be a
more common disease than that mentioned at Class I. 1. 2. 10.

M. M. Metallic injections, partial cold bath, internal method as in the
fluor albus above described. Balsam of copaiva. Tincture of cantharides.

9. _Hepatis tumor._ The liver becomes enlarged from defect of the
absorption of mucus from its cells, as in anasarca, especially in feeble
children; at the same time less bile is secreted from the torpid
circulation in the vena portae. And as the absorbents, which resume the
thinner parts of the bile from the gall-bladder and hepatic ducts, are also
torpid or quiescent, the bile is more dilute, as well as in less quantity.
From the obstruction of the passage of the blood through the compressed
vena porta these patients have tumid bellies, and pale bloated
countenances; their paleness is probably owing to the deficiency of the
quantity of red globules in the blood in consequence of the inert state of
the bile.

These symptoms in children are generally attended with worms, the dilute
bile and the weak digestion not destroying them. In sleep I have seen
fleuke-worms in the gall-ducts themselves among the dilute bile; which
gall-ducts they eat through, and then produce ulcers, and the hectic fever,
called the rot. See Class I. 1. 4. 10. and Article IV. 2. 6.

M. M. After a calomel purge, crude iron-filings are specific in this
disease in children, and the worms are destroyed by the returning acrimony
and quantity of the bile. A blister on the region of the liver. Sorbentia,
as worm-seed, santonicum. Columbo. Bark.

10. _Chlorosis._ When the defect of the due action of both the absorbent
and secerning vessels of the liver affects women, and is attended with
obstruction of the catamenia, it is called chlorosis; and is cured by the
exhibition of steel, which restores by its specific stimulus the absorbent
power of the liver; and the menstruation, which was obstructed in
consequence of debility, recurs.

Indigestion, owing to torpor of the stomach, and a consequent too great
acidity of its contents, attend this disease; whence a desire of eating
chalk, or marl. Sometimes a great quantity of pale urine is discharged in a
morning, which is owing to the inaction of the absorbents, which are
distributed on the neck of the bladder, during sleep. The swelling of the
ankles, which frequently attends chlorosis, is another effect of deficient
action of the absorbent system; and the pale countenance is occasioned by
the deficient quantity of red globules of blood, caused by the deficient
quantity or acrimony of the bile, and consequent weakness of the
circulation. The pulse is so quick in some cases of chlorosis, that, when
attended with an accidental cough, it may be mistaken for pulmonary
consumption. This quick pulse is owing to the debility of the heart from
the want of stimulus occasioned by the deficiency of the quantity, and
acrimony of the blood.

M. M. Steel. Bitters. Constant moderate exercise. Friction with flannel all
over the body and limbs night and morning. Rhubarb five grains, opium half
a grain, every night. Flesh diet, with small beer, or wine and water. The
disease continues some months, but at length subsides by the treatment
above described. A bath of about eighty degrees, as Buxton Bath, is of
service; a colder bath may do great injury.

11. _Hydrocele._ Dropsy of the vagina testis. Dropsies have been divided
into the incysted and the diffused, meaning those of the cellular membrane,
the cells of which communicate with each other like a sponge, and those of
any other cavity of the body. The collections of mucous fluids in the
various cells and cavities of the body arise from the torpor of the
absorbent vessels of those parts. It is probable, that in dropsies attended
with great thirst the cutaneous absorbents become paralytic first; and then
from the great thirst, which is thus occasioned by the want of atmospheric
moisture, the absorption of the fat ensues; as in fevers attended with
great thirst, the fat is quickly taken up. See Obesitas I. 2. 3. 17. Some
have believed, that the cellular and adipose membranes are different ones;
as no fat is ever deposited in the eye-lids or scrotum, both which places
are very liable to be distended with the mucilaginous fluid of the
anasarca, and with air in Emphysema. Sometimes a gradual absorption of the
accumulated fluid takes place, and the thinner parts being taken up, there
remains a more viscid fluid, or almost a solid in the part, as in some
swelled legs, which can not easily be indented by the pressure of the
finger, and are called scorbutic. Sometimes the paralysis of the absorbents
is completely removed, and the whole is again taken up into the
circulation.

The Hydrocele is known by a tumor of the scrotum, which is without pain,
gradually produced, with fluctuation, and a degree of pellucidity, when a
candle is held behind it; it is the most simple incysted dropsy, as it is
not in general complicated with other diseases, as ascites with schirrous
liver, and hydrocephalus internus, with general debility. The cure of this
disease is effected by different ways; it consists in discharging the water
by an external aperture; and by so far inflaming the cyst and testicle,
that they afterwards grow together, and thus prevent in future any
secretion or effusion of mucus; the disease is thus cured, not by the
revivescence of the absorbent power of the lymphatics, but by the
prevention of secretion by the adhesion of the vagina to the testis. This I
believe is performed with less pain, and is more certainly manageable by
tapping, or discharging the fluid by means of a trocar, and after the
evacuation of it to fill the cyst with a mixture of wine and water for a
few minutes till the necessary degree of stimulus is produced, and then to
withdraw it; as recommended by Mr. Earle. See also Medical Commentaries by
Dr. Duncan, for 1793.

12. _Hydrocephalus internus_, or dropsy of the ventricles of the brain, is
fatal to many children, and some adults. When this disease is less in
quantity, it probably produces a fever, termed a nervous fever, and which
is sometimes called a worm fever, according to the opinion of Dr.
Gilchrist, in the Scots Medical essays. This fever is attended with great
inirritability, as appears from the dilated pupils of the eyes, in which it
corresponds with the dropsy of the brain. And the latter disease has its
paroxysms of quick pulse, and in that respect corresponds with other fevers
with inirritability.

The hydrocephalus internus is distinguished from apoplexy by its being
attended with fever, and from nervous fever by the paroxysms being very
irregular, with perfect intermissions many times in a day. In nervous fever
the pain of the head generally affects the middle of the forehead; in
hydrocephalus internus it is generally on one side of the head. One of the
earliest criterions is the patient being uneasy on raising his head from
the pillow, and wishing to lie down again immediately; which I suppose is
owing to the pressure of the water on the larger trunks of the
blood-vessels entering the cavity being more intolerable than on the
smaller ones; for if the larger trunks are compressed, it must
inconvenience the branches also; but if some of the small branches are
compressed only, the trunks are not so immediately incommoded.

Blisters on the head, and mercurial ointment externally, with calomel
internally, are principally recommended in this fatal disease. When the
patient cannot bear to be raised up in bed without great uneasiness, it is
a bad symptom. So I believe is deafness, which is commonly mistaken for
stupor. See Class I. 2. 5. 6. And when the dilatation of the pupil of
either eye, or the squinting is very apparent, or the pupils of both eyes
much dilated, it is generally fatal. As by stimulating one branch of
lymphatics into inverted motion, another branch is liable to absorb its
fluid more hastily; suppose strong errhines, as common tobacco snuff to
children, or one grain of turpeth mineral, (Hydrargyrus vitriolatus), mixed
with ten or fifteen grains of sugar, was gradually blown up the nostrils?
See Class I. 3. 2. 1. I have tried common snuff upon two children in this
disease; one could not be made to sneeze, and the other was too near death
to receive advantage. When the mercurial preparations have produced
salivation, I believe they may have been of service, but I doubt their good
effect otherwise. In one child I tried the tincture of Digitalis; but it
was given with too timid a hand, and too late in the disease, to determine
its effects. See Sect. XXIX. 5. 9.

As all the above remedies generally fail of success, I think frequent,
almost hourly, shocks of electricity from very small charges might be
passed through the head in all directions with probability of good event.
And the use of the trephine, where the affected side can be distinguished.
See Strabismus, Class I. 2. 5. 4. When one eye is affected, does the
disease exist in the ventricule of that side?

13. _Ascites._ The dropsy of the cavity of the abdomen is known by a tense
swelling of the belly; which does not sound on being struck like the
tympany; and in which a fluctuation can be readily perceived by applying
one hand expanded on one side, and striking the tumour on the other.

Effusions of water into large cavities, as into that of the abdomen or
thorax, or into the ventricules of the brain or pericardium, are more
difficult to be reabsorbed, than the effusion of fluids into the cellular
membrane; because one part of this extensive sponge-like system of cells,
which connects all the solid parts of the body, may have its power of
absorption impaired, at the same time that some other part of it may still
retain that power, or perhaps possess it in an increased degree; and as all
these cells communicate with each other, the fluid, which abounds in one
part of it, can be transferred to another, and thus be reabsorbed into the
circulation.

In the ascites, cream of tartar has sometimes been attended with success; a
dram or two drams are given every hour in a morning till it operates, and
is to be repeated for several days; but the operation of tapping is
generally applied to at last. Dr. Sims, in the Memoirs of the Medical
Society of London, Vol. III. has lately proposed, what he believes to be a
more successful method of performing this operation, by making a puncture
with a lancet in the scar of the navel, and leaving it to discharge itself
gradually for several days, without introducing a canula, which he thinks
injurious both on account of the too sudden emission of the fluid, and the
danger of wounding or stimulating the viscera. This operation I have twice
known performed with less inconvenience, and I believe with more benefit to
the patient, than the common method.

After the patient has been tapped, some have tried injections into the
cavity of the abdomen, but hitherto I believe with ill event. Nor are
experiments of this kind very promising of success. First because the
patients are generally much debilitated, most frequently by spirituous
potation, and have generally a disease of the liver, or of other viscera.
And secondly, because the quantity of inflammation, necessary to prevent
future secretion of mucus into the cavity of the abdomen, by uniting the
peritoneum with the intestines or mesentery, as happens in the cure of the
hydrocele, would I suppose generally destroy the patient, either
immediately, or by the consequence of such adhesions.

This however is not the case in respect to the dropsy of the ovarium, or in
the hydrocele.

14. _Hydrops thoracis._ The dropsy of the chest commences with loss of
flesh, cold extremities, pale countenance, high coloured urine in small
quantity, and general debility, like many other dropsies. The patient next
complains of numbness in the arms, especially when elevated, with pain and
difficulty of swallowing, and an absolute impossibility of lying down for a
few minutes, or with sudden starting from sleep, with great difficulty of
breathing and palpitation of his heart.

The numbness of the arms is probably owing more frequently to the increased
action of the pectoral muscles in respiration, whence they are less at
liberty to perform other offices, than to the connexion of nerves mentioned
in Sect. XXIX. 5. 2. The difficulty of swallowing is owing to the
compression of the oesophagus by the lymph in the chest; and the
impossibility of breathing in an horizontal posture originates from this,
that if any parts of the lungs must be rendered useless, the inability of
the extremities of them must be less inconvenient to respiration; since if
the upper parts or larger trunks of the air-vessels should be rendered
useless by the compression of the accumulated lymph, the air could not gain
admittance to the other parts, and the animal must immediately perish.

If the pericardium is the principal seat of the disease, the pulse is quick
and irregular. If only the cavity of the thorax is hydropic, the pulse is
not quick nor irregular.

If one side is more affected than the other, the patient leans most that
way, and has more numbness in that arm.

The hydrops thoracis is distinguished from the anasarca pulmonum, as the
patient in the former cannot lie down half a minute; in the latter the
difficulty of breathing, which occasions him to rise up, comes on more
gradually; as the transition of the lymph in the cellular membranes from
one part to another of it is slower, than that of the effused lymph in the
cavity of the chest.

The hydrops thoracis is often complicated with fits of convulsive
breathing; and then it produces a disease for the time very similar to the
common periodic asthma, which is perhaps owing to a temporary anasarca of
the lungs; or to an impaired venous absorption in them. These exacerbations
of difficult breathing are attended with cold extremities, cold breath,
cold tongue, upright posture with the mouth open, and a desire of cold air,
and a quick, weak, intermittent pulse, and contracted hands.

These exacerbations recur sometimes every two or three hours, and are
relieved by opium, a grain every hour for two or three doses, with ether
about a dram in cold water; and seem to be a convulsion of the muscles of
respiration induced by the pain of the dyspnea. As in Class III. 1. 1. 9.

M. M. A grain of dried squill, and a quarter of a grain of blue vitriol
every hour for six or eight hours, unless it vomit or purge. A grain of
opium. Blisters. Calomel three grains every third day, with infusion of
senna. Bark. Chalybeates. Puncture in the side.

Can the fluctuation in the chest be heard by applying the ear to the side,
as Hippocrates asserts? Can it be felt by the hand or by the patient before
the disease is too great to admit of cure by the paracentesis? Does this
dropsy of the chest often come on after peripneumony? Is it ever cured by
making the patient sick by tincture of digitalis? Could it be cured, if on
one side only, by the operation of puncture between the ribs, and
afterwards by inflaming the cavity by the admission of air for a time, like
the cure of the hydrocele; the pleura afterwards adhering wholly to that
lobe of the lungs, so as to prevent any future effusion of mucus?

15. _Hydrops ovarii._ Dropsy of the ovary is another incysted dropsy, which
seldom admits of cure. It is distinguished from ascites by the tumour and
pain, especially at the beginning, occupying one side, and the fluctuation
being less distinctly perceptible. When it happens to young subjects it is
less liable to be mistaken for ascites. It affects women of all ages,
either married or virgins; and is produced by cold, fear, hunger, bad food,
and other debilitating causes. I saw an elegant young lady, who was shortly
to have been married to a sensible man, with great prospect of happiness;
who, on being overturned in a chaise in the night, and obliged to walk two
or three miles in wet, cold, and darkness, became much indisposed, and
gradually afflicted with a swelling and pain on one side of the abdomen;
which terminated in a dropsy of the ovary, and destroyed her in two or
three years. Another young woman I recollect seeing, who was about
seventeen, and being of the very inferior class of people, seemed to have
been much weakened by the hardship of a cold floor, and little or no bed,
with bad food; and who to these evils had to bear the unceasing obloquy of
her neighbours, and the persecution of parish officers.

The following is abstracted from a letter of my friend Mr. Power, surgeon,
at Bosworth in Leicestershire, on examining the body of an elderly lady who
died of this disease, March 29, 1793. "On opening the abdomen I found a
large cyst attached to the left ovarium by an elastic neck as thick as the
little finger, and so callous as not to admit of being separated by
scissars without considerable difficulty. The substance of the cyst had an
appearance much resembling the gravid uterus near the full period of
gestation, and was as thick. It had no attachment to the peritonaeum, or
any of the viscera, except by the hard callous neck I have mentioned; so
that the blood must with difficulty have been circulated through it for
some time. Its texture was extremely tender, being easily perforated with
the finger, was of a livid red colour, and evidently in a sphacelated
state. It contained about two gallons of a fluid of the colour of port
wine, without any greater tenacity. It has fallen to my lot to have opened
two other patients, whose deaths were occasioned by incysted dropsy of the
ovarium. In one of these the ovarium was much enlarged with eight or ten
cysts on its surface, but there was no adhesion formed by any of the cysts
to any other part; nor had the ovarium formed any adhesion with the
peritonaeum, though in a very diseased state. In the other the disease was
more simple, being only one cyst, without any attachment but to the
ovarium.

    "As the ovarium is a part not necessary to life, and dropsies of this
    kind are so generally fatal in the end, I think I shall be induced,
    notwithstanding the hazard attending wounds, which penetrate the cavity
    of the abdomen, to propose the extirpation of the diseased part in the
    first case, which occurs to me, in which I can with precision say, that
    the ovarium is the seat of the disease, and the patient in other
    respects tolerably healthy; as the cavity of the abdomen is often
    opened in other cases without bad consequences."

An argument, which might further countenance the operation thus proposed by
Mr. Power, might be taken from the disease frequently affecting young
persons; from its being generally in these subjects local and primary; and
not like the ascites, produced or accompanied with other diseased viscera;
and lastly, as it is performed in adult quadrupeds, as old sows, with
safety, though by awkward operators.

16. _Anasarca pulmonum._ The dropsy of the cellular membrane of the lungs
is usually connected with that of the other parts of the system. As the
cells of the whole cellular membrane communicate with each other, the
mucaginous fluid, which remains in any part of it for want of due
absorption, sinks down to the most depending cells; hence the legs swell,
though the cause of the disease, the deficiency of absorption, may be in
other parts of the system. The lungs however are an exception to this,
since they are suspended in the cavity of the thorax, and have in
consequence a depending part of their own.

The anasarca of the lungs is known by the difficulty of respiration
accompanied with swelled legs, and with a very irregular pulse. This last
circumstance has generally been ascribed to a dropsy at the same time
existing in the pericardium, but is more probably owing to the difficult
passage of the blood through the lungs; because I found on dissection, in
one instance, that the most irregular pulse, which I ever attended to, was
owing to very extensive adhesions of the lungs; insomuch that one lobe
intirely adhered to the pleura; and secondly, because this kind of dropsy
of the lungs is so certainly removed for a time along with the anasarca of
the limbs by the use of digitalis.

This medicine, as well as emetic tartar, or squill, when given so as to
produce sickness, or nausea, or perhaps even without producing either in
any perceptible degree, by affecting the lymphatics of the stomach, so as
either to invert their motion, or to weaken them, increases by reverse
sympathy the action, and consequent absorbent power of these lymphatics,
which open into the cellular membrane. But as those medicines seldom
succeed in producing an absorption of those fluids, which stagnate in the
larger cavities of the body, as in the abdomen, or chest, and do generally
succeed in this difficulty of breathing with irregular pulse above
described, I conclude that it is not owing to an effusion of lymph into the
pericardium, but simply to an anasarca of the lungs.

M. M. Digitalis. See Art. V. 2. 1. Tobacco. Squill. Emetic tartar
(antimonium tartarizatum). Then Sorbentia. Chalybeates. Opium half a grain
twice a day. Raisin wine and water, or other wine and water, is preferred
to the spirit and water, which these patients have generally been
accustomed to.

The usual cause of anasarca is from a diseased liver, and hence it most
frequently attends those, who have drank much fermented or spirituous
liquors; but I suspect that there is another cause of anasarca, which
originates from the brain; and which is more certainly fatal than that,
which originates from a diseased liver. These patients, where the anasarca
originates from, or commences in, the brain, have not other symptoms of
diseased liver; have less difficulty of breathing at the beginning; and
hold themselves more upright in their chair, and in walking. In this kind
of dropsy I suspect the digitalis has less or no effect; as it particularly
increases the absorption from the lungs.

17. _Obesitas._ Corpulency may be called an anasarca or dropsy of fat,
since it must be owing to an analogous cause; that is, to the deficient
absorption of fat compared to the quantity secreted into the cells which
contain it. See Class II. 1. 1. 4.

The method of getting free from too much fat without any injury to the
constitution, consists, first, in putting on a proper bandage on the belly,
so that it can be tightened or relaxed with ease, as a tightish under
waistcoat, with a double row of buttons. This is to compress the bowels and
increase their absorption, and it thus removes one principal cause of
corpulency, which is the looseness of the skin. Secondly, he should omit
one entire meal, as supper; by this long abstinence from food the absorbent
system will act on the mucus and fat with greater energy. Thirdly, he
should drink as little as he can with ease to his sensations; since, if the
absorbents of the stomach and bowels supply the blood with much, or perhaps
too much, aqueous fluid, the absorbents of the cellular membrane will act
with less energy. Fourthly, he should use much salt or salted meat, which
will increase the perspiration and make him thirsty; and if he bears this
thirst, the absorption of his fat will be greatly increased, as appears in
fevers and dropsies with thirst; this I believe to be more efficacious than
soap. Fifthly, he may use aerated alcaline water for his drink, which may
be supposed to render the fat more fluid,--or he may take soap in large
quantities, which will be decomposed in the stomach. Sixthly, short rest,
and constant exercise.

18. _Splenis tumor._ Swellings of the spleen, or in its vicinity, are
frequently perceived by the hand in intermittents, which are called
Ague-cakes, and seem owing to a deficiency of absorption in the affected
part.

Mr. Y----, a young man about twenty-five years of age, who lived
intemperately, was seized with an obstinate intermittent, which had become
a continued fever with strong pulse, attended with daily remission. A large
hard tumour on the left side, on the region of the spleen, but extending
much more downward, was so distinctly perceptible, that one seemed to get
one's fingers under the edge of it, much like the feel of the brawn or
shield on a boar's shoulder. He was repeatedly bled, and purged with
calomel, had an emetic, and a blister on the part, without diminishing the
tumour; after some time he took the Peruvian bark, and slight doses of
chalybeates, and thus became free from the fever, and went to Bath for
several weeks, but the tumour remained. This tumour I examined every four
or five years for above thirty years. His countenance was pale, and towards
the end of his life he suffered much from ulcers on his legs, and died
about sixty, of general debility; like many others, who live intemperately
in respect to the ingurgitation of fermented or spirituous liquors.

As this tumour commenced in the cold fit of an intermittent fever, and was
not attended with pain, and continued so long without endangering his life,
there is reason to believe it was simply occasioned by deficient
absorption, and not by more energetic action of the vessels which
constitute the spleen. See Class II. 1. 2. 13.

M. M. Venesection. Emetic, cathartic with calomel; then sorbentia,
chalybeates, Peruvian bark.

19. _Genu tumor albus._ White swelling of the knee, is owing to deficient
absorption of the lymphatics of the membranes including the joint, or
capsular ligaments, and sometimes perhaps of the gland which secretes the
synovia; and the ends of the bones are probably affected in consequence.

I saw an instance, where a caustic had been applied by an empiric on a
large white swelling of the knee, and was told, that a fluid had been
discharged from the joint, which became anchylosed, and healed without loss
of the limb.

M. M. Repeated blisters on the part early in the disease are said to cure
it by promoting absorption; saturnine solutions externally are recommended.
Bark, animal charcoal, as burnt sponge, opium in small doses. Friction with
the hand.

20. _Bronchocele._ Swelled throat. An enlargement of the thyroid glands,
said to be frequent in mountainous countries, where river water is drank,
which has its source from dissolving snows. This idea is a very ancient
one, but perhaps not on that account to be the more depended upon, as
authors copy one another. Tumidum guttur quis miratur in alpibus, seems to
have been a proverb in the time of Juvenal. The inferior people of Derby
are much subject to this disease, but whether more so than other populous
towns, I can not determine; certain it is, that they chiefly drink the
water of the Derwent, which arises in a mountainous country, and is very
frequently blackened as it passes through the morasses near its source; and
is generally of a darker colour, and attended with a whiter foam, than the
Trent, into which it falls; the greater quantity and whiteness of its froth
I suppose may be owing to the viscidity communicated to it by the colouring
matter. The lower parts of the town of Derby might be easily supplied with
spring water from St. Alkmond's well; or the whole of it from the abundant
springs near Bowbridge: the water from which might be conveyed to the town
in hollow bricks, or clay-pipes, at no very great expence, and might be
received into frequent reservoirs with pumps to them; or laid into the
houses.

M. M. Twenty grains of burnt sponge with ten of nitre made with mucilage
into lozenges, and permitted to dissolve slowly under the tongue twice a
day, is asserted to cure in a few months; perhaps other animal charcoal, as
candle-snuffs, might do the same.

I have directed in the early state of this disease a mixture of common salt
and water to be held in the mouth, particularly under the tongue, for a few
minutes, four or six times a day for many weeks, which has sometimes
succeeded, the salt and water is then spit out again, or in part swallowed.
Externally vinegar of squills has been applied, or a mercurial plaster, or
fomentations of acetated ammoniac; or ether. Some empirics have applied
caustics on the bronchocele, and sometimes, I have been told, with success;
which should certainly be used where there is danger of suffocation from
the bulk of it. One case I saw, and one I was well informed of, where the
bronchocele was cured by burnt sponge, and a hectic fever supervened with
colliquative sweats; but I do not know the final event of either of them.

De Haen affirms the cure of bronchocele to be effected by flowers of zinc,
calcined egg-shells, and scarlet cloth burnt together in a close crucible,
which was tried with success, as he assured me, by a late lamented
physician, my friend, Dr. Small of Birmingham; who to the cultivation of
modern sciences added the integrity of ancient manners; who in clearness of
head, and benevolence of heart, had few equals, perhaps no superiors.

21. _Scrophula._ King's evil is known by tumours of the lymphatic glands,
particularly of the neck. The upper lip, and division of the nostrils is
swelled, with a florid countenance, a smooth skin, and a tumid abdomen.
Cullen. The absorbed fluids in their course to the veins in the scrophula
are arrested in the lymphatic or conglobate glands; which swell, and after
a great length of time, inflame and suppurate. Materials of a peculiar
kind, as the variolous and venereal matter, when absorbed in a wound,
produce this torpor, and consequent inflammation of those lymphatic glands,
where they first arrive, as in the axilla and groin. There is reason to
suspect, that the tonsils frequently become inflamed, and suppurate from
the matter absorbed from carious teeth; and I saw a young lady, who had
both the axillary glands swelled, and which suppurated; which was believed
to have been caused by her wearing a pair of new green gloves for one day,
when she had perspired much, and was much exhausted and fatigued by
walking; the gloves were probably dyed in a solution of verditer.

These indolent tumours of the lymphatic glands, which constitute the
scrophula, originate from the inirritability of those glands; which
therefore sooner fall into torpor after having been stimulated too
violently by some poisonous material; as the muscles of enfeebled people
sooner become fatigued, and cease to act, when exerted, than those of
stronger ones. On the same account these scrophulous glands are much longer
in acquiring increase of motion, after having been stimulated into
inactivity, and either remain years in a state of indolence, or suppurate
with difficulty, and sometimes only partially.

The difference between scrophulous tumours, and those before described,
consists in this; that in those either glands of different kinds were
diseased, or the mouths only of the lymphatic glands were become torpid;
whereas in scrophula the conglobate glands themselves become tumid, and
generally suppurate after a great length of time, when they acquire new
sensibility. See Sect. XXXIX. 4. 5.

These indolent tumours may be brought to suppurate sometimes by passing
electric shocks through them every day for two or three weeks, as I have
witnessed. It is probable, that the alternate application of snow or iced
water to them, till they become painfully cold, and then of warm flannel or
warm water, frequently repeated, might restore their irritability by
accumulation of sensorial power; and thence either facilitate their
dispersion, or occasion them to suppurate. See Class II. 1. 4. 13.

This disease is very frequent amongst the children of the poor in large
towns, who are in general ill fed, ill lodged, and ill clothed; and who are
further weakened by eating much salt with their scanty meal of insipid
vegetable food, which is seldom of better quality than water gruel, with a
little coarse bread in it. See diarrhoea of infants, Class I. 1. 2. 5.
Scrophulous ulcers are difficult to heal, which is owing to the deficiency
of absorption on their pale and flabby surfaces, and to the general
inirritability of the system. See Class I. 1. 3. 13.

M. M. Plentiful diet of flesh-meat and vegetables with small-beer. Opium,
from a quarter of a grain to half a grain twice a day. Sorbentia. Tincture
of digitalis, thirty drops twice a day. Externally sea-bathing, or bathing
in salt and water, one pound to three gallons, made warm. The application
of Peruvian bark in fine powder, seven parts, and white lead, (cerussa) in
fine powder one part, mixed together and applied on the ulcers in dry
powder, by means of lint and a bandage, to be renewed every day. Or very
fine powder of calamy alone, lapis calaminaris. If powder of manganese?

22. _Schirrus._ After the absorbent veins of a gland cease to perform their
office, if the secerning arteries of it continue to act some time longer,
the fluids are pushed forwards, and stagnate in the receptacles or
capillary vessels of the gland; and the thinner part of them only being
resumed by the absorbent system of the gland, a hard tumour gradually
succeeds; which continues like a lifeless mass, till from some accidental
violence it gains sensibility, and produces cancer, or suppurates. Of this
kind are the schirrous glands of the breasts, of the lungs, of the
mesentery, and the scrophulous tumours about the neck and the bronchocele.

Another seat of schirrus is in the membranous parts of the system, as of
the rectum intestinum, the urethra, the gula or throat; and of this kind is
the verucca or wart, and the clavus pedum, or corns on the toes. A wen
sometimes arises on the back of the neck, and sometimes between the
shoulders; and by distending the tendinous fascia produces great and
perpetual pain.

M. M. Mercurial ointment. Cover the part with oiled silk. Extirpation.
Electric shocks through the tumour. An issue into the substance of the wen.
Opium. Ether externally.

23. _Schirrus recti intestini._ Schirrus of the rectum. A schirrus
frequently affects a canal, and by contracting its diameter becomes a
painful and deplorable disease. The canals thus obstructed are the rectum,
the urethra, the throat, the gall-ducts, and probably the excretory ducts
of the lymphatics, and of other glands.

The schirrus of the rectum is known by the patient having pain in the part,
and being only able to part with liquid feces, and by the introduction of
the finger; the swelled part of the intestine is sometimes protruded
downwards, and hangs like a valve, smooth and hard to the touch, with an
aperture in the centre of it. See a paper on this subject by J. Sherwin.
Memoirs of a London Medical Society, Vol. II. p. 9.

M. M. To take but little solid food. Aperient medicines. Introduce a candle
smeared with mercurial ointment. Sponge-tent. Clysters with forty drops of
laudanum. Introduce a leathern canula, or gut, and then either a wooden
maundril, or blow it up with air, so as to distend the contracted part as
much as the patient can bear. Or spread mercurial plaster on thick soft
leather, and roll it up with the plaster outwards to any thickness and
length, which can be easily introduced and worn; or two or three such
pieces may be introduced after each other. The same may be used to compress
bleeding internal piles. See Class I. 2. 1. 6.

24. _Schirrus urethrae._ Schirrus of the urethra. The passage becomes
contracted by the thickened membrane, and the urine is forced through with
great difficulty, and is thence liable to distend the canal behind the
stricture; till at length an aperture is made, and the urine forces its way
into the cellular membrane, making large sinuses. This situation sometimes
continues many months, or even years, and so much matter is evacuated after
making water, or at the same time, by the action of the muscles in the
vicinity of the sinuses, that it has been mistaken for an increased
secretion from the bladder, and has been erroneously termed a catarrh of
the bladder. See a paper by Dr. R. W. Darwin in the Medical Memoirs.

M. M. Distend the part gradually by catgut bougies, which by their
compression will at the same time diminish the thickness of the membrane,
or by bougies of elastic gum, or of horn boiled soft. The patient should
gain the habit of making water slowly, which is a matter of the utmost
consequence, as it prevents the distention, and consequent rupture, of that
part of the urethra, which is between the stricture and the neck of the
bladder.

When there occurs an external ulcer in the perinaeum, and the urine is in
part discharged that way, the disease can not be mistaken. Otherwise from
the quantity of matter, it is generally supposed to come from the bladder,
or prostate gland; and the urine, which escapes from the ruptured urethra,
mines its way amongst the muscles and membranes, and the patient dies
tabid, owing to the want of an external orifice to discharge the matter.
See Class II. 1. 4. 11.

25. _Schirrus oesophagi._ A schirrus of the throat contracts the passage so
as to render the swallowing of solids impracticable, and of liquids
difficult. It affects patients of all ages, but is probably most frequently
produced by swallowing hard angular substances, when people have lost their
teeth; by which this membrane is over distended, or torn, or otherwise
injured.

M. M. Put milk into a bladder tied to a canula or catheter; introduce it
past the stricture, and press it into the stomach. Distend the stricture
gradually by a sponge-tent fastened to the end of whale-bone, or by a plug
of wax, or a spermaceti candle, about two inches long; which might be
introduced, and left there with a string only fixed to it to hang out of
the mouth, to keep it in its place, and to retract it by occasionally; for
which purpose the string must be put through a catheter or hollow probang,
when it is to be retracted. Or lastly introduce a gut fixed to a pipe; and
then distend it by blowing wind into it. The swallowing a bullet with a
string put through it, to retract it on the exhibition of an emetic, has
also been proposed. Externally mercurial ointment has been much
recommended. Poultice. Oiled silk. Clysters of broth. Warm bath of broth.
Transfusion of blood into a vein three or four ounces a day? See Class III.
1. 1. 15.

I directed a young woman about twenty-two years of age, to be fed with new
milk put into a bladder, which was tied to a catheter, and introduced
beyond the stricture in her throat; after a few days her spirits sunk, and
she refused to use it further, and died. Above thirty years ago I proposed
to an old gentleman, whose throat was entirely impervious, to supply him
with a few ounces of blood daily from an ass, or from the human animal, who
is still more patient and tractable, in the following manner. To fix a
silver pipe about an inch long to each extremity of a chicken's gut, the
part between the two silver ends to be measured by filling it with warm
water; to put one end into the vein of a person hired for that purpose, so
as to receive the blood returning from the extremity; and when the gut was
quite full, and the blood running through the other silver end, to
introduce that end into the vein of the patient upwards towards the heart,
so as to admit no air along with the blood. And lastly, to support the gut
and silver ends on a water plate, filled with water of ninety-eight degrees
of heat, and to measure how many ounces of blood was introduced by passing
the finger, so as to compress the gut, from the receiving pipe to the
delivering pipe; and thence to determine how many gut-fulls were given from
the healthy person to the patient. See Class IV. 2. 4. 11. Mr. ----
considered a day on this proposal, and then another day, and at length
answered, that "he now found himself near the house of death; and that if
he could return, he was now too old to have much enjoyment of life; and
therefore he wished rather to proceed to the end of that journey, which he
was now so near, and which he must at all events soon go, than return for
so short a time." He lived but a few days afterwards, and seemed quite
careless and easy about the matter.

26. _Lacteorum inirritabilitas._ Inirritability of the lacteals is
described in Sect. XXVIII. under the name of paralysis of the lacteals; but
as the word paralysis has generally been applied to the disobedience of the
muscles to the power of volition, the name is here changed to
inirritability of the lacteals, as more characteristic of the disease.

27. _Lymphaticorum inirritabilitas._ The inirritability of the cellular and
cutaneous lymphatics is described in Sect. XXIX. 5. 1. and in Class I. 2.
3. 16. The inirritability of the cutaneous lymphatics generally accompanies
anasarca, and is the cause of the great thirst in that malady. At the same
time the cellular lymphatics act with greater energy, owing to the greater
derivation of sensorial power to them in consequence of the less
expenditure of it by the cutaneous ones; and hence they absorb the fat, and
mucus, and also the thinner parts of the urine. Whence the great emaciation
of the body, the muddy sediment, and the small quantity of water in this
kind of dropsy.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORDO II.

_Decreased Irritation._

GENUS IV.

_With Decreased Actions of other Cavities and Membranes._

Many of the diseases of this genus are attended with pain, and with cold
extremities, both which cease on the exhibition of wine or opium; which
shews, that they originate from deficient action of the affected organ.
These pains are called nervous or spasmodic, are not attended with fever,
but are frequently succeeded by convulsions and madness; both which belong
to the class of volition. Some of them return at periods, and when these
can be ascertained, a much less quantity of opium will prevent them, than
is necessary to cure them, when they are begun; as the vessels are then
torpid and inirritable from the want of sensorial power, till by their
inaction it becomes again accumulated.

Our organs of sense properly so called are not liable to pain from the
absence of their appropriated stimuli, as from darkness or silence; but the
other senses, which may be more properly called appetites, as those by
which we perceive heat, hunger, thirst, lust, want of fresh air, are
affected with pain from the defect or absence of their accustomed stimuli,
as well as with pleasure by the possession of them; it is probable that
some of our glands, whose sense or appetite requires or receives something
from the circulating blood, as the pancreas, liver, testes, prostate gland,
may be affected with aching or pain, when they cannot acquire their
appropriated fluid.

Wherever this defect of stimulus occurs, a torpor or inaction of the organ
ensues, as in the capillaries of the skin, when exposed to cold; and in the
glands, which secrete the gastric juice, when we are hungry. This torpor
however, and concomitant pain, which is at first owing to defect of
stimulus, is afterwards induced by other associations or catenations, and
constitutes the beginning of ague fits.

It must be further observed, that in the diseases of pain without fever,
the pain is frequently not felt in the part where the cause of the disease
resides; but is induced by sympathy with a distant part, whose irritability
or sensibility is greater or less than its own. Thus a stone at the neck of
the bladder, if its stimulus is not very great, only induces the pain of
strangury at the glans penis. If its stimulus be greater, it then induces
pain at the neck of the bladder. The concretions of bile, which are
protruded into the neck of the gall-bladder, when the disease is not very
great, produce pain at the other extremity of the bile-duct, which enters
the duodenum immediately under the pit of the stomach; but, when the
disease is great from the largeness of the bile-stone, the pain is felt in
the region of the liver at the neck of the gall-bladder.

It appears from hence, that the pains enumerated in this genus are
consequences of the inactivity of the organ; and, as they do not occasion
other diseases, should be classed according to their proximate cause, which
is defective irritation; there are nevertheless other pains from defect of
stimulus, which produce convulsions, and belong to Class III. 1. 1.; and
others, which produce pains of some distant part by association, and belong
to Class IV. 2. 2.

SPECIES.

1. _Sitis._ Thirst. The senses of thirst and of hunger seem to have this
connection, that the former is situated at the upper end, and the latter at
the lower end of the same canal. One about the pharinx, where the
oesophagus opens into the mouth, and the other about the cardia ventriculi,
where it opens into the stomach. The extremities of other canals have been
shewn to possess correspondent sensibilities, or irritabilities, as the two
ends of the urethra, and of the common gall-duct. See IV. 2. 2. 2. and 4.

The membrane of the upper end of the gullet becomes torpid, and
consequently painful, when there is a deficiency of aqueous fluid in the
general system; it then wants its proper stimulus. In the same manner a
want of the stimulus of more solid materials at the other end of the canal,
which terminates in the stomach, produces hunger; as mentioned in Sect.
XIV. 8. The proximate causes of both of them therefore consist in deficient
irritation, when they are considered as pains; because these pains are in
consequence of the inactivity of the organ, according to the fifth law of
animal causation. Sect. IV. 5. But when they are considered as desires,
namely of liquid or solid aliment, their proximate cause consists in the
pain of them, according to the sixth law of animal causation. So the
proximate cause of the pain of coldness is the inactivity of the organ, and
perhaps the consequent accumulation of sensorial power in it; but the pain
itself, or the consequent volition, is the proximate cause of the
shuddering and gnashing the teeth in cold fits of intermittent fevers. See
Class I. 2. 2. 1.

Thirst may be divided into two varieties alluding to the remote cause of
each, and may be termed sitis calida, or warm thirst, and sitis frigida, or
cold thirst. The remote cause of the former arises from the dissipation of
the aqueous parts of our fluids by the increased secretion of perspirable
matter, or other evacuations. And hence it occurs in hot fits of fever, and
after taking much wine, opium, spice, salt, or other drugs of the Art.
incitantia or secernentia. The thirst, which occurs about three hours after
eating a couple of red herrings, to a person unaccustomed to salted meat,
is of this kind; the increased action of the cutaneous vessels dissipates
so much of our fluids by insensible perspiration, as to require above two
quarts of water to restore the fluidity of the blood, and to wash the salt
out of the system. See Art. III. 2. 1.

M. M. Cold water. Vegetable acids. Warm bath.

The remote cause of sitis frigida, or cold thirst, is owing to the inaction
of the cutaneous, pulmonary, urinary, and cellular absorbents; whence the
blood is deprived of the great supply of moisture, which it ought to
receive from the atmosphere, and from the cells of the cellular membrane,
and from other cysts; this cause of thirst exists in dropsies, and in the
cold fits of intermittents. The desire of fluids, like that of solids, is
liable to acquire periods, and may therefore readily become diseased by
indulgence in liquids grateful to the palate.

Of diseased thirst, the most common is either owing to defect of the action
of the numerous absorbent vessels on the neck of the bladder, in which the
patient makes much paleish water; or to the defective absorption of the
skin and lungs, in which the patient makes but little water, and that
high-coloured, and with sediment. In both the tongue and lips are liable to
become very dry. The former in its greatest degree attends diabaetes, and
the latter anasarca.

M. M. Warm water, warm wine, warm bath. Opium. Cold bath. Iced water.
Lemonade. Cyder.

2. _Esuries._ Hunger has been fancifully ascribed to the sides of the
stomach rubbing against each other, and to the increased acidity of the
gastric juice corroding the coats of it. If either of these were the cause
of hunger, inflammation must occur, when they had continued some time; but,
on the contrary, coldness and not heat are attendant on hunger; which
evinces, that like thirst it is owing to the inactivity of the membrane,
which is the seat of it; while the abundant nerves about the cardia
ventriculi, and the pain of hunger being felt in that part, gives great
reason to conclude, that it is there situated.

The sense of hunger as well as of thirst is liable to acquire habits in
respect to the times of its returning painfulness, as well as in respect to
the quantity required to satiate its appetency, and hence may become
diseased by indulgence, as well as by want of its appropriate stimulus.
Those who have been accustomed to distend their stomach by large quantities
of animal and vegetable food, and much potation, find a want of distention,
when the stomach is empty, which occasions faintness, and is mistaken for
hunger, but which does not appear to be the same sensation. I was well
informed, that a woman near Lichfield, who eat much animal and vegetable
food for a wager, affirmed, that since distending her stomach so much, she
had never felt herself satisfied with food; and had in general taken twice
as much at a meal, as she had been accustomed to, before she eat so much
for a wager.

3. _Nausea sicca._ Dry nausea. Consists in a quiescence or torpor of the
mucous or salivary glands, and precedes their inverted motions, described
in nausea humida, Class I. 3. 2. 3. In the same manner as sickness of the
stomach is a quiescence of that organ preceding the action of vomiting, as
explained in Sect. XXXV. 1. 3. This is sometimes induced by disagreeable
drugs held in the mouth, at other times of disgustful ideas, and at other
times by the association of these actions with those of the stomach; and
thus according to its different proximate causes may belong to this, or to
the second, or to the fourth class of diseases.

M. M. Lemonade. Tasteful food. A blister. Warm bath.

4. _Aegritudo ventriculi._ Sickness of stomach is produced by the
quiescence or inactivity of that organ, as is explained in Sect. XXXV. 1.
3. It consists in the state between the usual peristaltic motions of that
organ, in the digestion of our aliment, and the retrograde motions of it in
vomiting; for it is evident, that the direct motions of it from the cardia
to the pylorus must stop, before those in a contrary direction can
commence. This sickness, like the nausea above described, is sometimes
produced by disgustful ideas, as when nasty objects are seen, and nasty
stories related, as well as by the exhaustion of the sensorial power by the
stimulus of some emetic drugs, and by the defect of the production of it,
as in enfeebled drunkards.

Sickness may likewise consist in the retrograde motions of the lymphatics
of the stomach, which regurgitate into it the chyle or lymph, which they
have lately absorbed, as in Class I. 3. 2. 3. It is probable, that these
two kinds of sickness may be different sensations, though they have
acquired but one name; as one of them attends hunger, and the other
