apparently a similar luminous filament. But this latter is made in
an entirely different manner. A platinum wire is employed, 1/100 of
a millimeter in diameter. This is obtained by the Wollaston process,
that is to say, a piece of coarse platinum wire is covered with a
stout coating of silver, and drawn down till the outside diameter
is 1/10 millimeter. The silver coating is then dissolved in a bath of
nitric acid, and the platinum wire is left behind. This wire is then
cut into lengths, bent into a U form, and placed in a glass globe, in
which circulates a current of bicarbonated hydrogen obtained by the
action of sulphuric acid on alcohol. This gas, previously purified,
circulates around the platinum filament, through which an electric
current is passed sufficient to bring it to a red heat. This
decomposes the gas, and a thin coating of absolutely pure carbon is
deposited on the wire. The operation is continued until a sufficient
thickness of carbon has been deposited for each type of lamp, and the
method of regulating the amount of deposit is effected very
simply, and, in fact, almost automatically. Indeed, one of the most
interesting features of the process is its great simplicity, although
it is somewhat more costly than the ordinary methods of producing
incandescence lamps. After having been subjected to the action of
the gas for two or three hours, the filament is taken from the glass
globe, its diameter is carefully measured, the length is calibrated,
and it is set on a platinum support, to which it is soldered by a very
ingenious process. The filament is then introduced into a second
glass globe charged with bicarbonate of hydrogen; it is placed between
pincers that hold the carbon near its union with the platinum, and the
platinum some millimeters below. These pincers are then thrown into
circuit, and a powerful current is passed through the part which is
to be soldered. The platinum and carbon become incandescent, the
bicarbonate is decomposed, and a fresh deposit of carbon solders the
filament to its support. The system thus mounted is placed within the
permanent globe, and a vacuum is obtained in the ordinary way, while
the testing and finishing details present nothing of special interest.
The finished lamp is then photometrically tested, and placed on a
support something like the Edison mounting. Upon it are engraved
the working constants. As an ordinary practical result, these lamps,
working with 50 volts and 1.15 amperes, give a luminous intensity of
20 candles, or the equivalent in luminous spherical intensity of 1.1
Edison A lamps. This result is interesting, especially as the life
of the lamp ranges from 900 to 1,100 hours, as was demonstrated by
various careful tests made with some 250 lamps; the most valuable
trials having taken place at the Turin Exhibition. After prolonged
use, a diminution in the fall of potential is produced, to a more
marked degree than in the Edison lamp, and the light can be maintained
constant by increasing the strength of the current in a proportion
that can be determined by means of resistances. The Cruto filament
examined under the microscope appears to be uniformly magnetic, and
is very regular, except at the curved parts where the diameter is
slightly diminished, and it is here that rupture generally takes
place. The great structural regularity of the filament probably
accounts for its high durability, and from the fact that it may
be worked with a higher current than probably any other form of
incandescence lamp. M. Desroziers in a series of experiments obtained
as much as 250 carcel spherical luminous value per horse-power; this
characteristic is one likely to be of great value in electric lighting
by incandescence of high intensity. At present only 20-candle lamps
are made on the Cruto system. The carbon filament, when properly
prepared, is gray in hue and of metallic appearance; it is built up
in very fine laminae indicating the mode of manufacture. The results
obtained with these lamps vary as much as 25 per cent., according to
the care bestowed in producing the filament. If traces of air exist in
the globe, they very quickly manifest themselves by the surface of
the glass becoming blackened, while an increased energy is required to
maintain the brightness of the light.

In the early days of this lamp it was thought necessary to remove
the delicate platinum wire which forms the core of the filament, by
raising the strength of the current sufficiently to destroy it in the
course of manufacture. This, however, was given up, and the platinum
now remains either as a continuous wire or as a series of small
separated granules.

       *       *       *       *       *




ELECTRIC LIGHT APPARATUS FOR MILITARY PURPOSES.


In the first period of the siege of a stronghold it is of very great
importance for the besieged to embarrass the first progress of the
attack, in order to complete their own armament, and to perform
certain operations which are of absolute necessity for the safety of
the place, but which are only then possible. In order to retard the
completion of the first parallel, and the opening of the fire, it is
necessary to try to discover the location of such parallel, as well as
that of the artillery, and to ply them with projectiles. But, on their
side, the besiegers will do all in their power to hide their works,
and those that they are unable to begin behind natural coverts they
will execute at night. It will be seen from this how important it is
for the besieged to possess at this stage of events an effective means
of lighting up the external country. Later on, such means will be of
utility to them in the night-firing of long-range rifled guns, as well
as for preventing surprises, and also for illuminating the breach and
the ditches at the time of an assault, and the entire field of battle
at the time of a sortie.

[Illustration: ELECTRIC LIGHT APPARATUS FOR ARMY USE.]

On a campaign it will prove none the less useful to be provided with
movable apparatus that follow the army. A few years ago. Lieut. A.
Cuvelier, in a very remarkable article in the _Revue Militaire Belge_,
pointed out the large number of night operations of the war of 1877,
and predicted the frequent use of such apparatus in future wars.

The accompanying engraving represents a very fine electric light
apparatus, especially designed for military use in mountainous
countries. It consists of a two-wheeled carriage, drawn by one horse
and carrying all the apparatus necessary for illuminating the works
of the enemy. The machine consists of the following parts: (1) A field
boiler. (2) A Gramme electric machine, type M, actuated directly by
a Brotherhood 3-cylinder motor. (3) A Mangin projector, 12 inches in
diameter, suspended for carriage from a movable support. This latter,
when the place is reached where the apparatus is to operate, may be
removed from the carriage and placed on the ground at a distance of
about a hundred yards from the machine, and be connected therewith by
a conductor. Col. Mangin's projector consists of a glass mirror with
double curvature, silvered upon its convex face. It possesses so
remarkable optical properties that it has been adopted by nearly
all powers. The fascicle of light that it emits has a perfect
concentration. In front of the projector there are two doors. The
first of these, which is plane and simple, is used when it is desired
to give the fascicle all the concentration possible; the other, which
consists of cylindrical lenses, spreads the fascicle horizontally, so
as to make it cover a wider space.

The range of the concentrated fascicle is about 86,000 feet. The
projector may be pointed in all directions, so as to bring it to bear
in succession upon all the points that it is desired to illuminate.
The 12-inch projector is the smallest size made for this purpose.
The constructors, Messrs. Sautter, Lemonnier & Co., are making more
powerful ones, up to 36 inches in diameter, with a corresponding
increase in the size of the electric machines, motors, and boilers.

The various powers make use of these apparatus for the defense of
fortresses and coasts, for campaign service, etc.

The various parts of the apparatus can be easily taken apart and
loaded upon the backs of mules. The only really heavy piece is the
boiler, which weighs about 990 pounds.

       *       *       *       *       *




ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM.[1]

   [Footnote 1: Introductory to the course of Lectures on Physics at
   Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri--_Kansas City
   Review._]

Prof. FRANCIS E. NIPHER.


It was known six hundred years before Christ that when amber is rubbed
it acquires the power of attracting light bodies. The Greek name for
amber, _elektron_, was afterward applied to the phenomenon. It was
also known to the ancients that a certain kind of iron ore, first
found at Magnesia, in Asia Minor, had the property of attracting
iron. This phenomenon was called magnetism. This is the history of
electricity and magnetism for two thousand years, during which these
facts stood alone, like isolated mountain peaks, with summits touched
and made visible by the morning sun, while the region surrounding and
connecting them lay hidden and unexplored.

In fact, it is only in more recent times that men could be found
possessing the necessary mental qualities to insure success in
physical investigation. Some of the ancients were acute observers, and
made valuable observations in descriptive natural history. They also
observed and described phenomena which they saw around them, although
often in vague and mystical terms.

They, however, were greatly lacking in power to discriminate
between the possible and the absurd, and so old wives' tales,
acute speculations, and truthful observations are strangely jumbled
together. With rare exceptions they did not contrive new conditions to
bring about phenomena which Nature did not spontaneously exhibit--they
did not experiment. They attempted to solve the universe in their
heads, and made little progress.

In mediaeval times intellectual men were busy in trying to set each
other right, and in disputing and arguing with those who believed
themselves to be right. It was an era of intellectual pugilism,
and nothing was done in physics. In fact, this frame of mind is
incompatible with any marked success in scientific work.

The physical investigator cannot take up his work in the spirit of
controversy; for the phenomena and laws of Nature will not argue with
him. He must come as a learner, and the true man of science is content
to learn, is content to lay his results before his fellows, and is
willing to profit by their criticisms. In so far as he permits himself
to assume the mental attitude of one who defends a position, in so far
does he reveal a grave disqualification for the most useful scientific
work. Scientific truth needs no man's defense, but our individual
statements of what we believe to be truth frequently need criticism.
It is hardly necessary to remark, also, that critics are of various
degrees of excellence, and it seems that those in whom the habit of
criticism has become chronic are of comparatively little service to
the world.

The great harbinger of the new era was Galileo. There had been
prophets before him, and after him came a greater one--Newton. They
did nothing of note in electricity and magnetism, but they were filled
with the true spirit of science, they introduced proper and reasonable
methods of investigation, and by their great ability and distinguished
success they have produced a revolution in the intellectual world.
Other great men had also appeared, such as Leibnitz and Huyghens; and
it became very clear that the methods of investigation which had borne
such fruit in the days of Galileo were not disposed of completely
by his unwilling recantation; it became very clear that the new
civilization which was dawning upon Europe was not destined to the
rude fate which had overwhelmed the brilliant scientific achievements
of the Spanish Moors of a half century before.

Already in 1580, about the time when Galileo entered Pisa as a
student, Borroughs had determined the variation of the magnetic needle
at London, and we have upon the screen a view of his instrument, which
seems rude enough, in comparison with the elaborate apparatus of our
times. The first great work on electricity and magnetism was the "De
Magnete" of Gilbert, physician of Queen Elizabeth, published in
1600. Galileo, already famous in Europe, recognized in the methods of
investigation used by Gilbert the ones which he had found so fruitful,
and wrote of him, "I extremely praise, admire, and envy this author."

Gilbert made many interesting contributions to magnetism, which we
shall notice in another lecture, and he also found that sulphur,
glass, wax, and other bodies share with amber the property of being
electrified by friction. He concluded that many bodies could not be
thus electrified. Gray, however, found in 1729 that these bodies were
conductors of electricity, and his discoveries and experiments were
explained and described to the president of the Royal Society while on
his death bed, and only a few hours before his death. If precautions
are taken to properly insulate conductors, all bodies which differ
in any way, either in structure, in smoothness of surface, or even in
temperature, are apparently electrified by friction. In all cases
the friction also produces heat, and if the bodies rubbed are exactly
alike, heat only is produced.

An electrified body will attract all light bodies. This gutta percha
when rubbed with a cat's skin attracts these bits of paper, and this
pith ball, and this copper ball; it moves this long lath balanced on
its center, and deflects this vertical jet of water into a beautiful
curve.

If a conductor is to be electrified, it must be supported by bad
conductors. This brass cylinder standing on a glass column has become
electrified by friction with cat's-skin. My assistant will stand upon
this insulating stool, and by stroking his hand you will observe that
with his other hand he can attract this suspended rod of wood, and you
will hear a feeble spark when I apply my knuckle to his.

Du Fay, of Paris, discovered what he called two kinds of electricity.
He found that a glass rod rubbed with silk will repel another glass
rod similarly rubbed, but that the silk would attract a rubbed
glass rod. We express the facts in the well-known law that like
electricities repel each other, and unlike attract. For a long time
the nature of the distinctions between the two electricities was not
understood. It was found later that when the two bodies are rubbed
together they become oppositely electrified, and that the two
electricities are always generated in equal quantity; so that if the
two bodies are held in contact after the rubbing has ceased the
two electricities come together again and the electrical phenomena
disappear. They have been added together, and the result is zero.
Franklin proposed to call these electricities positive and negative.
These names are well chosen, but we do not know any reason why one
should be called positive rather than the other. The electricity
generated on glass when rubbed with silk is called positive.

Let us now examine the distinction between positive and negative
electricities somewhat more closely, aiding ourselves by two cases
which are somewhat analogous.

Two air-tight cylinders, A and B, contain air at ordinary pressure.
The cylinders are connected by a tube containing an air-pump in such a
way that, when the pump is worked, air is taken from A and forced into
B. To use the language of the electricians, we at once generate two
kinds of pressure. The vessels have acquired new properties. If we
open a cock in the side of either vessel, we hear a hissing sound, if
a light body is placed before the opening in A it would be attracted,
and before the opening in B it would be repelled. Now this is only
roughly analogous to the case of the electrified bodies, but the
analogy will nevertheless aid us in our study. If the two vessels are
first connected with the air, and then closed up and the pump is set
to work, we increase the pressure in B and diminish the pressure in
A. To do this requires the expenditure of a quantity of work. If the
cylinders are connected by an open tube--a conductor--the difference
in pressure disappears by reason of a flow of gas from one vessel to
the other.

If we had a pump by means of which we could pump heat from one body
into another, starting with two bodies at the same temperature, the
temperature of one body would increase and that of the other would
diminish. If we knew less than we do of heat, we might well discuss
whether the plus sign should be applied to the heat or to the cold,
because these names were coined by people who knew very little about
the subject except that these bodies produce different sensations when
they come in contact with the human body.

Furthermore, we find that whether the hand is applied to a very hot
body or to a very cold body, the physiological effect is the same. In
each case the tissue is destroyed and a burn is produced. Shall we now
say that this burn is produced by an unusual flow of heat from the hot
body to the hand, or from the hand to the cold body, or shall we say
that it is due to an unusual flow of cold from the cold body to the
hand, or from the hand to the hot body?

Logically these expressions are identical; still we have come to
prefer one of them. It is because we have learned that in those bodies
which our fathers called hot, the particles are vibrating with greater
energy than in cold bodies, that we prefer to say that heat is added
and not cold subtracted, when a cold body becomes less cold.

Now to come back to our electrified bodies. Let us suppose that this
gutta percha, and this cat's-skin are not electrified. That means that
their electrical condition is the same as that of surrounding bodies.
Let us also suppose that their thermal condition is the same as
surrounding bodies, ourselves included--that is, they are neither hot
nor cold. We express these conditions in other words by saying
that the bodies have the same electrical _potential_ and the same
temperature.

Temperature in heat is analogous to potential in electricity. As
soon as adjacent bodies are at different temperatures, we have
the phenomena which reveal to us the existence of heat. As soon as
adjacent bodies have different electrical potentials, we have the
phenomena which reveal the existence of electricity. As soon as
adjacent regions in the air are at different pressures, we have
phenomena which reveal the existence of air.

Bodies all tend to preserve the same temperature and also the same
electrical potential. Any disturbances in electrical equilibrium are
much more quickly obliterated than in case of thermal equilibrium,
and we therefore see less of electrical phenomena than of thermal. In
thunder storms we see such disturbances, and with delicate instruments
we find them going on continuously. Changes in temperature occurring
on a large scale in our atmosphere, occurring in these gas jets,
in our fires, in the axles of machinery, and in thousands of other
places, are so familiar that we have ceased to wonder at them.

If we rub these two bodies together, the potential of the two is no
longer the same. We do not know which one has become greater, and in
this respect our knowledge of electricity is less complete than of
heat. We assume that the gutta percha has become negative. If we now
leave these bodies in contact, the potential of the cat's skin will
diminish and that of the gutta percha will increase until they have
again reached a common potential--that of the earth. As in the case of
heat and cold, we may say either that this has come about by a flow of
positive electricity from the cat's skin to the gutta percha, or by
a flow of negative electricity in the opposite direction, for these
statements are identical.

In case of our gas cylinders, the gas tends to leak out of the vessel
where the pressure is great into the vessel where it is small. The
heat tends to leak out of a body of high temperature into the colder
one, or the cold tends to go in the opposite direction. Similarly, the
plus electricity tends to flow from the body having a high potential,
to the body having a low potential, or the minus electricity tends to
go in the opposite direction.

       *       *       *       *       *

[ENGINEERING.]




THE HYDRODYNAMIC RESEARCHES OF PROFESSOR BJERKNES.

BY CONRAD W. COOKE.


[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

We have in former articles described the highly interesting series
of experimental researches of Dr. C. A. Bjerknes, Professor of
Mathematics in the University of Christiania, which formed so
attractive a feature in the Electrical Exhibition of Paris in 1881,
and which constituted the practical development of a theoretical
research which had extended over a previous period of more than twenty
years. The experiments which we described in those articles were,
as our readers will remember, upon the influence of pulsating and
rectilinear vibrating bodies upon one another and upon bodies in their
neighborhood, as well as upon the medium in which they are
immersed. This medium, in the majority of Professor Bjerknes earlier
experiments, was water, although he demonstrated mathematically, and
to a small extent experimentally, that the phenomena, which bear so
striking an analogy to those of magnetism, may be produced in air.

Our readers will recollect that in the spring of 1882 Mr. Stroh, by
means of some very delicate and beautifully designed apparatus,
was able to demonstrate a large number of the same phenomena in
atmospheric air of the ordinary density; and about the same time
Professor Bjerknes, in Christiania, was extending his researches to
phenomena produced by a different class of vibrations, namely, those
of bodies moving in oscillations of a circular character, such, for
example, as a cylinder vibrating about its own axis or a sphere
around one of its diameters; some of these experiments were brought
by Professor Bjerknes before the Physical Society of London in the
following June. Since that time, however, Professor Bjerknes, with the
very important assistance of his son, Mr. Vilhelm Bjerknes, has been
extending these experimental researches in the same direction, and
with the results which it is the object of the present series of
articles to describe.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

The especial feature of interest in all Professor Bjerknes experiments
has been the remarkably close analogy which exists between the
phenomena exhibited in his mechanical experiments in water and other
media and those of magnetism and of electricity, and it may be of some
interest if we here recapitulate some of the more striking of these
analogies.

(1.) In the first place, the vibrating or pulsating bodies, by setting
the water or other medium in which they are immersed into vibration,
set up in their immediate neighborhood a field of mechanical force
very closely analogous to the field of magnetic force with which
magnetized bodies are surrounded. The lines of vibration have
precisely the same directions and form the same figures, while at the
same time the decrease of the intensity of vibration by an increase of
distance obeys precisely the same law as does that of magnetic
intensity at increasing distances from a magnetic body.

(2.) When two or more vibrating bodies are immersed in a fluid, they
set up around them fields of vibration, and act and react upon one
another in a manner closely analogous to the action and reaction of
magnets upon one another, producing the phenomena of attraction
and repulsion. In this respect, however, the analogy appears to be
inverse, repulsion being produced where, from the magnetic analogy,
one would expect to find attraction, and _vice versa_.

(3.) If a neutral body, that is to say a body having no vibration of
its own, be immersed in the fluid and within the field of vibration,
phenomena are produced exactly analogous to the magnetic and
diamagnetic phenomena produced by the action of a magnet upon soft
iron or bismuth, its apparently magnetic or diamagnetic properties
being determined by the specific gravity of the neutral body as
compared to that of the medium in which it is immersed. If the neutral
body be lighter than the medium, it exhibits the magnetic induction of
