Frankie struggled to his feet. Nappy came driving in. Frankie
back-pedalled and took the vicious right cross while rolling away. Thus
he avoided being knocked out and was only floored for another
eight-count.

_Milt--Milt--for God's sake--_

The round was over. Frankie staggered, sick, to his corner and slumped
down. The handlers worked over him. He looked at Milt. But Milt neither
sent nor returned his gaze. Milt sat looking grimly off into space and
seemed older and wearier than time itself.

Then Frankie knew. Milt had sold him out!

The shocking truth stunned him even more than Nappy's punches. Milt had
sold him out! There had been rare cases of such things. When money meant
more than honor to a veteran. But Milt!

Numbed, Frankie pondered the ghastly thought. After all, Milt was old.
Old men needed money for their later years. But how could he? How could
he do it?

Suddenly Frankie hated. He hated Nappy and Pop and every one of the
millions of people looking silently on around the world. But most of
all, he hated Milt. It was a weird, sickening thing, that hatred. But
only a mentally sickening thing. Physically, it seemed to make Frankie
stronger, because when the bell rang and he got up and walked into a
straight right, it didn't hurt at all.

He realized he was on the floor; the gong was sounding; he was getting
up, moving in again. There was blood, a ringing in his head.

But above all, a rage to kill. To kill.

       *       *       *       *       *

He remembered going down several times and getting up. Not caring how he
had swung under Milt's control--only wanting to use his fists--to kill
the thing weaving in front of him.

Nappy. A grinning, weaving, lethal ghost.

He felt a pain in his right fist and saw Nappy go down. He saw Pop's
face go gray as though the old man himself had felt the force of the
blow. Saw Nappy climb erect slowly. He grinned through blood.
Frankie--ghost-catcher. He had to get him.

He was happy; happy with a new fierceness he had never before known. The
lust of battle was strong within him and when Pop weaved Nappy
desperately, Frankie laughed, waited, measured Nappy.

And smashed him down with a single jarring right.

The bell tolled ten. Pop got wearily off his stool and walked away.
Frankie strode grimly to his corner, ignored Milt, moved on into the
dressing room.

He knew Milt would come and he waited for him, sitting there coldly on
the edge of the table. Milt walked in the door and stood quietly.

"You sold me out," Frankie said.

There was open pride in Milt's eyes. "Sure--you had to think that."

"What do you mean, think? You didn't pick me up when Pop flattened me. I
saw the look between you and Pop."

"Sure." Milt's eyes were still proud. "You had to know. That's how I
wanted it."

"Milt--why did you do it?"

"I didn't do it. I just had to make you think I did."

"In God's name--why?"

"Because I'm sentimental, maybe, but I've always had my own ideas about
the kind of fighter who should be a Ten-Time winner. All my life I've
kept remembering the old greats--Dempsey, Sullivan, Corbett--the men who
did it on their own, and I wanted you to get it right--on your own--like
a real champion."

