plain to require explanation. Subsequently, several others were made
on the same plan.

       *       *       *       *       *




CAST IRON ROOFING.


A specimen of cast-iron plates for roofing of buildings, says the
Philadelphia Ledger, has been exhibited at the Exchange, in
Philadelphia, by the inventor and patentee, Mr. Wm. Beach. The plates
are about a foot square, and are made to fit one into another so as to
render the roof perfectly water-tight, with the application of white
lead to the joints. In every respect this material for roofing is
preferable to any other description now in use. As to its durability,
there can be no doubt that it would remain perfectly whole for ages,
if covered occasionally with a coat of paint, and even without that
preservative, rust would not affect it materially for a period of
fifty years at least. As compared with copper, the cost would be
nearly one half, as it is expected the iron can be furnished at 16
cents per square foot, while copper would at the most moderate
estimate cost 28 cents. As regards the weight of an iron roof, which
at first sight would appear an objection, it is far less than one
formed of slate, and does not much exceed one of copper. The iron
plates weigh three and a half pounds per square foot. A slate roof
would cost about eight cents per square foot, but for durability, and
the ease with which it can be put on and made water tight, the iron
roofing would appear to be far preferable. The plates exhibited were
cast at Troy, New York, and are of the very best quality. The patent
for the eastern States is now owned by Mr. Hiram Hemmistone, of Troy,
in which neighborhood the adaptation of such a durable material for
roofing is rapidly attracting public attention there. Starbuck's
machine shop and foundry at Troy has been covered on this plan, and it
has also been adopted for the roofing of an arsenal at West Point.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE NEW AND WONDERFUL PAVEMENT.


We presented in a late number, a brief extract from an article on this
subject from the "Eureka," and should have thought no more of it, had
we not observed the following notice editorial in the N, Y. Farmer and
Mechanic. We copy the article entire, that our readers may judge for
themselves whether the style and statements savor most of reality or
humbug.

"NEW PAVEMENTS.--A new system of making streets has been made known to
us;--but as it will be the subject of Patents, here and in Europe, we
can only give some of its most prominent features. A material or
composition, of a very cheap character, has been invented, as hard,
strong and compact as flint. It is formed into any desirable shape in
the course of manufacture. From this, streets of any grade may be
formed, and in such a way as to entirely secure a permanent and level
surface to its proper arch; it can be taken up in five minutes, so as
to get at the water pipes, and on being replaced will, from necessity,
resume its first position. In durability, it will last ten times as
long as granite, and twenty times as long as the common paving,
without liability to require repair. It is so laid that frost and
storms cannot affect it. But we shall have occasion to refer to it
again".--Persons wishing information may inquire of Kingsley & Pirsson,
No. 5 Wall street.

       *       *       *       *       *




TO RENDER SHINGLES DURABLE.


One of our exchanges mentions an experiment which was made
twenty-seven years ago, of dipping shingles into hot linseed oil prior
to nailing them on the roof: and although they have not been painted,
they are said to continue perfectly sound as when first put on. They
were of the common pine, and as much exposed as roofs in general. This
instance may be sufficient to establish the fact that shingles thus
prepared, will last longer without painting than they could possibly
be preserved by painting in the usual way. As a security against fire,
however, we should recommend that they be first dipped in a hot
solution of common salt; and afterward, when dry, be dipped in the hot
oil. The expense will be trifling, and there can be no doubt of their
durability, and there will be no danger of their taking fire from
sparks or cinders.

       *       *       *       *       *




BEST PLAN OF A BARN.


Perhaps no building on the farm in the Northern States is of more
importance than the barn. Those who have had the charge of cattle
during our long winters, can at once see that much time and hard labor
could be saved by a judicious arrangement of stalls, and bay or bay
lots, granaries, &c, so that every creature could be fed by taking as
few steps as possible. One very important thing to be considered, is
the best mode of preserving as well as collecting manure, so that it
shall retain all its valuable properties in the spring, and be easily
got out. We like the plan of having a barn on the side of a hill, and
so arranged that you may drive your cart load in pretty near the ridge
pole, and thus pitch most of your hay down instead of up. Having your
stalls under the hay, you can continue to pitch the hay down, and if
you have a cellar beneath, you can throw the manure down also, and
thus make the attraction of gravitation perform much of the labor of
transportation from the mow to the manure cart.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Westfield, Mass., News-Letter states that there are between 25 and
30 manufacturers of whips in that town, who employ not less than 1000
braiders, beside their shop hands.

       *       *       *       *       *




ROBERT FULTON.


Robert Fulton, a celebrated engineer, whose name is connected with
steamboat navigation, was born in the town of Little Britain, in the
state of Pennsylvania, in 1765. His genius disclosed itself at an
early period. He was attracted to the shops of mechanics; and at the
age of seven he painted landscapes and portraits in Philadelphia. Thus
he was enabled in part to purchase a small farm for his widowed
mother. At the age of twenty-one, he by the advice of his friends
repaired to London, to place himself under guidance of Mr. West, the
painter, and by him was kindly received, and admitted as an inmate of
his house for several years. Prosecuting his business as painter, he
spent two years in Devonshire, where he became acquainted with the
duke of Bridgewater and with lord Stanhope, well known for his
attachment to the mechanic arts. In 1793, he engaged in the project of
improving inland navigation, and in 1796, obtained patents for a
double inclined plane, and for machines for spinning flax and making
ropes. The subject of canals now chiefly occupied his attention, and
at this period, in 1796, his work on canals was published. In his
profession of civil engineer he was greatly benefitted by his skill in
drawing and painting. He went to Paris in 1797, and being received
into the family of Joel Barlow, he there spent seven years, studying
chemistry, physics and mathematics, and acquiring a knowledge of the
French, Italian, and German languages. In Dec. 1797, he made his first
experiment on sub-marine explosion in the Seine, but without success.
His plan for a sub-marine boat was afterwards perfected.--In 1801,
while he was residing with his friend, Mr. Barlow, he met in Paris
Chancellor Livingston, the American minister, who explained to him the
importance in America of navigating boats by steam. Mr. Fulton had
already conceived the project as early as 1793, as appears by his
letter to lord Stanhope. He now engaged anew in the affair, and at the
common expense of himself and Mr. Livingston built a boat on the
Seine, in 1803, and successfully navigated the river. The principles
of the steam engine he did not invent; he claimed only the application
of that machine to water wheel, for propelling vessels. In 1806 he
returned to America; he and Mr. Livingston built, in 1807, the first
boat, the Clermont, 130 feet in length, which navigated the Hudson at
the rate of five miles an hour. Nothing could exceed the surprise and
admiration of all who witnessed the experiment. The minds of the most
incredulous were, changed in a few minutes. Before the boat had made
the progress of a quarter of a mile, the greatest unbeliever must have
been converted. The man who, while he looked on the expensive machine,
thanked his stars that he had more wisdom than to waste his money on
such idle schemes, changed the expression of his features as the boat
moved from the wharf and gained her speed, and his complacent
expression gradually softened into one of wonder. The jeers of the
ignorant, who had neither sense nor feeling to suppress their
contemptuous ridicule and rude jokes, were silenced for a moment by a
vulgar astonishment, which deprived them of the power of utterance,
till the triumph of genius extorted from the incredulous multitude
which crowded the shores, shouts and acclamations of congratulation
and applause. In February, 1809, he took out his first patent. In 1811
and 1812, he built two steam ferry boats for crossing the Hudson; he
contrived also a very ingenious floating dock for the reception of
those boats. In 1813, he obtained a patent for a sub-marine battery.
Conceiving the plan of a steam man-of-war, the government, in March
1814, appropriated $320,000 for constructing it, and appointed him the
engineer. In about four months, she was launched with the name of
Fulton the First; but before this frigate was finished, Fulton had
paid the debt of nature.

       *       *       *       *       *


The population of Great Britain for the last ten years shows an
average annual increase of 230,000. The population of London has
increased 27 per cent. within fifteen years.

       *       *       *       *       *


Within the last 16 years, 612 steamboats have been built in
Pittsburg--besides 31 the present year.

       *       *       *       *       *




INTRODUCTION TO VOLUME II.


With our best bow, we present ourselves before our friends and the
public, in a new dress, from head to foot, and though conscious of
appearing rather plain and quaker-like, we can assure our friends that
in this, we conform to the newest fashion, and have no doubt of being
treated civilly by as large a portion of the public, as if we had
appeared with more gay feathers in our cap, with starched ruffles and
gilt buttons and trimmings. In this, however, we would not be
understood to boast, of any peculiar evidence of taste of our own, as
we have been induced in this instance, to submit wholly to that of our
tailors, who it must be conceded, understand these things much better;
while we have only to regard alertness and independence of movement,
with a little vivacity, and intelligence of conversation.--Our general
principles, and rules of self-government will continue according to
our original pledge, and the policy pursued in our first volume: we
shall endeavor to encourage and excite a spirit of enterprise and
emulation in artists, manufactures and mechanics, while we present
such instruction and useful intelligence in arts and trades, practical
science and new discoveries, inventions and improvements, as will add
to the facilities of enterprise, and conduce to the prosperity and
independence of the working class in particular. And that we may
furnish an acceptable family newspaper, we shall continue to give in a
brief and condensed form, the most useful and interesting intelligence
of passing events,--not omitting a small portion of serious matter,
suitable for Sunday reading, but avoiding the disgusting and
pernicious details of crime, with which too many of our public
journals abound, and which evidently produces a deleterious effect on
the morals of the community. With regard to political and sectarian
subjects, however, we feel much inclined to change our style of
neutrality so far as to advocate all parties, sects and denominations,
each in its turn, which course may be more in accordance with our own
maxim of "enlightening and pleasing," than either growling policy, or
the affected indifference and cold inattention which tends to produce
a reciprocity of coldness, and pleases none. On the subject of policy
and rules, we might say more; but having already said twice as much as
we at first intended, and finding ourselves near the bottom of the
scrap on which we scribble, we have only to find some suitable form of
sentence wherewith to round off this subject; and for this purpose,
without wishing to be suspected of any motives of interest, we would
gently and respectfully suggest to our readers the propriety of
advancing the intelligence, enterprise and consequent prosperity of
the community, by introducing and recommending to the patronage of
all, this same SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.

       *       *       *       *       *




ADVANTAGE OF LOW FARES.


During the month of July, 1845, when the fare between New York and
Boston was reduced to the "ruinous rates" of only two dollars, the
receipts on the different routes were $45,208; but during the
corresponding month of the present year, with the fare up to four
dollars, the receipts have been only $35,963: being _nine thousand two
hundred and forty-five dollars_ less for a single month, than when the
fares were at half-price.

       *       *       *       *       *




AVALON RAILROAD IRON.


The Covington Manufacturing Co. at their Avalon works, near
Baltimore, are now delivering, under their contract, the iron for the
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad. This iron is made exclusively of the best
quality of Baltimore charcoal pig iron. The fixtures by which it is
manufactured are of the most approved description, and embrace several
original improvements, by means of which nearly every bar is made
perfect.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MAGNETIC TELEGRAPH.


LINE TO BURLINGTON, VT.--A movement appears to be in progress in
Vermont for establishing a line of telegraphic communication from
Springfield or Albany to Burlington. Much confidence is expressed by
some of the Vermont papers that the enterprise will be carried
through.

It is stated that the Magnetic Telegraph will extended from Washington
city to Richmond, and completed before the middle of December next.

TELEGRAPH TO CANADA.--It affords us great satisfaction, says the
Montreal Herald, to learn that there is a great probability of the
"lightning lines"--the Electric Telegraph--being extended from the
great cities of the United States to Montreal and Quebec. A gentleman
is now in town, and has submitted proposals to the Board of Trade for
making an immediate commencement with this most, important public
work. This line is expected to be extended to Montreal from Saratoga,
to which place a line is already in operation.

The line between New York and Buffalo having been recently completed,
the following is reported to have been the first telegraphic
conversation on the occasion.

GENERAL CHAT BY LIGHTNING.--At one o'clock, P. M., precisely, the
Telegraph Line connected through the whole distance from New York to
Buffalo, 507 miles.

Upon turning the adjusting screw of the magnet by Prof. Morse, all
things were found right, and Prof. Morse sent his compliments to all
the operators on the line.

The first to answer was Albany.

"The compliments of the _Albany_ Office to Prof. Morse and Mr. Wood."

"_Utica_ Office wishes to be remembered to Prof. Morse and Mr. Wood."

"_Auburn_ Office sends compliments to Prof. Morse and Mr. Wood."

"_Buffalo_ sends compliments to Prof. Morse and Mr. Wood, and presents
_Lake Erie_ to _Old Ocean_."

"_Rochester_ Office sends compliments to Prof. Morse and Mr. Wood, and
presents _Erie Canal_ to _Croton Aqueduct_."

"_Auburn_ presents _State Prison_ to the _Tombs_."

"_Syracuse_ sends compliments to Prof. Morse, and asks how are the
Yorkers."

"_Troy_ says, Now give me a chance. Compliments to Prof. Morse and Mr.
Wood; and now for business, if there is any."

"_Utica_ asks, Need we keep dark any longer?"

"_Troy_ answers, No. Announce it to the four winds that Buffalo and
New York _are no longer separated--they talk to each other by
lightning._"
