
"We came to a great flat and open field outside the city and there
Thicourt stopped and we got out of the vehicle. There were big buildings
at the field's end, and I saw other vehicles rolling out of them across
the field, ones different from any I had yet seen, with flat winglike
projections on either side. They rolled out over the field very fast and
then I cried out as I saw them rising from the ground into the air.
Mother of God, they were flying! The men in them were flying!

"Rastin and Thicourt took me forward to the great buildings. They spoke
to men there and one brought forward one of the winged cars. Rastin told
me to get in, and though I was terribly afraid, there was too terrible a
fascination that drew me in. Thicourt and Rastin entered after me, and
we sat in seats with the other man. He had before him levers and
buttons, while at the car's front was a great thing like a double-oar or
paddle. A loud roaring came and that double-blade began to whirl so
swiftly that I could not see it. Then the car rolled swiftly forward,
bumping on the ground, and then ceased to bump. I looked down, then
shuddered. The ground was already far beneath! I too, was flying in the
air!

"We swept upward at terrible speed that increased steadily. The thunder
of the car was terrific, and, as the man at the levers changed their
position, we curved around and over downward and upward as though birds.
Rastin tried to explain to me how the car flew, but it was all too
wonderful, and I could not understand. I only knew that a wild thrilling
excitement held me, and that it were worth life and death to fly thus,
if but for once, as I had always dreamed that men might some day do.

"Higher and higher we went. The earth lay far beneath and I saw now that
Paris was indeed a mighty city, its vast mass of buildings stretching
away almost to the horizons below us. A mighty city of the future that
it had been given my eyes to look on!

"There were other winged cars darting to and fro in the air about us,
and they said that many of these were starting or finishing journeys of
hundreds of leagues in the air. Then I cried out as I saw a great shape
coming nearer us in the air. It was many rods in length, tapering to a
point at both ends, a vast ship sailing in the air! There were great
cabins on its lower part and in them we glimpsed people gazing out,
coming and going inside, dancing even! They told me that vast ships of
the air like this sailed to and fro for thousands of leagues with
hundreds inside them.

"The huge vessel of the air passed us and then our winged car began to
descend. It circled smoothly down to the field like a swooping bird,
and, when we landed there, Rastin and Thicourt led me back to the
ground-vehicle. It was late afternoon by then, the sun sinking westward,
and darkness had descended by the time we rolled back into the great
city.

"But in that city was not darkness! Lights were everywhere in it,
flashing brilliant lights that shone from its mighty buildings and that
blinked and burned and ran like water in great symbols upon the
buildings above the streets. Their glare was like that of day! We
stopped before a great building into which Rastin and Thicourt led me.

"It was vast inside and in it were many people in rows on rows of seats.
I thought it a cathedral at first but saw soon that it was not. The wall
at one end of it, toward which all in it were gazing, had on it pictures
of people, great in size, and those pictures were moving as though
themselves alive! And they were talking one to another, too, as though
with living voices! I trembled. What magic!

"With Rastin and Thicourt in seats beside me, I watched the pictures
enthralled. It was like looking through a great window into strange
worlds. I saw the sea, seemingly tossing and roaring there before me,
and then saw on it a ship, a vast ship of size incredible, without sails
or oars, holding thousands of people. I seemed on that ship as I
watched, seemed moving forward with it. They told me it was sailing over
the western ocean that never men had crossed. I feared!

"Then another scene, land appearing from the ship. A great statue,
upholding a torch, and we on the ship seemed passing beneath it. They
said that the ship was approaching a city, the city of New York, but
mists hid all before us. Then suddenly the mists before the ship cleared
and there before me seemed the city.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Mother of God, what a city! Climbing range on range of great
mountain-like buildings that aspired up as though to scale heaven
itself! Far beneath narrow streets pierced through them and in
the picture we seemed to land from the ship, to go through those
streets of the city. It was an incredible city of madness! The
streets and ways were mere chasms between the sky-toppling buildings!
People--people--people--millions on millions of them rushed through the
endless streets. Countless ground-vehicles rushed to and fro also, and
other different ones that roared above the streets and still others
below them!

"Winged flying-cars and great airships were sailing to and fro over the
titanic city, and in the waters around it great ships of the sea and
smaller ships were coming as man never dreamed of surely, that reached
out from the mighty city on all sides. And with the coming of darkness,
the city blazed with living light!

"The pictures changed, showed other mighty cities, though none so
terrible as that one. It showed great mechanisms that appalled me. Giant
metal things that scooped in an instant from the earth as much as a man
might dig in days. Vast things that poured molten metal from them like
