"I take it we're thinking of farming," Farrow said. "I've got equipment
that will break up the soil for you. And I can throw a dam across the
stream for water."

"There are seeds in the ship," Renner said, his eyes lighting with
enthusiasm. "We'll start this planet all over again!"

"There's still one thing," Beeson reminded him drily. "Humus! Leaves,
roots, organic material! Something to loosen up the soil, aerate it.
Nothing will grow in a brick."

Renner stood up. He took a few slow paces, and then stood looking out at
the groups of boulders studding the ancient plain.

"I see," he said. "And there's only one place to get it. We'll have to
use the lichens and the mosses."

"There'll be trouble with the natives if you do," Thorne said.

Renner looked at him. He frowned thoughtfully.

"You'll be taking their only food," the doctor pointed out.

"We can feed them from the synthetizer," Renner answered. "We know that
they will eat it."

"Why bother?" Farrow asked sourly.

Renner turned on him.

"Will the synthetizer handle it?" he asked.

"I guess so," Farrow grumbled. "For a while, at least. But I don't see
what good the natives are to us."

"If we take their food," Renner said, "we're going to feed them. At
least until such time as the crops come in, and they are able to feed
themselves!"

"Are you building this planet for us, or for them?" Farrow demanded.

Renner turned away.

       *       *       *       *       *

They put out cannisters of food for the natives that night. In the
morning it was gone. Each evening, someone left food for them near their
favorite nest of rocks. The natives took it in the dark, unseen.

Gradually, Captain Renner himself took over the feeding. He seemed to
derive a personal satisfaction from it. Gradually, too, the natives
began coming out into the open to receive it. Before long, they were
waiting for him every evening as he brought them food.

The gathering of the lichen began. They picked it by hand, working
singly or in pairs, searching out the rocks and hidden places where it
grew. From time to time they would catch glimpses of the natives
watching them from a distance. They were careful not to get close.

On one of these occasions, Captain Renner and David were working
together.

"Do they have a language?" Captain Renner asked.

"Yes, sir," David answered. "I have heard them talking among
themselves."

"Do you suppose you can learn it?" Renner asked. "Do you think you could
get near enough to them to listen in?"

"I could try," David offered.

"Then do so," Renner said. "That's an assignment."

Thereafter David went out alone. He found that getting close to the
natives was not too difficult. He tried to keep out of their sight,
while still getting near enough to them to hear their voices. They were
undoubtedly aware of his presence, but, with the feeding, they had lost
their fear of the men, and did not seem to care.

Bit by bit he learned their language, starting from a few key roots and
sounds. It was a job for which he had been trained.

Time passed rapidly, and the work went on. Captain Renner let his beard
grow. It came out white and thick, and he did not bother to trim it. The
others, too, became more careless in their dress, each man following his
own particular whim. There was no longer need for a taut ship.

Farrow threw a dam across the little stream, and, while the water grew
