THE HEAT OF VAPORIZATION OF WATER.

During experiments with man not all the heat leaves the body by
radiation and conduction, since a part is required to vaporize the water
from the skin and lungs. An accurate measurement of the heat production
by man therefore required a knowledge of the amount of heat thus
vaporized. One of the great difficulties in the numerous forms of
calorimeters that have been used heretofore with man is that only that
portion of heat measured by direct radiation or conduction has been
measured and the difficulties attending the determination of water
vaporized have vitiated correspondingly the estimates of the heat
production. Fortunately, with this apparatus the determinations of water
are very exact, and since the amount of water vaporized inside the
chamber is known it is possible to compute the heat required to vaporize
this water by knowing the heat of vaporization of water.

Since the earlier reports describing the first form of calorimeters were
written, there has appeared a research by one of our former associates,
Dr. A. W. Smith[11] who, recognizing the importance of knowing exactly
the heat of vaporization of water at 20 deg., has made this a special
object of investigation. When connected with our laboratory a number of
experiments were made by Doctors Smith and Benedict in an attempt to
determine the heat of vaporization of water directly in a large
calorimeter; but for lack of time and pressure of other experimental
work it was impossible to complete the investigation. Subsequently Dr.
Smith has carried out the experiments with the accuracy of exact
physical measurements and has given us a very valuable series of
observations.

Using the method of expressing the heat of vaporization in electrical
units, Smith concludes that the heat of vaporization of water between
14 deg. and 40 deg. is given by the formula

     L (in joules) = 2502.5 - 2.43T

and states that the "probable error" of values computed from this
formula is 0.5 joule. The results are expressed in international joules,
that is, in terms of the international ohm and 1.43400 for the E.M.F. of
the Clark cell at 15 deg. C., and assuming that the mean calorie is
equivalent to 4.1877 international joules,[12] the formula reads

     L (in mean calories) = 597.44 - 0.580T

With this formula Smith calculates that at 15 deg. the heat of vaporization
of water is equal to 588.73 calories; at 20 deg., 585.84 calories; at 25
deg., 582.93 calories; at 30 deg., 580.04 calories;[13] and at 35 deg.,
577.12 calories. In all of the calculations in the researches herewith we
have used the value found by Smith as 586 calories at 20 deg. Inasmuch as
all of our records are in kilo-calories, we multiply the weight of water
by the factor 0.586 to obtain the heat of vaporization.


THE BED CALORIMETER.

The chair calorimeter was designed for experiments to last not more than
6 to 8 hours, as a person can not remain comfortably seated in a chair
much longer than this time. For longer experiments (experiments during
the night and particularly for bed-ridden patients) a type of
calorimeter which permits the introduction of a couch or bed has been
devised. This calorimeter has been built, tested, and used in a number
of experiments with men and women. The general shape of the chamber is
given in fig. 26. The principles involved in the construction of the
chair calorimeter are here applied, _i. e._, the use of a
structural-steel framework, inner air-tight copper lining, outer zinc
wall, hair-felt insulation, and outer asbestos panels. Inside of the
chamber there is a heat-absorbing system suspended from the ceiling, and
air thermometers and thermometers for the copper wall are installed at
several points. The food-aperture is of the same general type and the
furniture here consists simply of a sliding frame upon which is placed
an air-mattress. The opening is at the front end of the calorimeter and
is closed by two pieces of plate glass, each well sealed into place by
wax after the subject has been placed inside of the chamber. Tubes
through the wall opposite the food-aperture are used for the
introduction of electrical connections, ingoing and outgoing water, the
air-pipes, and connections for the stethoscope, pneumograph, and
telephone.

The apparatus rests on four heavy iron legs. Two pieces of channel iron
are attached to these legs and the structural framework of the
calorimeter chamber rests upon these irons. The method of separating the
asbestos outer panels is shown in the diagram. In order to provide light
for the chamber, the outer wall in front of the glass windows is made
of glass rather than asbestos. The front section of the outer casing can
be removed easily for the introduction of a patient.

In this chamber it is impossible to weigh the bed and clothing, and
hence this calorimeter can not be used for the accurate determination of
the moisture vaporized from the lungs and skin of the subject, since
here (as in almost every form of respiration chamber) it is absolutely
impossible to distinguish between the amount of water vaporized from
bed-clothing and that vaporized from the lungs and skin of the subject.
With the chair calorimeter, the weighing arrangements make it possible
to weigh the chair, clothing, etc., and thus apportion the total water
vaporized between losses from the chair, furniture, and body of the man.
In view of the fact that the water vaporized from the skin and lungs
could not be determined, the whole interior of the chamber of the bed
calorimeter has been coated with a white enamel paint, which gives it a
bright appearance and makes it much more attractive to new patients. An
incandescent light placed above the head at the front illuminates the
chamber very well, and as a matter of fact the food-aperture is so
placed that one can lie on the cot and actually look outdoors through
one of the laboratory windows.

[Illustration: FIG. 26.--Cross-section of bed calorimeter, showing part
of steel construction, also copper and zinc walls, food-aperture, and
wall and air-resistance thermometers. Cross-section of opening,
cross-section of panels of insulating asbestos, and supports of
calorimeter itself are also indicated.]

Special precaution was taken with this calorimeter to make it as
comfortable and as attractive as possible to new and possibly
apprehensive patients. The painting of the walls unquestionably results
in a condensation of more or less moisture, for the paint certainly
absorbs more moisture than does the metallic surface of the copper. The
chief value of the determination of the water vaporized inside of the
chamber during an experiment lies, however, not in a study of the
vaporization of water as such, but in the fact that a certain amount of
heat is required to vaporize the water and obviously an accurate measure
of the heat production must involve a measure of the amount of water
vaporized. So far as the measurement of heat is concerned, it is
immaterial whether the water is vaporized from the lungs or skin of the
subject or the clothing, bedding, or walls of the chamber; since for
every gram of water vaporized inside of the chamber, from whatever
source, 0.586 calorie of heat must have been absorbed.

The apparatus as perfected is very sensitive. The sojourn in the chamber
is not uncomfortable; as a matter of fact, in an experiment made during
January, 1909, the subject remained inside of the chamber for 30 hours.
With male patients no difficulty is experienced in collecting the urine.
No provision is made for defecation, and hence it is our custom in long
experiments to empty the lower bowel with an enema and thus defer as
long as possible the necessity for defecation. With none of the
experiments thus far made have we experienced any difficulty in having
to remove the patient because of necessity to defecate in the cramped
quarters. It is highly probable that, with the majority of sick
patients, experiments will not extend for more than 8 or 10 hours, and
consequently the apparatus as designed should furnish most satisfactory
results.

In testing the apparatus by the electrical-check method, it has been
found to be extremely accurate. When the test has been made with burning
alcohol, as described beyond, it has been found that the large amount of
moisture apparently retained by the white enamel paint on the walls
vitiates the determination of water for several hours after the
experiment begins, and only after several hours of continuous
ventilating is the moisture content of the air brought down to a low
enough point to establish equilibrium between the moisture condensed on
the surface and the moisture in the air and thus have the measured
amount of moisture in the sulphuric acid vessels equal the amount of
moisture formed by the burning of alcohol. Hence in practically all of
the alcohol-check experiments, especially of short duration, with this
calorimeter, the values for water are invariably somewhat too high. A
comparison of the alcohol-check experiments made with the bed and chair
calorimeters gives an interesting light upon the power of paint to
absorb moisture and emphasizes again the necessity of avoiding the use
of material of a hygroscopic nature in the interior of an apparatus in
which accurate moisture determinations from the body are to be made.

The details of the bed calorimeter are better shown in fig. 4. The
opening at the front is here removed and the wooden track upon which the
frame, supporting the cot, slides is clearly shown. The tension
equalizer (see page 71) partly distended is shown connected to the
ingoing air-pipe, and on the top of the calorimeter connected to the
tension equalizer is a Sonden manometer. On the floor at the right is
seen the resistance coil used for electrical tests (see page 50). A
number of connections inside the chamber at the left are made with
electric wires or with rubber tubing. Of the five connections appearing
through the opening, reading from left to right, we have, first, the
rubber connection with the pneumograph, then the tubing for connection
with the stethoscope, then the electric-resistance thermometer, the
telephone, and finally a push button for bell call. The connections for
the pneumograph and stethoscope are made with the instruments outside on
the table at the left of the bed calorimeter.


MEASUREMENTS OF BODY-TEMPERATURE.

While it is possible to control arbitrarily the temperature of the
calorimeter by increasing or decreasing the amount of heat brought away,
and thus compensate exactly for the heat eliminated by the subject, the
hydrothermal equivalent of the system itself being about 20 calories--on
the other hand the body of the subject may undergo marked changes in
temperature and thus influence the measurement of the heat production to
a noticeable degree; for if heat is lost from the body by a fall of
body-temperature or stored as indicated by a rise in temperature,
obviously the heat produced during the given period will not equal that
eliminated and measured by the water-current and by the latent heat of
water vaporized. In order to make accurate measurements, therefore, of
the heat-production as distinguished from the heat elimination, we
should know with great accuracy the hydrothermal equivalent of the body
and changes in body temperature. The most satisfactory method at present
known of determining the hydrothermal equivalent of the body is to
assume the specific heat of the body as 0.83.[14] This factor will of
course vary considerably with the weight of body material and the
proportion of fat, water, and muscular tissue present therein, but for
general purposes nothing better can at present be employed. From the
weight of the subject and this factor the hydrothermal equivalent of the
body can be calculated. It remains to determine, then, with great
exactness the body temperature.

Recognizing early the importance of securing accurate body-temperatures
in researches of this kind, a number of investigations were made and
published elsewhere[15] regarding the body-temperature in connection
with the experiments with the respiration calorimeter. It was soon
found that the ordinary mercurial clinical thermometer was not best
suited for the most accurate observations of body-temperature and a
special type of thermometer employing the electrical-resistance method
was used. In many of the experiments, however, it is impracticable with
new subjects to complicate the experiment by asking them to insert the
electrical rectal thermometer, and hence we have been obliged to resort
to the usual clinical thermometer with temperatures taken in the mouth,
although in a few instances they have been taken in the axilla and the
rectum. For the best results the electrical rectal thermometer is used.
This apparatus permits a continuous measurement of body temperature,
deep in the rectum, unknown to the subject and for an indefinite period
of time, it being necessary to remove the thermometer only for
defecation.

As a result of these observations it was soon found that the body
temperature was not constant from hour to hour, but fluctuated
considerably and underwent more or less regular rhythm with the minimum
between 3 and 5 o'clock in the morning and the maximum about 5 o'clock
in the afternoon. In a number of experiments where the mercurial
thermometer was used under the tongue and observations thus taken
compared with records with the resistance thermometer, it was found that
with careful manipulation and avoiding muscular activity, mouth
breathing, and the drinking of hot or cold liquid, a fairly uniform
agreement between the two could be obtained. Such comparisons made on
laboratory assistants can not be duplicated with the ordinary subject.

It is assumed that fluctuations in temperature measured by the rectal
thermometer likewise hold true for the average temperature of the whole
body, but evidence on this point is unfortunately not as complete as is
desirable. In an earlier report of investigations of this nature, a few
experiments on comparison of measurements of resistance thermometer deep
in the rectum and in a well-closed axilla showed a distinct tendency for
the curves to continue parallel. A research is very much needed at
present on a topographical distribution of body temperature, and
particularly on the course of the fluctuations in different parts of the
body. A series of electric-resistance thermometers placed at different
points in the colon, at different points in a stomach tube, in the
well-closed axilla, possibly attached to the surface of the body, and in
women in the vagina, should give a very accurate picture of the
distribution of the body-temperature and likewise indicate the
proportionality of the fluctuations in different parts of the body.
Until such a research is completed, however, it is necessary to assume
that fluctuations in body-temperature as measured by the electric rectal
thermometer are a true measure of the average body-temperature of the
whole body. Indeed it is upon this assumption that it is necessary for
us to make corrections for heat lost from or stored in the body. It is
our custom, therefore, to compute the hydrothermal equivalent by
multiplying the body-weight by the specific heat of the body, commonly
assumed as 0.83, and then to make allowance for fluctuations in
body-temperature.

When it is considered that with a subject having a weight of 70 kilos a
difference in temperature of 1 deg. C. will make a difference in the
measurement of heat of some 60 calories, it is readily seen that the
importance of knowing the exact body-temperature can not be
overestimated; indeed, the whole problem of the comparison of the direct
and indirect calorimetry hinges more or less upon this very point, and
it is strongly to be hoped that ere long the much-needed observations on
body-temperature can be made.


CONTROL EXPERIMENTS WITH THE CALORIMETER.

After providing a suitable apparatus for bringing away the heat
generated inside the chamber and for preventing the loss of heat by
maintaining the walls adiabatic, it is still necessary to demonstrate
the ability of the calorimeter to measure known amounts of heat
accurately. In order to do this we pass a current of electricity of
known voltage through a resistance coil and thus develop heat inside the
respiration chamber. While, undoubtedly, the use of a standard
resistance and potentiometer is the most accurate method for measuring
currents of this nature, thus far we have based our experiments upon the
measurements made with extremely accurate Weston portable voltmeter and
mil-ammeters. Thanks to the kindness of one of our former co-workers,
Mr. S. C. Dinsmore, at present associated with the Weston Electrical
Instrument Company, we have been able to obtain two especially exact
instruments. The mil-ammeter is so adjusted as to give a maximum current
of 1.5 amperes and the voltmeter reads from zero to 150 volts. The
direct current furnished the building is caused to pass through a
variable resistance for adjusting minor variations in voltage and then
through the mil-ammeter into a manganin resistance-coil inside the
chamber, having a resistance of 84.2 ohms. Two leads from the terminals
of the manganin coil connect with the voltmeter outside the chamber, and
hence the drop in potential can be measured very accurately and as
frequently as is desired. The current furnished the building is
remarkably steady, but for the more accurate experiments a small degree
of hand regulation is necessary.

The advantage of the electrical method of controlling the apparatus is
that the measurements can be made very accurately, rapidly, and in short
periods. In making experiments of this nature it is our custom first to
place the resistance-coil in the calorimeter and make the connections.
The current is then passed through the coil, and simultaneously the
water is started flowing through the heat-absorbing system and the whole
calorimeter is adjusted in temperature equilibrium as soon as possible.
When the temperature of the air and walls is constant and the
thermal-junction system in equilibrium, the exact time is noted and the
water-current deflected into the meter. At the end of one hour, the
usual length of a period, the water-current is deflected from the meter,
the meter is weighed, and the average temperature-difference of the
water obtained by averaging the results of all the temperature
differences noted during the hour. Usually during an experiment of this
nature, records of the water-temperatures are made every 4 minutes;
occasionally, when the fluctuations are somewhat greater than usual,
records are made every 2 minutes.

The calculation of the heat developed in the apparatus is made by means
of the formula C x E x _t_ x 0.2385 = calories, in which C equals the
current in amperes, E the electromotive force, and _t_ the time in
seconds. This gives the heat expressed in calories at 15 deg. C. This
procedure we have followed as a result of the recommendation of Dr. E.
B. Rosa, of the National Bureau of Standards. In order to convert the
values to 20 deg., the unit commonly employed in calorimetric work, it has
been necessary to multiply by the ratio of the specific heat of water at
15 deg. to that of water at 20 deg. Assuming the specific heat of water at
20 deg. to be 1, the specific heat at 15 deg. is 1.001.[16]

Of the many electrical check-tests made with this type of apparatus, but
one need be given here, pending a special treatment of the method of
control of the calorimeter in a forthcoming publication. An electrical
check-experiment with the chair calorimeter was made on January 4, 1909,
and continued 6 hours. The voltmeter and mil-ammeter were read every few
minutes, the water collected in the water-meter, carefully weighed, and
the temperature differences as measured on the two mercury thermometers
were recorded every 4 minutes.

The heat developed during the experiment may be calculated from the data
as follows: Average current = 1.293 amperes; average E. M. F. = 109.15
volts; time = 21,600 seconds; factor used to convert watt-seconds to
calories = 0.2385. (1.293 x 109.15 x 21600 x 0.2385) x 1.001 = 727.8
calories produced.

During the 6 hours 237.63 kilograms of water passed through the
absorbing system.

The average temperature rise was 3.04 deg. C., the total heat brought away
was therefore (237.63 x 3.04) x 1.0024[17] = 724.1 calories.

Thus in 6 hours there were about 3.7 calories more heat developed inside
the apparatus than were measured by the water-current, a discrepancy of
about 0.5 per cent.

Under ideal conditions of manipulation, the withdrawal of heat from the
calorimeter should be at just such a rate as to exactly compensate for
the heat developed by the resistance-coil. Under these conditions, then,
there would be no heat abstracted from nor stored by the calorimeter and
its temperature should remain constant throughout the whole experiment.
Practically this is very difficult to accomplish and there are minor
fluctuations in temperature above and below the initial temperature
during a long experiment and, indeed, during a short experimental
period. If a certain amount of heat has been stored up in the
calorimeter chamber or has been abstracted from it, there should be
corrections made for the variations in the temperature of the chamber.
Such corrections are impossible unless a proper determination of the
hydrothermal equivalent has been made. A number of experiments to
determine this hydrothermal equivalent have been made and the results
are recorded beyond, together with a discussion of the nature of the
experiments. As a result of these experiments it has been possible to
make correction for the slight temperature changes in the calorimeter.

It is interesting to note that these fluctuations are small and there
may therefore be a considerable error in the determination of the
hydrothermal equivalent without particularly affecting the corrections
applied in the ordinary electrical check-test. The greatest difficulty
experienced with the calorimeter as a means of measuring heat has been
to secure the average temperature of the ingoing water. The temperature
difference between the mass of water flowing through the pipes and the
outer wall of the pipe is at best considerable. The use of the
vacuum-jacketed glass tubes has minimized the loss of heat through this
tube considerably, but it is advisable that the bulb of the thermometer
be placed exactly in the center of the water-tube, as otherwise too high
a temperature-reading will be secured. When the proper precautions are
taken to secure the correct temperature-reading, the results are most
satisfactory.

In testing both calorimeters a large number of electrical check
experiments have led to the conclusion that discrepancies in results
were invariably due, not to the loss of heat through the walls of the
calorimeter, but to erroneous measurement of the temperature of the
water-current.


DETERMINATION OF THE HYDROTHERMAL EQUIVALENT OF THE CALORIMETER.

While the temperature control of the calorimeter is such that in general
the average temperature varies but a few hundredths of a degree between
the beginning and the end of an experimental period, in extremely
accurate work it is necessary to know the amount of heat which is
absorbed with any increase in temperature. In other words, the
determination of the hydrothermal equivalent is essential.

The large majority of the methods for determining the hydrothermal
equivalent of materials are at once eliminated when the nature of the
calorimeter here used is taken into consideration. Obviously, in warming
up the chamber there are two sources of heat: first, the heat inside of
the chamber; second, the heat in the outer walls. As has been previously
described, the zinc wall is arbitrarily heated so that its temperature
fluctuations will follow exactly those of the inner wall, hence it is
impossible to compute from the weight of the metal the hydrothermal
equivalent. By means of the electrical check experiments, however, a
method for determining the hydrothermal equivalent is at hand. The
general scheme is as follows.

During an electrical check experiment, when thermal equilibrium has been
thoroughly established and the heat brought away by the water-current
exactly counterbalances the heat generated in the resistance-coil inside
the chamber, the temperature of the calorimeter is allowed to rise
slowly by raising the temperature of the ingoing water and thus bringing
away less heat. At the same time the utmost pains are taken to maintain
the adiabatic condition of the metal walls. Since the temperature is
rising during this period, it is necessary to warm the air in the outer
spaces by the electric current. By this method it is possible to raise
the temperature of the calorimeter 1 degree or more in 2 hours and
establish thermal equilibrium at the higher level. The experiment is
then continued for 2 hours at this level, and the next 2 hours the
temperature is gradually allowed to fall by lowering the temperature of
the ingoing water so that more heat is brought away than is generated,
care being taken likewise to keep the walls adiabatic. Under these
conditions the heat brought away by the water-current during the period
of rising temperature is considerably less than that actually developed
by the electric current and the difference represents the amount of heat
absorbed by the calorimeter in the period of the temperature rise.
Conversely, during the period when the temperature is falling, there is
a considerable increase in the amount of heat brought away by the
water-current over that generated in the resistance-coil and the
difference represents exactly the amount of heat given up by the
calorimeter during the fall in temperature. It is thus possible to
measure the capacity of the calorimeter for absorbing heat during a rise
in temperature and the amount of heat lost by it during cooling. A
number of such experiments have been made with both calorimeters and it
has been found that the hydrothermal equivalent of the bed calorimeter
is not far from 21 kilograms. For the chair calorimeter a somewhat lower
figure has been found, _i. e._, 19.5 kilograms.


GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF RESPIRATION APPARATUS.

This apparatus is designed much after the principle of the
Regnault-Reiset apparatus, in that there is a confined volume of air in
which the subject lives and which is purified by its passage through
vessels containing absorbents for water and carbon dioxide. Fresh oxygen
is added to this current of air and it is then returned to the chamber
to be respired. This principle, in order to be accurate for oxygen
determinations, necessitates an absolutely air-tight system and
consequently special precautions have been taken in the construction of
the chamber and accessories.


TESTING THE CHAMBER FOR TIGHTNESS.

As already suggested, the walls are constructed of the largest possible
sheets of copper with a minimum number of seams and opportunities for
leakage. In testing the apparatus for leaks, the greatest precaution is
taken. A small air-pressure is applied and the variations in height of a
delicate manometer noted. In cases of apparent leakage, all possible
sources of leak are gone over with soapsuds when there is a slight
pressure on the chamber. As a last resort, which has ultimately proven
to be the best method of testing, an assistant goes inside of the
chamber, it is then hermetically sealed, and a slight diminished
pressure is produced. Ether is then poured about the walls of the
chamber and the odor of ether soon becomes apparent inside of the
chamber if there is a leakage. Many leaks that could not be found by
soapsuds can be readily detected by this method.


VENTILATION OF THE CHAMBER.

The special features of the respiration chamber are the ventilating-pipe
system and openings for supplementary apparatus for absorption of water
and carbon dioxide. The air entering the chamber is absolutely dry and
is directed into the top of the chamber immediately above the head of
the subject. The moisture given off from the lungs and skin and the
expired gases all tend to mix readily with this dry air as it descends,
and the final mixture of gases is withdrawn through an opening near the
bottom of the chamber at the front. Under these conditions, therefore,
we believe we have a maximum intermingling of the gases. However, even
with this system of ventilation, we do not feel that there is
theoretically the best mixture of gases, and an electric fan is used
inside of the chamber. In experiments where there is considerable
regularity in the carbon-dioxide production and oxygen consumption, the
system very quickly attains a state of equilibrium, and while the
analysis of the outcoming air does not necessarily represent fairly the
actual composition of the air inside of the chamber, it evidently
represents to the same degree from hour to hour the state of equilibrium
that is usually maintained through the whole of a 6-hour experiment.

The interior of the chamber and all appliances are constructed of metal
except the chair in which the subject sits. This is of hard wood, well
shellacked, and consequently non-porous. With this calorimeter it is
desired to make studies regarding the moisture elimination, and
consequently it is necessary to avoid the use of all material of a
hygroscopic nature. Although the chair can be weighed from time to time
with great accuracy and its changes in weight obtained, it is obviously
impossible, in any type of experiment thus far made, to differentiate
between the water vaporized from the lungs and skin of the man and that
from his clothes. Subsequent experiments with a metal chair, with
minimum clothing, with cloth of different textures, without clothing,
with an oiled skin, and various other modifications affecting the
vaporization of water from the body of the man will doubtless throw more
definite light upon the question of the water elimination through the
skin. At present, however, we resort to the use of a wooden chair,
relying upon its changes in weight as noted by the balance to aid us in
apportioning the water vaporized between the man and his clothing and
the chair.

The walls of the chamber are semi-rigid. Owing to the calorimetric
features of this apparatus, it is impracticable to use heavy
boiler-plate or heavy metal walls, as the sluggishness of the changes in
temperature, the mass of metal, and its relatively large hydrothermal
equivalent would interfere seriously with the sensitiveness of the
apparatus as a calorimeter. Hence we use copper walls, with a fair
degree of rigidity, attached to a substantial structural-steel support;
and for all practical purposes the apparatus can be considered as of
constant volume. Particularly is this the case when it is considered
that the pressure inside of the chamber during an experiment never
varies from the atmospheric pressure by more than a few millimeters of
water. It is possible, therefore, from the measurements of this chamber,
to compute with considerable accuracy the absolute volume. The apparent
volume has been calculated to be 1,347 liters.
