could. Shrinking inside himself, seeking escape.

Only when the flying creature began dissolving did he realize the nature
of the room outside. Sprays of steaming liquid came from all sides,
raining down until the cylinders were covered. After one last clash of
its jaws, the Pyrran animal was washed off and carried away. The liquid
drained away through the floor and a second and third shower followed.

While the solutions were being pumped away, Jason fought to bring his
emotions into line. He was surprised at himself. No matter how frightful
the creature had been, he couldn't understand the fear it could generate
through the wall of the sealed tube. His reaction was all out of
proportion to the cause. Even with the creature destroyed and washed out
of sight it took all of his will power to steady his nerves and bring
his breathing back to normal.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meta walked by outside and he realized the sterilization process was
finished. He opened his own tube and climbed wearily out. Meta and the
others had gone by this time and only a hawk-faced stranger remained,
waiting for him.

"I'm Brucco, in charge of the adaptation clinic. Kerk told me who you
were. I'm sorry you're here. Now come along, I want some blood samples."

"Now I feel right at home," Jason said. "The old Pyrran hospitality."
Brucco only grunted and stamped out. Jason followed him down a bare
corridor into a sterile lab.

The double gravity was tiring, a constant drag on sore muscles. While
Brucco ran tests on the blood sample, Jason rested. He had almost dozed
off into a painful sleep when Brucco returned with a tray of bottles and
hypodermic needles.

"Amazing," he announced. "Not an antibody in your serum that would be of
any use on this planet. I have a batch of antigens here that will make
you sick as a beast for at least a day. Take off your shirt."

"Have you done this often?" Jason asked. "I mean juice up an outlander
so he can enjoy the pleasures of your world?"

Brucco jammed in a needle that felt like it grated on the bone. "Not
often at all. Last time was years ago. A half-dozen researchers from
some institute, willing to pay well for the chance to study the local
life forms. We didn't say no. Always need more galaxy currency."

Jason was already beginning to feel light-headed from the shots. "How
many of them lived?" he mumbled vaguely.

"One. We got him off in time. Made them pay in advance of course."

At first Jason thought the Pyrran was joking. Then he remembered they
had very little interest in humor of any kind. If one-half of what Meta
and Kerk had told him was true, six to one odds weren't bad at all.

There was a bed in the next room and Brucco helped him to it. Jason felt
drugged and probably was. He fell into a deep sleep and into the dream.

Fear and hatred mixed in equal parts and washed over him red hot. If
this was a dream, he never wanted to sleep again. If it wasn't a dream,
he wanted to die. He tried to fight up against it, but only sank in more
deeply. There was no beginning and no end to the fear and no way to
escape.

When consciousness returned Jason could remember no detail of the
nightmare. Just the fear remained. He was soaked with sweat and ached in
every muscle. It must have been the massive dose of shots, he finally
decided, that and the brutal gravity. That didn't take the taste of fear
out of his mouth, though.

Brucco stuck his head in the door then and looked Jason up and down.
"Thought you were dead," he said. "Slept the clock around. Don't move,
I'll get something to pick you up."

The pickup was in the form of another needle and a glassful of
evil-looking fluid. It settled his thirst, but made him painfully aware
of gnawing hunger.

"Want to eat?" Brucco asked. "I'll bet you do. I've speeded up your
metabolism so you'll build muscle faster. Only way you'll ever beat the
gravity. Give you quite an appetite for a while though."

Brucco ate at the same time and Jason had a chance to ask some
questions. "When do I get a chance to look around your fascinating
planet? So far this trip has been about as interesting as a jail term."

"Relax and enjoy your food. Probably be months before you're able to go
outside. If at all."

Jason felt his jaw hanging and closed it with a snap. "Could you
possibly tell me why?"

"Of course. You will have to go through the same training course that
our children take. It takes them six years. Of course it's their first
six years of life. So you might think that you, as an adult, could learn
faster. Then again they have the advantage of heredity. All I can say is
you'll go outside these sealed buildings when you're ready."

Brucco had finished eating while he talked, and sat staring at Jason's
bare arms with growing disgust. "The first thing we want to get you is a
gun," he said. "It gives me a sick feeling to see someone without one."

Of course Brucco wore his own gun continually, even within the sealed
buildings.

"Every gun is fitted to its owner and would be useless on anyone else,"
Brucco said. "I'll show you why." He led Jason to an armory jammed with
deadly weapons. "Put your arm in this while I make the adjustments."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a boxlike machine with a pistol grip on the side. Jason clutched
the grip and rested his elbow on a metal loop. Brucco fixed pointers
that touched his arm, then copied the results from the meters. Reading
the figures from his list he selected various components from bins and
quickly assembled a power holster and gun. With the holster strapped to
his forearm and the gun in his hand, Jason noticed for the first time
they were connected by a flexible cable. The gun fitted his hand
perfectly.

"This is the secret of the power holster," Brucco said, tapping the
flexible cable. "It is perfectly loose while you are using the weapon.
But when you want it returned to the holster--" Brucco made an
adjustment and the cable became a stiff rod that whipped the gun from
Jason's hand and suspended it in midair.

"Then the return." The rod-cable whirred and snapped the gun back into
the holster. "The drawing action is the opposite of this, of course."

"A great gadget," Jason said, "but how _do_ I draw? Do I whistle or
something for the gun to pop out?"

"No, it is not sonic control," Brucco answered with a sober face. "It is
much more precise than that. Here, take your left hand and grasp an
imaginary gun butt. Tense your trigger finger. Do you notice the pattern
of the tendons in the wrist? Sensitive actuators touch the tendons in
your right wrist. They ignore all patterns except the one that says
_hand ready to receive gun_. After a time the mechanism becomes
completely automatic. When you want the gun--it is in your hand. When
you don't--it is in the holster."

Jason made grasping motions with his right hand, crooked his index
finger. There was a sudden, smashing pain against his hand and a loud
roar. The gun was in his hand--half the fingers were numb--and smoke
curled up from the barrel.

"Of course there are only blank charges in the gun until you learn
control. Guns are _always_ loaded. There is no safety. Notice the lack
of a trigger guard. That enables you to bend your trigger finger a
slight bit more when drawing so the gun will fire the instant it touches
your hand."

It was without a doubt the most murderous weapon Jason had ever
handled, as well as being the hardest to manage. Working against the
muscle-burning ache of high gravity, he fought to control the devilish
device. It had an infuriating way of vanishing into the holster just as
he was about to pull the trigger. Even worse was the tendency to leap
out before he was quite ready. The gun went to the position where his
hand should be. If the fingers weren't correctly placed, they were
crashed aside. Jason only stopped the practice when his entire hand was
one livid bruise.

Complete mastery would come with time, but he could already understand
why the Pyrrans never removed their guns. It would be like removing a
part of your own body. The movement of gun from holster to hand was too
fast for him to detect. It was certainly faster than the neural current
that shaped the hand into the gun-holding position. For all apparent
purposes it was like having a lightning bolt in your fingertip. Point
the finger and _blamm_, there's the explosion.

       *       *       *       *       *

Brucco had left Jason to practice alone. When his aching hand could take
no more, he stopped and headed back towards his own quarters. Turning a
corner he had a quick glimpse of a familiar figure going away from him.

"Meta! Wait for a second--I want to talk to you."

She turned impatiently as he shuffled up, going as fast as he could in
the doubled gravity. Everything about her seemed different from the girl
he had known on the ship. Heavy boots came as high as her knees, her
figure was lost in bulky coveralls of some metallic fabric. The trim
waist was bulged out by a belt of canisters. Her very expression was
coldly distant.

"I've missed you," he said. "I hadn't realized you were in this
building." He reached for her hand but she moved it out of his reach.

"What is it you want?" she asked.

"What is it I want!" he echoed with barely concealed anger. "This is
Jason, remember me? We're friends. It _is_ allowed for friends to talk
without 'wanting' anything."

"What happened on the ship has nothing to do with what happens on
Pyrrus." She started forward impatiently as she talked. "I have finished
my reconditioning and must return to work. You'll be staying here in the
sealed buildings so I won't be seeing you."

"Why don't you say 'with the rest of the children'--that's what your
tone implies? And don't try walking out, there are some things we have
to settle first--"

Jason made the mistake of putting out his hand to stop her. He didn't
really know what happened next. One instant he was standing--the next he
sprawled suddenly on the floor. His shoulder was badly bruised, and Meta
had vanished down the corridor.

Limping back to his own room he cursed women in general and Meta in
particular. Dropping onto his rock-hard bed he tried to remember the
reasons that had brought him here in the first place. And weighed them
against the perpetual torture of the gravity, the fear-filled dreams it
inspired, the automatic contempt of these people for any outsider. He
quickly checked the growing tendency to feel sorry for himself. By
Pyrran standards he _was_ soft and helpless. If he wanted them to think
any better of him, he would have to change a good deal.

He sank into a fatigue-drugged sleep then, that was broken only by the
screaming fear of his dreams.




VII.


In the morning Jason awoke with a bad headache and the feeling he had
never been to sleep. As he took some of the carefully portioned
stimulants that Brucco had given him, he wondered again about the
combination of factors that filled his sleep with such horror.

"Eat quickly," Brucco told him when they met in the dining room. "I can
no longer spare you time for individual instruction. You will join the
regular classes and take the prescribed courses. Only come to me if
there is some special problem that the instructors or trainers can't
handle."

The classes--as Jason should have expected--were composed of stern-faced
little children. With their compact bodies and no-nonsense mannerisms
they were recognizably Pyrran. But they were still children enough to
consider it very funny to have an adult in their classes. Jammed behind
one of the tiny desks, the red-faced Jason did not think it was much of
a joke.

All resemblance to a normal school ended with the physical form of the
classroom. For one thing, every child--no matter how small--packed a
gun. And the courses were all involved with survival. The only possible
grade in a curriculum like this was one hundred per cent and students
stayed with a lesson until they mastered it perfectly. No courses were
offered in the normal scholastic subjects. Presumably these were studied
after the child graduated survival school and could face the world
alone. Which was a logical and cold-hearted way of looking at things. In
fact, logical and cold-hearted could describe any Pyrran activity.

Most of the morning was spent on the operation of one of the medikits
that strapped around the waist. This was a poison analyzer that was
pressed over a puncture wound. If any toxins were present, the antidote
was automatically injected on the site. Simple in operation but
incredibly complex in construction. Since all Pyrrans serviced their own
equipment--you could then only blame yourself if it failed--they had to
learn the construction and repair of all the devices. Jason did much
better than the child students, though the effort exhausted him.

In the afternoon he had his first experience with a training machine.
His instructor was a twelve-year-old boy, whose cold voice didn't
conceal his contempt for the soft off-worlder.

"All the training machines are physical duplicates of the real surface
of the planet, corrected constantly as the life forms change. The only
difference between them is the varying degree of deadliness. This first
machine you will use is of course the one infants are put into--"

"You're too kind," Jason murmured. "Your flattery overwhelms me." The
instructor continued, taking no notice of the interruption.

"... Infants are put into as soon as they can crawl. It is real in
substance, though completely deactivated."

       *       *       *       *       *

Training machine was the wrong word, Jason realized as they entered
through the thick door. This was a chunk of the outside world duplicated
in an immense chamber. It took very little suspension of reality for him
to forget the painted ceiling and artificial sun high above and imagine
himself outdoors at last. The scene _seemed_ peaceful enough. Though
clouds banking on the horizon threatened a violent Pyrran storm.

"You must wander around and examine things," the instructor told Jason.
"Whenever you touch something with your hand, you will be told about it.
Like this--"

The boy bent over and pushed his finger against a blade of the soft
grass that covered the ground. Immediately a voice barked from hidden
speakers.

"Poison grass. Boots to be worn at all times."

Jason kneeled and examined the grass. The blade was tipped with a hard,
shiny hook. He realized with a start that every single blade of grass
was the same. The soft green lawn was a carpet of death. As he
straightened up he glimpsed something under a broad-leafed plant. A
crouching, scale-covered animal, whose tapered head terminated in a long
spike.

"What's _that_ in the bottom of my garden?" he asked. "You certainly
give the babies pleasant playmates." Jason turned and realized he was
talking to the air, the instructor was gone. He shrugged and petted the
scaly monstrosity.

"Horndevil," the impersonal voice said from midair. "Clothing and shoes
no protection. Kill it."

A sharp _crack_ shattered the silence as Jason's gun went off. The
horndevil fell on its side, keyed to react to the blank charge.

"Well ... I _am_ learning," Jason said, and the thought pleased him. The
words _kill it_ had been used by Brucco while teaching him to use the
gun. Their stimulus had reached an unconscious level. He was aware of
wanting to shoot only after he had heard the shot. His respect for
Pyrran training techniques went up.

Jason spent a thoroughly unpleasant afternoon wandering in the child's
garden of horror. Death was everywhere. While all the time the
disembodied voice gave him stern advice in simple language. So he could
do unto, rather than being done in. He had never realized that violent
death could come in so many repulsive forms. _Everything_ here was
deadly to man--from the smallest insect to the largest plant.

Such singleness of purpose seemed completely unnatural. Why was this
planet so alien to human life? He made a mental note to ask Brucco.
Meanwhile he tried to find one life form that wasn't out for his blood.
He didn't succeed. After a long search he found the only thing that when
touched didn't elicit deadly advice. This was a chunk of rock that
projected from a meadow of poison grass. Jason sat on it with a friendly
feeling and pulled his feet up. An oasis of peace. Some minutes passed
while he rested his gravity-weary body.

"ROTFUNGUS--DO NOT TOUCH!"

The voice blasted at twice its normal volume and Jason leaped as if he
had been shot. The gun was in his hand, nosing about for a target. Only
when he bent over and looked closely at the rock where he had been
sitting, did he understand. There were flaky gray patches that hadn't
been there when he sat down.

"Oh you tricky devils!" he shouted at the machine. "How many kids have
you frightened off that rock after they thought they had found a little
peace!" He resented the snide bit of conditioning, but respected it at
the same time. Pyrrans learned very early in life that there was no
safety on this planet--except that which they provided for themselves.

While he was learning about Pyrrus he was gaining new insight into the
Pyrrans as well.



