station was beyond on an outlying hill. The Secretary of War was in
charge. An hour's work and this was again in commission to flash to the
world the story of disaster. It told the world also of what lay ahead.
The writing was plain. No prophet was needed to forecast the doom and
destruction that awaited the earth.

Civilization was helpless. What of armies and cannon, of navies, of
aircraft, when from some unreachable height these monsters within their
bulbous machines could drop coldly--methodically--their diminutive
bombs. And when each bomb meant shattering destruction; each explosion
blasting all within a radius of miles; each followed by the blue blast
of fire that melted the twisted framework of buildings and powdered the
stones to make of a proud city a desolation of wreckage, black and
silent beneath the cold stars. There was no crumb of comfort for the
world in the terror the radio told.

Slim Riley was lying on an improvised cot when Thurston and the
representative of the Bureau of Standards joined him. Four walls of a
room still gave shelter in a half-wrecked building. There were candles
burning: the dark was unbearable.

"Sit down," said MacGregor quietly; "we must think...."

"Think!" Thurston's voice had an hysterical note. "I can't think! I
mustn't think! I'll go raving crazy...."

"Yes, think," said the scientist. "Had it occurred to you that that is
our only weapon left?

"We must think, we must analyze. Have these devils a vulnerable spot? Is
there any known means of attack? We do not know. We must learn. Here in
this room we have all the direct information the world possesses of this
menace. I have seen their machines in operation. You have seen more--you
have looked at the monsters themselves. At one of them, anyway."

       *       *       *       *       *

The man's voice was quiet, methodical. Mr. MacGregor was attacking a
problem. Problems called for concentration; not hysterics. He could have
poured the contents from a beaker without spilling a drop. His poise was
needed: they were soon to make a laboratory experiment.

The door burst open to admit a wild-eyed figure that snatched up their
candles and dashed them to the floor.

"Lights out!" he screamed at them. "There's one of 'em coming back." He
was gone from the room.

The men sprang for the door, then turned to where Riley was clumsily
crawling from his couch. An arm under each of his, and the three men
stumbled from the room.

They looked about them in the night. The fog-banks were high, drifting
in from the ocean. Beneath them the air was clear; from somewhere above
a hidden moon forced a pale light through the clouds. And over the
ocean, close to the water, drifted a familiar shape. Familiar in its
huge sleek roundness, in its funnel-shaped base where a soft roar made
vaporous clouds upon the water. Familiar, too, in the wild dread it
inspired.

The watchers were spellbound. To Thurston there came a fury of impotent
frenzy. It was so near! His hands trembled to tear at that door, to rip
at that foul mass he knew was within.... The great bulb drifted past. It
was nearing the shore. But its action! Its motion!

Gone was the swift certainty of control. The thing settled and sank, to
rise weakly with a fresh blast of gas from its exhaust. It settled
again, and passed waveringly on in the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thurston was throbbingly alive with hope that was certainty. "It's been
hit," he exulted; "it's been hit. Quick! After it, follow it!" He dashed
for a car. There were some that had been salvaged from the less ruined
buildings. He swung it quickly around where the others were waiting.

"Get a gun," he commanded. "Hey, you,"--to an officer who
appeared--"your pistol, man, quick! We're going after it!" He caught the
tossed gun and hurried the others into the car.

"Wait," MacGregor commanded. "Would you hunt elephants with a pop-gun?
Or these things?"

"Yes," the other told him, "or my bare hands! Are you coming, or aren't
you?"

The physicist was unmoved. "The creature you saw--you said that it
writhed in a bright light--you said it seemed almost in agony. There's
an idea there! Yes, I'm going with you, but keep your shirt on, and
think."

He turned again to the officer. "We need lights," he explained, "bright
lights. What is there? Magnesium? Lights of any kind?"

"Wait." The man rushed off into the dark.

He was back in a moment to thrust a pistol into the car. "Flares," he
explained. "Here's a flashlight, if you need it." The car tore at the
ground as Thurston opened it wide. He drove recklessly toward the
highway that followed the shore.

The high fog had thinned to a mist. A full moon was breaking through to
touch with silver the white breakers hissing on the sand. It spread its
full glory on dunes and sea: one more of the countless soft nights where
peace and calm beauty told of an ageless existence that made naught of
the red havoc of men or of monsters. It shone on the ceaseless surf
that had beaten these shores before there were men, that would thunder
there still when men were no more. But to the tense crouching men in the
car it shone only ahead on a distant, glittering speck. A wavering
reflection marked the uncertain flight of the stricken enemy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thurston drove like a maniac; the road carried them straight toward
their quarry. What could he do when he overtook it? He neither knew nor
cared. There was only the blind fury forcing him on within reach of the
thing. He cursed as the lights of the car showed a bend in the road. It
was leaving the shore.

He slackened their speed to drive cautiously into the sand. It dragged
at the car, but he fought through to the beach, where he hoped for firm
footing. The tide was out. They tore madly along the smooth sand,
breakers clutching at the flying wheels.

The strange aircraft was nearer; it was plainly over the shore, they
saw. Thurston groaned as it shot high in the air in an effort to clear
the cliffs ahead. But the heights were no longer a refuge. Again it
settled. It struck on the cliff to rebound in a last futile leap. The
great pear shape tilted, then shot end over end to crash hard on the
firm sand. The lights of the car struck the wreck, and they saw the
shell roll over once. A ragged break was opening--the spherical top fell
slowly to one side. It was still rocking as they brought the car to a
stop. Filling the lower shell, they saw dimly, was a mucouslike mass
that seethed and struggled in the brilliance of their lights.

MacGregor was persisting in his theory. "Keep the lights on it!" he
shouted. "It can't stand the light."

While they watched, the hideous, bubbling beast oozed over the side of
the broken shell to shelter itself in the shadow beneath. And again
Thurston sensed the pulse and throb of life in the monstrous mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

He saw again in his rage the streaming rain of black airplanes; saw,
too, the bodies, blackened and charred as they saw them when first they
tried rescue from the crashed ships; the smoke clouds and flames from
the blasted city, where people--his people, men and women and little
children--had met terrible death. He sprang from the car. Yet he
faltered with a revulsion that was almost a nausea. His gun was gripped
in his hand as he ran toward the monster.

"Come back!" shouted MacGregor. "Come back! Have you gone mad?" He was
jerking at the door of the car.

Beyond the white funnel of their lights a yellow thing was moving. It
twisted and flowed with incredible speed a hundred feet back to the base
of the cliff. It drew itself together in a quivering heap.

An out-thrusting rock threw a sheltering shadow; the moon was low in the
west. In the blackness a phosphorescence was apparent. It rippled and
rose in the dark with the pulsing beat of the jellylike mass. And
through it were showing two discs. Gray at first, they formed to black,
staring eyes.

Thurston had followed. His gun was raised as he neared it. Then out of
the mass shot a serpentine arm. It whipped about him, soft, sticky,
viscid--utterly loathsome. He screamed once when it clung to his face,
then tore savagely and in silence at the encircling folds.

       *       *       *       *       *

The gun! He ripped a blinding mass from his face and emptied the
automatic in a stream of shots straight toward the eyes. And he knew as
he fired that the effort was useless; to have shot at the milky surf
would have been as vain.

The thing was pulling him irresistibly; he sank to his knees; it dragged
him over the sand. He clutched at a rock. A vision was before him: the
carcass of a steer, half absorbed and still bleeding on the sand of an
Arizona desert....

To be drawn to the smothering embrace of that glutinous mass ... for
that monstrous appetite.... He tore afresh at the unyielding folds, then
knew MacGregor was beside him.

In the man's hand was a flashlight. The scientist risked his life on a
guess. He thrust the powerful light into the clinging serpent. It was
like the touch of hot iron to human flesh. The arm struggled and flailed
in a paroxysm of pain.

Thurston was free. He lay gasping on the sand. But MacGregor!... He
looked up to see him vanish in the clinging ooze. Another thick tentacle
had been projected from the main mass to sweep like a whip about the
man. It hissed as it whirled about him in the still air.

The flashlight was gone; Thurston's hand touched it in the sand. He
sprang to his feet and pressed the switch. No light responded; the
flashlight was out--broken.

A thick arm slashed and wrapped about him.... It beat him to the ground.
The sand was moving beneath him; he was being dragged swiftly,
helplessly, toward what waited in the shadow. He was smothering.... A
blinding glare filled his eyes....

       *       *       *       *       *

The flares were still burning when he dared look about. MacGregor was
pulling frantically at his arm. "Quick--quick!" he was shouting.
Thurston scrambled to his feet.

One glimpse he caught of a heaving yellow mass in the white light; it
twisted in horrible convulsions. They ran stumblingly--drunkenly--toward
the car.

Riley was half out of the machine. He had tried to drag himself to their
assistance. "I couldn't make it," he said: "then I thought of the
flares."

"Thank Heaven," said MacGregor with emphasis, "it was your legs that
were paralyzed, Riley, not your brain."

Thurston found his voice. "Let me have that Very pistol. If light hurts
that damn thing, I am going to put a blaze of magnesium into the middle
of it if I die for it."

"They're all gone," said Riley.

"Then let's get out of here. I've had enough. We can come back later
on."

He got back of the wheel and slammed the door of the sedan. The
moonlight was gone. The darkness was velvet just tinged with the gray
that precedes the dawn. Back in the deeper blackness at the cliff-base a
phosphorescent something wavered and glowed. The light rippled and
flowed in all directions over the mass. Thurston felt, vaguely, its
mystery--the bulk was a vast, naked brain; its quiverings were like
visible thought waves....

       *       *       *       *       *

The phosphorescence grew brighter. The thing was approaching. Thurston
let in his clutch, but the scientist checked him.

"Wait," he implored, "wait! I wouldn't miss this for the world." He
waved toward the east, where far distant ranges were etched in palest
rose.

"We know less than nothing of these creatures, in what part
of the universe they are spawned, how they live, where they
live--Saturn!--Mars!--the Moon! But--we shall soon know how one dies!"

The thing was coming from the cliff. In the dim grayness it seemed less
yellow, less fluid. A membrane enclosed it. It was close to the car. Was
it hunger that drove it, or cold rage for these puny opponents? The
hollow eyes were glaring; a thick arm formed quickly to dart out toward
the car. A cloud, high above, caught the color of approaching day....

Before their eyes the vile mass pulsed visibly; it quivered and beat.
Then, sensing its danger, it darted like some headless serpent for its
machine.

It massed itself about the shattered top to heave convulsively. The top
was lifted, carried toward the rest of the great metal egg. The sun's
first rays made golden arrows through the distant peaks.

The struggling mass released its burden to stretch its vile length
toward the dark caves under the cliffs. The last sheltering fog-veil
parted. The thing was halfway to the high bank when the first bright
shaft of direct sunlight shot through.

Incredible in the concealment of night, the vast protoplasmic pod was
doubly so in the glare of day. But it was there before them, not a
hundred feet distant. And it boiled in vast tortured convulsions. The
clean sunshine struck it, and the mass heaved itself into the air in a
nauseous eruption, then fell limply to the earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

The yellow membrane turned paler. Once more the staring black eyes
formed to turn hopelessly toward the sheltering globe. Then the bulk
flattened out on the sand. It was a jellylike mound, through which
trembled endless quivering palpitations.

The sun struck hot, and before the eyes of the watching, speechless men
was a sickening, horrible sight--a festering mass of corruption.

The sickening yellow was liquid. It seethed and bubbled with liberated
gases; it decomposed to purplish fluid streams. A breath of wind blew in
their direction. The stench from the hideous pool was overpowering,
unbearable. Their heads swam in the evil breath.... Thurston ripped the
gears into reverse, nor stopped until they were far away on the clean
sand.

The tide was coming in when they returned. Gone was the vile
putrescence. The waves were lapping at the base of the gleaming machine.

"We'll have to work fast," said MacGregor. "I must know, I must learn."
He drew himself up and into the shattered shell.

It was of metal, some forty feet across, its framework a maze of
latticed struts. The central part was clear. Here in a wide, shallow pan
the monster had rested. Below this was tubing, intricate coils, massive,
heavy and strong. MacGregor lowered himself upon it, Thurston was
beside him. They went down into the dim bowels of the deadly instrument.

"Hydrogen," the physicist was stating. "Hydrogen--there's our starting
point. A generator, obviously, forming the gas--from what? They couldn't
compress it! They couldn't carry it or make it, not the volume that they
evolved. But they did it, they did it!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Close to the coils a dim light was glowing. It was a pin-point of
radiance in the half-darkness about them. The two men bent closer.

"See," directed MacGregor, "it strikes on this mirror--bright metal and
parabolic. It disperses the light, doesn't concentrate it! Ah! Here is
another, and another. This one is bent--broken. They are adjustable. Hm!
Micrometer accuracy for reducing the light. The last one could reflect
through this slot. It's light that does it, Thurston, it's light that
does it!"

"Does what?" Thurston had followed the other's analysis of the diffusion
process. "The light that would finally reach that slot would be hardly
perceptible."

"It's the agent," said MacGregor, "the activator--the catalyst! What
does it strike upon? I must know--I must!"

The waves were splashing outside the shell. Thurston turned in a
feverish search of the unexplored depths. There was a surprising
simplicity, an absence of complicated mechanism. The generator, with its
tremendous braces to carry its thrust to the framework itself, filled
most of the space. Some of the ribs were thicker, he noticed. Solid
metal, as if they might carry great weights. Resting upon them were
ranged numbers of objects. They were like eggs, slender, and inches in
length. On some were propellers. They worked through the shells on long
slender rods. Each was threaded finely--an adjustable arm engaged the
thread. Thurston called excitedly to the other.

"Here they are," he said. "Look! Here are the shells. Here's what blew
us up!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He pointed to the slim shafts with their little propellerlike fans.
"Adjustable, see? Unwind in their fall ... set 'em for any length of
travel ... fires the charge in the air. That's how they wiped out our
air fleet."

There were others without the propellers; they had fins to hold them
nose downward. On each nose was a small rounded cap.

"Detonators of some sort," said MacGregor. "We've got to have one. We
must get it out quick; the tide's coming in." He laid his hands upon one
of the slim, egg-shaped things. He lifted, then strained mightily. But
the object did not rise; it only rolled sluggishly.

The scientist stared at it amazed. "Specific gravity," he exclaimed,
"beyond anything known! There's nothing on earth ... there is no such
substance ... no form of matter...." His eyes were incredulous.

"Lots to learn," Thurston answered grimly. "We've yet to learn how to
fight off the other four."

The other nodded. "Here's the secret," he said. "These shells liberate
the same gas that drives the machine. Solve one and we solve both--then
we learn how to combat it. But how to remove it--that is the problem.
You and I can never lift this out of here."

His glance darted about. There was a small door in the metal beam. The
groove in which the shells were placed led to it; it was a port for
launching the projectiles. He moved it, opened it. A dash of spray
struck him in the face. He glanced inquiringly at his companion.

"Dare we do it?" he asked. "Slide one of them out?"

Each man looked long into the eyes of the other. Was this, then, the end
of their terrible night? One shell to be dropped--then a bursting
volcano to blast them to eternity....

"The boys in the planes risked it," said Thurston quietly. "They got
theirs." He stopped for a broken fragment of steel. "Try one with a fan
on; it hasn't a detonator."

The men pried at the slim thing. It slid slowly toward the open port.
One heave and it balanced on the edge, then vanished abruptly. The spray
was cold on their faces. They breathed heavily with the realization that
they still lived.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were days of horror that followed, horror tempered by a numbing
paralysis of all emotions. There were bodies by thousands to be heaped
in the pit where San Diego had stood, to be buried beneath countless
tons of debris and dirt. Trains brought an army of helpers; airplanes
came with doctors and nurses and the beginning of a mountain of
supplies. The need was there; it must be met. Yet the whole world was
waiting while it helped, waiting for the next blow to fall.

Telegraph service was improvised, and radio receivers rushed in. The
news of the world was theirs once more. And it told of a terrified,
waiting world. There would be no temporizing now on the part of the
invaders. They had seen the airplanes swarming from the ground--they
would know an airdrome next time from the air. Thurston had noted the
windows in the great shell, windows of dull-colored glass which would
protect the darkness of the interior, essential to life for the horrible
occupant, but through which it could see. It could watch all directions
at once.

       *       *       *       *       *

The great shell had vanished from the shore. Pounding waves and the
shifting sands of high tide had obliterated all trace. More than once
had Thurston uttered devout thanks for the chance shell from an
anti-aircraft gun that had entered the funnel beneath the machine, had
bent and twisted the arrangement of mirrors that he and MacGregor had
seen, and, exploding, had cracked and broken the domed roof of the
bulb. They had learned little, but MacGregor was up north within reach
of Los Angeles laboratories. And he had with him the slim cylinder of
death. He was studying, thinking.

Telephone service had been established for official business. The whole
nation-wide system, for that matter, was under military control. The
Secretary of War had flown back to Washington. The whole world was on a
war basis. War! And none knew where they should defend themselves, nor
how.

An orderly rushed Thurston to the telephone. "You are wanted at once;
