The metal-collared leader of the pack that had captured Powell
presented the rat-king with the captive's gun-belt and two Silver
Belts, accompanying the gifts with a squealing oration that was
apparently a recital of the capture. The old monarch took the
trophies with delight.

The two Silver Belts were promptly draped over his own furry
shoulders by the king--seemingly following the same primitive love
for adornment that inspires an African savage to ornament his person
with any new and glittering object he happens to acquire. The
rat-king then graciously draped the cartridge-belt and holstered
automatics around the shoulders of the metal-collared leader who had
captured Powell.

The king turned his attention back to his prisoner. He studied the
captive curiously for a moment or two, then squealed a brief
command. A score of the rat-men promptly closed in upon Powell, and
began herding him toward a far back corner of the big cavern.

Stopping a few yards away from the edge of what seemed to be a wide
deep pit in the rock floor, the guard stripped Powell's bonds from
him. Powell made no move to take advantage of his freedom, realizing
that the swarming thousands of rodents in the cave made escape out
of the question for the moment. He allowed himself to be docilely
herded on to the edge of the pit.

And the next moment he exclaimed aloud in delighted surprise as he
gazed down at the floor of the pit ten feet beneath him. There,
sitting on a low heap of stones on the pit's sandy floor,
white-faced and weary but apparently unhurt, was Joan Marlowe.

       *       *       *       *       *

The girl's face brightened in relief as she looked up and recognized
him.

"Larry! Oh, thank God you've come!"

The leader of the guards motioned for Powell to jump down into the
pit. He needed no urging. A moment later he landed lightly on the
sandy floor of the pit, and Joan was in his arms.

The rat-men left a dozen of their number scattered as sentries
around the edge of the pit. The rest of them returned to the main
horde, leaving the prisoners to their own devices.

"I knew that you'd come, Larry, as soon as you got my note," Joan
exclaimed happily. "But how did you ever succeed in finding this
Cave of Blue Flame?"

"I didn't find it myself," Powell admitted. "I was captured like a
boob and dragged here." He told Joan of his mishaps since arriving
in Arret.

The girl nodded when he had finished. "Much the same happened to me,
Larry, only the red moon wasn't shining then. The only light was
from what looked like the dim ghost of a big yellow sun. I
materialized in Arret almost in the middle of a scouting group of
rat-men. They took me captive immediately. When several minutes
passed without you and Uncle Benjamin broadcasting the recall wave
for me, I knew that something terrible must have happened back in
the laboratory, and that I might be marooned in Arret for hours.

"I tried to hang onto my Silver Belt, of course," the girl
continued, "but when I was brought to the cavern here I saw that the
king was going to take it. There was a notebook and a pencil in my
laboratory smock. I managed to write the note and twine it into the
belt just before it was taken from me. The king seemed to think the
note enhanced the Belt's value as an ornament. He was wearing it
when I last saw it. Was he materialized in the laboratory with the
Belt?"

Powell told her of the amber egg and the skeleton.

"The same sort of crystalline amber egg that accompanied the work of
the mysterious Tinkling Death, wasn't it?" Joan mused. "One of the
king's lieutenants must have stolen the Belt, and reaped prompt
retribution when he tried to flee. I wonder what that weird Tinkling
Death is?"

"Possibly some strange weapon of the rat-men," Powell hazarded.

"No, they are as afraid of it as we are. While I was being brought
here to this cave the Tinkling Death was heard several times in the
distance, and the rat-men were obviously terrified at the sound."

       *       *       *       *       *

The prisoners' conversation was abruptly interrupted by a rhythmic,
snarling chant from the vast horde of rat-men in the cavern above.
The chant rose and fell in a rude cadence that was suggestively
ritual in nature.

"They've been doing that at intervals ever since I was first brought
here," Joan commented. "It sounds almost like the beginning of some
primitive religious ceremony, doesn't it?"

Powell nodded, without telling Joan the depressing thought in his
mind. The rat-men were so low in the evolutionary scale as to be
little more than beasts, and a prominent feature of nearly all
primitive religious rites is the sacrifice of living beings. Powell
could not help but wonder whether the chanting might not mark the
beginning of rites which would end with the sacrifice of himself and
Joan to some monstrous deity of theirs.

The snarling chant continued with monotonous regularity for hours,
while the prisoners huddled helplessly together there on the floor
of the pit, awaiting the next move of the rat-men. Any thought of
escape was out of the question. The sheer walls of the pit were
always guarded by alert sentries who had only to call to bring the
entire horde to their help.

Without Powell's wrist-watch, the captives had no way of accurately
following the lapse of time, but they both realized that the
twelve-hour time limit upon Joan's rescue from Arret must be coming
perilously near its end. They waited in momentary fear lest a sudden
turmoil in the cavern above them should indicate that Benjamin
Marlowe had broadcast the recall wave, whisking the two Belts back
to Earth, together with the old rat-king who presumably still wore
them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The chanting above rose slowly to a snarling climax, then swiftly
died away into silence. A moment later there came the sound of
thousands of claw-like feet scratching over the rocky floor as the
main horde apparently began marching out of the cavern. A detachment
of fifty rat-men appeared at the pit's edge.

A rude metal ladder was shoved down to the captives, and a
metal-collared leader motioned for them to climb up. Seeing nothing
to be gained by refusal, they obeyed. They were seized as they
reached the top, and their hands again bound behind them. The
overwhelming numbers of the rat-men made any attempt at resistance
futile.

There was no sign of the main horde as Joan and Powell were herded
out through the empty cavern and out into the open air again. With
their prisoners in the center of their group, the rat-men started
along a well-worn path that wound through the red vegetation.
Overhead the blood-red moon still blazed down in lurid splendor.

From somewhere ahead of them the captives began to again hear the
distant squealing chant of the main horde. They steadily approached
the sound, until abruptly they emerged into a huge clearing that had
apparently been a ceremonial assembly place for generations, for its
smooth sandy floor was packed down nearly to the hardness of rock.

The main horde of rat-men was there now, countless thousands of
them, packed in a roughly crescent-shaped mob, with the open side of
their formation facing what seemed to be a large deep pit, some
