real name was A-zooma. A-zooma ruled the world. Its ships with sails
of copper and engines of brass covered the many seas which now are
lands. Its airships clove the air with a safety and speed your own
have still to attain. The wealth of the world poured into A-zooma, and
its rulers waxed vain-glorious and proud. Time after time the
enslaved masses of A-zooma and of conquered countries rose in great
rebellions. Then against them marched the "iron baylas" breathing
death and destruction, and from the air mighty ships poured down the
yellow fog...."

Zoro paused, but presently went on: "So we ruled--for ten thousand
years; until the scientists who begot those engines of destruction
became afraid, because the serfs themselves began to build secret
laboratories. We of the priesthood of science saw the inevitable
disaster. Long ago we had put off our bodies--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Zoro smiled at the Americans' amazement. "No," he said, "I am not a
cripple in a wheelchair. This tubular container holds no fleshly body.
Inside of it is a mechanical heart which pumps artificial blood--blood
purified by a process I will not describe--through my head. It also
contains certain inner devices under my mental control, devices that
take the place of human hands and feet. Only by accident or through
lack of certain essentials can I die."

His listeners stared at him in awe. "You mean," faltered Miles, "that
save for your head you are all--machine?"

"Practically, yes. We priest-scientists of the Inner Mystery prolonged
life in such fashion. I was three thousand years old when--But enough!
I will not weary you with a recital of how the slaves burrowed the
bowels of A-zooma and of how the masters loosed against them the
forces of the atom. Suffice it to say that on an island we built our
vast system of buildings--or tunnel as you choose to call it--and
sealed them away from the outside world, entrance being made by
submarines through automatically controlled locks.

"At about this time our experiments opened up another realm of
existence, manifesting at a vibratory rate above that of earth. To
this new realm we brought workers who built the City of Apex and the
palace you are in. But, unfortunately, we brought with us no weapons
of offense, and in the new world we had neither the material nor the
delicate mechanisms and factories to reproduce them. However, for
countless ages there was no rebellion on the part of the workers who,
even in A-zooma, had worshipped us as gods. They were born, grew old
and died, but we abode forever. Besides, in the City of Apex they were
freer than they had ever been before, merely having to furnish our
laboratories with certain raw materials and the wherewithal to sustain
the blood supply on which our lives depend. But, of late, they have
made common cause with the original inhabitants of this plane, the
green men--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The green men! As if the words were a signal, a dreadful thing
happened. Out of a far shadow leaped a lean and hideous monster. To
Miles' startled eyes it seemed to grow as it leaped. Thin,
unbelievably thin it was, yet swelling at the head. From between two
goggle-eyes writhed a rope-like trunk. Twelve feet in the air its head
towered over Zoro. "Look out!" screamed the American.

Zoro's chair seemed to jump. Too late! Around the tubular container
wrapped the snake-like trunk, plucking the wheelchair and its occupant
from the floor and dangling them high in air. "Shoot!" cried Zoro.

Miles shot. His bullet ploughed through the unbelievably thin body and
ricochetted from a pillar beyond. Ward fired with better effect. One
of the goggle eyes spattered like glass. Under a fusillade of bullets
the monster wilted, giving expression to a weird, shrill cry. Zoro
dangled head downwards. To drop from such a height on his skull would
probably be fatal.

But the monster did not drop him. Instead, in its death agony, its
grip tightened, and the Americans witnessed an incredible sight.
Before their very eyes the monster began rapidly to shrink. Its
tenuous body telescoped together, becoming thinner and thinner in the
process, until on the floor there lay the lifeless body of a
snake-like creature not more than six inches in length!

"Good Lord!" breathed Miles.

Zoro who had escaped unscathed from his perilous plight, regarded it
with his peculiarly colored eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It is a tah-a-la," he said, "and must have entered the room at the
same time you did. The green men often capture and train them for
hunting. When about to seize their prey their bodies have the power of
enormously stretching." Outwardly he seemed unaffected by the danger
safely passed and waved away several of his fellows who had wheeled to
the spot attracted by the noise of the pistols. The Americans were
more shaken. "Perhaps," said Ward, "there is danger of--"

"None," replied Zoro. "I know there are no other tah-a-las inside
these rooms, since it is the nature of these beasts to rush to each
other's aid when they scream. And as for outside attacks, the
laboratories are insulated against any the insurgent workers can make.
Their weapons are poor--the green men use but clubs. No, it is not
their attacks we fear but their refusal to furnish us with supplies.
They worshipped us as gods, and the giving of supplies was long a
religious rite. But now they doubt our divinity, and, since they no
longer listen to or obey our decrees, we have no means of punishing
them. Spiro is responsible for this."

"Spiro?" questioned the two men.

"He whom we raised to the dignity of godhead on the accidental death
of Bah-koo, causing a deep sleep to fall upon him in the temple and
grafting his head upon the mechanical body left by the latter. Twice
before we had done this with citizens of Apex, and how were we to know
that Spiro would resent it? True, he was in love with Ah-eeda, but the
physical passions of men die with the organisms that give them birth.
For three years he dwelt with us in the laboratories, learning the
wisdom of the Heads, and then,"--Zoro's face became forbidding--"he
denounced us to the people. Though there was more or less discontent,
they would never have dared defy us save for him. He told them that
our curses could do no harm, that we were merely the heads of men like
himself and would die if they refused to give us the wherewithal to
renew blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

"But this refusal of theirs is an evil thing," he cried, looking at
the Americans with his strangely colored eyes. "It violates the custom
of ages, and strikes at the very roots of our existence. So we held
council and sent two of our number to Earth after men and weapons to
enforce our demands. For years we had watched Earth, seen its myriad
civilizations rise and fall, studied the coming of America to power
and importance. So it was to America that Solino went, by way of the
tunnel that still exists under the Atlantic--"

"And hired us," interrupted Ward, "and brought us to the tunnel in the
submarine-car where we--"

"Stepped into the crystal chamber," finished Zoro. "That chamber is a
re-vibrating device of certain rays and chemicals. The shutting of the
door closed the switches and hurled your bodies to where a
receiving-station on this plane integrated them again."

So they were not at the bottom of the ocean. They were--stupendous
thought--living in a new world of matter!

"Spiro suspected our plans," continued Zoro. "He isolated us in our
laboratories, and, by means of a crystal tube, went through to the
tunnel, tore up a section of track, and wrecked the submarine-car. But
his act was only partially successful. You two escaped death; you are
here; you are ready to keep faith and fight in our service."

