so above the dappled Atlantic cloud-belts and after a volt-flurry which
has cleared and tempered your nerves. While we discussed the thickening
traffic with the superiority that comes of having a high level reserved
to ourselves, we heard (and I for the first time) the morning hymn on a
Hospital boat.

She was cloaked by a skein of ravelled fluff beneath us and we caught
the chant before she rose into the sunlight. "_Oh, ye Winds of God_,"
sang the unseen voices: "_bless ye the Lord! Praise Him and magnify Him
forever!_"

We slid off our caps and joined in. When our shadow fell across her
great open platforms they looked up and stretched out their hands
neighbourly while they sang. We could see the doctors and the nurses and
the white-button-like faces of the cot-patients. She passed slowly
beneath us, heading northward, her hull, wet with the dews of the night,
all ablaze in the sunshine. So took she the shadow of a cloud and
vanished, her song continuing. _Oh, ye holy and humble men of heart,
bless ye the Lord! Praise Him and magnify Him forever._

"She's a public lunger or she wouldn't have been singing the
_Benedicite_; and she's a Greenlander or she wouldn't have snow-blinds
over her colloids," said George at last. "She'll be bound for
Frederikshavn or one of the Glacier sanatoriums for a month. If she was
an accident ward she'd be hung up at the eight-thousand-foot level.
Yes--consumptives."

"Funny how the new things are the old things. I've read in books," Tim
answered, "that savages used to haul their sick and wounded up to the
tops of hills because microbes were fewer there. We hoist 'em into
sterilized air for a while. Same idea. How much do the doctors say we've
added to the average life of a man?"

"Thirty years," says George with a twinkle in his eye. "Are we going to
spend 'em all up here, Tim?"

"Flap along, then. Flap along. Who's hindering?" the senior captain
laughed, as we went in.

We held a good lift to clear the coastwise and Continental shipping;
and we had need of it. Though our route is in no sense a populated one,
there is a steady trickle of traffic this way along. We met Hudson Bay
furriers out of the Great Preserve, hurrying to make their departure
from Bonavista with sable and black fox for the insatiable markets. We
over-crossed Keewatin liners, small and cramped; but their captains, who
see no land between Trepassy and Blanco, know what gold they bring back
from West Africa. Trans-Asiatic Directs, we met, soberly ringing the
world round the Fiftieth Meridian at an honest seventy knots; and
white-painted Ackroyd & Hunt fruiters out of the south fled beneath us,
their ventilated hulls whistling like Chinese kites. Their market is in
the North among the northern sanatoria where you can smell their
grapefruit and bananas across the cold snows. Argentine beef boats we
sighted too, of enormous capacity and unlovely outline. They, too, feed
the northern health stations in ice-bound ports where submersibles dare
not rise.

Yellow-bellied ore-flats and Ungava petrol-tanks punted down leisurely
out of the north like strings of unfrightened wild duck. It does not pay
to "fly" minerals and oil a mile farther than is necessary; but the
risks of transhipping to submersibles in the ice-pack off Nain or Hebron
are so great that these heavy freighters fly down to Halifax direct, and
scent the air as they go. They are the biggest tramps aloft except the
Athabasca grain-tubs. But these last, now that the wheat is moved, are
busy, over the world's shoulder, timber-lifting in Siberia.

We held to the St. Lawrence (it is astonishing how the old water-ways
still pull us children of the air), and followed his broad line of
black between its drifting ice blocks, all down the Park that the wisdom
of our fathers--but every one knows the Quebec run.

We dropped to the Heights Receiving Towers twenty minutes ahead of time
and there hung at ease till the Yokohama Intermediate Packet could pull
out and give us our proper slip. It was curious to watch the action of
the holding-down clips all along the frosty river front as the boats
cleared or came to rest. A big Hamburger was leaving Pont Levis and her
crew, unshipping the platform railings, began to sing "Elsinore"--the
oldest of our chanteys. You know it of course:

   _Mother Rugen's tea-house on the Baltic_--
     _Forty couple waltzing on the floor!_
   _And you can watch my Ray,_
   _For I must go away_
     _And dance with Ella Sweyn at Elsinore!_

Then, while they sweated home the covering-plates:

     _Nor-Nor-Nor-Nor-_
   _West from Sourabaya to the Baltic--_
     _Ninety knot an hour to the Skaw!_
   _Mother Rugen's tea-house on the Baltic_
     _And a dance with Ella Sweyn at Elsinore!_

The clips parted with a gesture of indignant dismissal, as though
Quebec, glittering under her snows, were casting out these light and
unworthy lovers. Our signal came from the Heights. Tim turned and
floated up, but surely then it was with passionate appeal that the great
tower arms flung open--or did I think so because on the upper staging a
little hooded figure also opened her arms wide towards her father?

       *       *       *       *       *

In ten seconds the coach with its clerks clashed down to the
receiving-caisson; the hostlers displaced the engineers at the idle
turbines, and Tim, prouder of this than all, introduced me to the maiden
of the photograph on the shelf. "And by the way," said he to her,
stepping forth in sunshine under the hat of civil life, "I saw young
Williams in the Mark Boat. I've asked him to tea on Friday."

[Illustration: "I'VE ASKED HIM TO TEA ON FRIDAY"]




AERIAL BOARD OF CONTROL BULLETIN




Aerial Board of Control

Lights


No changes in English Inland lights for week ending Dec. 18.

PLANETARY COASTAL LIGHTS. Week ending Dec. 18. Verde inclined
guide-light changes from 1st proximo to triple flash--green white
green--in place of occulting red as heretofore. The warning light for
Harmattan winds will be continuous vertical glare (white) on all oases
of trans-Saharan N. E. by E. Main Routes.

INVERCARGIL (N. Z.)--From 1st prox.: extreme southerly light (double
red) will exhibit white beam inclined 45 degrees on approach of
Southerly Buster. Traffic flies high off this coast between April and
October.

TABLE BAY--Devil's Peak Glare removed to Simonsberg. Traffic making
Table Mountain coastwise keep all lights from Three Anchor Bay at least
five shipping hundred feet under, and do not round to till beyond E.
shoulder Devil's Peak.

SANDHEADS LIGHT--Green triple vertical marks new private landing-stage
for Bay and Burma traffic only.

SNAEFELL JOKUL--White occulting light withdrawn for winter.

PATAGONIA--No summer light south C. Pilar. This includes Staten Island
and Port Stanley.

C. NAVARIN--Quadruple fog flash (white), one minute intervals (new).

EAST CAPE--Fog flash--single white with single bomb, 30 sec. intervals
(new).

MALAYAN ARCHIPELAGO lights unreliable owing eruptions. Lay from Somerset
to Singapore direct, keeping highest levels.

                             _For the Board_:
                                             CATTERTHUN }
                                             ST. JUST   } _Lights._
                                             VAN HEDDER }


Casualties

Week ending Dec. 18th.

SABLE ISLAND LANDING TOWERS--Green freighter, number indistinguishable,
up-ended, and fore-tank pierced after collision, passed 300-ft. level 2
P.M. Dec. 15th. Watched to water and pithed by Mark Boat.

N. F. BANKS--Postal Packet 162 reports _Halma_ freighter (Fowey--St.
John's) abandoned, leaking after weather, 46 deg. 15' N. 50 deg. 15' W. Crew
rescued by Planet liner _Asteroid_. Watched to water and pithed by
postal packet, Dec. 14th.

KERGUELEN MARK BOAT reports last call from _Cymena_ freighter (Gayer
Tong-Huk & Co.) taking water and sinking in snow-storm South McDonald
Islands. No wreckage recovered. Addresses, etc., of crew at all A. B. C.
offices.

FEZZAN--T. A. D. freighter _Ulema_ taken ground during Harmattan on
Akakus Range. Under plates strained. Crew at Ghat where repairing Dec.
13th.

BISCAY, MARK BOAT reports _Carducci_ (Valandingham line) slightly spiked
in western gorge Point de Benasque. Passengers transferred _Andorra_
(same line). Barcelona Mark Boat salving cargo Dec. 12th.

ASCENSION, MARK BOAT--Wreck of unknown racing-plane, Parden rudder,
wire-stiffened xylonite vans, and Harliss engine-seating, sighted and
salved 7 deg. 20' S. 18 deg. 41' W. Dec. 15th. Photos at all A. B. C. offices.


Missing

No answer to General Call having been received during the last week from
following overdues, they are posted as missing.

   _Atlantis_, W. 17630        Canton--Valparaiso
   _Audhumla_, W. 809          Stockholm--Odessa
   _Berenice_, W. 2206         Riga--Vladivostock
   _Draco_, E. 446             Coventry--Puntas Arenas
   _Tontine_, E. 3068          C. Wrath--Ungava
   _Wu-Sung_, E. 41776         Hankow--Lobito Bay

General Call (all Mark Boats) out for:

   _Jane Eyre_, W. 6990        Port Rupert--City of Mexico
   _Santander_, W. 5514        Gobi-desert--Manila
   _V. Edmundsun_, E. 9690     Kandahar--Fiume


Broke for Obstruction, and Quitting Levels

VALKYRIE (racing plane), A. J. Hartley owner, New York (twice warned).

GEISHA (racing plane), S. van Cott owner, Philadelphia (twice warned).

MARVEL OF PERU (racing plane), J. X. Peixoto owner, Rio de Janeiro
(twice warned).

                             _For the Board_:

                                             LAZAREFF  }
                                             MCKEOUGH  }  _Traffic._
                                             GOLDBLATT }




NOTES




Notes

High-Level Sleet
