"I dive out when I get to be the size of the bottle," he murmured.

With that, he leaped into the violet beam.

He felt no unusual sensation, except one of pleasant, tingling warmth,
as if the direct rays of the sun were bearing down upon him. For a
moment he feared that his size was not being affected. Then he
noticed, not that he appeared to become smaller, but that the
laboratory seemed to be growing immensely larger.

The walls seemed to race away from him. The green-blue sphere of the
tiny planet which he proposed to visit expanded and drew away above
his head.

Abruptly fearful, alarmed at the hugeness of the room, he turned to
look at the bottle he had placed to serve as a standard of size. It
had grown with everything else, until it seemed to be about three feet
high.

And it was swiftly expanding. It reached to the level of his shoulder.
And higher!

He ran to the edge of the crystal disk, which now seemed a floor many
yards across, and leaped from its edge. It was a dozen steps to where
he had left the bottle. And it was as tall as himself!

He started across the floor of the laboratory toward the table under
which the toy plane stood. The incredible immensity of his
surroundings awed him strangely. The walls of the room seemed distant,
Cyclopean cliffs; the roof was like a sky. Table legs towered up like
enormous columns.

It seemed a hundred yards across the strangely rough floor to the
plane. As he drew near it, it gave him huge satisfaction to see that
it was of normal size, correctly proportioned to his own dimensions.

"Great luck," he muttered, "that I can fly!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He paused, as he reached the cabin's open door, to wonder at the
astounding fact that a little while ago he had opened that door with a
hand larger than his entire body now was.

"I guess this is my day of wonders!" he muttered. "Allah knows I had
to wait long enough for it!"

First he examined the weapons in the cabin. There were two heavy
sporting rifles and two .45 automatics. There were also two smaller
automatics, which, he supposed, had been intended for Agnes' use. And
there was abundant ammunition.

Then he inspected the plane. It looked to be in excellent condition in
every way. The gasoline and oil tanks were full.

He set about starting the motor, using the plane's inertia starter,
which was driven by an electric motor. Soon the engine coughed,
sputtered, and gave rise to a roaring, rhythmic note that Larry found
musical.

When the motor was warm, he opened the throttle and taxied out from
beneath the colossal table, and across the laboratory floor toward the
Titanic mechanism in the center of the room. The disk of crystal was
set almost flush with the floor, its edge beveled. The plane rolled
easily upon it, and out into the Cyclopean pillar of violet flame.

Once more, Larry felt the sensation that everything about him except
the plane itself, was expanding inconceivably in size. Soon the
laboratory's walls and roof were lost in hazy blue distance. He could
distinguish only the broad, bright field formed by the surface of the
crystal disk, with the floor stretching away beyond it like a vast
plain. And above, the green-blue sphere of the tiny planet, bright on
one side and dark on the other, so that it looked like a half-moon,
immensely far-off.

       *       *       *       *       *

As he waited, he noticed a curious little dial, in a lower corner of
the instrument board, which he had not seen at first. One end of its
graduated scale was marked, "Earth Normal," the other, "Pygmy Planet
Normal." A tiny black needle was creeping slowly across the scale,
toward "Pygmy Planet Normal."

"That's how we tell what size we are without having to look at a
bottle," he muttered.

When the area of the crystal platform appeared to be about half a
square mile, he decided that he would now have sufficient space to
spiral up the violet ray toward the planet. If he waited too long to
start, the distance would become impossibly great.

He gave the little plane the gun. The motor thundered a throbbing
song; the ship rolled smoothly forward over the polished surface,
gained flying speed and took the air without a shock.

"Feels good to hold the stick again!" Larry murmured.

Making small circles to keep within the upright pillar of violet
radiance, he climbed steadily and as rapidly as possible, keeping his
eyes upon the brilliant half-moon of the Pygmy Planet.

The strangest flight in the annals of aviation! He was flying toward
a goal that, a few minutes before, he could have touched. Toward a
goal that, at the beginning of his flight, was only a few lengths of
his plane away. And his size dwindled so rapidly as he flew that the
planet seemed to swell and draw away from him.

As Larry and the plane grew smaller, the relative size of the violet
ray increased, so there was no longer much danger of flying out of it.
It seemed that he flew through a world of violet flame.

He met a curious problem in time. It is evident that time passes
faster for a small animal than for a large one, because nerve currents
require a shorter time in transit, and all thought and action is
consequently speeded up. It took a hundred-foot dinosaur nearly a
second to know that his tail had been pinched. A fly can get under way
in time to escape a descending swatter. The Pygmy Planet rotated in a
few seconds of earth time; one of its inhabitants might have lived,
aged, and died in the duration of a single day in our larger world.

       *       *       *       *       *

So Larry found that time seemed to pass more rapidly, or rather that
the time of the world he had left appeared to move more slowly, as he
adventured into smallness. He had been flying, it seemed to him,
nearly an hour when he reached the level of the planet's equator.

Now it seemed a vast world, filling half the visible universe. He flew
toward it steadily, until he knew, by the fading before him of the
violet flame which now seemed to fill all space, that he was near the
edge of the ray. And as he flew, he watched the little scale, upon
which the black needle was now nearing the line marked, "Pygmy Planet
Normal."

Circling slowly, keeping always on the level of the planet's equator,
and near the edge of the violet ray, so as to be as close as possible
to his landing place when he reached the proper size, he watched the
creeping black needle.

Too, he scanned with eager eyes the planet floating before him. Bare,
red deserts; narrow strips of green vegetation; shrunken, blue oceans;
silvery lines of rivers, passed in fascinating panorama beneath his
eyes. The rate of the planet's spinning seemed continually to lessen,
with the changing of his own sense of time.

Agnes! Larry thought of her with a curious, eager pain in his heart.
She was somewhere on that strange, ancient world, a prisoner of weird
machine-monsters! Intended victim of a grotesque sacrificial ceremony!

Could he find her, in the vastness of an unfamiliar world? And having
found her, would there be a chance to rescue her from her hideous
captors? The project seemed insane. But Larry felt a queer, unfamiliar
urge, which, he knew, would drive him on until he had discovered and
saved her--or until he was dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

At last, when it seemed to Larry nearly three hours since he had begun
this amazing flight, the crawling ebon needle reached the mark, "Pygmy
Planet Normal."

He flew out of the wall of violet flame toward the planet's surface.
Before, the distance between the planet and the ray's edge had seemed
only the fraction of an inch. Now it appeared to be many miles.

