learned from Fetter, and deciding upon a course of action for the
following day. Kincaide, whom I had left on watch, was there waiting.

"Well, sir, how do things stack up?" he asked anxiously.

"Not so good. Please ask Mr. Hendricks to report here at once, and
I'll give you the whole story."

Kincaide pressed the attention signal to Hendricks' room, and waited
impatiently for a response. There was none.

"Try my room," suggested Correy. "Maybe he hasn't moved back to his
own quarters yet."

"That's what he said he would be doing," replied Kincaide. But that
signal too failed to bring any response.

       *       *       *       *       *

Correy glanced at me, a queer, hurt expression in his eyes.

"Shall I go forward and see if he--if he's ill?" he asked quickly.

"Please do," I said, and as soon as he was gone I turned to the
microphone and called the sentry on duty at the exit.

"Commander Hanson speaking. Has Mr. Hendricks left the ship?"'

"Yes, sir. Some time ago. The lady came back, saying she had word from
you; she and Mr. Hendricks left a few minutes later. That was all
right, sir?"

"Yes," I said, barely able to force the word from between my lips.
Hendricks ... and Liane? Hendricks ... a traitor? I cut the microphone
and glanced at Kincaide. He must have read the facts in my eyes.

"He's ... gone, sir?"

"With Liane," I nodded.

The door burst open, and Correy came racing into the room.

"He's not there, sir!" he snapped. "But in his room I found this!"

He held out an envelope, addressed to me. I ripped it open, glanced
through the hasty, nervous scrawl, and then read it aloud:

     "Sir:

     I am leaving with Liane. I am sorry. It had to be.

                                                   Hendricks."

"That, gentlemen," I said hoarsely, after a long silence, "will make
the blackest entry ever spread upon the log of the _Ertak_--upon any
ship of the Service. Let us dismiss this thing from our minds, and
proceed."

But that was easier, by far, to propose than to accomplish.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was late indeed when we finished our deliberations, but the plan
decided upon was exceedingly simple.

We would simply enforce our authority until we located definite
resistance; we would then concentrate our efforts upon isolating the
source of this resistance and overcoming it. That we would find Liane
at the bottom of our difficulties, we knew perfectly well, but we
desired to place her in a definite position as an enemy. So far, we
had nothing against her, no proof of her activities, save the rather
guarded report of the Chief, and the evidence given us by Fetter.

There were three major continents on Lakos, but only one of them was
inhabited or habitable, the other two being within the large northern
polar cap. The activities of The Worshipers of the Flame were centered
about the chief city of Gio, Fetter had told us, and therefore we were
in position to start action without delay.

Force of men would avail us nothing, since the entire crew of the
_Ertak_ would be but a pitiful force compared to the horde Liane could
muster. Our mission could be accomplished--if, indeed, it could be
accomplished at all--by the force of whatever authority our position
commanded, and the outwitting of Liane.

Accordingly, it was decided that, in the emergency, all three of us
would undertake the task, leaving the ship in charge of Sub-officer
Scholey, chief of the operating room crew, and a very capable,
level-headed man. I gave him his final instructions as we left the
ship, early the next morning:

"Scholey, we are leaving you in a position of unusual responsibility.
An emergency makes it necessary, or at least desirable, for Mr.
Correy, Mr. Kincaide and myself to leave the ship. Mr. Hendricks has
already departed; therefore, the _Ertak_ will be left in your charge.

"Remain here for five days; if we do not return in that time, leave
for Base, and report the circumstances there. The log will reveal full
authority for your actions."

"Very well, sir!" He saluted, and we passed through the air-lock which
protected the _Ertak_ from the unpleasant atmosphere of Lakos, armed
only with atomic pistols, and carrying condensed rations and menores
at our belts.

       *       *       *       *       *

We went directly to the largest of the mines, the natives regarding us
with furtive, unfriendly eyes. A great crowd of men were lounging
around the mouth of the mine, and as we approached, they tightened
their ranks, as though to block our passage.

"We'll bluff it through," I whispered. "They know the uniform of the
Service, and they have no leader."

"I'd like to take a swing at one of them," growled Correy. "I don't
like their looks--not a bit. But just as you say, sir."

Our bluff worked. We marched up to the packed mass as though we had
not even noticed them, and slowly and unwillingly, they opened a path
for us, closing in behind us with rather uncomfortable celerity. For a
moment I regretted we had not taken a landing crew from the _Ertak_.

However, we won through the mouth of the mine without violence, but
here a huge Lakonian who seemed to be in authority held up his hand
and blocked our way.

"Let me handle him, sir," said Correy from the corner of his mouth. "I
understand a little of their language."

"Right," I nodded. "Make it strong!"

Correy stepped forward, his head thrust out truculently, thumbs hooked
through his belt, his right hand suggestively near his automatic
pistol. He rapped out something in unpleasant gutturals, and the tall
Lakonian replied volubly.

"He says it's orders," commented Correy over his shoulder. "Now I'll
tell him who's giving orders around here!"

He stepped closer to the Lakonian, and spoke with emphatic briefness.
The Lakonian fell back a step, hesitated, and started to reply. Correy
stopped him with a single word, and motioned us to follow him. The
guard watched us doubtfully, and angrily, but he let us pass.

"He told me," explained Correy, "that _she_ had given orders. Didn't
name her, but we can guess, all right. I told him that if she wished
to say anything to us, she could do it in person; that we weren't
afraid of her, of him, or all the Lakonians who ever breathed green
soup and called it air. He's a simple soul, and easily impressed. So
we got by."

"Nice work," I commended him. "It's an auspicious start, anyway."

       *       *       *       *       *

The mouth of the mine was not the usual vertical shaft; as Fetters had
told us, it was a great ramp, of less than forty-five degrees, leading
underground, illuminated by jets of greenish flame from metal brackets
set into the wall at regular intervals, and fed by a never-failing
interplay of natural gas. The passageway was of varying height and
width, but nowhere less than three times my height from floor to
ceiling, and it was broad enough at its narrowest so that ten men
might have marched easily abreast.

The floor, apparently, had been smoothed by human effort, but for the
rest, the corridor was, to judge from the evidence, entirely natural
for the walls of shiny black rock bore no marks of tools.

At intervals, other passages branched off from the main one we were
following, at greater and less angles, but these were much narrower,
and had very apparently been hewn in the solid rock. Like the central
passage, they were utterly deserted.

"We'll be coming out on the other side, pretty soon," commented Correy
after a steady descent of perhaps twenty minutes. "This tunnel must go
all the way through. I--what's that?"

We paused and listened. From behind us came a soft, whispering sound,
the nature of which we could not determine.

"Sounds like the shuffle of many feet, far behind," suggested Kincaide
gravely.

"Or, more likely, the air rushing around the corners of those smaller
passages," I suggested. "This is a drafty hole. Or it may be just the
combined flarings of all these jets of flame."

"Maybe you're right, sir," nodded Correy. "Anyway, we won't worry
about it until we have to. I guess we just keep on going?"

"That seems to be about all there is to do; we should enter one of the
big subterranean chambers Fetters mentioned, before long."

