"There's something out there--look," said Dorwin.

"That is our ship," the intruder told them blandly. "That is why we
stopped the train here. It is the only flat area sufficiently unsettled
for our landing and departure without detection. We must return at once
or lose perihelion."

"Let me see," said Bezdek. He peered through the window. There _was_
something out there--something black and vague and shaped like an
immense turtle with jagged projections. He tried to tell himself he was
seeing things, failed.

"Amazing!" said E. Carter Dorwin. "It's utterly amazing!"

"Incredible is the word for it," Bezdek said wearily. He faced the
intruder, said bluntly, "Very well, you say you're from Mars. And I say
to your face that you aren't!"

"You seem remarkably sure, Mr. Bezdek."

"And why not?" The movie-maker was in his element now, delivering the
clincher in an argument. "Our scientists have proved conclusively that
Earthmen cannot exist on Mars without space-suits. You say you're a
Martian. Yet you look like one of us. So if you can live on Mars, how
can you live in our atmosphere without a space-suit of some sort?
There's one for you to answer!" He chortled.

"But I _am_ wearing protection--a protective suit arranged to give the
impression that I am an Earthman." A flicker of something akin to
distaste passed over his singularly immobile face.

"I'd like to see what you _do_ look like," said Dorwin, suddenly
entering into the eerie conversation.

Something like a sigh escaped the intruder. Then he said, "Very well. It
is important that you believe me, so--" His hands went to the top of his
scalp and deliberately he peeled the life-like mask slowly from the
hidden features of his thoroughly Martian face!

It was a very odd face--not at all human. It reminded Bezdek a little of
an immutably sad Bassett Hound he kept in his Hollywood kennel. It made
Dorwin think of his mother-in-law. It was not a frightening face and the
single eye in the center of the forehead held them with its mournful
regard, held them, held them ...

When they were thoroughly under its hypnotic spell the Martian began to
speak softly ...

       *       *       *       *       *

Ty Falter was slow in waking up. But when he realized that he was lying
there in the corridor he came to with a start. If Bezdek ever found out
about this he'd be cooked as far as Hollywood went!

He got to his feet, his unsteadiness helped not at all by the fact that
the train chose that moment to start with a jerk. He grabbed at the wall
as a meteor flashed through the dark of the Kansas night outside the
window.

Funny, he thought, the damned thing was going _up_, not _down_. But he
forgot about the meteor as he heard the voices coming from the stateroom
he was being paid to guard. He reeled over to the partly opened door and
listened.

Bezdek was talking volubly, enthusiastically as he did when he spoke of
the actual making of a picture. "... so we'll only have to reshoot a few
sequences, Dorwin. The cost will be nothing compared to the returns.
Think of it! Our space-pilot hero crashes on _Venus_. He has to fight
horrible slimy swamp creatures--we can make them look like crocodiles
with six or eight legs--to reach the mountaintop where the girl is
hiding ..."

He paused and Dorwin said gravely, "I'm glad, since these space operas
seem to be necessary, that you have decided to locate them on a _real_
planet like Venus rather than a _fictitious_ one like Mars. If minority
pressure groups force us to use fantasy then it is as well to stay as
