universe."

"Look," I says, pawing beads of sweat as big as the creep's eyes from my
brow, "have you been testin' atom bombs and worse down here?"

"Jar."

"There, I knew Professor Zalpha was off the beam," I yelp at Wurpz.
"This is what is causin' the earthquakes."

"Come, schwine," the creep says. "I will show you something. The tomb of
my ancestor. Then to the museum to show you how he arrived in Subterro
in the year 1945. This is the city of Adolfus. Mach schnell! Heil
Hitler. I am Agrodyte Hitler, grandson of the Liberator."

The short hairs on the back of my neck start crawling down my spine. We
leave the Mole and walk along a big square paved with a mineral we never
saw upstairs. Thousands of inhabitants of Subterro hiss at us and click
their long black fingers. We walk up a long flight of steps and come to
a cadaver memorial and on the front there are big letters and numerals
in what looks like bloodstone that says: ADOLPH HITLER. 1981.

"Jar, Earthmen, mortal enemies of Subterro's hero, you thought he did
not escape, hah? Come, we go to the museum."

We do. In a glass case is an antique U-boat. "I can't believe it," I
says to Zahooli.

"Neither do I. We never took off. They have us locked up in the booby
hatch in Metropolita. We went nuts."

"He escaped in a submarine, bringing three of Nazi Germany's smartest
scientists with him. He brought plans showing us he could split the
atom. He brought working models." The creep laughs mockingly. "We have
certain elements down here also. Puranium, better than your uranium.
And pitchblende Plus Nine. It will power our fleet of submarines that
will conquer Earth. It is nearly der tag! We will leave through the
underground river that our benefactor found three miles below the
surface of the ocean near Brazil. It spirals down through this earth and
empties into Lake Schicklegruber eighty miles from here."

"And Hitler took one of those Subterro dames as a mate, huh," I says.
"It figures. He was not human himself."

I get another cuffing around but I am too punchy already to feel
anything. The next thing I know I am in the Subterro clink with Wurpz
and Zahooli. D'Ambrosia says maybe we will get released from the strait
jackets soon and get shock treatments and find ourselves back in
Metropolita in our favorite night spot.

"We have to be dreamin' this," I keep telling myself. The guard looks in
at us and he has little slanting eyes.

"How did Jap beetles get here?" I ask Wurpz. I shiver. I think of all
the Subterro subs pouring out of a hole under Brazil and sinking all
Earthian merchant marines, and shooting guided missiles that will land
all over the U.S. They could have rays that would reach up over a
million miles and wash up space traffic.

Then we get another jolt. They bring us our chow and say it is angleworm
and hellgrammite porridge as that is what the Subterro denizens live on
mostly. There is a salad made out of what looks like skunk cabbage
leaves. We found out later that Hitler's brain trust had made an
artificial sun for the Subterrors and they had been given greens for the
first time and increased in size over a hundred per cent.

"We have got to escape," I says to my pals.

"That is easy," Zahooli sniffs. "First we have to break through the
walls here, get to the Mole which can't never move again, and then fight
off maybe six million creeps. We would git reduced to cinders by ray
Betsys the minute we hit the street."

I sigh deeply and reach into my knapsack. I find some lamb stew and
tapioca pudding capsules and split them with Zahooli and Wurpz. Then I
come up with a little box and glance at the label. It says, URGOXA'S
INSECT POWDER--Contains Radiatol.

I get up nonchalantly and call the guard to the barred window.
Beetlehead sticks his face in close and asks what I want. I empty some
of the powder into the palm of my hand and then blow it into his face.
The Subterro sentry's eyes cross. His face turns as pale as milk and he
collapses like a camp stool.

"Eureka!" I yelp. "We are in business, pals."

I hide the box of bug powder when I hear two other creeps come running.
They start yakking in Universa and in bug language both. Agrodyte
Hitler appears and looks in at us.

"What happened, Great One?" I ask very politely.

"We will perform an autopsy," Hitler's grandson says, and turns to
another beetlehead. "Open the door," he says. "I am showing my guests
something before we exterminate them. Too bad about Voklogoo. Most
likely a coronary entomothrombosis. Achtung! Raus mitt!"

"It means get the lead out in old Germanic literature," I says to Wurpz
and Zahooli.

"It is curtains," D'Ambrosia gulps. "In about five minutes we will be
residue."

The Neofeuhrer is like all egomaniacs before him. He wants to brag. We
get into a Subterro Jetjeep and drive about twenty miles through the
underground countryside to the entrance to a cave guarded by some extra
