Then he bowed and was gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

The two remained staring at the empty doorway.

"I--I wish he'd been dead--sleeping," whispered June at last, twisting
her handkerchief with trembling fingers. "He--I didn't like the way he
kept looking at me."

"He seemed all right to me." Jack tried to forget his own prejudice.
"He's willing to help us."

"Might he not be one of the hashish addicts? Those eyes--the pupils
were mere pinpoints--and those evil-smelling cigarettes."

"Then why should he have offered to help?" puzzled Jack. "He could
have killed us."

"Nevertheless I hope we've seen the last of him. Are you about
through? Let's get out of this awful place. He looked like a mummy!"

They drove back to the apartment so completely preoccupied that both
forgot to obtain the drug which the doctor had requested.

"Yes, I've heard of him," Manthis said after he had been informed of
the encounter. "A naturalized Russian. Used to do quite a bit of
valuable work in various fields of physics. But he was some sort of
radical--seems to me an old-fashioned anarchist--and not popular. He
dropped out of sight several years ago. I presumed he was dead."

They soon had the new equipment installed and again began exploring
the wave bands, beginning with the comparatively lengthy ones and
working down into those only slightly longer than light. It was
tedious work, but all were by now as adept as Jack in combing the
ether and their task progressed rapidly. Despite the labor, however,
nothing could be heard. There was only the universal, breathless
silence. At times they moved to the commercial bands and tried to pick
up the stations they had heard on the previous day, but even there
they met with failure.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the evening of the third day they had left the wave bands which
could be measured in meters and were exploring those strange and
almost wholly uncharted depths of the ether which must be calculated
in centimeters. There at last luck favored them. It was Jack who
caught a strange pulsating tone on the three-centimeter band. It rose
and fell, rose and fell, then died away like the keening of a lost
soul.

"Listen," he whispered. "Plug in here. I've found something."

June and the doctor followed his instructions. Delicately fingering
the coils, Baron picked up the sound again, only to lose it. Then it
came once more. This time he followed it as it changed to the five
centimeter band. Back and forth it went as though weaving an intricate
and devilish web.

"What do you make of it?" queried the doctor at last.

"Don't know." Jack bit his lips. "It's no natural phenomenon, I'll
swear. Somebody is manipulating a broadcasting station of terrific
power not far from here and playing with that wave as a helmsman
brings a sailing ship into the wind and lets her pay off again."

"What do we do now?" The little chemist, finding his theory apparently
confirmed, was at a loss. "Could we wreck that station?"

"Fat chance!" The engineer laughed bitterly as he reached for a
cigarette. "Whoever has conceived that bit of hellishness is well
guarded. The three of us wouldn't have a ghost of a show. What I can't
understand is--"

"No use talking about theories now." Manthis sat down, crushed.
Dropping his head in his bands, he pulled his few hairs as though that
might drag out an idea. "What's to be done? Do you realise that we
hold more responsibility than ever man has held before? Caesar!
Napoleon! They were pikers. We have to save a world."

       *       *       *       *       *

Silence greeted his outburst. The scratching of a match as June lit a
cigarette sounded like an explosion. Then the smoke eddied undisturbed
while the three stared vacantly into space, trying to think.

"Couldn't we"--the girl swallowed hesitantly as she realized her
ignorance of radio engineering--"couldn't we interfere with that wave?
Interfere with the wave which already is breaking up the thought
waves. Cancel its power. Oh, Jack, you must know what I mean."

"With this dinky, five-kilowatt station? We couldn't reach Yonkers
against the power they've got. By Jove!" He leaped to his feet as a
new thought struck him. "Maybe we could just wake up New York. Get
help from the police then! Smash that other station afterwards!"

"But we don't know whether interference would break the spell,"
interposed the practical doctor. "And it will take a lot of practise
to follow that wave. It jumps back and forth like a grasshopper."

"And if we don't do it right the first time, whoever is operating that
station will be down on us like a ton of brick," admitted Jack.

"Let's get the child we saved," suggested June. "We can bring her up
here. Then we'll need only a little power, just enough to be effective
in this room, to bring her to life if we can. They wouldn't hear our
wave."

"Great!" Jack bent over and kissed her. "You're a real help. I'll be
back in a minute." He dashed out. Soon they heard his step on the
stairs and he reappeared, tenderly bearing his golden-haired burden.

"Now, June," he commanded briskly, "place her in a comfortable
position on the work table while I get ready." He began arranging
equipment and connecting it with the bank of storage batteries.

"Shall I adjust a headset for her?" asked the impatient doctor.

"Be yourself!" Jack placed a crooked vacuum tube near the child's head
and clamped two flat electrodes on her temples. "This wave must act
directly on the brain. The sense of hearing has nothing to do with it.

"All right, Sleeping Beauty." He stretched the kinks out of his aching
back. "Let's see what we can do for you. Pardon me, Doctor, if I
seemed rude. This is ticklish work. Pick up the outside wave for me.
Thanks. Now I've got our dinky sending station set on the same wave
length at a different frequency. It's adjusted so that as I keep in
touch through this tuning coil, our wave will fluctuate over the same
path as the other. It should take six or eight hours to overcome the
effect on her, I judge. Here we go. June, you'd better get yourself
and your dad some food. Doctor, you examine the kid from time to time.
In an hour or so June can relieve me."

He pressed a switch. The tubes filled with a green glow.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours passed, and the sun was sinking behind the trees of the park
in a bloody haze when Jack at last signaled for June to handle the
dials. For a time he guided her slim fingers. Then, as she caught the
trick, he rose and stretched his cramped muscles.

"Don't lose the wave for a moment or we'll have to start all over
again," he warned. "Now for dinner!"

She nodded and, frowning slightly, bent over the dials.

At that moment there came a heavy knock on the apartment door.

"Who's that?" gasped Manthis, his face turning grey.

"Probably Solinski," replied Jack, feeling his spine crawl as he
remembered the moldy Russian. "Fine time he chose for a visit."

"Shall I let him in?"

"Don't see what else there is to do."

"Good evening," cried their guest as Manthis opened the door. "Ah, Dr.
Manthis, I believe. I have heard so much about your work." His hoarse
yet ringing voice made the little man start violently and caused June
to shake her head in annoyance as the sound interfered with the
humming of the vagrant wave. "Sorry I could not come earlier."
Solinski advanced into the laboratory, giving the effect of driving
the chemist before him. "Trying to revive one of the sufferers, I see.
May God aid you in this noble work."
