headlight power up and examined the hand closely, there could be no
doubt about it. These gaskets on the joints, the rivet pattern at the
base of the thumb meant only one thing, it was the dismembered hand of a
Venex robot.

Quickly, yet gently, he shoveled away the rubble behind the hand and
unearthed the rest of the robot. The torso was crushed and the power
circuits shorted, battery acid was dripping from an ugly rent in the
side. With infinite care Jon snapped the few remaining wires that joined
the neck to the body and laid the green head on the barrow. It stared at
him like a skull, the shutters completely dilated, but no glow of life
from the tubes behind them.

He was scraping the mud from the number on the battered chestplate when
Druce lowered himself into the tunnel and flashed the brilliant beam of
a hand-spot down its length.

"Stop playing with that junk and get digging--or you'll end up the same
as him. This tunnel has gotta be through by tonight."

Jon put the dismembered parts on the barrow with the sand and rock and
pushed the whole load back up the tunnel, his thoughts running in
unhappy circles. A dead robot was a terrible thing, and one of his
family too. But there was something wrong about this robot, something
that was quite inexplicable, the number on the plate had been "17," yet
he remembered only too well the day that a water-shorted motor had
killed Venex 17 in the Orange Sea.

It took Jon four hours to drive the tunnel as far as the ancient granite
wall of the storm sewer. Druce gave him a short pinch bar and he levered
out enough of the big blocks to make a hole large enough to let him
through into the sewer.

When he climbed back into the office he tried to look casual as he
dropped the pinch bar to the floor by his feet and seated himself on the
pile of rubble in the corner. He moved around to make a comfortable seat
for himself and his fingers grabbed the severed neck of Venex 17.

Coleman swiveled around in his chair and squinted at the wall clock. He
checked the time against his tie-pin watch, with a grunt of satisfaction
he turned back and stabbed a finger at Jon.

"Listen, you green junk-pile, at 1900 hours you're going to do a job,
and there aren't going to be any slip ups. You go down that sewer and
into the Hudson River. The outlet is under water, so you won't be seen
from the docks. Climb down to the bottom and walk 200 yards north, that
should put you just under a ship. Keep your eyes open, _but don't show
any lights_! About halfway down the keel of the ship you'll find a chain
hanging.

"Climb the chain, pull loose the box that's fastened to the hull at the
top and bring it back here. No mistakes--or you know what happens."

Jon nodded his head. His busy fingers had been separating the wires in
the amputated neck. When they had been straightened and put into a row
he memorized their order with one flashing glance.

He ran over the color code in his mind and compared it with the
memorized leads. The twelfth wire was the main cranial power lead,
number six was the return wire.

With his precise touch he separated these two from the pack and glanced
idly around the room. Druce was dozing on a chair in the opposite
corner. Coleman was talking on the phone, his voice occasionally rising
in a petulant whine. This wasn't interfering with his attention to
Jon--and the radio switch still held tightly in left hand.

Jon's body blocked Coleman's vision, as long as Druce stayed asleep he
would be able to work on the head unobserved. He activated a relay in
his forearm and there was a click as the waterproof cover on an exterior
socket swung open. This was a power outlet from his battery that was
used to operate motorized tools and lights underwater.

If Venex 17's head had been severed for less than three weeks he could
reactivate it. Every robot had a small storage battery inside his skull,
if the power to the brain was cut off the battery would provide the
minimum standby current to keep the brain alive. The robe would be
unconscious until full power was restored.

Jon plugged the wires into his arm-outlet and slowly raised the current
to operating level. There was a tense moment of waiting, then 17's eye
shutters suddenly closed. When they opened again the eye tubes were
glowing warmly. They swept the room with one glance then focused on Jon.

The right shutter clicked shut while the other began opening and closing
in rapid fashion. It was International code--being sent as fast as the
solenoid could be operated. Jon concentrated on the message.

_Telephone--call emergency operator--tell her "signal 14" help will--_

The shutter stopped in the middle of a code group, the light of reason
dying from the eyes.

For one instant Jon's heart leaped in panic, until he realized that 17
had deliberately cut the power. Druce's harsh voice rasped in his ear.

"What you doing with that? None of your funny robot tricks. I know your
kind, plotting all kinds of things in them tin domes." His voice trailed
off into a stream of incomprehensible profanity. With sudden spite he
lashed his foot out and sent 17's head crashing against the wall.

The dented, green head rolled to a stop at Jon's feet, the face staring
up at him in mute agony. It was only Circuit 92 that prevented him from
injuring a _human_. As his motors revved up to send him hurtling forward
the control relays clicked open. He sank against the debris, paralyzed
for the instant. As soon as the rush of anger was gone he would regain
control of his body.

They stood as if frozen in a tableau. The robot slumped backward, the
man leaning forward, his face twisted with unreasoning hatred. The head
lay between them like a symbol of death.

Coleman's voice cut through the air of tenseness like a knife.

"_Druce_, stop playing with the grease-can and get down to the main door
to let Little Willy and his junk-brokers in. You can have it all to
yourself afterward."

The angry man turned reluctantly, but pushed out of the door at
Coleman's annoyed growl. Jon sat down against the wall, his mind sorting
out the few facts with lightning precision. There was no room in his
thoughts for Druce, the man had become just one more factor in a complex
problem.

Call the emergency operator--that meant this was no local matter,
responsible authorities must be involved. Only the government could be
behind a thing as major as this. Signal 14--that inferred a complex set
of arrangements, forces that could swing into action at a moment's
