Joe saw her slim against the light, and his thoughts were like the sea
surge, wild, unruly.

_Maybe Mike will get me. Maybe I'll be dead by this time tomorrow. Maybe
I'm crazy to love her the way I do ..._

Her hair against the light, a tumbled mass of spun gold.

_Always a woman bothering me for as long as I can remember. Molly, Anne,
Janice ... Some were good for me and some were bad._

_You see a woman on the street walking ahead of you, hips swaying, and
you think: I don't even know her name but I'd like to crush her in my
arms!_

_I guess every guy feels like that about every pretty woman he sees.
Even about some that aren't so pretty. But then you get to know and like
a woman, and you don't feel that way so much. You respect her and you
don't let yourself feel that way._

_Then something happens. You love her so much it's like the first time
again but with a whole lot added. You love her so much you'd die to make
her happy._

       *       *       *       *       *

Joe was shaking when he slipped into the chair left vacant by Mike and
reached out for both her hands.

"I'm taking you away tonight," he said. "You're coming with me."

Joe was scared, she knew. But he didn't want her to know. His hands were
like ice and his fear blended with her own fear as their hands met.

"He'll kill you, Joe! You've got to forget me!" she sobbed.

"I'm not afraid of him. I'm stronger than you think. He won't dare come
at me with a gun, not here before all these people. If he comes at me
with his fists I'll hook a solid left to his jaw that will stretch him
out cold!"

She knew he wasn't deceiving himself. Joe didn't want to die any more
than she did.

The Man from Time had an impulse to get up, walk over to the two
frightened children and comfort them with a reassuring smile. He sat
watching, feeling their fear beating in tumultuous waves into his brain.
Fear in the minds of a boy and a girl because they desperately wanted
one another!

He looked steadily at them and his eyes spoke to them ...

_Life is greater than you know. If you could travel in Time, and see how
great is man's courage--if you could see all of his triumphs over
despair and grief and pain--you would know that there is nothing to
fear! Nothing at all!_

Joe rose from the table, suddenly calm, quiet.

"Come on," he said quietly. "We're getting out of here right now. My
car's outside and if Mike tries to stop us I'll fix him!"

The boy and the girl walked toward the door together, a young and
extremely pretty girl and a boy grown suddenly to the full stature of a
man.

Rather regretfully Moonson watched them go. As they reached the door the
girl turned and smiled and the boy paused too--and they both smiled
suddenly at the man in the bathing trunks.

Then they were gone.

Moonson got up as they disappeared, left the tavern.

It was dark when he reached the cabin. He was dog-tired, and when he saw
the seated man through the lighted window a great longing for
companionship came upon him.

He forgot that he couldn't talk to the man, forgot the language
difficulty completely. But before this insurmountable element occurred
to him he was inside the cabin.

Once there he saw that the problem solved itself--the man was a writer
and he had been drinking steadily for hours. So the man did all of the
talking, not wanting or waiting for an answer.

A youngish, handsome man he was, with graying temples and keenly
observant eyes. The instant he saw Moonson he started to talk.

"Welcome, stranger," he said. "Been taking a dip in the ocean, eh? Can't
say I'd enjoy it, this late in the season!"

Moonson was afraid at first that his silence might discourage the
writer, but he did not know writers ...

"It's good to have someone to talk to," the writer went on. "I've been
sitting here all day trying to write. I'll tell you something you may
not know--you can go to the finest hotels, and you can open case after
case of the finest wine, and you still can't get started sometimes."

The writer's face seemed suddenly to age. Fear came into his eyes and he
raised the bottle to his lips, faced away from his guest as he drank as
if ashamed of what he must do to escape despair every time he faced his
fear.

He was trying to write himself back into fame. His greatest moment had
