level to another, are coming into successful use in France. It appears
to us to be much behind the age, since, by certain American
inventions, an ordinary train may be elevated 100 feet in five
minutes, by the engine alone.


[Illustration: The Vertical Propeller.]

We have alluded to this subject in a former number, and now present
one of the several plans which have been introduced within the present
year, although we are not fully authorised to give the name of the
inventor of this particular plan. We have preferred to represent the
paddles and crank unconnected with an apparent vessel or section
thereof, but must require the reader to suppose that the line A B is
the level of the railing of the boat, and that the crank-shaft E
projects from the side, while the crank-pivot governs the motion of
the walking bar D E, and with it the paddles, which are supposed to be
just now dipping in the surface of the water. It will be understood
that the motion of the walking bar being circular, and that of the
heads of the paddles being vertical and nearly rectilinear, the motion
of the blades of the paddles must be elliptical, inclining to the
horizontal; and that the position of the paddles is kept so nearly
vertical that they will meet with less resistance in entering or
leaving the water than those of a common paddle wheel, while the
atmospheric resistance to be encountered thereby is much less. There
appears no reasonable doubt that this plan might be made to succeed
well on a larger scale, though it is very doubtful whether any of the
steamboat proprietors can be persuaded to adopt it until it has been
more thoroughly tested by experiment.


=A Great Astronomical Discovery.=

A late number of an astronomical journal published at Altona, near
Hamburg, contains a long article by Dr. Maedler, director of the
Dorpat Observatory, Russia, well known to the astronomical world, in
which he announces the extraordinary discovery of the _grand central
star or sun_, about which the universe of stars is revolving, our own
sun and system among the rest.

This discovery, the result of many years of incessant toil and
research, has been deduced by a train of reasoning and an examination
of facts scarcely to be surpassed in the annals of science.

He announces his discovery in the following language: 'I therefore
pronounce the Pleiades to be the central group of that mass of fixed
stars limited by the stratum composing the Milky Way and Alcyene as
the individual star of this group, which, among all others, combines
the greatest probability of being the true Central Sun.'

By a train of reasoning, which I shall not attempt to explain, he
finds the probable parallax of this great central star to be six
thousandths of one second of arc, and its distance to be 34 millions
of times the distance of the sun, or so remote that light, with a
velocity of 12 millions of miles per minute, requires a period of 537
years to pass from _the great centre_ to our sun.

As a first rough approximation, he deduces the period of the
revolution of our sun, with all its train of planets, satellites and
comets, about the grand centre, to be _eighteen millions two hundred
thousand years_.


=Ocean Steam Navigation.=

The 'Ocean Steam Company,' which has the patronage of the United
States Government to the amount of $400,000 per annum, are getting on
rapidly with the first steamship of their line. She is to be completed
and commence running on the first of March next.


SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

NEW YORK, OCTOBER 10, 1846.


=Employment.=

It is dangerous for a man of superior ability to find himself thrown
upon the world without some regular employment. The restlessness
inherent in genius, being thus undirected by any permanent influence,
frames for itself occupations out of accidents. Moral integrity
sometimes falls a prey to the want of a fixed pursuit, and the man who
receives his direction in active life from the fortuitous impulse of
circumstances, will be very apt to receive his principles likewise
from chance. Genius, under such guidance, attains no noble ends, but
resembles rather a copious spring conveyed in a falling aqueduct,
where the waters continually escape through the frequent crevices, and
waste themselves ineffectually on their passage. The law of nature is
here, as elsewhere, binding, and no powerful results ever ensue from
the trivial exercise of high endowments. The finest mind, when thus
destitute of a fixed purpose, passes away without leaving permanent
traces of its existence; losing its energy by turning aside from its
course, it becomes as harmless and inefficient as the lightning,
which, of itself irresistible, may yet be rendered powerless by a
slight conductor.


=The Editor.=

Write--keep writing--is the motto of an editor. If he has no ideas, he
must dig for them; if he has but little time to arrange them, no
matter, the work must be done. Sickness may come upon him; want may
stare him in the face, but he must cogitate something for the dear
public. Perhaps in his darkest moments, he indites a paragraph that
cheers thousands. When almost desponding, his words may put courage
into the hearts of millions. Who would be an editor? Yet he has much
to encourage him. If he can call no time his own, he is not rusting
out, or in unprofitable society. A faithful contributor of the public
press, is a man of great influence. No person has more power than
himself. He instructs tens of thousands, and leads them to virtue, to
honor, to happiness. No man will have more to answer for than the
conductor of a corrupt and vacillating press.


=A Mountain in Labor.=

The workmen, says a Paris paper, are still busily engaged in
excavating Montmarte in quest of holy vases and other riches said to
have been deposited there in the early days of the French revolution
by the orders of the Lady Superior of the Abbey of Montmarte.--Two
workmen, who were at the time charged with transporting the wealth to
the place designated, were never after seen, and it is supposed that
they were sacrificed to the necessity of the secret. The Superior, at
her death, bequeathed the secret to a lady friend, who, in turn, on
her death bed, divulged it to her daughter, then thirteen years of
age. The child, now a sexagenary, disclosed it to the municipality.
Her statements have thus far been found scrupulously correct. The
_cesarian_ operation is actively going on, an excavation of 50 feet
having been made, and the mountain's speedy deliverance of a mine of
wealth is anticipated. May it not prove a mouse!


=That Editorial Committee.=

We are informed that the Editorial Committee of the National
Association of Inventors have by _their own request_ been discharged
from the supervision of the new periodical which has recently appeared
under the title of 'The Eureka.'


=News by Telegraph.=

The news by the Great Western which arrived on Wednesday week, was
published within four hours in Boston, New Haven, Springfield, Albany,
Utica, Rochester, Buffalo, Philadelphia and Baltimore.

The following beautiful extract we find in a recent number of the New
York Sun. It is from the pen of Mr. C. D. Stuart, the able
correspondent of that paper, now in London.

      "On remarking to an Englishman, that I did not see
      here in London as at home, the artizan, the drayman,
      the laborer of every kind, with a newspaper in his
      pocket, which at intervals in his toil he could glance
      at and be as learned in the condition of his country
      and the world as the man of fortune, he replied--"No,
      they have something better to do, they attend to their
      work." Here lies the rub, and it may be a fear of the
      sedition of thought that has put these close hampers
      upon the English press. It would seem by such an
      argument that the differences of condition are not
      induced by unholy oppressions, by the trampling for
      ages of one class upon another until servitude became
      almost a birth-right--and the law of strength that
      proved itself in barbarous times the "Supremacy" had
      at last from concession so long made, become the law
      of human justice and divine right. The steer may work
      under his yoke an appointed time, the slave bow mutely
      through his whole life, but the freeman--has he so
      fallen, that while the lord revels in his "club-room"
      and reads not only papers, but gilt edged and velvet
      bound books, he forsooth being a common "poor devil"
      not able to enjoy a tithe of his unearned luxury--has
      something better than reading to do. Let him dig
      then! There are those in the young republic whose
      spirit begins to animate the world, who, though they
      toil, remember, that it was said in the beginning to
      all men, "thou shalt earn thy bread by the sweat of
      thy brow," and will read freely as they drink in the
      common air, and enjoy the common light. There are
      classes in England intelligent no doubt beyond any
      other people in the world--classes that enjoy the
      means of making themselves so, but as a mass they will
      in no-wise compare with their progeny, the
      Anglo-Saxons. All that they have here in the main we
      have got, and our wits have not been blunted by a
      contact with the wilderness, and the difficulties of
      founding an empire "in the Woods." I see now more
      clearly than ever where our faults lie; contrast
      exposes them; but they are all twigs upon the rising
      trunk, which the keen knife of national experience,
      age, and the calm that must succeed the rush and
      tumult of our giant and boisterous infancy will cut
      off.--With greater pride than ever, however much I may
      like the Old World, and especially England, I look
      over the Ocean to America for an exemplification of
      what the world has not known, an _Earthly_ paradise
      for humanity.--It is but three quarters of a century,
      remember, since we were nationally born: give as the
      fourteen hundred years that have nursed and cultivated
      this Island, and where is the limit of our perfection
      and strength? On either side of that Mississippi
      back-bone of ours to the Oceans, and as far north and
      south as freedom and knowledge can pierce, America
      must be a garden and a goal, filled with every
      excellence and beauty, beyond which there can be no
      advance. We shall not live to see it, but it will
      come, only let us pull careful and steady. We have
      been Dickens'd and Trollop'd, and it should do us
      good. Nothing but the grandeur that lies germinating
      in our heart provokes this idle spleen from our
      neighbors, and the moment we cool down and think and
      curb ourselves the rest is secure."


=New Glass Factory.=

Erastus Corning & Co. are about establishing a factory near the ferry
at Troy, for the manufacture of all kinds of glass ware. The work is
fast progressing, and in about four weeks they will commence blowing.
It will afford employment to a large number of men, and will, no
doubt, meet with that success which it certainly merits.


=Result of Observation.=

The editor of the New Haven Herald sets it down as a fact in natural
history, proved by his experience for years, that when a traveller
rides up to a toll gate, the keeper--if a man, invariably brings out a
box, or a handful of change; but if a woman, she comes out and takes
the traveller's coin, and then goes back for the change.

    *    *    *    *    *

Snags and other obstructions in the Western rivers, are now
denominated _Polk stalks_.


=The Science of Astronomy.=

DESCRIPTIVE ASTRONOMY.

Mercury, the nearest planet to the sun, is a globe of about 3140 miles
in diameter, rotating on its axis in 24 hours and 5 1-2 minutes, and
revolving round the central luminary, at a distance of 37,000,000 of
miles, in 88 days.--From the earth it can only be seen occasionally in
the morning or evening, as it never rises before, or sets after the
sun, at a greater distance of the time than 1 hour and 50 minutes. It
appears to the naked eye as a small and brilliant star, but when
observed through a telescope, is horned like the moon, because we only
see a part of the surface which the sun is illuminating. Mountains of
great height have been observed on the surface of this planet,
particularly in its lower or southern hemisphere. One has been
calculated at 10 3-4 miles in height, being about eight times higher,
in proportion to the bulk of the planet, than the loftiest mountains
upon earth. The matter of Mercury is of much greater density than that
of the earth, equalling lead in weight; so that a human being placed
upon its surface would be so strongly drawn towards the ground as
scarcely to be able to crawl.

Venus is a globe of about 7800 miles in diameter, or nearly the size
of the earth, rotating on its axis in 23 hours, 21 minutes, and 19
seconds, and revolving round the sun, at the distance of 68,000,000 of
miles in 225 days.--Like Mercury, it is visible to an observer on the
earth only in the morning and evening, but for a greater space of time
before sunrise and after sunset. It appears to us the most brilliant
and beautiful of all the planetary and stellar bodies, occasionally
giving so much light as to produce a sensible shadow. Observed through
a telescope, it appears horned, on account of our seeing only a part
of its luminous surface. The illuminating part of Venus occasionally
presents slight spots. It has been ascertained that its surface is
very unequal, the greatest mountains being in the southern hemisphere,
as in the case of both Mercury and the Earth. The higher mountains in
Venus range between 10 and 22 miles in altitude. The planet is also
enveloped in an atmosphere like that by which animal and vegetable
life is supported on earth; and it has consequently a twilight. Venus
performs its revolution round the sun in 225 days. Mercury and Venus
have been termed the Inferior Planets, as being placed within the
orbit of the Earth.

The Earth, the third planet in order, and one of the smaller size,
though not the smallest, is important to us, as the theatre on which
our race have been placed to 'live, move, and have their being.' It is
7902 miles in mean diameter, rotating on its axis in 24 hours, at a
mean distance of 95,000,000 of miles from the sun, round which it
revolves in 365 days, 5 hours, 50 minutes, and 57 seconds. As a planet
viewed from another of the planets, suppose the moon, 'It would
present a pretty, variegated, and sometimes a mottled appearance. The
distinction between its seas, oceans, continents, and islands, would
be clearly marked; they would appear like brighter and darker spots
upon its disc. The continents would appear bright, and the ocean of a
darker hue, because water absorbs the greater part of the solar light
that falls upon it. The level plains, (excepting perhaps, such regions
as the Arabian deserts of sand) would appear of a somewhat darker
color than the more elevated and mountainous regions, as we find to be
the case on the surface of the moon. The islands would appear like
small bright specks on the darker surface of the ocean; and the lakes
and mediterranean seas like darker spots or broad streaks intersecting
the bright parts, or the land. By its revolution round its axis,
successive portions of the surface would be brought into view, and
present a different aspect from the parts which preceded,'--(Dick's
Celestial Scenery, 135.)

The form of the earth, and probably that of every other planet, is not
