their usual policy to have shot us on sight. It must be that they want
some sort of information from us."

Neither of his companions had a better reason to offer and conversation
languished. For an hour they sat almost without speech. A sound at the
door brought them to their feet. It opened and a Russian girl pushed in
a cart laden with food. She made no reply to the remarks which Dr. Bird
addressed to her but quickly and silently put their food on the table.
When she had completed her task, she left the room without having spoken
a word.

"Beautiful, but dumb," Dr. Bird remarked. "Let's eat."

"Do you suppose that it's safe to eat this food, Doctor?" asked Carnes
in a whisper.

"I don't know, and I don't care. If we've got to go out, we might as
well be poisoned as shot. If we refuse food, they can poison us through
our water. We couldn't refuse that for any length of time. I'm hungry
and I'm going to make a good meal. What's this stuff, _bortsch_?"

       *       *       *       *       *

They soon received proof that they were under observation. Hardly had
they pushed back their chairs at the completion of the meal than the
door opened and the Russian girl who had brought their food removed the
empty dishes. Silence settled down over the cell. For another hour they
waited before the door opened again. A tall bearded Russian entered with
a younger man at his heels. The bearded man dropped into a chair while
his companion sat at the table and opened a notebook.

"Stand up!" barked the Russian sternly.

Carnes and McCready rose to their feet but Dr. Bird remained stretched
out on a bed.

"What for?" he demanded languidly.

The Russian bristled with rage.

"When I speak to you, you shall obey," he said in curiously clipped
English, "else it will be the worse for you. Would you rather be
questioned while in the _strelska_ than while standing?"

"Not by a long shot," replied Dr. Bird promptly as he rose to his feet.
"Fire away, old fellow. I'll talk."

"What are your names?"

"I am Addison Sims of Seattle," replied Dr. Bird gravely, "and my
friends are Mr. Earle Liedermann and Mr. Bernarr Macfadden. You may have
read of us in the American magazines."

"Their names," said the Russian to his clerk, "are Dr. Bird, of the
Bureau of Standards; Operative Carnes, of the United States Secret
Service; and Lieutenant McCready, of the United States Navy. Dr. Bird,
you will save yourself trouble if you will answer my future questions
truthfully."

"Then ask questions to which I am not sure that you know the answer,"
replied the doctor dryly.

"What vessel brought you here?"

"The _Denver_."

"What is her armament?"

"Consult the Navy list. You will doubtless find a copy in your files. It
may be purchased from the Superintendent of Public Documents at
Washington."

       *       *       *       *       *

"What is your errand here?"

"To consult with Ivan Saranoff and learn his future plans. If he means
merely to bestow on the northern hemisphere additional sunshine and
warmth, it is possible that the United States will not oppose him. We
would benefit equally with Russia, you know. Possibly the northern
countries could form some sort of an alliance against the southern
hemisphere which is already threatening war."

"You chose a peculiar way of showing your peaceable intentions. You shot
down our plane without warning and you dropped bombs on us at first
sight."

"But they didn't explode."

"No, thanks to our ray operators. Dr. Bird, I have no time to waste.
Either you will answer my questions fully and truthfully or I will
resort to torture."

"You don't dare. You were merely bluffing when you mentioned the
_strelska_. If you tortured us, you would have to answer to Ivan
Saranoff on his return."

"How did you know that he is--" The Russian paused and bit his lip.
"Shall I tell him that you refuse to talk?"

"When he returns, you may tell him that I will be glad to talk frankly
with him. I came to Russia for that purpose, but I will not talk with
one of his underlings. In the meanwhile, we are having lovely weather
for this time of year, aren't we?"

With a muttered curse the Russian rose and left the room. Carnes turned
to Dr. Bird.

"How did you know that Saranoff was away?" he demanded.

"I didn't," replied Dr. Bird with a chuckle, "it was merely a shrewd
guess. We have twisted his tail so often that I figured he could not
resist the temptation to come here and gloat a few gloats over us if he
were here. I know his ruthless methods in dealing with his subordinates
and I knew that they would never dare to resort to torture in his
absence. No, old dear, we are safe until he returns. I hope he stays
away a long time."

       *       *       *       *       *

Four days passed monotonously. Three times a day the Russian girl
appeared with ample meals. Despite their attempts to engage her in
conversation, not a word would she reply or give any indication that she
either heard or understood their remarks. The bearded Russian appeared
daily and tried to question them, but Dr. Bird laughed at his threats
and reaffirmed his intention of talking to no one but Saranoff.

"Your chance will soon come," replied the Russian with an evil leer on
the fourth day. "He will be here the day after to-morrow. He will be
able to make you talk."

"If he's telling the truth, the jig's about up," said Dr. Bird when the
Russian had left. "I don't fancy that Saranoff will show us much mercy
when he finds out what we've attempted to do."

"How would it be to overpower our waitress and make a break?" asked
McCready in a guarded whisper.

"No good at all," replied the doctor decisively. "We wouldn't have a
Chinaman's chance. Our best bet is to talk turkey to Saranoff. He may
spare us if I can make him believe that I am willing to work for him.
What a man he is! If we could turn his genius into the right channels,
he would be a blessing to the world."

       *       *       *       *       *

He paused as the door swung open and the Russian girl appeared with
their food. She placed the cart against the wall and suddenly turned and
faced them.

"Dr. Bird," she said in excellent English, "I am Feodrovna Androvitch."

"I'm glad to know you," said Dr. Bird with a bow.

"Do you recognize my name?"

"I'm very sorry, my dear, but it simply doesn't register."

"Do you remember Stefan Androvitch?"

A sudden light came into Dr. Bird's face.

"Yes," he exclaimed, "I do. He used to work for me in the Bureau some
time ago. I had to let him go under peculiar circumstances. Is he
related to you?"

"He was my twin brother. The peculiar circumstances you refer to were
that you caught him stealing platinum. Instead of turning him over to
the police, you asked him why he stole. He told you his wife was dying
