
What could that be, he asked himself. Through clearing eyes, Anders
looked at the formality he had called his world.

He wondered momentarily if he would have come to this if the voice
hadn't guided him. Yes, he decided after a few moments, it was
inevitable.

But who was the voice? And what had he left out?

"Let's see what a party looks like now," he said to the voice.

       *       *       *       *       *

The party was a masquerade; the guests were all wearing their faces. To
Anders, their motives, individually and collectively, were painfully
apparent. Then his vision began to clear further.

He saw that the people weren't truly individual. They were discontinuous
lumps of flesh sharing a common vocabulary, yet not even truly
discontinuous.

The lumps of flesh were a part of the decoration of the room and almost
indistinguishable from it. They were one with the lights, which lent
their tiny vision. They were joined to the sounds they made, a few
feeble tones out of the great possibility of sound. They blended into
the walls.

The kaleidoscopic view came so fast that Anders had trouble sorting his
new impressions. He knew now that these people existed only as patterns,
on the same basis as the sounds they made and the things they thought
they saw.

_Gestalts_, sifted out of the vast, unbearable real world.

"Where's Judy?" a discontinuous lump of flesh asked him. This particular
lump possessed enough nervous mannerisms to convince the other lumps of
his reality. He wore a loud tie as further evidence.

"She's sick," Anders said. The flesh quivered into an instant sympathy.
Lines of formal mirth shifted to formal woe.

"Hope it isn't anything serious," the vocal flesh remarked.

"You're warmer," the voice said to Anders.

Anders looked at the object in front of him.

"She hasn't long to live," he stated.

The flesh quivered. Stomach and intestines contracted in sympathetic
fear. Eyes distended, mouth quivered.

The loud tie remained the same.

"My God! You don't mean it!"

"What are you?" Anders asked quietly.

"What do you mean?" the indignant flesh attached to the tie demanded.
Serene within its reality, it gaped at Anders. Its mouth twitched,
undeniable proof that it was real and sufficient. "You're drunk," it
sneered.

Anders laughed and left the party.

       *       *       *       *       *

"There is still something you don't know," the voice said. "But you were
hot! I could feel you near me."

"What are you?" Anders asked again.

"I don't know," the voice admitted. "I am a person. I am I. I am
trapped."

"So are we all," Anders said. He walked on asphalt, surrounded by heaps
of concrete, silicates, aluminum and iron alloys. Shapeless, meaningless
heaps that made up the _gestalt_ city.

And then there were the imaginary lines of demarcation dividing city
from city, the artificial boundaries of water and land.

All ridiculous.

"Give me a dime for some coffee, mister?" something asked, a thing
indistinguishable from any other thing.

"Old Bishop Berkeley would give a nonexistent dime to your nonexistent
presence," Anders said gaily.

