"You have a Drinko?" the operator asked cautiously. "There must be some
mistake. You are calling from Earth? From 1954? I am sorry. Congress
ruled Earth 1954 could not be connected with the dimension-system. It
would be impossible for you to own a Drinko."

"Some crooks from 1964 stole my Drinko!" I insisted.

"One moment, please. The Supervisor informs me this is an unauthorized
call. It will be necessary to conduct a police investigation." There
were clickings, there were buzzings, there were groups of fuzzy, far-off
voices, and finally the police came in.

"A couple of crooks stole my baby's Drinko!" I repeated loudly. "I
demand my rights as a dimension-citizen!"

"Two thieves confiscated your Drinko," a dry voice said. "Very well.
Describe them, please. Describe characteristic phrases, expressions, and
voice-intonations also." I described them. "Very good. Did you say Earth
1954? Excellent. Only a matter of six dimensions and thirty years. We
shall investigate immediately." He hung up.

"Hi, Stella," said Mabel, up on one elbow and looking fuzzily at me.
"You think I'll get out of this in time to get Bill's dinner in the
oven? Bill's so darned touchy about dinner."

"Teach him a lesson, then," I snapped, disgusted with her, and running
to the door, because somebody was knocking there. "Train him. Disappoint
him. Break his pattern. Don't have dinner. Good evening, gentlemen," I
said as I opened the door. The police came in. They had Beany. They had
Jake.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were three police. The one in front, a young, nice-looking one,
touched his cap and smiled quietly. "Here's your Drinko, ma'am," he
said, but I already knew the Drinko was back. Harry, Jr., stopped
crying. He gurgled happily. Somehow, I was willing to bet, he could see
the Drinko. I put him on the floor and the policeman put the Drinko on
the floor. It was beautiful, those squeals that came from my baby. The
young policeman smiled again, a quiet, tanned smile.

"We want to thank you, ma'am. These two are the worst criminals in the
dimension-system. I want you to know you may have the Drinko as a reward
for your part in apprehending them. Also, I wish to say that I admire
you for your trippo in pretending to be a dimension-citizen, when, of
course, you are not."

"Trippo?"

"Spunk, if you prefer."

"Well, I had to get my baby's Drinko back," I said.

"Naturally," he smiled. "Drinkos make wonderful pets. The day may come
when Earth 1954 will be connected with dimension-system--and then more
Drinkos will be available."

"Can't we," I asked, "just stay alone in our quiet nook of space?"

"My thought, too," said Mabel, getting to her feet at last and throwing
her hair back. "And is there any chance of getting out of here? It's
exciting, thrilling, and romantic, but Bill still has to eat."

"Immediately, Madam! It is merely a matter of disengaging the
chrono-beam, which happened to become tangled, in space-time, with the
gravitonic structure of the neutronic chrono-field."

"Well!" said Mabel. "That explains it! And so clearly!"

They set up an instrument that looked like the one Jake and Beany had.
They sighted along the diagonals of the room and pressed buttons. Then
they opened the door. "In two minutes, ma'am," the smiling cop said.
"Good day. It is my hope that we shall meet again." They disappeared out
the door. Sure enough, there was a cake-pan ship hanging in the grey
steam. They piled into it and the ship moved off, wobbling, until I
couldn't see it any more.

A minute later, the grey steam melted away and so did Mabel.

