George cut off its engine.

Over Good Fox's shoulder hung a small clay water jug hung in a plaited
yucca net. George asked for a drink from it and when he tasted it and
found it fresh it was wondrous to him that its water was hundreds of
years old. He brought out a thermos, showing the Indians the modern
version of carrying water. They tasted of its contents and exclaimed at
its coolness. Good Fox held the thermos, admiring it.

"Would you like to have it?" asked George.

"You would give it to me?" the handsome young Indian asked.

"It's yours."

"Then I give you mine." He gave George his clay water jug and could not
know how much more valuable it was than the thermos.

George then took them to the portable television set and turned it on.
When faces, music, and words appeared the Indians jerked back, then
jabbered and gathered closer to watch. A girl singer, clad in a gown
that came up to her neck, caused Moon Water to inquire, "Why does she
hide herself? Is she ashamed?"

The standards of modesty, George reflected as he glanced at the lovely
nude form of the prehistoric Indian girl, change with the ages.

Of the people and noises on the TV screen Good Fox wanted to know quite
solemnly, "Are these crazy people? Is it the way you treat your people
who go crazy?"

George laughed. "You might say it's something like that."

A shout came from Sidney at the card table near the tent where he was
taking down Huk's story. "George! He's just told me why the cliff people
left! And why the desert people will have to leave in time. It's a
reason we never thought of! It's because--"

Just then a big multi-engined plane came over, drowning out his words.
The Indians stared skyward, now in great alarm. They looked about for a
place to run and hide, but there was none. They held their hands over
their ears and glanced fearfully at the TV which now spluttered, its
picture and sound thrown off by the plane. Awesomely, they waited until
the plane went over.

"We fly now in machines with wings," George explained.

"To make such a noise in the air," Moon Water said, "is wicked,
destroying all peace."

"I'll agree with you there," said George.

"You have this," Good Fox observed, indicating the TV, which was now
back to normal, "and you send the other through the sky to make it
crazier than before." He shook his head, not comprehending.

George shut off the TV. He took up a camera of the kind that
automatically finishes a picture in a minute's time. Grouping Good Fox,
Moon Water and the other warriors, he took their picture, waited, then
pulled it out and showed it to them.

They cried out, one man shouting in fear, "It is great magic!"

George took a number of photographs, including several of Huk as he sat
talking with Sidney. No matter what happened he would have this record
as Sidney would have that he was taking down on the typewriter.

Next he showed them a pair of binoculars, teaching them how to look
through them. They exclaimed and Good Fox said, "With this we could see
our enemies before they see us."

"You have enemies?" George asked.

"The Apache," Good Fox said fiercely.

George handed him the binoculars. "It is yours to use against the
Apache."

Solemnly the young chief answered, "The man with white skin is thanked.
The red man gives in return his atlatl and lances." He held out his
throwing stick and unslung his quiver of lances. George accepted them
with thanks; they would be museum pieces.

Finally George showed them a rifle. He looked about for game and after
some searching saw a rabbit sitting on a mound in the excavations. As
he took aim Good Fox asked, "You would hunt it with your stick?"

George nodded.

"This cannot be done from here," stated one warrior.

George squeezed the trigger. Instantaneously with the explosion of the
shell the rabbit jumped high and then came down, limp and dead. The
Indians yelled with fright and ran off in all directions. Huk jumped up
from the table. Then all stopped and cautiously returned. One went to
the rabbit and picked it up, bringing it back. All, including Huk who
left the table, stared with fright at it and at the rifle.

Moon Water expressed their opinion of it. "The thunder of the killing
stick is evil."

"Moon Water speaks the truth," said Huk.

