He had gone out of the air lock mainly on a puff of air, with some
fumbling help from Peters. That had been enough to send him out of
sight of the ship--in space, not necessarily very far--and now he was
back, after two hours.

_A long, flat orbit in relation to the ship_, he told himself,
remembering in time to avoid speaking aloud that Braigh might be at
the ship's radio, _but actually weaving back and forth across the
rocket's course, just nipping it at this end_.

He edged a hand inside the suit again and turned off his radio. If he
found an answer, it would be fatal to be overheard mumbling about it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ship now seemed to be rushing at him, and Tremont deduced that his
orbital speed had increased as he approached the focus represented by
the _Annabel_. He would doubtless pass near the air lock at about his
expulsion speed.

"Here's the chance!" he exulted. "A little air let out to slow down ... or
even just to veer close enough to lay hands on something! You launched me,
Peters, but you didn't lose me."

Getting through the airlock should be easy enough. He might be well up
the shaft before the others emerged from the control room. In fact,
unless Peters were on watch, the air lock operating signal might flash
unnoticed on the board.

"And I'll be cracking skulls before they know what's up!" he growled.

It struck him with a flash of ironic amusement that he had not felt
half so much hate when believing himself doomed. After two hours of
sweating out his helplessness, he had discovered a lively resentment
of the vicious callousness with which he had been jettisoned.

He was only about twenty-five yards away now, seemingly circling the
ship. Peering closer, he saw that actually he was sweeping in toward
it.

_Now, be ready with the air tank valve, just in case!_ he warned
himself.

The great fins loomed to his right; the hull blotted most of the sky
from his view. It looked as if he would curve down to a spot beside
the same air lock from which he had been expelled. It seemed to be
still open.

Then he saw the shape of a helmet rise around the curve of the ship.
Someone was out on the hull.

Tremont switched on his radio and listened.

The spacesuited figure climbed completely into view. There appeared to
be a line running from the belt into the air lock, and the figure
carried a long pole of some sort.

"Oh, there you are, Tremont!" came Braigh's voice over the receiver.
"I've been waiting for you."

The chuckle that followed made Tremont curse, which in turn provoked a
hearty laugh from the other.

"You didn't think I'd forget you?" asked Braigh. "We figured out what
happened as soon as we heard you putting out those distress calls.
After that, it was just a matter of timing. Have you had an amusing
trip?"

"Have you found out you can't make anything of those papers yet?"
countered Tremont.

"Oh, the coding? It might take a little time, but we have plenty ...
now, now, Tremont! That kind of abusive language will get you
nowhere."

Tremont had drifted to a point above the other's head, almost within
reach. He was kicking out in little motions that betrayed his
eagerness to come to grips with Braigh or _something_ solid.

"Why, Tremont! I do believe that you thought I came out to bargain
with you," chuckled the blond man. "Not at all! I told you that you'd
be no trouble. I just came out to finish the job Peters bungled."

Tremont saw the pole jabbing upward at his stomach. Instinctively, he
grabbed at the end. Braigh was not disturbed.

"Take it with you, then!" he laughed, letting go his end with a
powerful push. "Let me know if you're alive the next time you come
around, so I can come out again."

Tremont began to swear at him, then got a grip on himself long enough
to snap his radio off.

He had begun pulling himself down the pole when Braigh had shoved.
That sapped some of the force, but it was still enough to send him
spinning out into the void once more.

The ship receded slowly. He saw Braigh return to the air lock and
enter. A moment later, that light was cut off, and Tremont began to
back off into space as he had the first time.

_They know all about it_, he realized. _They could leave me any time
just by burning a little fuel. Peters wouldn't care about wasting
it--I paid for it. Maybe he's just too lazy to calculate the course
correction._

If so, he decided, the pilot was right. Tremont might drift back, but
