give them a good holiday.

The tall weed swayed gently against her and several small fish darted
past in fright. As the first heavy beat of the water struck against her
slim body, she looked up. Frozen with horror, she released her
container, but in forty feet of water, the monster caught her before
she had moved a hundred yards.

As it fed, horribly, other grim shapes, attracted by the blood moved in
from the distant murk of deeper water.


Savathake-er rode his one-man torpedo alertly as he probed the southern
bay of Ramasarett. He was a scientist-12 and also a hereditary hunter.
If the giant fish, long since eliminated from the rest of the seas,
were breeding in some secret area of the far and desolate southern
rocks, it was his business to know it. No fish could catch his
high-powered torpedo, while his electric spears packed a lethal jolt.
Probably, he thought, a rumor of the poor fisher folk who worked the
southern fringe areas. What else could you expect from such types, who
had never even learned to read in a thousand cycles. Nevertheless, as
he patrolled the sunken rocks, he was alert, scanning the water on all
sides constantly for the great shape he sought, his skin alert for the
first strange vibration. By neglecting the broken bottom, brown with
laminaria and kelp, he missed the great, mottled tentacle which plucked
him off his torpedo in a flash of movement, leaving the riderless craft
to cruise aimlessly away into the distance.


"Your highness," said the Supervisor Supreme, "we are helpless. We have
never used metal nets, because we have never had to. Our fiber nets
they slash to ribbons. They attack every species of food-fish from the
Ursaa to the Krad. The breeding rate is fantastic, and now my equal who
controls the mines says they are attacking the miners despite all the
protection he can give them. They are not large, but in millions----"

"Cease your outcries," said the First in Council, wearily, "and remove
that animal from my writing desk. I have seen many pictures of it since
they first appeared five cycles ago. It still looks alien and
repulsive."

They stared in silence at the shape that any high-school biology
student of distant Terra could have identified in his sleep.

At length, the First in Council dismissed the Supervisor of Fisheries
and headed thoughtfully for an inner room of his palace. He knew at
last the meaning of the strange metal communicating devices, discovered
and confiscated, after the star ship had departed, six cycles before.
It was a simple machine to operate, and he guessed food could be sent
incredibly quickly to his starving planet. Just as quickly as other
things, he thought grimly. And we have to beg. Hah. Admission to the
great peace-loving Combine, may the crabs devour them.

But he knew that he would send and that they would come.


"I was comparing the two reports, my friend," said Mazechazz, "but I am
not so familiar with your planetary ecology as I should be. When
Mureess applied for admission to the Combine, I requested a copy of
their secret directive from Biology, but I had never seen the older
report until you gave it to me just now. Can you explain the names to
me, if I read them off?"

"Go ahead," said Powers, sipping his sherbet noisily. He seldom
wondered what alcohol would feel like any longer. Most Old Believers
had tried it when young and disliked it.

"I've already looked up the names I didn't know," he said, "so start
the Mureessan list first."

"Great White Shark, or Man-eater," read Mazechazz. "He sounds obvious
and nasty."

"He is," said Powers. He put down his glass. "Remember, as usual, the
birth rate has been at least tripled. An increased metabolism means
increased food consumption, and no shark on Terra was ever full. This
brute runs forty feet when allowed, in size, that is. A giant
carnivorous fish, very tough."

"Number two is Architeuthis, or Giant Squid," continued the Lyran. "Is
that a fish? Sorry, but on my world, well, fish are curiosities."

"It's an eyed, carnivorous mollusk with enormous arms, ten of them and
