understand the tongue, but no other words so join the voice of the
_gamelan_."

       *       *       *       *       *

"This is the gravy-train," said Murphy. "Instead of a garden suite with
a private pool, I usually sleep in a bubble-tent, with nothing to eat
but condensed food."

Soek Panjoebang flung the water out of her sleek black hair. "Perhaps,
Weelbrrr, you will regret leaving Cirgamesc?"

"Well," he looked up to the transparent roof, barely visible where the
sunlight collected and refracted, "I don't particularly like being shut
up like a bird in an aviary.... Mildly claustrophobic, I guess."

After breakfast, drinking thick coffee from tiny silver cups, Murphy
looked long and reflectively at Soek Panjoebang.

"What are you thinking, Weelbrrr?"

Murphy drained his coffee. "I'm thinking that I'd better be getting to
work."

"And what do you do?"

"First I'm going to shoot the palace, and you sitting here in the garden
playing your _gamelan_."

"But Weelbrrr--not _me_!"

"You're a part of the universe, rather an interesting part. Then I'll
take the square...."

"And the sjambak?"

A quiet voice spoke from behind. "A visitor, Tuan Murphy."

Murphy turned his head. "Bring him in." He looked back to Soek
Panjoebang. She was on her feet.

"It is necessary that I go."

"When will I see you?"

"Tonight--at the Barangipan."

       *       *       *       *       *

The quiet voice said, "Mr. Rube Trimmer, Tuan."

Trimmer was small and middle-aged, with thin shoulders and a paunch. He
carried himself with a hell-raising swagger, left over from a time
twenty years gone. His skin had the waxy look of lost floridity, his
tuft of white hair was coarse and thin, his eyelids hung in the off-side
droop that amateur physiognomists like to associate with guile.

"I'm Resident Director of the Import-Export Bank," said Trimmer. "Heard
you were here and thought I'd pay my respects."

"I suppose you don't see many strangers."

"Not too many--there's nothing much to bring 'em. Cirgamesc isn't a
comfortable tourist planet. Too confined, shut in. A man with a
sensitive psyche goes nuts pretty easy here."

"Yeah," said Murphy. "I was thinking the same thing this morning. That
dome begins to give a man the willies. How do the natives stand it? Or
do they?"

Trimmer pulled out a cigar case. Murphy refused the offer.

"Local tobacco," said Trimmer. "Very good." He lit up thoughtfully.
"Well, you might say that the Cirgameski are schizophrenic. They've got
the docile Javanese blood, plus the Arabian elan. The Javanese part is
on top, but every once in a while you see a flash of arrogance.... You
never know. I've been out here nine years and I'm still a stranger." He
puffed on his cigar, studied Murphy with his careful eyes. "You work for
_Know Your Universe!_, I hear."

"Yeah. I'm one of the leg men."

"Must be a great job."

"A man sees a lot of the galaxy, and he runs into queer tales, like this
sjambak stuff."

Trimmer nodded without surprise. "My advice to you, Murphy, is lay off
the sjambaks. They're not healthy around here."

Murphy was startled by the bluntness. "What's the big mystery about
these sjambaks?"

Trimmer looked around the room. "This place is bugged."

"I found two pick-ups and plugged 'em," said Murphy.

Trimmer laughed. "Those were just plants. They hide 'em where a man
might just barely spot 'em. You can't catch the real ones. They're woven
into the cloth--pressure-sensitive wires."

Murphy looked critically at the cloth walls.

"Don't let it worry you," said Trimmer. "They listen more out of habit
than anything else. If you're fussy we'll go for a walk."

The road led past the palace into the country. Murphy and Trimmer
sauntered along a placid river, overgrown with lily pads, swarming with
large white ducks.

"This sjambak business," said Murphy. "Everybody talks around it. You
can't pin anybody down."

"Including me," said Trimmer. "I'm more or less privileged around here.
The Sultan finances his reclamation through the bank, on the basis of my
reports. But there's more to Singhalut than the Sultan."

"Namely?"

Trimmer waved his cigar waggishly. "Now we're getting in where I don't
like to talk. I'll give you a hint. Prince Ali thinks roofing-in more
valleys is a waste of money, when there's Hadra and New Batavia and
Sundaman so close."

"You mean--armed conquest?"

Trimmer laughed. "You said it, not me."

"They can't carry on much of a war--unless the soldiers commute by
monorail."

"Maybe Prince Ali thinks he's got the answer."

"Sjambaks?"

"I didn't say it," said Trimmer blandly.

Murphy grinned. After a moment he said. "I picked up with a girl named
Soek Panjoebang who plays the _gamelan_. I suppose she's working for
either the Sultan or Prince Ali. Do you know which?"

Trimmer's eyes sparkled. He shook his head. "Might be either one.
There's a way to find out."

"Yeah?"

"Get her off where you're sure there's no spy-cells. Tell her two
things--one for Ali, the other for the Sultan. Whichever one reacts you
know you've got her tagged."

"For instance?"

"Well, for instance she learns that you can rig up a hypnotic ray from a
flashlight battery, a piece of bamboo, and a few lengths of wire.
That'll get Ali in an awful sweat. He can't get weapons. None at all.
And for the Sultan," Trimmer was warming up to his intrigue, chewing on
his cigar with gusto, "tell her you're on to a catalyst that turns clay
into aluminum and oxygen in the presence of sunlight. The Sultan would
sell his right leg for something like that. He tries hard for Singhalut
and Cirgamesc."

"And Ali?"

Trimmer hesitated. "I never said what I'm gonna say. Don't forget--I
never said it."

"Okay, you never said it."

"Ever hear of a _jehad_?"

"Mohammedan holy wars."

"Believe it or not, Ali wants a _jehad_."

"Sounds kinda fantastic."

"Sure it's fantastic. Don't forget, I never said anything about it. But
suppose someone--strictly unofficial, of course--let the idea percolate
around the Peace Office back home."

"Ah," said Murphy. "That's why you came to see me."

       *       *       *       *       *

Trimmer turned a look of injured innocence. "Now, Murphy, you're a
little unfair. I'm a friendly guy. Of course I don't like to see the
bank lose what we've got tied up in the Sultan."

"Why don't you send in a report yourself?"

"I have! But when they hear the same thing from you, a _Know Your
Universe!_ man, they might make a move."

Murphy nodded.
