still strapped to the machine; a logical race makes use of a traitor,
but a logical race does not trust him.

"Sometimes," Korvin said.

"It has other names?" the Ruler said.

"It has no name," Korvin said truthfully. The Tr'en idiom was like the
Earthly one; and certainly a planet had no name. People attached names
to it, that was all. It had none of its own.

"Yet you call it Earth?" the Ruler said.

"I do," Korvin said, "for convenience."

"Do you know its location?" the Ruler said.

"Not with exactitude," Korvin said.

There was a stir. "But you can find it again," the Ruler said.

"I can," Korvin said.

"And you will tell us about it?" the Ruler went on.

"I will," Korvin said, "so far as I am able."

"We will wish to know about weapons," the Ruler said, "and about plans
and fortifications. But we must first know of the manner of decision
on this planet. Is your planet joined with others in a government or
does it exist alone?"

Korvin nearly smiled. "Both," he said.

A short silence was broken by one of the attendant experts. "We have
theorized that an underling may be permitted to make some of his own
decisions, leaving only the more extensive ones for the master. This
seems to us inefficient and liable to error, yet it is a possible
system. Is it the system you mean?"

Very sharp, Korvin told himself grimly. "It is," he said.

"Then the government which reigns over several planets is supreme,"
the Ruler said.

"It is," Korvin said.

"Who is it that governs?" the Ruler said.

The key question had, at last, been asked. Korvin felt grateful that
the logical Tr'en had determined to begin from the beginning, instead
of going off after details of armament first; it saved a lot of time.

"The answer to that question," Korvin said, "cannot be given to you."

"Any question of fact has an answer," the Ruler snapped. "A paradox is
not involved here; a government exists, and some being is the
governor. Perhaps several beings share this task; perhaps machines do
the work. But where there is a government, there is a governor. Is
this agreed?"

"Certainly," Korvin said. "It is completely obvious and true."

"The planet from which you come is part of a system of planets which
are governed, you have said," the Ruler went on.

"True," Korvin said.

"Then there is a governor for this system," the Ruler said.

"True," Korvin said again.

The ruler sighed gently. "Explain this governor to us," he said.

Korvin shrugged. "The explanation cannot be given to you."

The Ruler turned to a group of his experts and a short muttered
conversation took place. At its end the Ruler turned his gaze back to
Korvin. "Is the deficiency in you?" he said. "Are you in some way
unable to describe this government?"

"It can be described," Korvin said.

"Then you will suffer unpleasant consequences if you describe it to
us?" the Ruler went on.

"I will not," Korvin said.

It was the signal for another conference. With some satisfaction,
Korvin noticed that the Tr'en were becoming slightly puzzled; they
were no longer moving and speaking with calm assurance.

The plan was taking hold.

The Ruler had finished his conference. "You are attempting again to
confuse us," he said.

Korvin shook his head earnestly. "I am attempting," he said, "not to
confuse you."

"Then I ask for an answer," the Ruler said.

"I request that I be allowed to ask a question," Korvin said.

The Ruler hesitated, then nodded. "Ask it," he said. "We shall answer
