
"Next morning, I t'ink he no show up. But no, I am mistaken. Bromptly at
nine o'clock he come to my inn with a little dogcart, wit' de animals.
He puts dem on de stage in de bar of de inn. They act like before."

"But they didn't talk, of course?"

"Oh, my vriend, dat's where you are wrong. Dey talk like nobotty's
business. De jokes are funnier than ever. Even dirtier, maybe. But
Dworken is not fooled. He t'ink. 'Aha!' I say to de Martian, 'You fake
this, what? De animals not talk. Suppose you have them do de act while
you outside stay, what?' Then I t'ink I have him.

"Ze Martian tear his curly hair, flash his black eyes. He takes insult
that I t'ink he is fake. 'Name of de Martian gods!' he cry. But at last
he agree to go away, and tell animals to go ahead."

"Dworken, you were a sap to string along with him even that far," I said
wearily. "I hope you hadn't paid the guy any money."

He shook his head. "No, my old and best," he said. "Dworken no fool is,
even on Mars. No, no money. But wait! De animals go on without the
owner. Same stage business, same talk, same jokes, and even funnier
yedt. What?"

I started at Dworken. He did not smile, but finished off the eleventh
_shchikh_--the fifth I had bought him.

"Listen," I said. "Are you sitting there telling me you have a _tllooll_
and a _shiyooch'iid_ that can really talk?"

"You listen, my vriend. Like you, I t'ink something is wrong. I say to
Martian owner, 'My vriend, maybe I buy your act, if you tell me how it
is done. But you know as well as I do dat it is impossible to dese
animals to talk. Tell me what is de trick?'"

Dworken lifted his glass and shook it, as though he could not believe it
was empty, then looked at me questioningly. I shook my head. He snorted,
looked melancholy, writhed up from his chair and reached for his fur
cape.

"Vell, thanks for de drinks," he said.

A dark suspicion crept into my mind, but I could not restrain myself.

"Wait, Dworken!" I shouted. "You can't just leave me up in the air like
that! What happened then?"

Dworken snorted into his green handkerchief.

"De Martian admitted it was a fake, after all," he said mournfully. "Can
you imachine it? What a chiseler!

"'De _shiyooch'iid_,' he said, 'can't really talk; de _tllooll_ just
t'rows his voice!'"


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_ November
    1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.



