There was nothing more to be discussed about New Delos, they simply would
have to wait until their arrival. Ronny switched subjects. "Ever hear of
the planet Shangri-La?" he asked her. He took a sip of his brew.

"Of course," she said. "A rather small planet, Earth type within four
degrees. Noted for its near perfect climate and its scenic beauty."

"Captain was talking about it," Ronny said. "Sounds like a regular
paradise."

Tog made a negative sound.

"Well, what's wrong with Shangri-La?" Ronny said impatiently.

"Static," she said briefly.

He looked at her. "It sounds to me as though it's developed a near perfect
socio-economic system. What do you mean, static?"

"No push, no drive," Tog said definitely. "Everyone--what is the old
term?--everyone has it made. The place is stagnating. I wouldn't be
surprised to see Tommy Paine show up there sooner or later."

Ronny said, "Look, since we've known each other, have I ever said anything
you agree with?"

Tog raised her delicate eyebrows. "Why, Ronny. You know perfectly well we
both agreed that the eggs for breakfast were quite inedible."

Ronny came to his feet again. Considering her size, she certainly was an
irritating baggage. "I think I'll go to my room and see if I can get any
inspirations on tracking down our quarry."

"Good night, Ronny," she said demurely.

                  -------------------------------------

They ran into a minor difficulty upon arrival at New Delos. The captain
called both Ronny Bronston and Tog Lee Chang Chu to the bridge.

He nodded in the direction of the communications screen. A bald headed,
robed character--obviously a priest--scowled at them.

Captain Woiski said, "The Sub-Bishop informs me that the provisional
government has ruled that any spacecraft landing on New Delos cannot take
off again without permission and that every individual who lands, even
United Planets personnel, will need an exit visa before being allowed to
depart."

Ronny said, "Then you can't land?"

The captain said reasonably, "My destination is Merlini. I've gone out of
my way slightly to drop you off here. But I can't afford to take the
chance of having my ship tied up for what might be an indefinite period.
Evidently, there's considerably civil disorder down there."

From the screen the priest snapped, "That is an inaccurate manner of
describing the situation."

"Sorry," the captain said dryly.

Ronny Bronston said desperately, "But, captain, Miss Tog and I simply have
to land." He reached for his badge. "High priority, Bureau of
Investigation."

The captain shrugged his hefty shoulders. "Sorry, I have no instructions
that allow me to risk tying up my ship. Here's a possibility. Can you
pilot a landing craft? I could spare you one, then you and your assistant
would be the only ones involved. You could turn it over to whatever Space
Forces base we have here."

Ronny said miserably, "No. I'm not a space pilot."

"I am," Tog said softly. "The idea sounds excellent."

"We shall expect you," the Sub-Bishop said. The screen went blank.

Tog Lee Chang Chu piloted a landing craft with the same verve that she
seemed to be able to handle any other responsibility. As he sat in the
seat next to her, Ronny Bronston took in her practiced flicking of the
controls from the side of his eyes. He wondered vaguely at the efficiency
of such Section G officials as Metaxa and Jakes that they would assign an
unknown quality such as himself to a task as important as running down
Tommy Paine, and then as an assistant provide him with an experienced
operative such as Tog. The bureaucratic mind can be a dilly, he decided.
Was the fact that she was a rather delicately constructed girl a factor?
He felt the weight of the Model-H gun nestled under his left armpit.
Perhaps in the clutch Section G preferred men as agents.

They swooped into a landing that brought them as close to the control
tower as was practical. In a matter of moments there was a guard of twenty
or more sloppily uniformed men about their small craft.

Tog made a move. "Welcoming committee," she said.

                             [Illustration.]

They climbed out the circular port, and flashed their United Planets
Bureau of Investigation badges to the youngish looking soldier who seemed
in command. He was indecisive.

"United Planets?" he said. "All I know is I'm supposed to arrest anybody
landing."

Ronny snapped, "We're to be taken immediately to United Planets
headquarters."

"Well, I don't know about that. I don't take orders from foreigners."

One of his men was nervously fingering the trigger of his submachine gun.

Ronny's mouth went dry. He had the feeling of being high, high on a rock
face, inadequately belayed from above.

Tog said smoothly, "But, major, I'm sure whoever issued your orders had no
expectation of a special delegation from the United Planets coming to
congratulate your new authorities on their success. Of course, it's
unknown to arrest a delegation from United Planets."

"It is?" he frowned at her. "I mean, you are?"

"Yes," Tog said sweetly.

Ronny took the hint. "Where can we find a vehicle, major, to get us to the
capital and to United Planets headquarters? Evidently we arrived before we
were expected. There should have been a big welcoming committee here."

"Oh," the obviously recently promoted lad said hesitantly. "Well, I
suppose we can make arrangements. This way please." He grinned at Tog as
they walked toward the administration building. "Do all girls dress like
you on Earth?"

"Well, no," she said demurely.

"That's too bad," he said gallantly.

"Why, major!" Tog said, keeping her eyes on the tarmac.

At the administration building there was little of order, but eventually
they managed to arrange for their transportation. Luckily, they were
supplied with a chauffeur driven helio-car.

Luckily, because without the chauffeur to help them run the gauntlet they
would have been held up by parades, demonstrations and monstrous street
meetings a dozen times before they ever reached their destination. Twice,
Ronny stopped short of drawing his gun only by a fraction when half
drunken demonstrators stopped them.

The driver, a wispy, sad looking type, shook his head. "There's no going
back now," he told them over his shoulder. "No going back. Last week I was
all with the rest, I never did believe David the One was really Immortal.
But you was just used to the idea, see? It'd always been that way, with
the priests running everything and we was used to it. Now I wish we was
still that way. At least you knew how you stood, see? Now, what's going to
happen?"

"That's an interesting question," Tog said politely.

Ronny said, "Possibly you'll have the chance to build a better world,
now."

The driver shot a contemptuous look over his shoulder. "Better world? What
do I want with a better world? I just don't want to be bothered. I've been
getting my three squares a day, got a nice little flat for my family. How
do I know it's not going to be a worse world?"

"That's always a possibility," Tog told him. "Do most people seem to feel
the same?"

"Practically everybody I know does," he said glumly. "But the fat's in the
fire now. The priests are trying to hold on but their government is
falling apart all over the place."

"Well," Ronny said, "at least you can figure just about anything in the
way of a new government will be better than one based on superstition and
inquisition. It couldn't get worse."

"Things can always get worse," the other contradicted him sadly.

                  -------------------------------------

They left the cab before an impressively tall, many windowed building in
city center. As they mounted the steps, Ronny frowned at her. "You seemed
to be encouraging that man in his pessimism. So far as I can see, the best
thing that ever happened to this planet was toppling that phony
priesthood."

"Perhaps," she said agreeably. "However, the man's mind was an ossified
one. A surprisingly large percentage of people have them, especially when
it comes to institutions such as religion and government. We weren't going
to be able to teach him anything, but it was possible to learn from him."

Ronny grunted his disgust. "What could we possibly learn from him?"

Tog said mildly, "We could learn what people of the street were thinking.
It might give us some ideas about what direction the new government will
take."

They approached the portals of the building and were halted by an armed
Space Forces guard of half a dozen men. Their sergeant saluted, taking in
their obvious other-planet clothing.

"Identifications, please," he said briskly.

They showed their badges and were passed on through. Ronny said to him,
"Much trouble, sergeant?"

The other shrugged. "No. Just precautions, sir. We've been here only three
or four weeks. Civil disturbance. We're used to it. Were over on Montezuma
two basic months ago. Now there was _real_ trouble. Had to shoot our way
out."

Tog called, "Coming Ronny? I have this elevator waiting."

He followed her, scowling. An idea was trying to work its way through.
Somehow he missed getting it.

Headquarters of the Department of Justice were on the eighth floor. A
receptionist clerk led them through three or four doors to the single
office which housed Section G.

A red eyed, exhausted agent looked up from the sole desk and snarled a
question at them. Ronny didn't get it, but Tog said mildly, "Probationary
Agent Ronald Bronston and Tog Lee Chang Chu. On special assignment." She
flicked open her badge so that the other could see it.

His manner changed. "Sorry," he said, getting up to shake hands. "I'm
Mouley Hassan, in charge of Section G on New Delos. We've just had a
crisis here, as you can imagine. The worst of it's now over." He added
sourly, "I hope. All my assistants have already taken off for Avalon." He
was a short statured, dark complected man, his features betraying his
Semitic background.

Ronny shook hands with him and said, "Sorry to bother you at a time like
this."

They found chairs and Mouley Hassan flicked a key on his order box and
said to them, "How about a drink? They make a wonderful sparkling wine on
this planet. Trust any theocracy to have top potables."

Ronny accepted the offer, Tog refused it politely. She sat demurely, her
hands in her lap.

Mouley Hassan ran a weary hand through already mussed hair. "What's this
special assignment you're on?"

Ronny said, "Commissioner Metaxa has sent me looking for Tommy Paine."

"Tommy Paine!" the other blurted. "At a time like this, when I haven't had
three nights' sleep in the last three basic weeks, you come around looking
for Tommy Paine?"

Ronny was taken aback. "Sid Jakes seemed to think this might be one of
Paine's jobs."

Tog said mildly, "What better place to look for Tommy Paine, than in a
situation like this, Agent Hassan?" Her eyebrows went up. "Or don't you
think the quest for Paine is an important one?"

The other subsided somewhat. "I suppose you're right," he said. "I'm
deathly tired. Do whatever you want. But don't expect much from me."

Tog said, just a trifle tartly, Ronny thought, "We'll have to call on you,
as usual, Agent Hassan. There's probably no single job in Section G more
important than the pursuit of Tommy Paine."

"All right, all right," Mouley Hassan admitted. "I'll co-operate. How long
have you been away from Earth?" he said to Ronny.

"About one basic week."

"Oh," he grunted. "This is your first stop, eh? Well, I don't envy you
your job." He brought a cool bottle from a delivery drawer in the desk
along with two glasses. "Here's the wine."

Ronny leaned forward to accept the glass. "This situation here," he said,
"do you think it can be laid to Paine?"

Mouley Hassan shrugged wearily. "I don't know."

Ronny sipped the drink, looking at the tired agent over the glass rim.
"From what we understand, check has been kept on all persons leaving the
planet since the bombing."

"Check is right. There's only one ship that took off and it carried nobody
except my assistants. If you ask me, I still needed them, but some brass
hat back on Earth decided they were more necessary over on Avalon." He was
disgusted.

Ronny put the glass down. "You mean only one ship's left this planet since
the God-King was killed?"

"That's right. It was like pulling teeth to get the visas."

"How many men aboard?"

Mouley Hassan looked at him speculatively. "Four-man crew and six Section
G operatives."

Tog said brightly, "Why, that means, then, that either Tommy Paine is
still on this planet, or he's one of the passengers or crew members of
that ship." She added, "That is, of course, unless he had a private craft,
hidden away somewhere."

Ronny slumped back into his chair as some of the ramifications came home
to him. "If it was Tommy Paine at all," he said.

Mouley Hassan nodded. "That's always a point." He finished his glass and
looked pleadingly at Tog. "Look, I have work. If I can finish some of it,
I might have time for some sleep. Couldn't we postpone the search for
Tommy Paine."

Tog said nothing to him.

Ronny came to his feet. "We'll get along. A couple of ideas occur to me.
I'll check with you later."

"Fine," the agent said. He shook hands with them again. He said, somehow
more to Tog than to Ronny, "I know how important your job is. It's just
that I've been pushed to the point where I can't operate efficiently."

She smiled her understanding, gave him her small, delicate hand.

In the elevator, Ronny said to her, "Why should this sort of thing
particularly affect Section G?"

Tog said, "It's times like this that planets drop out of the UP. Or,
possibly, get into the hands of some jingoistic military group and start
off halfcocked to provoke a war with some other planet, or to missionarize
or propagandize it." She thought about it a moment. "A new revolution, in
government or religion, seems almost invariably to want to spread the
light. An absolute compulsion to bring to others the new truths that
they've found." She added, her voice holding a trace of mockery, "Usually
the new truths are rather hoary ones, and there are few interested in
hearing them."

                  -------------------------------------

They spent their first day in getting accommodations in a centrally
located hotel, in making arrangements, through the Department of Justice,
for the local means of exchange--it turned out to be coinage, based on
gold--and getting the feel of their surroundings.

Evidently Delos, the capital city of the planet New Delos, was but slowly
emerging from the chaos that had taken over on the assassination. A
provisional government, composed of representatives of half a dozen
different organizations which had sprung up like mushrooms following the
collapse of the regime, had assumed power. Elections had been promised and
were to be brought off when arrangements could be made.

Meanwhile, the actual government was still largely in the hands of the
lower echelons of the priesthood. A nervous priesthood it was, seemingly
desirous of getting out from under while the going was good, afraid of
being held responsible for former excesses.

Ronny Bronston, high hopes still in his head, looked up the Sub-Bishop who
had given them landing orders while they were still aboard the Space
Forces cruiser. Tog was off making arrangements for various details
involved in their being in Delos in its time of crisis.

A dozen times, on his way over to keep his appointment with the official,
Ronny had to step into doorways, or in other wise make himself
inconspicuous. Gangs of demonstrators roamed the street, some of them
drunken, looking for trouble, and scornful of police or the military.
Twice, when it looked as though he might be roughed up, Ronny drew his gun
and held it in open sight, ready for use, but not threateningly. The
demonstrators made off.

His throat was dry by the time he reached his destination. The life of a
Section G agent, on interplanetary assignment, had its drawbacks.

The Sub-Bishop had formerly been in charge of Interplanetary
Communications which involved commerce as well as intercourse with United
Planets. It must have been an ultra-responsible position only a month ago.
Now his offices were all but deserted.

He looked at Ronny's badge, only vaguely interested. "Section G of the
Bureau of Investigation," he said. "I don't believe I am aware of your
responsibilities. However," he nodded with sour courtesy, "please be
seated. You must forgive my lack of ability to offer refreshment. Isn't
there an old tradition about rats deserting a sinking ship? I am afraid my
former assistants had rodentlike instincts."

Ronny said, "Section G deals with Interplanetary Security, sir--"

"I am addressed as Holiness," the other said.

