_Three weeks!_

Taggert had to assume that the minimum time prediction was the
accurate one. Damn! Why couldn't this last prediction have been as
precise as the one about the air flight from Puerto Rico?

It had taken six days for the "accredited" agents of the S.M.M.R. to
persuade Dr. Peter Forsythe that he should leave his little place on
the Boardwalk and come down to Arlington to work. It isn't easy to
persuade a man to leave a business that he's built up over a long
period of years, especially during the busy season. To leave the
Boardwalk during the summer would, as far as Forsythe was concerned,
be tantamount to economic suicide. He had to be offered not only an
income better than the one he was making, but better security as well.
At fifty-four, one does not lightly throw over the work of a lifetime.

Still, he had plenty of safeguards. The rent was paid on his Boardwalk
office, he had a guaranteed salary while he was working, and a
"research bonus," designed to keep him working until the Society was
finished with that phase of its work.

It's rather difficult for a man to resist the salesmanship of a
telepath who knows exactly what his customer wants and, better, what
he needs.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the fourth floor, there were sounds of movement, the low staccato
chatter of typers, occasional bits of conversation, and the hum of
electronic equipment.

Forsythe was impressed, though not a line on his face showed it. The
office to which he had been assigned was lined with electronic
calculators, and his name had already been put on the door in gold. It
was to his credit that he was impressed by the two factors in that
order.

In the rear of the room, two technicians were working on an open panel
in one of the units. Nearby, a dark-haired, dark-eyed, maturely
handsome woman in her early thirties was holding a clip board and
making occasional notes as the men worked. One of the men was using an
electric drill, and the whine of metal on metal drowned out the slight
noise that Taggert and Forsythe made as they entered. Only the woman
was aware that they had come in, but she didn't betray the fact.

"Miss Tedesco?" Taggert called.

She looked up from her clip board, smiled, and walked toward the two
newcomers. "Yes, Mr. Taggert?"

"'Bout done?"

"Almost. They're setting in the last component now."

Taggert nodded absently. "Miss Tedesco, this is Dr. Peter Forsythe,
whom I told you about. Dr. Forsythe, this is Miss Donna Tedesco; she's
the computer technician who will be working with you."

Miss Tedesco's smile was positively glittering. "I'm so pleased to
meet you, doctor; I know our work together will be interesting."

"I trust it will," Forsythe said, beaming. Then a faint cloud seemed to
come over his features. "I'm afraid I must confess a certain ... er ...
lack of knowledge in the realm of computerdom. Mr. Taggert attempted to
explain, but he, himself, has admitted that his knowledge of the details
is ... er ... somewhat vague."

"I'm not a computerman, myself," Taggert said, smiling. "Miss Tedesco
will be able to give you the details better than I can."

Miss Tedesco blinked. "You know the broad outline, surely? Of the
project, I mean."

"Oh, yes, certainly," Forsythe said hurriedly. "We are attempting to
determine whether the actions of human beings can actually have any
effect on the outcome of the prophecy itself. In other words, if it is
possible to avert, say, a disaster if it is foretold, or whether the
very foretelling itself assures the ultimate outcome."

The woman nodded her agreement.

"As I understand it," Forsythe continued, "we are going to get several
score clients--or, rather, _subjects_--and I am to ... uh ... exercise
my talents, just as I have been doing for many years. The results are
to be tabulated and run through the computers to see if there is any
correlation between human activity taken as a result of the forecast
and the actual foretold events themselves."

"That's right," said Miss Tedesco. She looked at Taggert. "That's what
the committee outlined, in general, isn't it?"

"In general, yes," Taggert said.

"But what about the details?" Forsythe asked doggedly. "I mean, just
how are we going to go about this? You must remember that I'm not at
all familiar with ... er ... scientific research procedures."

"Oh, we'll work all that out together," said Miss Tedesco brightly.
"You didn't think we'd plan a detailed work schedule without your
co-operation, did you?"

"Well--" Forsythe said, swelling visibly with pride, "I suppose--"

Taggert, glancing at his watch, interrupted. "I'll have to leave you
two to work out your research schedule together. I have an appointment
in a few minutes." He grasped Forsythe's hand and pumped it
vigorously. "I believe we'll get along fine, Dr. Forsythe. And I
believe our work here will be quite fruitful. Will you excuse me?"

"Certainly, Mr. Taggert. And I want to thank you for this opportunity
to do research work along these lines."

Brian Taggert thanked Forsythe and hurried out with the air of a man
with important and urgent things on his mind.

He went up the stairs to the office directly over the one he had
assigned to Forsythe and stepped in quietly. Two men were relaxed in
lounge chairs, their eyes closed.

_Meshing?_ Taggert asked wordlessly.

_Meshing._

Taggert closed the door carefully and went into his own office.

       *       *       *       *       *

General Howard Layton, USSF, looked no different from any other Space
Force officer, except that he was rather handsomer than most. He
looked as though he might have posed for recruiting posters at one
time, and, in point of fact, he had--back when he had been an ensign
in the United States Navy's Submarine Service. He was forty-nine and
looked a prematurely graying thirty.

He stood in the observation bunker at the landing area of St. Thomas
Spacefield and watched through the periscope as a heavy rocket settled
itself to the surface of the landing area. The blue-white tongue of
flame touched the surface and splattered; then the heavy ship settled
slowly down over it, as though it were sliding down a column of light.
The column of light shortened--

And abruptly vanished as the ship touched down.

