
"He's not eligible. Officers are automatically disqualified."

Colonel Spaulding sighed. "A guy can't win against competition like that.
Anything new this morning?"

"Mr. Poe is waiting in your office. Other than that, there's just the
routine things."

He went on into his office. Lenny Poe was seated behind the colonel's
desk, leaning back in the swivel chair, his feet on the top of the desk.
He was sound asleep.

The colonel walked over to the desk, took his cigar from his mouth, and
said: "_Good_ morrrning, Colonel Spaulding!"

Lenny snapped awake. "I'm not Colonel Spaulding," he said.

"Then why are you sitting in Colonel Spaulding's chair?"

"I figured if I was asleep nobody'd know the difference." Lenny got up and
walked over to one of the other chairs. "These don't lean back
comfortably. I can't sleep in 'em."

"You can sleep later. How was your session with Rafe?"

Lenny glowered glumly. "I wish you and Rafe hadn't talked me into this
job. It's a strain on the brain. I don't know how he expects anyone to
understand all that garbage."

"All what garbage?"

Lenny waved a hand aimlessly. "All this scientific guff. I'm an artist,
not a scientist. If Rafe can get me a clear picture of something, I can
copy it, but when he tries to explain something scientific, he might as
well be thinking in Russian or Old Upper Middle High Martian or
something."

"I know," said Colonel Spaulding, looking almost as glum as Lenny. "Did
you get anything at all that would help Dr. Davenport figure out what
those drawings mean?"

"Rafe says that the translations are all wrong," Lenny said, "but I can't
get a clear picture of just what _is_ wrong."

       *       *       *       *       *

Colonel Spaulding thought for a while in silence. Telepathy--at least in
so far as the Poe brothers practiced it--certainly had its limitations.
Lenny couldn't communicate mentally with anyone except his brother Rafe.
Rafe could pick up the thoughts of almost anyone if he happened to be
close by, but couldn't communicate over a long distance with anyone but
Lenny.

The main trouble lay in the fact that it was apparently impossible to
transmit a concept directly from Brain A to Brain B unless the basic
building blocks of the concept were already present in Brain B. Raphael
Poe, for instance, had spent a long time studying Russian, reading
Dostoevski, Tolstoy, and Turgenev in the original tongue, familiarizing
himself with modern Russian thought through the courtesy of _Izvestia_,
_Pravda_, and _Krokodil_, and, finally, spending time in the United
Nations building and near the Russian embassy in order to be sure that he
could understand the mental processes involved.

Now, science has a language of its own. Or, rather, a multiplicity of
languages, each derived partly from the native language of the various
scientific groups and partly of borrowings from other languages. In the
physical sciences especially, the language of mathematics is a further
addition.

More than that, the practice of the scientific method automatically
induces a thought pattern that is different from the type of thought
pattern that occurs in the mind of a person who is not scientifically
oriented.

Lenny's mind was a long way from being scientifically oriented. Worse, he
was a bigot. He not only didn't know why the light in his room went on
when he flipped the switch, he didn't _want_ to know. To him, science was
just so much flummery, and he didn't want his brain cluttered up with it.

Facts mean nothing to a bigot. He has already made up his mind, and he
doesn't intend to have his solid convictions disturbed by anything so
unimportant as a contradictory fact. Lenny was of the opinion that all
mathematics was arcane gobbledygook, and his precise knowledge of the
mathematical odds in poker and dice games didn't abate that opinion one
whit. Obviously, a mind like that is utterly incapable of understanding a
projected thought of scientific content; such a thought bounces off the
impregnable mind shield that the bigot has set up around his little area
of bigotry.

Colonel Spaulding had been aware of these circumstances since the
inception of the Operation Mapcase. Even though he, himself, had never
experienced telepathy more than half a dozen times in his life, he had
made a study of the subject and was pretty well aware of its limitations.
The colonel might have dismissed--as most men do--his own fleeting
experiences as "coincidence" or "imagination" if it had not been for the
things he had seen and felt in Africa during World War II. He had only
been a captain then, on detached duty with British Intelligence, under
crusty old Colonel Sir Cecil Haversham, who didn't believe a word of "all
that mystic nonsense." Colonel Haversham had made the mistake of
alienating one of the most powerful of the local witch doctors.

The British Government had hushed it all up afterwards, of course, but
Spaulding still shuddered when he thought of the broken-spirited,
shrunken caricature of his old self that Colonel Haversham had become
after he told the witch doctor where to get off.

Spaulding had known that there were weaknesses in the telepathic
communication linkage that was the mainspring of Operation Mapcase, but he
had thought that they could be overcome by the strengths of the system.
Lenny had no blockage whatever against receiving visual patterns and
designs. He could reproduce an electronic wiring diagram perfectly
because, to him, it was not a grouping of scientific symbols, but a design
of lines, angles, and curves.

At first, it is true, he had had a tendency to change them here and there,
to make the design balance better, to make it more aesthetically
satisfying to his artistic eye, but that tendency had been easily
overcome, and Colonel Spaulding was quite certain that that wasn't what
was wrong now.

Still--

"Lenny," he said carefully, "are you sure you didn't jigger up those
drawings to make 'em look prettier?"

Lenny Poe gave the colonel a look of disgust. "Positive. Rafe checked 'em
over every inch of the way as I was drawing them, and he rechecked again
last night--or this morning--on those photostats Davenport gave us. That's
when he said there was something wrong with the translations.

"But he couldn't make it clear just what was wrong, eh?"

Lenny shrugged. "How anybody could make any sense out of that gobbledegook
is beyond me."

The colonel blew out a cloud of cigar smoke and looked thoughtfully at the
ceiling. As long as the diagrams were just designs on paper, Lenny Poe
could pick them up fine. Which meant that everything was jim-dandy as long
as the wiring diagrams were labeled in the Cyrillic alphabet. The labels
were just more squiggles to be copied as a part of the design.

But if the labels were in English, Lenny's mind would try to "make sense"
out of them, and since scientific concepts did _not_ "make sense" to him,
the labels came out as pure nonsense. In one of his drawings, a lead wire
had been labeled "simply ground to powder," and if the original drawing
hadn't been handy to check with, it might have taken quite a bit of
thought to realize that what was meant was "to power supply ground."
Another time, a GE 2N 188A transistor had come out labeled GEZNISSA. There
were others--much worse.

Russian characters, on the other hand, didn't have to make any sense to
Lenny, so his mind didn't try to force them into a preconceived mold.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lenny unzipped the leather portfolio he had brought with him--a
specially-made carrier that looked somewhat like an oversized brief case.

"Maybe these'll help," he said.

"We managed to get two good sketches of the gadget--at least, as much of
it as that Russian lady scientist has put together so far. I kind of like
the rather abstract effect you get from all those wires snaking in and
around, with that green glass tube in the center. Pretty, isn't it?"

[Illustration]

"Very," said the colonel without conviction. "I wonder if it will help
Davenport any?" He looked at the pictures for several seconds more, then,
suddenly, his eyes narrowed. "Lenny--this piece of green glass--the
thing's shaped like the letter Q."

"Yeah, sort of. Why?"

"You said it was a tube, but you didn't make it look hollow when you drew
it."

"It isn't; it's solid. Does a tube have to be hollow? Yeah, I guess it
does, doesn't it? Well, then, it isn't a tube."

Colonel Spaulding picked up the phone and dialed a number.

"Colonel Spaulding here," he said after a moment. "Let me speak to Dr.
Davenport." And, after a wait: "This is Colonel Spaulding, doctor. I think
we may have something for you."

"Good morning, colonel. I'm glad to hear that. What is it?"

"The Q-shaped gadget--the one that you said was supposed to be painted
emerald green. Are you _sure_ that's the right translation of the
Russian?"

"Well ... uh--" Davenport hesitated. "I can't be sure on my own say-so, of
course. _I_ don't understand Russian. But I assure you that Mr. Berensky
is perfectly reliable."

