more before earth midnight!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Randall sent their machine racing again toward one of the upward
tunnels, and as the long mechanism began to climb smoothly up the
darkness he heard Lanier agonizing beside him.

"God, if we have only enough time to get to that matter-transmitter
before the Martians start flashing to earth through it!"

"But Milton?" Randall cried. "We don't know whether he's alive or
dead! We can't leave him!"

"We must!" said Lanier solemnly. "Our duty's to the earth now, man, to
the world that we alone can save from the Martian invasion and
conquest! At the hour of twelve Nelson will have the matter-receiver
turned on and at that hour the Martian will start flashing to
earth--unless we prevent!"

Suddenly Randall grasped the knob in his hands more tightly as light
showed above them. They had been climbing upward through the enlarged
tunnel at their machine's highest speed, and now as the tunnel curved
the light grew stronger. Suddenly they were emerging into the thin
sunlight of the Martian day.

In the crimson jungle about them were many Martians, milling excitedly
to and fro, and other centipede-machines that were blasting their way
down through tunnels to the worm world beneath.

Randall and Lanier, breathless, crouched low in the
transparent-windowed control room as they sent their mechanism racing
through this scene of swarming activity. Both gasped as one of the
centipede-machines clashed against their own in passing, its Martian
driver turning to stare after them. But there came no alarm, and in a
moment they had passed out of the swarm of Martians and machines and
were heading through the jungle in the direction of the city.

       *       *       *       *       *

Through the weird red vegetation their mechanism raced with them,
Randall holding it at its highest speed, and in minutes they came out
of the jungle and were racing over the clear space between it and the
great canal. Beyond that canal loomed into the thin sunlight the
clustering cones of the mighty Martian city, two towering above all
the others--the cone of the Martian Master and the other cone in which
was the matter-transmitter and receiver.

It was toward the latter that Lanier pointed. "Head straight toward
that cone, Randall--we've but minutes left!"

They were racing now up over the great arch of the canal's metal
bridge, and then scuttling smoothly off it and along the broad metal
street through which they had fled in darkness hours before. In it
Martians and centipede-machines were coming and going in great
numbers, but none noticed the human forms of the two crouched low in
their mechanism's control room.

They were rushing then toward the looming cone of the Martian Master.
As they flashed past it Randall saw Lanier's face working, knew the
desire that tore at him even as at himself to burst inside and
ascertain whether or not Milton still lived in the laboratories from
which they had fled. But they were past it, faces white and grim, were
rushing on through the Martian city at reckless speed toward the other
mighty cone.

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed that all in the great city were heading toward the same
goal, streams of crocodilian Martians and masses of shining
centipede-machines filling the streets as they moved toward it. As
they came closer to the mighty structure, hearts pounding, they saw
that around it surged a mighty mass of Martians and machines. The
hordes waiting to be released through the matter-transmitter inside
upon the unsuspecting earth!

"Try to get the machine inside!" Lanier whispered tensely. "If we can
smash that transmitter yet...."

Randall nodded grimly. "Keep ready at the ray-tubes," he told the
other.

As unobtrusively as possible he sent their long mechanism worming
forward through the vast throng of machines and Martians, toward the
great cone's door. Crouching low, the hands of their watches closing
fast toward the twelfth figure, they edged forward in the long
machine. At last they were moving through the mighty door, into the
cone's interior.

They moved slowly on through the mass of machines and crocodile forms
inside, then halted. For at the great crowd's center was a clear
circle hundreds of feet across, and as Randall gazed across it his
heart seemed to leap once and then stop.

At the center of that clear circle rose the two cubical metal chambers
of the matter-transmitter and receiver. The transmitting chamber, they
saw, was flooded with humming force, with white light pouring from its
inner walls. It was already in operation, and the masses of Martians
in the great cone were only waiting for the moment to sound when the
receiver on earth would be operating also. Then they would pour into
the chamber to be flashed in masses across the gulf to earth! The eyes
of all in the cone seemed turned toward an erect dial-mechanism beside
the chambers which was clocklike in appearance, and that would mark
the moment when the first Martian could enter the transmitting-chamber
and flash out.

       *       *       *       *       *

A little distance from the two metal chambers stood a low dais on
which there sat the hideous triple-bodied form of the Martian Master.
Around him were the massed members of his council, waiting like him
for the start of their age-planned invasion of earth. And beside the
dais was a figure between two crocodilian guards at sight of whom
Randall forgot all else.

"Milton! My God, Lanier, it's Milton!"

"Milton! They've brought him here to torture or kill him if they find
he's lied about the moment they could flash to earth!"

Milton! And at sight of him something snapped in Randall's brain.

With a single motion of the knob he sent their centipede-machine
crashing out into the clear circle at the mighty cone's center. A wild
uproar of hissing cries broke from all the thousands in it as he sent
the mechanism whirling toward the dais of the Martian Master. He saw
the crocodilian forms there scattering blindly before him, and then
as his rays drove out and spun and stabbed in mad figures of crimson
death through the astounded Martian masses he saw Milton looking up
toward them, crying out crazily to them as his two guards loosed him
for the moment.

A high call from the Martian Master ripped across the hall and was
answered by a shattering roar of hissing voices as Martians and
machines surged madly toward them. Randall and Lanier in a single leap
were out of the centipede-machine, and in an instant had half-dragged
Milton with them in a great leap up to the edge of the humming
transmitting chamber.

       *       *       *       *       *

Milton was shouting hoarsely to them over the wild uproar. To enter
that transmitting chamber before the destined moment was annihilation,
to be flashed out with no receiver on earth awaiting them. They
turned, struck with all their strength at the first Martians rushing
up to them. No rays flashed, for a ray loosed would destroy the
chamber behind them that was the one gate for the Martians to the
world they would invade. But as the Martian Master's high call hissed
again all the countless crocodilian forms in the great cone were
rushing toward them.

Braced at the very edge of the humming, light-filled chamber, Randall
and Lanier and Milton struck madly at the Martians surging up toward
them. Randall seemed in a dream. A score of taloned paws clutched him
from beneath; scaled forms collapsed under his insane blows.

The whole vast cone and surging reptilian hordes seemed spinning at
increasing speed around him. As his clenched fists flashed with waning
strength he glimpsed crocodilian forms swarming up on either side of
them, glimpsed Lanier down, talons reaching toward him, Milton
fighting over him like a madman. Another moment would see it
ended--reptilian arms reaching in scores to drag him down--Milton
jerking Lanier half to his feet. The Martian Master's call
sounded--and then came a great clanging sound at which the Martian
hordes seemed to freeze for an instant motionless, at which Milton's
voice reached him in a supreme cry.

_"Randall--the transmitter!"_

For in that instant Milton was leaping back with Lanier, and as
Randall with his last strength threw himself backward with them into
the humming transmitting-chamber's brilliant light, he heard a last
frenzied roar of hissing cries from the Martian hordes about them.
Then as the brilliant light and force from the chamber's walls smote
them, Randall felt himself hurled into blackness inconceivable, that
smashed like a descending curtain across his brain.

The curtain of blackness lifted for a moment. He was lying with Milton
and Lanier in another chamber whose force beat upon them. He saw a
yellow-lit room instead of the great cone--saw the tense, anxious face
of Nelson at the switch beside them. He strove to move, made to Nelson
a gesture with his arm that seemed to drain all strength and life from
him; and then, as in answer to it Nelson drove up the switch and
turned off the force of the matter-receiver in which they lay, the
black curtain descended on Randall's brain once more.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours later it was when Milton and Randall and Lanier and Nelson
turned to the laboratory's door. They paused to glance behind them. Of
the great matter-transmitter and receiver, of the apparatus that had
crowded the laboratory, there remained now but wreckage.

For that had been their first thought, their first task, when the
astounded Nelson had brought the three back to consciousness and had
heard their amazing tale. They had wrecked so completely the
matter-station and its actuating apparatus that none could ever have
guessed what a mechanism of wonder the laboratory a short time before
had held.

The cubical chambers had been smashed beyond all recognition, the
dynamos were masses of split metal and fused wiring, the batteries of
tubes were shattered, the condensers and transformers and wiring
demolished. And it had only been when the last written plans and
blue-prints of the mechanism had been burned that Milton and Randall
and Lanier had stopped to allow their exhausted bodies a moment of
rest.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now as they paused at the laboratory's door, Lanier reached and swung
it open. Together, silent, they gazed out.

It all seemed to Randall exactly as upon the night before. The shadowy
masses in the darkness, the heaving, dim-lit sea stretching far away
before them, the curtain of summer stars stretched across the heavens.
And, sinking westward amid those stars, the red spark of Mars toward
which as though toward a magnet all their eyes had turned.

Milton was speaking. "Up there it has shone for centuries--ages--a
crimson spot of light. And up there the Martians have been watching,
watching--until at last we opened to them the gate."

Randall's hand was on his shoulder. "But we closed that gate, too, in
the end."

Milton nodded slowly. "We--or the fate that rules our worlds. But the
gate is closed, and God grant, shall never again be opened by any on
this world."

"God grant it," the other echoed.

And they were all gazing still toward the thing. Gazing up toward the
crimson spot of light that burned there among the stars, toward the
planet that shone red, menacing, terrible, but whose menace and whose
terror had been thrust back even as they had crouched to spring at
last upon the earth.




The Exile of Time

BEGINNING A FOUR-PART NOVEL

_By Ray Cummings_

CHAPTER I

_Mysterious Girl_

[Illustration: _Presently there was not one Robot, but three!_]

[Sidenote: From somewhere out of Time come a swarm of Robots who
inflict on New York the awful vengeance of the diabolical cripple
Tugh.]


The extraordinary incidents began about 1 A.M. in the night of June
8-9, 1935. I was walking through Patton Place, in New York City, with
my friend Larry Gregory. My name is George Rankin. My business--and
Larry's--are details quite unimportant to this narrative. We had been
friends in college. Both of us were working in New York; and with all
our relatives in the middle west we were sharing an apartment on this
Patton Place--a short crooked, little-known street of not particularly
impressive residential buildings lying near the section known as
Greenwich Village, where towering office buildings of the business
districts encroach close upon it.

This night at 1 A. M. it was deserted. A taxi stood at a corner; its
chauffeur had left it there, and evidently gone to a nearby lunch
room. The street lights were, as always, inadequate. The night was
sultry and dark, with a leaden sky and a breathless humidity that
presaged a thunder storm. The houses were mostly unlighted at this
hour. There was an occasional apartment house among them, but mostly
they were low, ramshackle affairs of brick and stone.

We were still three blocks from our apartment when without warning the
incidents began which were to plunge us and all the city into
disaster. We were upon the threshold of a mystery weird and strange,
but we did not know it. Mysterious portals were swinging to engulf
us. And all unknowing, we walked into them.

Larry was saying, "Wish we would get a storm to clear this air--_what
the devil?_ George, did you hear that?"

       *       *       *       *       *

We stood listening. There had sounded a choking, muffled scream. We
were midway in the block. There was not a pedestrian in sight, nor any
vehicle save the abandoned taxi at the corner.

"A woman," he said. "Did it come from this house?"

We were standing before a three-story brick residence. All its windows
were dark. There was a front stoop of several steps, and a basement
entryway. The windows were all closed, and the place had the look of
being unoccupied.

"Not in there, Larry," I answered. "It's closed for the summer--" But
I got no further; we heard it again. And this time it sounded, not
like a scream, but like a woman's voice calling to attract our
attention.

"George! Look there!" Larry cried.

The glow from a street light illumined the basement entryway, and
behind one of the dark windows a girl's face was pressed against the
pane.

Larry stood gripping me, then drew me forward and down the steps of
the entryway. There was a girl in the front basement room. Darkness
was behind her, but we could see her white frightened face close to
the glass. She tapped on the pane, and in the silence we heard her
muffled voice:

"Let me out! Oh, let me get out!"

The basement door had a locked iron gate. I rattled it. "No way of
getting in," I said, then stopped short with surprise. "What the
devil--"

I joined Larry by the window. The girl was only a few inches from us.
She had a pale, frightened face; wide, terrified eyes. Even with that
first glimpse, I was transfixed by her beauty. And startled; there was
something weird about her. A low-necked, white satin dress disclosed
her snowy shoulders; her head was surmounted by a pile of snow-white
hair, with dangling white curls framing her pale ethereal beauty. She
called again.

"What's the matter with you?" Larry demanded. "Are you alone in there?
What is it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

She backed from the window; we could see her only as a white blob in
the darkness of the basement room.

I called, "Can you hear us? What is it?"

Then she screamed again. A low scream; but there was infinite terror
in it. And again she was at the window.

"You will not hurt me? Let me--oh please let me come out!" Her fists
pounded the casement.

What I would have done I don't know. I recall wondering if the
policeman would be at our corner down the block; he very seldom was
there. I heard Larry saying:

"What the hell!--I'll get her out. George, get me that brick.... Now,
get back, girl--I'm going to smash the window."

But the girl kept her face pressed against the pane. I had never seen
such terrified eyes. Terrified at something behind her in the house;
and equally frightened at us.

I call to her: "Come to the door. Can't you come to the door and open
it?" I pointed to the basement gate. "Open it! Can you hear me?"

"Yes--I can hear you, and you speak my language. But you--you will not
