has been opened in broad daylight for many years." He selected a key
from the ring of the late Count and inserted it into the keyhole. The
door swung back, revealing a large crucifix attached to its outer
surface. Lord Darcy crossed himself. "Lord in Heaven," he said softly,
"what is this?"

He looked out into a small shrine. It was walled off from the
courtyard and had a single small entrance some ten feet from the
doorway. There were four _prie-dieus_--small kneeling benches--ranged
in front of the doorway.

"If I may explain, your lordship--" Sir Pierre began.

"No need to," Lord Darcy said in a hard voice. "It's rather obvious.
My lord the Count was quite ingenious. This is a relatively
newly-built shrine. Four walls and a crucifix against the castle wall.
Anyone could come in here, day or night, for prayer. No one who came
in would be suspected." He stepped out into the small enclosure and
swung around to look at the door. "And when that door is closed, there
is no sign that there is a door behind the crucifix. If a woman came
in here, it would be assumed that she came for prayer. But if she knew
of that door--" His voice trailed off.

"Yes, your lordship," said Sir Pierre. "I did not approve, but I was
in no position to disapprove."

"I understand." Lord Darcy stepped out to the doorway of the little
shrine and took a quick glance about. "Then anyone within the castle
walls could come in here," he said.

"Yes, your lordship."

"Very well. Let's go back up."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the small office which Lord Darcy and his staff had been assigned
while conducting the investigation, three men watched while a fourth
conducted a demonstration on a table in the center of the room.

Master Sean O Lochlainn held up an intricately engraved gold button
with an Arabesque pattern and a diamond set in the center.

He looked at the other three. "Now, my lord, your Reverence, and
colleague Doctor, I call your attention to this button."

Dr. Pateley smiled and Father Bright looked stern. Lord Darcy merely
stuffed tobacco--imported from the southern New England counties on
the Gulf--into a German-made porcelain pipe. He allowed Master Sean a
certain amount of flamboyance; good sorcerers were hard to come by.

"Will you hold the robe, Dr. Pateley? Thank you. Now, stand back.
That's it. Thank you. Now, I place the button on the table, a good ten
feet from the robe." Then he muttered something under his breath and
dusted a bit of powder on the button. He made a few passes over it
with his hands, paused, and looked up at Father Bright. "If you will,
Reverend Sir?"

Father Bright solemnly raised his right hand, and, as he made the Sign
of the Cross, said: "May this demonstration, O God, be in strict
accord with the truth, and may the Evil One not in any way deceive us
who are witnesses thereto. In the Name of the Father and of the Son
and of the Holy Spirit. Amen."

"Amen," the other three chorused.

Master Sean crossed himself, then muttered something under his breath.

The button leaped from the table, slammed itself against the robe
which Dr. Pateley held before him, and stuck there as though it had
been sewed on by an expert.

"Ha!" said Master Sean. "As I thought!" He gave the other three men a
broad, beaming smile. "The two were definitely connected!"

Lord Darcy looked bored. "Time?" he asked.

[Illustration]

"In a moment, my lord," Master Sean said apologetically. "In a
moment." While the other three watched, the sorcerer went through more
spells with the button and the robe, although none were quite so
spectacular as the first demonstration. Finally, Master Sean said:
"About eleven thirty last night they were torn apart, my lord. But I
shouldn't like to make it any more definite than to say between
eleven and midnight. The speed with which it returned to its place
shows that it was ripped off very rapidly, however."

"Very good," said Lord Darcy. "Now the bullet, if you please."

"Yes, my lord. This will have to be a bit different." He took more
paraphernalia out of his large, symbol-decorated carpet bag. "The Law
of Contagion, gently-born sirs, is a tricky thing to work with. If a
man doesn't know how to handle it, he can get himself killed. We had
an apprentice o' the guild back in Cork who might have made a good
sorcerer in time. He had the talent--unfortunately, he didn't have the
good sense to go with it. According to the Law of Contagion any two
objects which have ever been in contact with each other have an
affinity for each other which is directly proportional to the product
of the degree of relevancy of the contact and the length of time they
were in contact and inversely proportional to the length of time since
they have ceased to be in contact." He gave a smiling glance to the
priest. "That doesn't apply strictly to relics of the saints, Reverend
Sir; there's another factor enters in there, as you know."

As he spoke, the sorcerer was carefully clamping the little handgun
into the padded vise so that its barrel was parallel to the surface of
the table.

"Anyhow," he went on, "this apprentice, all on his own, decided to get
rid of the cockroaches in his house--a simple thing, if one knows how
to go about it. So he collected dust from various cracks and crannies
about the house, dust which contained, of course, the droppings of the
pests. The dust, with the appropriate spells and ingredients, he
boiled. It worked fine. The roaches all came down with a raging fever
and died. Unfortunately, the clumsy lad had poor laboratory technique.
He allowed three drops of his own perspiration to fall into the
steaming pot over which he was working, and the resulting fever killed
him, too."

By this time, he had put the bullet which Dr. Pateley had removed from
the Count's body on a small pedestal so that it was exactly in line
with the muzzle of the gun. "There now," he said softly.

Then he repeated the incantation, and the powdering that he had used
on the button. As the last syllable was formed by his lips, the bullet
vanished with a _ping_! In its vise, the little gun vibrated.

"Ah!" said Master Sean. "No question there, eh? That's the death
weapon, all right, my lord. Yes. Time's almost exactly the same as
that of the removal of the button. Not more than a few seconds later.
Forms a picture, don't it, my lord? His lordship the Count jerks a
button off the girl's gown, she outs with a gun and plugs him."

Lord Darcy's handsome face scowled. "Let's not jump to any hasty
conclusions, my good Sean. There is no evidence whatever that he was
killed by a woman."

"Would a man be wearing that gown, my lord?"

"Possibly," said Lord Darcy. "But who says that anyone was wearing it
when the button was removed?"

"Oh." Master Sean subsided into silence. Using a small ramrod, he
forced the bullet out of the chamber of the little pistol.

"Father Bright," said Lord Darcy, "will the Countess be serving tea
this afternoon?"

The priest looked suddenly contrite. "Good heavens! None of you has
eaten yet! I'll see that something is sent up right away, Lord Darcy.
In the confusion--"

Lord Darcy held up a hand. "I beg your pardon, Father; that wasn't
what I meant. I'm sure Master Sean and Dr. Pateley would appreciate a
little something, but I can wait until tea time. What I was thinking
was that perhaps the Countess would ask her guests to tea. Does she
know Laird and Lady Duncan well enough to ask for their sympathetic
presence on such an afternoon as this?"

Father Bright's eyes narrowed a trifle. "I dare say it could be
arranged, Lord Darcy. You will be there?"

"Yes--but I may be a trifle late. That will hardly matter at an
informal tea."

The priest glanced at his watch. "Four o'clock?"

"I should think that would do it," said Lord Darcy.

Father Bright nodded wordlessly and left the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Pateley took off his pince-nez and polished the lenses carefully
with a silk handkerchief. "How long will your spell keep the body
incorrupt, Master Sean?" he asked.

"As long as it's relevant. As soon as the case is solved, or we have
enough data to solve the case--as the case may be, heh heh--he'll
start to go. I'm not a saint, you know; it takes powerful motivation
to keep a body incorrupt for years and years."

Sir Pierre was eying the gown that Pateley had put on the table. The
button was still in place, as if held there by magnetism. He didn't
touch it. "Master Sean, I don't know much about magic," he said, "but
can't you find out who was wearing this robe just as easily as you
found out that the button matched?"

Master Sean wagged his head in a firm negative. "No, sir. 'Tisn't
relevant sir. The relevancy of the integrated dress-as-a-whole is
quite strong. So is that of the seamstress or tailor who made the
garment, and that of the weaver who made the cloth. But, except in
certain circumstances, the person who wears or wore the garment has
little actual relevancy to the garment itself."

"I'm afraid I don't understand," said Sir Pierre, looking puzzled.

"Look at it like this, sir: That gown wouldn't be what it is if the
weaver hadn't made the cloth in that particular way. It wouldn't be
what it is if the seamstress hadn't cut it in a particular way and
sewed it in a specific manner. You follow, sir? Yes. Well, then, the
connections between garment-and-weaver and garment-and-seamstress are
strongly relevant. But this dress would still be pretty much what it
is if it had stayed in the closet instead of being worn. No
relevance--or very little. Now, if it were a well-worn garment, that
would be different--that is, if it had always been worn by the same
person. Then, you see, sir, the garment-as-a-whole is what it is
because of the wearing, and the wearer becomes relevant."

He pointed at the little handgun he was still holding in his hand.
"Now you take your gun, here, sir. The--"

"It isn't my gun," Sir Pierre interrupted firmly.

"I was speaking rhetorically, sir," said Master Sean with infinite
patience. "This gun or any other gun in general, if you see what I
mean, sir. It's even harder to place the ownership of a gun. Most of
the wear on a gun is purely mechanical. It don't matter _who_ pulls
the trigger, you see, the erosion by the gases produced in the
chamber, and the wear caused by the bullet passing through the barrel
will be the same. You see, sir, 'tisn't relevant _to the gun_ who
pulled its trigger or what it's fired at. The bullet's a slightly
different matter. To the bullet, it _is_ relevant which gun it was
fired from and what it hit. All these things simply have to be taken
into account, Sir Pierre."

"I see," said the knight. "Very interesting, Master Sean." Then he
turned to Lord Darcy. "Is there anything else, your lordship? There's
a great deal of county business to be attended to."

Lord Darcy waved a hand. "Not at the moment, Sir Pierre. I understand
the pressures of government. Go right ahead."

"Thank you, your lordship. If anything further should be required, I
shall be in my office."

As soon as Sir Pierre had closed the door, Lord Darcy held out his
hand toward the sorcerer. "Master Sean; the gun."

Master Sean handed it to him. "Ever see one like it before?" he asked,
turning it over in his hands.
