responding with unquestioning obedience to the direction of Ann's
transmitter. And Hunter had no doubt that United manipulated the
transmission.

Simultaneously he realized something else. If the cartel went to this
extreme to forestall his search for Ann, she must still be alive. For
some reason they still needed her. Possibly her patent drawings had
been submitted for government registry in such a way that only Ann
understood them.

Ann had been through the general school, and knew what the score was.
She would have protected her invention--and incidentally insured her
own survival--if she could have possibly done so, even at a fearful
risk to herself.

Hunter swung toward the door. It did not occur to him to call the
police, since they were all cartel mercenaries. Whatever he did to
help Ann, he would have to do on his own. Until he found her, he could
count on help from Consolidated. After that--nothing.

He jerked open the front door--and froze. Three men were waiting on
the porch with drawn blasters. Hunter had no time to recognize facial
features which it might have been to his advantage to remember later,
no time to find any identifying insignia on their tunics. With a
barely visible flickering fire arced from one of the weapons, and pain
exploded in his body, unconsciousness washed into his brain.

His first sensation when the paralysis began to wear off was the dull
ache of visceral nausea. He opened his eyes, and saw, bleakly
shadowed, the living room of the Ames house. It was after dark, which
could only mean that he had lain there nearly four hours. To knock him
out for that period of time, they must have given him a nearly lethal
charge from the blaster calculated just under the limit of physical
endurance.

His motor control and his sense of touch returned more slowly. For a
quarter of an hour he lay helpless in the chintz-covered rocker,
feeling nothing but a tingling, like pin-pricks of fire, in his arms
and legs.

He looked down and saw that he held a blaster in his hand--his own
blaster, which he had left in his room in the Roost. He did not yet
have the neural control to release his fingers from the firing dial.

As his sense of hearing was restored, he became aware that the Tri D
had been left on. The screen pictured the swirling confusion of a mob.
An announcer was describing the sudden outburst of labor violence
which had occurred in the industrial district that afternoon. Eric
Young's U.F.W. had gone on strike against a dozen separate plants.

Essential plants, naturally. Everything was always essential, and
government spokesmen always made pretty speeches deploring the
situation. It was a pattern familiar to Hunter for years. One of the
cartels would pay Young to strike factories belonging to the other.
Then a second bribe, paid by the struck cartel, bought off the strike.
Occasionally a sop of bonus credits had to be dished out to the
faithful.

It was not a maneuver either Consolidated or United used frequently,
because the advantage was transitory, and the only long-term winner
was Eric Young.

This time there was a slight variation in the formula. Young had
struck plants of both cartels. That puzzled Hunter, but any curiosity
he felt was subordinate to his disgust. How much longer would this
farce go on before it dawned on the rank and file of the U.F.W. that
Eric Young was playing them all for suckers? Hunter tried to get up to
snap off the telecast. He managed only to throw himself awkwardly over
the arm of the chair.

And then he saw the body on the floor--the body of the genuine Mrs.
Ames, charred by a ragged blaster wound seared through her breast.
They had murdered her--naturally with his blaster--and left him at the
scene, neatly framed for the crime.

Hunter heard--right on cue--the whine of a police siren outside.
Everything timed to trap him just as the motor paralysis wore off!
With an effort that brought beads of sweat to his forehead, he dropped
his blaster and pushed himself out of the chair. His feet were numb.
He moved a few steps and banged into the piano. Clawing for support,
his hands crashed in jangling discord on the keys.

The siren swelled loud in front of the house. Hunter heard the
drum-beat of boots on the porch. He stumbled toward the kitchen--and
fell into the arms of two police officers who had entered from the
rear of the house.

He swung his fist; the fingers felt like clods of wet clay. One of the
mercenaries caught his wrist and held it easily. In the gloom Hunter
saw the Consolidated insignia on the man's jacket, and the guard
whispered quickly, "This deal was a set-up, Hunter--packaged evidence,
dropped at headquarters ten minutes ago."

Hunter stared. "Accusing me by name? Get this straight! Four hours ago
they put me under with a blaster and--"

"It's a United frame," the guard said. "They want you out for good.
The top brass of Consolidated is giving you the green right down the
line. The fastest out Jake and I could figure--" He jerked his head
toward his companion. "--was to give the United boys on our team the
front of the house, and let you make a break for it from the back.
We'll fake enough here to protect ourselves."

They pushed a blaster into Hunter's hands. He stumbled through the
kitchen as the front door gave and two United mercenaries burst into
the house. Hunter ran awkwardly, without full control of his legs.

He saw, looming black against the night shadows, the oval silhouette
of the autojet on the Ames flat, still held under his twenty-four hour
charter. It offered a tempting means of escape, but a public car was
too easily traced and brought down by police tracers. However, it
could perform a miracle as a diversion.


VI

Hunter slid into the car, punched out a destination blindly, and
engaged the flight gear. With the customary roar of power, the car
shot up from the flat. Hunter leaped free. His feet struck the cement.
The lingering trace of paralysis, destroying his normal co-ordination,
made the fall very painful.

Hunter flung himself flat in the shadow of the ornamental shrubs along
the edge of the parking flat. The four police mercenaries sprinted out
of the house and leaped into the police jet. With sirens screaming,
it soared up in pursuit of the empty autojet.

Hunter estimated that he had perhaps thirty minutes before they sent
out a general alarm. A painfully small margin of safety. Where could
he hide that the machines of detection--the skilled, emotionless,
one-track, electronic brains--would not eventually find him? And what
of Ann Saymer? What could he do as a fugitive to save her?

United had planned it all down to the smallest detail. But that was
the way the cartels operated. It was the system Hunter was accustomed
to. He felt neither anger not resentment, simply a determination to
out-plan and out-play the enemy.

If he accepted defeat he would admit frustration, and for Captain Max
Hunter that was impossible. Hadn't he survived a decade of frontier
conflict with an adjustment index of zero-zero? Instead of hopelessly
weighing the odds stacked against him, he counted the advantage which
a single man held in maneuverability and rapid change of pace.

He walked along the museum street, the blaster in his hand. A block
away rose the bulk of a factory building and behind it towered the
monster of center-city, transformed into a fairyland by the glow of
lights on the many levels. Hunter's eye followed the pattern up toward
the top, hidden above the blanket of haze.

The top! Luxury casinos and the castles of the cartels. Werner von
Rausch and his empire of United Researchers. Werner von Rausch, who
gave orders and Ann Saymer disappeared. Werner von Rausch, who gave
new orders and Mrs. Ames lay murdered in her living room.

But behind the facade of his spacefleet and his private army, behind
his police mercenaries, Werner von Rausch was one man--an old man,
Hunter had been told--and a vulnerable target. Hunter weighed his
changes, and the margin of success seemed to be balanced in his favor.

It was not what they would expect him to do. They had framed him for
murder and he should now be running for his life. The hunted turned
hunter. Hunter grinned savagely, enjoying his pun.

       *       *       *       *       *

He slipped the blaster under his belt, leaving the scarlet jacket open
to his navel so that the loose folds would conceal the outline of the
weapon. He would have no trouble reaching the top level.

The resort casinos, like the mid-city amusement area, were open to any
citizen. Special autojets, with destinations pre-set for the casino
flat, were available in every monorail terminal. Hunter could by-pass
a probe inspection at a regular metro-entry. The nearest terminal,
from the north-coast line, was less than a quarter of a mile away.

As Hunter entered the industrial district he heard the turmoil of an
angry crowd. He came upon them suddenly, swarming at the gates of a
factory close to the terminal.

Eric Young's trouble-makers, he thought with a worried frown, jumping
obediently when the big boss spoke the word. In less than five years
Eric Young had turned the union into a third cartel, more powerful
than Consolidated or United because the commodity Young
controlled--human labor--was essential to the other two.

A third cartel! Suddenly Max Hunter understood why the cartels had to
have Ann's patent at any cost. The absolute control of the human mind!
It was the only weapon which Consolidated or United could use to break
Young's power.

Hunter shouldered his way through the strikers toward the terminal.
Though he wore no U.F.W. disc, he felt no alarm. Eric Young's strike
riots were always well-managed. None of the violence was real and no
one was ever seriously hurt.

But these trouble-makers seemed absurdly well-disciplined. They stood
in drill-team ranks, moving and shouting abuse in perfect unison. Then
Hunter saw their faces, as blank as death masks--and in all their
skulls the still unhealed scalpel wound, as well as an occasional
projecting platinum strand which sometimes caught the reflected light.

Max Hunter felt a chill of terror. He was walking in a human graveyard
of living automatons, responding to the transmission from Ann's
machine. United had lost no time in putting the thing to work. This
was no ordinary strike, but the opening skirmish in the conflict that
would wreck both Consolidated and the Union of Free Workers.

Hunter entered the monorail terminal. It was deserted except for a
woman who stood by the window looking out at the crowd. She was
wearing a demure, pink dress. Her face was plain, and she had used no
cosmetic plasti-skin to make it more striking. Her brown hair,
streaked with a gray which she took no trouble to hide, was pulled
into a bun at the back of her neck.

Surprisingly, Hunter thought she was pretty, perhaps because she was
so different from the eternal, baby-faced adolescent who thronged the
city in a million identical duplications.

Hunter knew he had seen her before. He couldn't remember where. She
shifted her position slightly and the light cast a sharp, angular
shadow on her face. Then he knew.

"Dawn!" he cried.

Startled, she turned to face him with a strange look in her eyes.

"I was hoping you wouldn't recognize me, Captain Hunter," she said.

"What are you doing here--dressed like some dowdy just in from a farm
