"It will not harm you. It is my servant." She hesitated, groping for a
word. "A machine. A robot. It will not harm you."

I said, "Is it intelligent?"

"Yes. But it is not alive. Our people made it. We have many such
machines."

The robot swayed toward me, the rim of cilia flashing and twisting.
Lhar said, "It speaks thus, without words or thought...." She paused,
watching the sphere, and I sensed dejection in her manner.

The robot turned to me. The cilia twisted lightly about my arm,
tugging me toward Lhar. I said, "What does it want?"

"It knows that I am dying," Lhar said.

That shocked me. "Dying? No!"

"It is true. Here in this alien world I do not have my usual food. So
I will die. To survive I need the blood of mammals. But there are none
here save those seven the Other has taken. And I cannot use them for
they are now spoiled."

I didn't ask Lhar what sort of mammals she had in her own world.
"That's what the robot wanted when it tried to stop me before, isn't
it?"

"He wanted you to help me, yes. But you are weak from the shock you
have had. I cannot ask you--"

I said, "How much blood do you need?"

At her answer, I said, "All right. You saved my life; I must do the
same for you. I can spare that much blood easily. Go ahead."

She bowed toward me, a fluttering white flame in the dimness of the
tree-room. A tendril flicked out from among her petals, wrapped itself
about my arm. It felt cool, gentle as a woman's hand. I felt no pain.

"You must rest now," Lhar said. "I will go away but I shall not be
long."

The robot clicked and chattered, shifting on its tentacle legs. I
watched it, saying, "Lhar, this can't be true. Why am I--believing
impossible things?"

"I have given you peace," she told me. "Your mind was dangerously
close to madness. I have drugged you a little, physically; so your
emotions will not be strong for a while. It was necessary to save your
sanity."

It was true that my mind felt--was drugged the word? My thoughts were
clear enough, but I felt as if I were submerged in transparent but
dark water. There was an odd sense of existing in a dream. I
remembered Swinburne's lines:

    _Here, where the world is quiet,
       Here, where all trouble seems
     Dead winds' and spent waves' riot
       In doubtful dreams of dreams...._

"What is this place?" I asked.

Lhar bent toward me. "I do not know if I can explain. It is not quite
clear to me. The robot knows. He is a reasoning machine. Wait...."
She turned to the sphere. Its cilia fluttered in quick, complicated
signals.

Lhar turned back to me. "Do you know much of the nature of Time? That
it is curved, moves in a spiral...."

She went on to explain, but much of her explanation I did not
understand. Yet I gathered enough to realize that this valley was not
of Earth. Or, rather, it was not of the earth I knew.

"You have geological disturbances, I know. The strata are tumbled
about, mixed one with another--"

I remembered what Fra Rafael had said about an earthquake, three
months before. Lhar nodded toward me.

"But this was a time-slip. The space-time continuum is also subject to
great strains and stresses. It buckled, and strata--Time-sectors--were
thrust up to mingle with others. This valley belongs to another age,
as do I and the machine, and also--the Other."

She told me what had happened.... There had been no warning. One
moment she had been in her own World, her own Time. The next, she was
here, with her robot. And with the Other....

"I do not know the origin of the Other. I may have lived in either
your future or your past. This valley, with its ruined stone
structures, is probably part of your future. I had never heard of such
a place before. The Other may be of the future also. Its shape I do
not know...."

       *       *       *       *       *

She told me more, much more. The Other, as she called it--giving the
entity a thought-form that implied complete alienage--had a strangely
chameleon-like method of feeding. It lived on life-force, as well as I
could understand, draining the vital powers of a mammal vampirically.
And it assumed the shape of its prey as it fed. It was not possession,
in the strict sense of the word. It was a sort of merging....

Humanity is inclined to invest all things with its own attributes,
forgetting that outside the limitations of time and space and size,
familiar laws of nature do not apply.

So, even now I do not know all that lay behind the terror in that
Peruvian valley. This much I learned: the Other, like Lhar and her
robot, had been cast adrift by a time-slip, and thus marooned here.
There was no way for it to return to its normal Time-sector. It had
created the fog-wall to protect itself from the direct rays of the
sun, which threatened its existence.

Sitting there in the filigreed, silver twilight beside Lhar, I had a
concept of teeming universes of space-time, of an immense spiral of
lives and civilizations, races and cultures, covering an infinite
cosmos. And yet--what had happened? Very little, in that inconceivable
infinity. A rift in time, a dimensional slip--and a sector of land and
three beings on it had been wrenched from their place in time and
transported to _our_ time-stratum.

A robot, a flower that was alive and intelligent--and feminine--and
the Other....

"The native girls," I said. "What will happen to them?"
