wouldn't have creatures that could invade Earth--and the other planets
were hopeless. Perhaps from another star--but that would mean
violating the theories of mass-increase with the speed of light, and
he was not ready to accept that, yet.

This time, he went out of the building without looking first. It could
do no good--they could hide from him, he knew, and he would only call
attention to himself by looking around. With the change in appearance,
he might get by. He moved rapidly up to Broadway, where he found a
little clothing store and a ready-made suit that nearly fitted him.
The tailor there seemed unconcerned when he insisted the cuffs be
turned up at once, and that he wanted to wear it immediately. It took
nearly an hour, but he felt safe, for a change. A five-and-ten
furnished a pair of heavy-rimmed glasses that seemed to have blanks in
them, and he decided he might get by.

There was no evidence of pursuit. He caught a cab, and headed for the
library. Ellen had been well-heeled--suspiciously so for a girl who
lived in a cold-water flat like that; he'd peeled fifteen tens from
her wallet, and there'd been more, not to mention the twenties. His
conscience bothered him a bit, but he was in no position to worry too
much.

       *       *       *       *       *

The library was still the puzzle of the ages to him--he'd used it half
his life, and still found it impossible to guess why such a building
had been chosen. But eventually, he found the periodical room, and
managed to get through the red tape enough to be given a small table
with a stack of newspapers and magazines.

The mathematics magazines interested him most. He pored through them,
looking for a single hint of the things he had seen. Einstein's work
with gravity stood out, but no real advances had come from it. It was
still a philosophical rather than an actual attack on physics--as
beautiful as a new theology, and about as hard to utilize. He skimmed,
through the pages, but nothing showed. No real advance had been made
since his memory blanked out, except for one paper on variable stars
which was interesting, but unhelpful.

He threw them aside in disgust. He knew that it was useless to look in
other languages. Work couldn't be done without some first stages that
would be reported, and any significant new theory would be picked up
and spread. Science wasn't yet completely under political wraps.

For a second, he stopped as he came to a paper bearing his by-line.
Then he grimaced--it was an old one, just published--his attempt to
find how the phenomena of poltergeists could be fitted into the
conservation of energy, and his final proof that the whole business
was sheer rubbish. It would be nice to be able to get back to a life
where he could fool around with such learned jokes.

The newspapers, beginning with the last day he could remember, were
almost as barren of results. There was the story of the cold war,
without the strange overtones that should be there if any of the major
powers--where all the major scientists would tend to be--had found
something new. He'd studied the statistical analysis of mob psychology
at times, and felt sure he could spot the signs.

He skimmed on, without results, until he finally came to the current
paper. This he read more carefully. There was no mention of him. But
he found something on the fat man. It was a simple followup to the
story about the scientist who'd turned himself in at Bellevue--the man
had mysteriously disappeared, three hours later. And there was a
picture--the face of the fat man, with "Professor Arthur Meinzer"
under it.

It didn't help.

Hawkes shoved the magazines and papers back, and went through the
series of halls and stairs that led him to the main reference room,
inconveniently located on the top floor. He found the book he wanted,
and thumbed rapidly through it. Meinzer was listed on the bottom of
page 972--but as he looked for 973, a pile of ashes dribbled onto the
floor.

There was no use. They'd gotten there ahead of him.

He made one final attempt. He called the college, asking for Meinzer,
to find that nobody even knew the name! He knew they were lying--but
he could do nothing about that. Maybe it was only because of the
publicity--or maybe because someone or something had gotten to them
first!

       *       *       *       *       *

Fear was growing with him as he came out on the street. He ducked into
a crowd, and headed slowly into a corner drug store, trying to seem
inconspicuous, but the fear mounted. They were near--they would get
him! Run, GO!

He fought it down, and found that it was weakened, either by his
becoming used to it or because the urgency was less than it had been.

He ducked into a phone-booth and called the newspaper, keeping his eye
on both entrances to the store. It seemed to take forever to locate
the proper man there, but finally he had his connection.

"Meinzer," the voice said, with a curious doubtfulness.

"Oh, yeah. Mister, that story's dead! Call up...."

The telephone melted slowly, dropping into a little cold puddle on the
floor!

Hawkes had felt the tension mounting, and he was prepared for
anything. Now he found himself on the street, darting across
Forty-second Street against the light, without even remembering having
left the booth. He stole a quick glance back, to see people staring at
him with open mouths. He thought he saw a slim figure in gray tweeds,
but he couldn't be sure--and there were probably thousands of such men
in New York.

He ducked into a bank, wormed his way around the various aisles, and
out the back entrance. A cab was waiting there, and he held out a
bill.

"I'm late, buddy. Penn Station!"

The cab-driver took the bill and the hint, and darted out, just as the
light was changing.

Penn Station was as good a place to try to get lost from pursuit as
any. Hawkes examined his wallet, considering trying to get a train
out--but he'd used up nearly all he had taken from Ellen.

And all his careful disguise had proved useless. They weren't
fooled--and this business of dodging was wearing thin. By now, they'd
know his habits!

He drew out a coin, flipping it. It came up heads. He frowned, but
there was nothing else to do. He moved down the ramp toward the subway
that would carry him back to Sixty-sixth and Broadway. He was probably
walking into their trap by now, but the coin was right. He had to free
Ellen. If they got him, it couldn't be much worse for him.

Then he shuddered. He couldn't know whether it would be worse for his
country, or even his world. He couldn't really know anything.


V

It was growing dark as he walked down Sixty-sixth, eyeing every man
suspiciously, and knowing his suspicion would do no good. He was still
trying to think, though he knew his thoughts were as useless as his
suspicions.

If he could remember! His mind came up sharply against leaving Irma
and taking out the mail; then it went abruptly blank. What had been in
the letter? It had been from a professor--it might have been from
Professor Meinzer. That would tie in neatly. But Meinzer was dead, and
he couldn't remember. They'd stripped him of his memory. How? Why?
Were they trying to prevent his giving information to others--or were
they trying to get something from him? And what could he know?

He'd dabbled with ESP mathematically, but now he found himself
wondering if it could exist. Could they be tracking him by some
natural or mechanical ability to read his mind? He strained his own
mind to find a whisper of foreign thought, outside his brain. He drew
a blank, of course, as he'd expected.

There were no answers. They could play with him, like a cat juggling a
mouse, letting him almost learn something--and then, always, they
arrived just in time to prevent his success!

Put a rat in a maze where it can't learn the path, and it goes insane.
But what good would he be to anyone if they drove him insane? And why
bother with all that when they could silence him as well by killing
him?

He'd forgotten to watch, and was surprised to find his feet on the
steps of the apartment building. He jerked back, and bumped into
someone.

"Sorry." The words came from behind him, automatically, and he turned
to see the slim young man stepping aside. For a second, their eyes met
squarely. A row of teeth flashed in a brief smile as the man started
around him. "Guess I was thinking. Should have watched where I was
going."

The man went on down the street, and turned in at the restaurant
entrance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hawkes lifted a foot that weighed a ton and slowly closed his mouth.
He'd been facing away from the street light--and his face might have
been hard to see. Yet....

It didn't fit. The young man must have known him!

He blanked it from his mind. He couldn't believe that it was anything
but lack of recognition. It was hard to see here, where the other was
facing the light, and he was in the shadow.

But it still meant that they were waiting, nearby.

He dashed up the stairs, expecting a rush at both landings. The normal
sounds of the apartment house went on. He listened at his door, but he
could hear nothing except the same drip he had heard before. Slowly,
he inserted the key and went in. The small bulb was still on. He crept
along, trying to move silently on floors that insisted on creaking.
The living room was as he had left it, and he caught sight of Ellen on
the bed.

He spotted a mirror over one of the dressers, and used that to study
more of the bedroom. It seemed as empty as before.

Finally, he stepped inside. There was no one there but Ellen, and she
seemed to be asleep, doubled up in a position that might have made the
unkind cords easier to stand. She moaned slightly as he untied her
gently, but didn't awaken. Her breathing was regular, and her breath
had the odd muskiness of someone who has slept for several hours.

He found a bottle of liquor on the shelf where she had put it, and
rinsed out a couple of glasses. It was good liquor--good enough to
take without mixers, as they'd have to do.

She came awake when he called her, rubbing her eyes and then her
wrists, where the cords had left a mark. But she was smiling. "Hi,
Will. I knew you'd come back. Hey, not on an empty stomach."

"You need it--and so do I," he told her. "Bottoms up!"

They were big glasses. She gasped over it, but she downed it, then
reached for the water he had brought as a chaser. She swallowed, and
blinked tears out of her eyes. "I don't usually drink."

He made no comment, but refilled the glass. The liquor had less effect
on him than he'd expected, though he'd always had a good head for it.
It took some of the edge off his worrying, though.

She giggled suddenly, and he frowned. She couldn't take much on an
empty stomach, it seemed. Then he shrugged. Let her drink--maybe if he
could get her drunk, he could find something out; at least he might
learn whether the slim young man had been there during the day.

"Like when you found your dad's cider," she said, and giggled again.
"You got awful--hp!--awful drunk, Willy, din't you? You
were--so--funny!"

She was trying to be careful with her words already. She slid around,
doing things that brought more honestly beautiful thigh into the light
than Will had seen in ten years. He reached to adjust her dress, and
she giggled again, sliding against him.

"You kissed me then, Willy. Remember? Bet you don' remember!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He began it coldly, deliberately. If he could work on her emotions
enough, he'd crack the wall of evasion and lies, somehow. He reached
for her, calculating what would arouse her without causing any shock
to bring her back to her senses.

He hadn't counted on the quickness of her reponse, nor the complete
acceptance of his right with which she took it. The liquor had reduced
her to the stage of a little girl who competely trusted her companion.
She seemed as unconscious of her body as a child might be.

Instead of protesting, she reached down and began unfastening the
buttons on her dress. "'Syour turn now, Willy. Put you to bed last
night, you put me to bed t'-night. Then you gotta kiss me good-night.
Nighty-night, nighty-night."

He felt like a heel at first. And then he began to feel like a
