
"Not serious, you fool," Doc said. "The _star_ Sirius--the Dog Star,
it's called--it moved a good sixty degrees, _then stopped dead_!"

I sat up and took notice then, partly because the star really had
stopped instead of burning out the way a falling star seems to do,
partly because anything that excites Doc Shull that much is something
to think about.

We watched the star like two cats at a mouse-hole, but it didn't move
again. After a while a smaller one did, though, and later in the night
a whole procession of them streaked across the sky and fell into place
around the first one, forming a pattern that didn't make any sense to
us. They stopped moving around midnight and we went to bed, but
neither of us got to sleep right away.

"Maybe we ought to look for another interest in life ourselves instead
of drumming up one for Joey," Doc said. He meant it as a joke but it
had a shaky sound; "Something besides getting beered up every night,
for instance."

"You think we've got the d.t.'s from drinking _beer_?" I asked.

Doc laughed at that, sounding more like his old self. "No, Roy. No
two people ever had instantaneous and identical hallucinations."

"Look," I said. "I know this sounds crazy but maybe Joey--"

Doc wasn't amused any more. "Don't be a fool, Roy. If those stars
really moved you can be sure of two things--Joey had nothing to do
with it, and the papers will explain everything tomorrow."

He was wrong on one count at least.

The papers next day were packed with scareheads three inches high but
none of them explained anything. The radio commentators quoted every
authority they could reach, and astronomers were going crazy
everywhere. It just couldn't happen, they said.

Doc and I went over the news column by column that night and I learned
more about the stars than I'd learned in a lifetime. Doc, as I've said
before, is an educated man, and what he couldn't recall offhand about
astronomy the newspapers quoted by chapter and verse. They ran
interviews with astronomers at Harvard Observatory and Mount Wilson
and Lick and Flagstaff and God knows where else, but nobody could
explain why all of those stars would change position then stop.

It set me back on my heels to learn that Sirius was twice as big as
the Sun and more than twice as heavy, that it was three times as hot
and had a little dark companion that was more solid than lead but
didn't give off enough light to be seen with the naked eye. This
little companion--astronomers called it the "Pup" because Sirius was
the Dog Star--hadn't moved, which puzzled the astronomers no end. I
suggested to Doc, only half joking, that maybe the Pup had stayed put
because it wasn't bright enough to suit Joey's taste, but Doc called
me down sharp.

"Don't joke about Joey," he said sternly. "Getting back to
Sirius--it's so far away that its light needs eight and a half years
to reach us. That means it started moving when Joey was only eighteen
months old. The speed of light is a universal constant, Roy, and
astronomers say it can't be changed."

"They said the stars couldn't be tossed around like pool balls, too,"
I pointed out. "I'm not saying that Joey really moved those damn
stars, Doc, but if he did he could have moved the light along with
them, couldn't he?"

But Doc wouldn't argue the point. "I'm going out for air," he said.

I trailed along, but we didn't get farther than Joey's wheelchair.

There he sat, tense and absorbed, staring up at the night sky. Doc and
I followed his gaze, the way you do automatically when somebody on the
street ahead of you cranes his neck at something. We looked up just
in time to see the stars start moving again.

The first one to go was a big white one that slanted across the sky
like a Roman candle fireball--_zip_, like that--and stopped dead
beside the group that had collected around Sirius.

Doc said, "There went Altair," and his voice sounded like he had just
run a mile.

That was only the beginning. During the next hour forty or fifty more
stars flashed across the sky and joined the group that had moved the
night before. The pattern they made still didn't look like anything in
particular.

I left Doc shaking his head at the sky and went over to give Joey, who
had called it a night and was hand-rolling his wheelchair toward the
Pond trailer, a boost up the entrance ramp. I pushed him inside where
Doc couldn't hear, then I asked him how things were going.

"Slow, Roy," he said. "I've got 'most a hundred to go, yet."

"Then you're really moving those stars up there?"

He looked surprised. "Sure, it's not so hard once you know how."

The odds were even that he was pulling my leg, but I went ahead anyway
and asked another question.

"I can't make head or tail of it, Joey," I said. "What're you making
up there?"

He gave me a very small smile.

