They're big and camouflaged, and the mesh size is right."

"So maybe we'll have to do that," said Mr. Untz.

Dr. Mildume dipped his head. "I don't know. I'd like to see these
other cages first."

"Look," said Mr. Untz. "Don't worry about it. If they hold lions they
will hold your whatever-you-call-thems. I'll get the animal trainer,
Flaubert, to stand by. He practically talks to animals--except horses,
which is his hard luck."

The jungle cages were duly summoned and so was Etienne Flaubert of the
Golden West Animal Education Studios on Sunset Boulevard. While they
waited Mr. Untz stood aside with Harold Potter. He mopped his brow--he
gestured at the whole group. "This," he said, "is the story of my
life."

"It is?" asked Harold.

Mr. Untz nodded. "Me, I am an expert on musicals. Musicals I can do
with my left hand. But ever since I am in Hollywood I do everything
_but_ a musical. And always something gets fouled up. Always there is
trouble. You will not believe this, Harold, but I am an unhappy man."

"I believe it," said Harold.

Mr. Untz looked at him sharply and said, "You don't have to believe it
so quickly. You could give me a chance to explain."

"Look," said Harold--now being truly interested and forgetting some of
the first principles of buttering-up one's boss, "take the scientific
attitude. Everything is _relative_."

"Yes," said Mr. Untz, "In Hollywood everything is relatives, believe
me."

"No, no--I wasn't referring to nepotism," said Harold. "I was thinking
that you and many others, of course, prefer musicals. But there are
vast other groups who prefer westerns, detectives, comedies or what
have you. One man's meat is another's poison.

"But nourishment stays the same in principle. The artistic demands
still hold and a good picture is a picture, whatever its field. Now,
if you, as a producer, can shift to the other fellow's viewpoint--find
out why the thing that terrifies you amuses him--or vice versa."

"Harold," said Mr. Untz, not without suspicion, "are you an assistant
producer or a philosopher?"

"Sometimes to be the one," sighed Harold, "you have to be the other."

The big jungle cage arrived presently. While it was being set up
another assistant came to Mr. Untz and said, "Jimsy LaRoche is
outside, yelling to get in, Mr. Untz."

Mr. Untz whirled on the assistant and said, "Tell that overpaid
brat--who I personally didn't want in my picture in the first
place--tell him in the second place the President of the United States
could not get in here this afternoon. No, wait a minute, that wouldn't
mean anything to him--he makes more money than the President. Just
tell him no."

"Yes, sir," said the assistant. He left.

About then the animal trainer, Etienne Flaubert, was admitted. He
walked right up to Mr. Untz. Flaubert was nearly seven feet tall. He
had tremendous shoulders and none of it was coat padding. He had a
chest one might have gone over Niagara Falls in. He had a huge golden
beard. When he spoke it sounded like the bass viol section of the Los
Angeles Symphony tuning up.

He said to Mr. Untz, "Where are these monsters I hear about? I'd like
to see the monster that isn't just a big kitty, like all the rest. Big
kitties, that's all they are. You gotta know how to handle them."

Mr. Untz led Flaubert to the cage and said, "There."

Flaubert gasped. Then he steadied himself. The monsters had been
maneuvered into the bigger cage by now--Dr. Mildume had enticed them
with broken electric light bulbs and slammed the drop-doors behind
them by a remote-control rope. They had finished their meal of glass.
They were curled in a corner of the cage now, tentacles wrapped about
each other, squeaking contentedly.

Flaubert recovered a bit.

"Kitties, just big kitties," he growled.

Eddie Tamoto called, "Hey, Max, we'd like to get 'em in the center of
the cage for a shot." He was gesturing from the camera boom seat.
"Only moving around. You know--looking fierce."

"Can you do it, Flaubert?" said Mr. Untz, turning to the big trainer.

"Just big kitties," said Flaubert.

He had brought his own whip and blank cartridge pistol. His assistant
stood by with a .30-30 rifle. Dr. Mildume opened the door quickly and
Flaubert slipped into the cage.

"Okay--get set, everybody!" yelled Mr. Untz. People scurried. An
attendant switched on the warning light and rocker arm that warned
people outside of the stage not to barge in. "Quiet!" yelled Mr. Untz.
"Quiet--_quiet_!" yelled several assistants. The order went down the
line. Through channels.

And there stood Etienne Flaubert, huge and more or less unafraid, in
the middle of the cage. The monsters in the corner began slowly to
uncoil their tentacles from about each other. Their eye-stalks rose
and began to wave slowly. Their red saw-toothed mouths worked into
pouts, gapes and grins.

The smaller of the two suddenly shuddered all over. Its angry
