
"Now for the last half of our job, Allie," Bert said. "First we attach
shoulder-pack jets to our spacesuits."

This was accomplished a few seconds before the stupendous flash of the
Big Pill's explosion blazed beyond the horizon. The dark curve of
Titan's bulk was limned against thin white fire that streamed outward
toward the stars like comet's hair. The spectacle looked like a
much-enlarged color-photo of a segment of a solar eclipse. The glare
on the other side of Titan was so intense and far-reaching that the
night-portions of huge Saturn and his other satellites, and the
shadowed part of the fabulous, treasure-filled Rings, all hundreds of
thousands of miles away, registered an easily perceptible flicker.
But in airless space, of course, no sound was transmitted.

Alice's face went pale. Bert did not stop doing what must be
done--adjusting the timing system in the black case beside his pilot
seat, and looking with a final, intense glance along the cable which
led back through the hull of the ship to a silvery, pipelike thing
around which the thousands of tons of sinister black ingots were
stacked. It was the primer-cap of another kind of subatomic fury.

About the white fire beyond the horizon, hardly dimming at all after
its first dazzling flash, neither Alice nor Bert said anything. Maybe
their awe and concern were too great. But already long fingers of
incandescent gases were jetting and flowing over the hilltops, as if
to catch up with the speeding ship.

Bert Kraskow knew pretty well what was going on where the Big Pill had
struck the crust of Titan. First, there had been that stupendous
blast. Then, inconceivable blue-white incandescence, like the heart of
a star, began gnawing more gradually into the walls of the gigantic
crater that had been formed. A chain-reacting process was now
spreading through the silicates and other components of Titan's crust.
It was a blunt and terrible inferno.

But to the scientist's view, chemical compounds were being broken
apart; atoms were being shattered, and recast in new forms, as floods
of neutrons, and other basic particles raced like bullets through
their structure. On a small scale, here was something that was like
the birth of the universe.

Bert found his voice at last. "The ship is firm in its orbit around
Titan, Allie. The primer is set for thirty minutes from now. And we're
approaching position above camp again. So here's where we bail out."

The Kraskow's closed their helmet face-windows and jumped from the
airlock together. Flame-propelled by their shoulder-pack jets, they
darted downward toward the sad, rolling hills that curved away under
the weak light of the distance-shrunken sun. It was hard to believe
that eons ago, before most of Titan's air and water had leaked away
into space, those hills had been green with life.

Even with an ugly, red-lit vapor pouring and spreading over the arc of
Titan's edge, they thought of such things.

       *       *       *       *       *

Their helmet radiophones were full of static from intense
electromagnetic disturbances, so that it was hard to converse.

But presently Alice shouted: "Bert! It's funny that we don't see the
ship from camp anywhere in space. They must have gotten our warning to
blast off with everybody. Radio reception was clear as a bell,
then!... Wait! Somebody's trying to call us now...."

Bert strained his ears to penetrate the scratchy noises thrown up by
the atomic holocaust that he had set off, and hear the words spoken
blurredly by a familiar voice:

"... Bert ... Alice.... This is Lawler.... Rockets of ship won't
function.... So ... can't leave ... camp.... Two Space Patrol boats
cleared Titan with some ... women.... Too small ... few passengers....
Most ... stranded here.... Bert--what?... I think ... Lauren...."

The rest of the words were drowned in a cataract of static.

Bert gulped. His mouth tasted suddenly sour with near-panic. "Lauren,"
he grated, his voice like a file. "Again. It would be a long chance
that the ship broke down just by coincidence. He doctored those
rockets and probably got clear in his own spaceboat. Leave it to him
to make the use of the Big Pill look like disaster. And it can be
that, now, with people left in the danger zone, losing their heads,
acting foolishly."

Bert felt much more than just bitter, furious chagrin. His fellow
colonists might lose their lives. He was responsible. He had launched
a gigantic experiment recklessly.

"All we can do is get back to camp as fast as possible," Alice shouted
above the static. "Come on, Bert! Bear down on the jets!"

So they hurtled at even greater speed toward the surface of Titan
below. Meanwhile, faintly luminous vapors continued to pour over the
hills from the direction of the terrible glow that fringed the
horizon. Minutes before they reached the ground, hot, dusty murk
thickened around them. It blew against them like a devil's wind.

They began to use their jets to brake speed. The camp was all but lost
to view in the thickening haze. They landed heavily a mile outside it
and went rolling for a few yards after the impact. Dazed, they
staggered up.

For a while their impressions were blurred, as if they struggled
through some murky, cobwebby nightmare. Once more on Titan, silent as
death for unthinkable ages, there were howling wind-sounds that found
their way to Alice and Bert dimly through their oxygen helmets. Often
the hot blast bowled them over, but they arose and kept on toward
camp.

Bert took a Geiger counter, pencil-size from his chest-pouch. In it,
flashes of light replaced the ancient clicking. It flickered madly.
This meant that outside their shielding spacesuits was radioactive
death. The gases of the wind that howled around them, had been in part
released from chemical compounds, but more had been transmuted from
other elements of the rock and dust in the crust of Titan, in that
atomic vortex where the Big Pill had struck. Those gases were so new
that they were tainted with the fires of their birth--saturated with
radioactivity.

"It's nothing that we didn't expect, Allie," Bert grated into his
helmet-phone, as if to reassure himself as well as his wife. "We knew
beforehand."

His arm was around Alice, supporting her unsteady steps. Through
blowing clouds of dust and gas that had surpassed hurricane force,
they reached camp. Through the murk they saw that the wind had
flattened and scorched every airdome. But there was no one in sight.

"The people must be inside the ship!" Alice shouted. "Even if it can't
fly, it can protect them! There it is, undamaged!..."

"Yeah," Bert agreed, but he knew that her cheerfulness was a little
