
Just before they landed on the roof of the UN annex, Lansberg handed
the impressor back to Karnes. It had obviously failed to do what
either of them had hoped it would.

"It's your baby," Lansberg said, shaking his head. "All I have to say
is it's a hell of a way to earn ten bucks."

Karnes grinned and dropped the thing back in his coat pocket.

By the time that evening had rolled around, Karnes was beginning to
get just a little bored. He and Lansberg had been in and out of the
New York office in record time. Then they had spent a few hours with
New York's Finest and the District Attorney, lining up a net to pick
up all the little rats involved.

After that, there was nothing to do but wait.

Karnes slept a couple of hours to catch up, read two magazines from
cover to cover, and played eight games of solitaire. He was getting
itchy.

His brain kept crackling. _What's the matter with me? I ought to be
thinking about this Brittain fellow instead of--_

But, after all, what did Brittain matter? According to the records, he
was born Alex Bretinov, in Marseilles, France, in nineteen
sixty-eight. His father, a dyed-in-the-wool Old Guard Communist, had
been born in Minsk in nineteen forty.

_Or had he been wound up, and his clockwork started in January of
nineteen fifty-three?_

The radio popped. "Eighteen. Alert. Brittain just left his place on
foot. Carson, Reymann following. Over."

Lansberg dropped his magazine. "He seems to be heading for the Big
Boy--I hope."

The ground car followed him to a subway, and two men on foot followed
him in from Flatbush Avenue.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some hours later, after much devious turning, dodging, and switching,
Brittain climbed into a taxi on the corner of Park Avenue and
Forty-seventh Street, evidently feeling he had ditched any tails he
might have had.

Karnes and Lansberg were right behind him in a radio car.

The cab headed due south on Park Avenue, following it until it became
Fourth, swung right at Tenth Street, past Grace Church, across
Broadway. At Sixth, it angled left toward Greenwich Village.

"Somewhere in the Village, nickels to knotholes," Lansberg guessed as
he turned to follow.

Karnes, at the radio, was giving rapid-fire directions over the
scrambler-equipped transceiver. By this time, several carloads of
agents and police were converging on the cab from every direction.
From high above, could be heard the faint hum of 'copters.

Lansberg was exultant. "We've got them for once! And the goods on
every essobee in the place."

The cars hummed smoothly through the broad streets, past the
shabby-genteel apartment neighborhood. Back in the early sixties, some
of these buildings had been high-priced hotels, but the Village had
gone to pot since the seventies.

A few minutes later, the cab pulled up in front of an imposing looking
building of slightly tarnished aluminum paneling. Brittain got out,
paid his fare, and went inside.

As the cab pulled away, Karnes gave orders for it to be picked up a
few blocks away, just in case.

The rest of the vehicles began to surround the building.

Karnes, meanwhile, followed Brittain into the foyer of the apartment
hotel. It was almost a mistake. Brittain hadn't gone in. Evidently
attracted by the footsteps following him, he turned and looked back
out. Karnes wasn't more than ten feet away.

_Just pretend you live here_, thought Karnes, _and bully-boy will
never know the difference_.

He walked right on up to the doorway, pretending not to notice
Brittain. Evidently, the saboteur was a little flustered, not quite
knowing who Karnes was. He, too, pretended that he had no suspicions.
He pressed a buzzer on the panel to announce himself to a guest.
Karnes noticed it was 523; a fifth floor button.

The front door, inside the foyer, was one of those gadgets with an
electric lock that doesn't open unless you either have a key to the
building or can get a friend who lives there to let you in.

When Karnes saw Brittain press the buzzer, he waited a second and took
a chance.

"Here," he said, fishing in his pocket, "I'll let you in." _That ought
to give him the impression I live here._

Brittain smiled fetchingly. "Thanks, but I--"

Bzzzz! The old-fashioned lock announced that it was open. Karnes
stopped fishing and opened the door, letting Brittain follow him in.
He stayed in the lead to the elevator, and pushed the button marked
"4."

"You getting off before four?" he asked conversationally.

"No."

The elevator slid on up to four without another word being said by
either man.

Karnes was judging the speed of the elevator, estimating the time it
took for the doors to open as they did so, and making quick mental
comparisons with his own ability to climb stairs at a run. The
elevator was an old one, and fairly slow--

When the doors slid open, he stepped out and began to walk easily down
the hall toward the stairway. When the elevator clicked shut, he broke
into a run and hit the stairway at top speed, his long legs taking the
steps three at a time.

The stairway was poorly lit, since it was hardly ever used, and, at
the fifth floor, he was able to conceal himself in the darkness as
Brittain turned up the hall toward 523.

Karnes looked closely at his surroundings for the first time. There
was a well-worn, but not ragged, nylon carpet on the floor, dull
chrome railing on the stair bannisters, and the halls were lit by
old-fashioned glo-plates in the ceiling. The place was inexpensive,
but not cheap.

Having made sure that Brittain actually had entered 523, he stepped
back toward the elevator in order to notify Lansberg.

A sudden voice said: "You lookin' for-a somebody, meester?"

Karnes turned. An elderly man with a heavy mustache and a heavy body
stood partway up the stairs, clad in slacks and shirt.

"Who are you?" frowned Karnes.

"I'm Amati, the supratendent. Why?" The scowl was heavy.

Karnes couldn't take any chances. The man might be perfectly okay,
but--

       *       *       *       *       *

Lansberg's steps sounded, coming up the stairs. With him was a
Manhattan Squad officer of the Police Department.

"Shhh, Mr. Amati. C'mere a minute," said the cop.

"Oh. Lootenant Carnotti. Whatsa--"

"Shhhhhh! C'mere, I said, and be quiet!"

"You know this man?" Lansberg asked the policeman softly, indicating
Amati.
