eat. But where was it?

He examined the object Casker was sitting on. It was about the size
and shape of a large coffin, with a shallow depression on top. It was
made of a hard, corrugated substance.

"What do you suppose this is?" Hellman asked.

"Does it matter?"

Hellman glanced at the symbols painted on the side of the object, then
looked them up in his dictionary.

"Fascinating," he murmured, after a while.

"Is it something to eat?" Casker asked, with a faint glimmering of
hope.

"No, You are sitting on something called THE MOROG CUSTOM SUPER
TRANSPORT FOR THE DISCRIMINATING HELGAN WHO DESIRES THE BEST IN
VERTICAL TRANSPORTATION. It's a vehicle!"

"Oh," Casker said dully.

"This is important! Look at it! How does it work?"

Casker wearily climbed off the Morog Custom Super Transport and looked
it over carefully. He traced four almost invisible separations on its
four corners. "Retractable wheels, probably, but I don't see--"

Hellman read on. "It says to give it three amphus of high-gain Integor
fuel, then a van of Tonder lubrication, and not to run it over three
thousand Ruls for the first fifty mungus."

"Let's find something to eat," Casker said.

"Don't you see how important this is?" Hellman asked. "This could
solve our problem. If we could deduce the alien logic inherent in
constructing this vehicle, we might know the Helgan thought pattern.
This, in turn, would give us an insight into their nervous systems,
which would imply their biochemical makeup."

Casker stood still, trying to decide whether he had enough strength
left to strangle Hellman.

"For example," Hellman said, "what kind of vehicle would be used in a
place like this? Not one with wheels, since everything is up and down.
Anti-gravity? Perhaps, but what _kind_ of anti-gravity? And why did
the inhabitants devise a boxlike form instead--"

Casker decided sadly that he didn't have enough strength to strangle
Hellman, no matter how pleasant it might be. Very quietly, he said,
"Kindly stop making like a scientist. Let's see if there isn't
_something_ we can gulp down."

"All right," Hellman said sulkily.

       *       *       *       *       *

Casker watched his partner wander off among the cans, bottles and
cases. He wondered vaguely where Hellman got the energy, and decided
that he was just too cerebral to know when he was starving.

"Here's something," Hellman called out, standing in front of a large
yellow vat.

"What does it say?" Casker asked.

"Little bit hard to translate. But rendered freely, it reads:
MORISHILLE'S VOOZY, WITH LACTO-ECTO ADDED FOR A NEW TASTE SENSATION.
EVERYONE DRINKS VOOZY. GOOD BEFORE AND AFTER MEALS, NO UNPLEASANT
AFTER-EFFECTS. GOOD FOR CHILDREN! THE DRINK OF THE UNIVERSE!"

"That sounds good," Casker admitted, thinking that Hellman might not
be so stupid after all.

"This should tell us once and for all if their meat _is_ our meat,"
Hellman said. "This Voozy seems to be the closest thing to a universal
drink I've found yet."

"Maybe," Casker said hopefully, "maybe it's just plain water!"

"We'll see." Hellman pried open the lid with the edge of the burner.

Within the vat was a crystal-clear liquid.

"No odor," Casker said, bending over the vat.

The crystal liquid lifted to meet him.

Casker retreated so rapidly that he fell over a box. Hellman helped
him to his feet, and they approached the vat again. As they came near,
the liquid lifted itself three feet into the air and moved toward
them.

"What've you done now?" Casker asked, moving back carefully. The
liquid flowed slowly over the side of the vat. It began to flow toward
him.

"Hellman!" Casker shrieked.

Hellman was standing to one side, perspiration pouring down his face,
reading his dictionary with a preoccupied frown.

"Guess I bumbled the translation," he said.

"Do something!" Casker shouted. The liquid was trying to back him into
a corner.

"Nothing I can do," Hellman said, reading on. "Ah, here's the error.
It doesn't say 'Everyone drinks Voozy.' Wrong subject. 'Voozy drinks
_everyone_.' That tells us something! The Helgans must have soaked
liquid in through their pores. Naturally, they would prefer to be
drunk, instead of to drink."

Casker tried to dodge around the liquid, but it cut him off with a
merry gurgle. Desperately he picked up a small bale and threw it at
the Voozy. The Voozy caught the bale and drank it. Then it discarded
