"Lazy tongue! It's _more_, not mur!"

John dropped to all fours and retreated. Usually Neff slapped him in
the belly when he used that tone. But Neff was bemused tonight. He
kept listening for sounds, sounds that he knew could never penetrate
the thick walls.

They were out there, he was sure. Another damned fool or two, flashing
a light around, trying to figure out something. Neff remembered one
pair who had even tried nitroglycerin. He saw the burns on the outside
of the door the next morning.

Amateurs! Nobody knew for sure just how much money Neff kept in the
old desk, and big-time pros wouldn't tackle a job like this without a
pretty fair notion of the loot. For all they knew, maybe he mailed it
to an out-of-town bank.

"Okay, fetch the pencil."

John jumped from the desk and moved toward the open door of the
shower-stall where Neff had thrown the pencil stub. He paused by the
wheat can, then scurried on to get the pencil. He climbed Neff's leg
and dropped the pencil into the open palm.

"Smart punks up at State College. So you can't teach a rat anything
but mazes and how to go nuts from electric shocks, eh? Wouldn't they
be surprised to meet you, John?"

"Hungrih!"

"You're always hungry!"

"Meat! Meat!"

"Yeah. You can sound your "e's" real good when you say, 'meat.' Some
day I'll cut off your tail and feed it to you." He laughed, grabbed
John by the coarse hair of his back and slipped him back under the
cage.

Then he undressed down to his underwear, turned out the light and lay
on the narrow iron bed. John rustled in his cage for a minute, then
there was only the faint hum of the blower and sucker motors in the
ventilating system. The incoming and outgoing air was baffled and
trapped to kill sounds, and spring-loaded sliding doors poised to jam
shut and seal off the room if anyone tampered with the exterior
grilles in the roof.

The fans hummed softly and Erd Neff slept.

_Sleck-thud, sleck-thud!_

       *       *       *       *       *

He was awake pawing the wall for the light switch, but even as his
hand found it, and his eyes discovered the closed ventilator doors, a
reddish vapor sank over his body. A single gasp and Neff was clawing
his throat. Sharp, brown-tasting, acid-burning, eye-searing,
nose-stinging!

He fell to his knees and clawed to the far corner, fighting for air,
but the acrid stink stained his throat and nose. His eyes kept
burning. The whole room must be full!

The door-lever! No, that's what they wanted. Blind! Gun's no good now.
God, for a breath of air! Damned tears! Can't open my eyes! Air! _Got
to have it!_

His throat refused to open. The stink, a little like iodine, a lot
like a hospital smell but a million times stronger--raked at the
tender tissues of his throat. Icepicks stabbed from his soft palate,
up into his brain, his temples. He swayed against the door, caught the
lever and heaved convulsively. The door fell away slowly. He stumbled
forward, gashing his knee against the sharp jamb.

A light struck redly through his clenched, tear-soaked eye-lids.

"That did it. Get the gun!" The voice was high, almost girlish. A
young boy?

A slightly heavier voice said, "Got it. Keep an eye on him while I
find out why the fan stopped working."

"He's going no place. You were right. That bromine stuff really did
the business. Lookit his face. Sure it won't kill him?"

"Don't care if it does now. We got the door open."

"What is this bromine, anyhow? Boy it sure stinks!"

"It's a chemical element like chlorine, only it's a liquid. It fumes
if you don't keep it covered with water, and the fumes really get you.
They used it in gas bombs in the war."

"That was chlorine."

"They used bromine, too. I read it."

"Air!" Neff rasped.

"Help yourself if you call this stinkin' stuff in your warehouse air."

From the vault the deadened voice came. "This must be the switch. The
other switch is for the lights."

"Look out! When you turn it on don't get dosed yourself."
