"And next time," Martin said, "please don't joggle my elbow when I'm
holding a Helena Glinska. It's most annoying."

St. Cyr drew a mighty breath, rose to his full height--and then
subsided. St. Cyr at the moment looked like a Keystone Kop after the
chase sequence, and knew it. Even if he killed Martin now, the element
of classic tragedy would be lacking. He would appear in the untenable
position of Hamlet murdering his uncle with custard pies.

"Do nothing until I return!" he commanded, and with a final glare at
Martin plunged moistly out of the theater.

The door crashed shut behind him. There was silence for a moment except
for the soft music from the overhead screen which DeeDee had caused to
be turned on again, so that she might watch her own lovely form flicker
in dimmed images through pastel waves, while she sang a duet with Dan
Dailey about sailors, mermaids and her home in far Atlantis.

"And now," said Martin, turning with quiet authority to Watt, who was
regarding him with a baffled expression, "I want a word with you."

"I can't discuss your contract till Raoul gets back," Watt said quickly.

"Nonsense," Martin said in a firm voice. "Why should St. Cyr dictate
your decisions? Without you, he couldn't turn out a box-office success
if he had to. No, be quiet, Erika. I'm handling this, my pretty
creature."

Watt rose to his feet. "Sorry, I can't discuss it," he said. "St. Cyr
pictures make money, and you're an inexperien--"

"That's why I see the true situation so clearly," Martin said. "The
trouble with you is you draw a line between artistic genius and
financial genius. To you, it's merely routine when you work with the
plastic medium of human minds, shaping them into an Ideal Audience. You
are an ecological genius, Tolliver Watt! The true artist controls his
environment, and gradually you, with a master's consummate skill, shape
that great mass of living, breathing humanity into a perfect
audience...."

"Sorry," Watt said, but not, bruskly. "I really have no time--ah--"

"Your genius has gone long enough unrecognized," Martin said hastily,
letting admiration ring in his golden voice. "You assume that St. Cyr is
your equal. You give him your own credit titles. Yet in your own mind
you must have known that half the credit for his pictures is yours. Was
Phidias non-commercial? Was Michaelangelo? Commercialism is simply a
label for functionalism, and all great artists produce functional art.
The trivial details of Rubens' masterpieces were filled in by
assistants, were they not? But Rubens got the credit, not his hirelings.
The proof of the pudding's obvious. Why?" Cunningly gauging his
listener, Martin here broke off.

"Why?" Watt asked.

"Sit down," Martin urged. "I'll tell you why. St. Cyr's pictures make
money, but you're responsible for their molding into the ideal form,
impressing your character-matrix upon everything and everyone at Summit
Studios...."

        *        *       *        *        *

Slowly Watt sank into his chair. About his ears the hypnotic bursts of
Disraelian rhodomontade thundered compellingly. For Martin had the man
hooked. With unerring aim he had at the first try discovered Watt's
weakness--the uncomfortable feeling in a professionally arty town that
money-making is a basically contemptible business. Disraeli had handled
tougher problems in his day. He had swayed Parliaments.

Watt swayed, tottered--and fell. It took about ten minutes, all in all.
By the end of that time, dizzy with eloquent praise of his economic
ability, Watt had realized that while St. Cyr might be an artistic
genius, he had no business interfering in the plans of an economic
genius. Nobody told Watt what to do when economics were concerned.

"You have the broad vision that can balance all possibilities and show
the right path with perfect clarity," Martin said glibly. "Very well.
You wish Eden. You feel--do you not?--that I am unsuitable material.
Only geniuses can change their plans with instantaneous speed.... When
will my contract release be ready?"

"What?" said Watt, in a swimming, glorious daze. "Oh. Of course. Hm-m.
Your contract release. Well, now--"

"St. Cyr would stubbornly cling to past errors until Summit goes broke,"
Martin pointed out. "Only a genius like Tolliver Watt strikes when the
iron is hot, when he sees a chance to exchange failure for success, a
Martin for an Eden."

"Hm-m," Watt said. "Yes. Very well, then." His long face grew shrewd.
"Very, well, you get your release--_after_ I've signed Eden."

"There you put your finger on the heart of the matter," Martin approved,
after a very brief moment of somewhat dashed thought. "Miss Eden is
still undecided. If you left the transaction to somebody like St. Cyr,
say, it would be botched. Erika, you have your car here? How quickly
could you drive Tolliver Watt to Laguna? He's the only person with the
skill to handle this situation."

"What situa--oh, yes. Of course, Nick. We could start right away."

"But--" Watt said.

The Disraeli-matrix swept on into oratorical periods that made the walls
ring. The golden tongue played arpeggios with logic.

"I see," the dazed Watt murmured, allowing himself to be shepherded
toward the door. "Yes, yes, of course. Then--suppose you drop over to my
place tonight, Martin. After I get the Eden signature, I'll have your
release prepared. Hm-m. Functional genius...." His voice fell to a low,
crooning mutter, and he moved quietly out of the door.

Martin laid a hand on Erika's arm as she followed him.

"Wait a second," he said. "Keep him away from the studio until we get
the release. St. Cyr can still out-shout me any time. But he's hooked.
We--"

"Nick," Erika said, looking searchingly into his face. "What's
happened?"

"Tell you tonight," Martin said hastily, hearing a distant bellow that
might be the voice of St. Cyr approaching. "When I have time I'm going
to sweep you off your feet. Did you know that I've worshipped you from
afar all my life? But right now, get Watt out of the way. Hurry!"

Erika cast a glance of amazed bewilderment at him as he thrust her out
of the door. Martin thought there was a certain element of pleasure in
the surprise.

        *        *       *        *        *

"Where is Tolliver?" The loud, annoyed roar of St. Cyr made Martin
wince. The director was displeased, it appeared, because only in
Costumes could a pair of trousers be found large enough to fit him. He
took it as a personal affront. "What have you done with Tolliver?" he
bellowed.

"Louder, please," Martin said insolently. "I can't hear you."

"DeeDee," St. Cyr shouted, whirling toward the lovely star, who hadn't
stirred from her rapturous admiration of DeeDee in technicolor overhead.
"Where is Tolliver?"

Martin started. He had quite forgotten DeeDee.

"You don't know, do you, DeeDee?" he prompted quickly.

"Shut up," St. Cyr snapped. "Answer me, you--" He added a brisk
polysyllable in Mixo-Lydian, with the desired effect. DeeDee wrinkled
her flawless brow.

"Tolliver went away, I think. I've got it mixed up with the picture. He
went home to meet Nick Martin, didn't he?"

"See?" Martin interrupted, relieved. "No use expecting DeeDee to--"

"But Martin is _here_!" St. Cyr shouted. "Think, think!"

"Was the contract release in the rushes?" DeeDee asked vaguely.

"A contract release?" St. Cyr roared. "What is this? Never will I permit
it, never, never, never! DeeDee, answer me--where has Watt gone?"

"He went somewhere with that agent," DeeDee said. "Or was that in the
rushes too?"

"But where, where, where?"

"They went to Atlantis," DeeDee announced with an air of faint triumph.

"No!" shouted St. Cyr. "That was the _picture_! The mermaid came from
Atlantis, not Watt!"

"Tolliver didn't say he was coming from Atlantis," DeeDee murmured,
unruffled. "He said he was going to Atlantis. Then he was going to meet
Nick Martin at his house tonight and give him his contract release."

"When?" St. Cyr demanded furiously. "Think, DeeDee? What time did--"

"DeeDee," Martin said, stepping forward with suave confidence, "you
can't remember a thing, can you?" But DeeDee was too subnormal to react
even to a Disraeli-matrix. She merely smiled placidly at him.

"Out of my way, you writer!" roared St. Cyr, advancing upon Martin. "You
will get no contract release! You do not waste St. Cyr's time and get
away with it! This I will not endure. I fix you as I fixed Ed Cassidy!"

Martin drew himself up and froze St. Cyr with an insolent smile. His
hand toyed with an imaginary monocle. Golden periods were hanging at the
end of his tongue. There only remained to hypnotize St. Cyr as he had
hypnotized Watt. He drew a deep breath to unlease the floods of his
eloquence--

And St. Cyr, also too subhuman to be impressed by urbanity, hit Martin a
clout on the jaw.

It could never have happened in the British Parliament.




III


When the robot walked into Martin's office that evening, he, or it, went
directly to the desk, unscrewed the bulb from the lamp, pressed the
switch, and stuck his finger into the socket. There was a crackling
flash. ENIAC withdrew his finger and shook his metallic head violently.

"I needed that," he sighed. "I've been on the go all day, by the
Kaldekooz time-scale. Paleolithic, Neolithic, Technological--I don't
even know what time it is. Well, how's your ecological adjustment
getting on?"

Martin rubbed his chin thoughtfully.

"Badly," he said. "Tell me, did Disraeli, as Prime Minister, ever have
any dealings with a country called Mixo-Lydia?"

"I have no idea," said the robot. "Why do you ask?"

"Because my environment hauled back and took a poke at my jaw," Martin
said shortly.

"Then you provoked it," ENIAC countered. "A crisis--a situation of
stress--always brings a man's dominant trait to the fore, and Disraeli
was dominantly courageous. Under stress, his courage became insolence.
But he was intelligent enough to arrange his environment so insolence
would be countered on the semantic level. Mixo-Lydia, eh? I place it
vaguely, some billions of years ago, when it was inhabited by giant
white apes. Or--oh, now I remember. It's an encysted medieval survival,
isn't it?"

Martin nodded.

"So is this movie studio," the robot said. "Your trouble is that you've
run up against somebody who's got a better optimum ecological adjustment
than you have. That's it. This studio environment is just emerging from
medievalism, so it can easily slip back into that plenum when an optimum
medievalist exerts pressure. Such types caused the Dark Ages. Well,
you'd better change your environment to a neo-technological one, where
the Disraeli matrix can be successfully pro-survival. In your era, only
a few archaic social-encystments like this studio are feudalistic, so go
somewhere else. It takes a feudalist to match a feudalist."

"But I can't go somewhere else," Martin complained. "Not without my
contract release. I was supposed to pick it up tonight, but St. Cyr
found out what was happening, and he'll throw a monkey-wrench in the
works if he has to knock me out again to do it. I'm due at Watt's place
now, but St. Cyr's already there--"

"Spare me the trivia," the robot said, raising his hand. "As for this
St. Cyr, if he's a medieval character-type, obviously he'll knuckle
under only to a stronger man of his own kind."

"How would Disraeli have handled this?" Martin demanded.

"Disraeli would never have got into such a situation in the first
place," the robot said unhelpfully. "The ecologizer can give you the
ideal ecological differential, but only for your own type, because
otherwise it wouldn't be your optimum. Disraeli would have been a
failure in Russia in Ivan's time."

"Would you mind clarifying that?" Martin asked thoughtfully.

"Certainly," the robot said with great rapidity. "It all depends on the
threshold-response-time of the memory-circuits in the brain, if you
assume the identity of the basic chromosome-pattern. The strength of
