as we are beyond the cavemen. In fact, we have so little in common
that I can't think of a single reason why they would want to stay
here, and the fact that they do only adds to my confusion."

"But you must have learned something," the President said.

"Oh we've managed to collect data," Matson replied. "But there's a lot
of difference between data and knowledge."

"I can appreciate that, but I'd still like to know what you think.
Your opinion could have some weight."

Matson doubted it. His opinions were contrary to those of the
majority. Still, the Chief asked for it--and he might possibly have an
open mind. It was a chance worth taking.

"Well, Sir, I suppose you've heard of the so-called "wild talents"
some of our own people occasionally possess?"

The President nodded.

"It is my belief," Matson continued, "that the Aztlans possess these
to a far greater degree than we do, and that their science is based
upon them. They have something which they call psychomathematics,
which by definition is the mathematics of the mind, and this seems to
be the basis of their physical science. I saw their machines, and I
must confess that their purpose baffled me until I realized that they
must be mechanisms for amplifying their own natural equipment. We know
little or nothing about psi phenomena, so it is no wonder I couldn't
figure them out. As a matter of fact we've always treated psi as
something that shouldn't be mentioned in polite scientific
conversation."

The President grinned. "I always thought you boys had your blind
spots."

"We do--but when we're confronted with a fact, we try to find out
something about it--that is if the fact hits us hard enough, often
enough."

"Well, you've been hit hard and often," the President chuckled, "What
did you find out?"

"Facts," Matson said grimly, "just facts. Things that could be
determined by observation and measurement. We know that the aliens are
telepathic. We also know that they have a form of ESP--or perhaps a
recognition of danger would be a better term--and we know its range is
somewhat over a third of a mile. We know that they're telekinetic. The
lack of visible controls in their ship would tell us that, even if we
hadn't seen them move small objects at a distance. We know that they
have eidetic memories, and that they can reason on an extremely high
level. Other than that we know nothing. We don't even know their
physical structure. We've tried X-ray but they're radio-opaque. We've
tried using some human sensitives from the Rhine Institute, but
they're unable to get anywhere. They just turn empathic in the aliens'
presence, and when we get them back, they do nothing but babble about
the beauty of the Aztlan soul."

"Considering the difficulties, you haven't done too badly," the
President said. "I take it then, that you're convinced that they are
an advanced life form. But do you think they're sincere in their
attitude toward us?"

"Oh, they're sincere enough," Matson said. "The only trouble is that
we don't know just what they're sincere about. You see, sir, we are in
the position of a savage to whom a trader brings the luxuries of
civilization. To the savage, the trader may represent purest altruism,
giving away such valuable things as glass beads and machine made cloth
for useless pieces of yellow rock and the skins of some native pest.
The savage hasn't the slightest inkling that he's being exploited. By
the time he realizes he's been had, and the yellow rock is gold and
the skins are mink, he has become so dependent upon the goods for
which the trader has whetted his appetite that he inevitably becomes
an economic slave.

"Of course you can argue that the cloth and beads are far more
valuable to the savage than the gold or mink. But in the last
analysis, value is determined by the higher culture, and by that
standard, the savage gets taken. And ultimately civilization moves in
and the superior culture of the trader's race determines how the
savage will act.

"Still, the savage has a basis for his acts. He is giving something
for something--making a trade. But we're not even in that position.
The aliens apparently want nothing from us. They have asked for
nothing except our good will, and that isn't a tradable item."

"But they're altruists!" the President protested.

"Sir, do you think that they're insane?" Matson asked curiously. "Do
they appear like fanatics to you?"

"But we can't apply our standards to them. You yourself have said that
their civilization is more advanced than ours."

"Whose standards can we apply?" Matson asked. "If not ours, then
whose? The only standards that we can possibly apply are our own, and
in the entire history of human experience there has never been a
single culture that has had a basis of pure altruism. Such a culture
could not possibly exist. It would be overrun and gobbled up by its
practical neighbors before it drew its first breath.

"We must assume that the culture from which these aliens come has had
a practical basis in its evolutionary history. It could not have risen
full blown and altruistic like Minerva from the brain of Jove. And if
the culture had a practical basis in the past, it logically follows
that it has a practical basis in the present. Such a survival trait as
practicality would probably never be lost no matter how far the Aztlan
race has evolved. Therefore, we must concede that they are practical
people--people who do not give away something for nothing. But the
question still remains--what do they want?

"Whatever it is, I don't think it is anything from which we will
profit. No matter how good it looks, I am convinced that cooperation
with these aliens will not ultimately be to our advantage. Despite the
reports of every investigative agency in this government, I cannot
believe that any such thing as pure altruism exists in a sane mind.
And whatever I may believe about the Aztlans, I do not think they're
insane."

The President sighed. "You are a suspicious man, Matson, and perhaps
you are right; but it doesn't matter what you believe--or what I
believe for that matter. This government has decided to accept the
help the Aztlans are so graciously offering. And until the reverse is
proven, we must accept the fact that the star men _are_ altruists, and
work with them on that basis. You will organize your office along
those lines, and extract every gram of information that you can. Even
you must admit that they have knowledge that will improve our American
way of life."

Matson shook his head doggedly. "I'm afraid, Sir, if you expect Aztlan
science to improve the American way of life, you are going to be
disappointed. It might promote an Aztlan way of life, but the reverse
is hardly possible."

"It's not my decision," the President said. "My hands are tied.
Congress voted for the deal by acclamation early this morning. I
couldn't veto it even if I wanted to."

"I cannot cooperate in what I believe is our destruction." Matson said
in a flat voice.

"Then you have only one course," the President said. "I will be forced
to accept your resignation." He sighed wearily.

"Personally, I think you're making a mistake. Think it over before
you decide. You're a good man, and Lord knows the government can use
good men. There are far too many fools in politics." He shrugged and
stood up. The interview was over.
