
The girl scrambled up and knelt beside Oliver to listen to his
heartbeat, found that he was alive and raised her voice in an urgent
arpeggio that held in spite of its operatic timbre a distinct note of
command.

In answer to her call the great beast in the corner--built something
on the order of a hippopotamus but with unorthodox variations in that
it boasted six legs to either side and was covered with close-curling,
bright blue wool--trotted out of the shadows and scooped up the
unconscious bear in its four powerful anterior arms.

A word from Perrl-high-C-trill-and-A-above sent it into the main
menagerie quarters, where it stuffed the limp bear into its old cage
and trotted back to its mistress with a look of adoring deference on
its round face.

The girl gave the creature a random trill of commendation and,
displaying surprising strength for one so slight, herself dragged the
reviving Oliver back to the scene of his unfinished diagnosis. The
order given her earlier by Mr. Furnay was not forgotten, however, for
she did not linger.

"Not handsome, no," she murmured, locking the partition door behind
her this time. "But O Personal Deity of Unmarried Maidens, such
headlong bravery!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Oliver roused ten minutes later to find himself alone with a memory of
nightmare and a sleeping bear that offered no resistance whatever when
he funneled a quantity of tetrachlorethylene down its throat.

He was still alone an hour later--and still trying dizzily to separate
fact from fancy, having tried the partition door and found it
locked--when the bear returned to semi-consciousness and submitted
groggily to a follow-up dosage of purgative.

Oliver would have liked to stay long enough to learn the results of
his diagnosis and to see Perrl-high-C-trill-and-A-above if she should
reappear, but a glance at his watch electrified him with the
realization that he had been away from his clinic for more than two
hours and that his Aunt Katisha and Glenna might by now have the state
police beating the palmetto flats for his body. Accordingly he left
the Furnay estate in a great hurry, pausing at the gate only long
enough to leave word for Mr. Furnay that he would ring later in the
evening to check his patient's progress.

It was not until he had returned home and found his Aunt Katisha still
out that his overworked nerves, punished outrageously by shock,
violence and confusion, composed themselves enough to permit him a
reasonable guess as to what actually had happened--and by that time
his conclusions had taken a turn so fantastically improbable that he
was lost again in a hopeless muddle of surmise.

He poured himself a glass of milk in the kitchen (he preferred coffee,
but his Aunt Katisha frowned on the habit) and took his grisly
suspicions down to the clinic, where he felt more at ease than in the
antimacassared austerity of the house. There he mulled them over
again, and time was able to weave into the pattern the disjointed
impressions carried over from his period of semi-consciousness and
dismissed until now as nightmare figments from the delirium of shock.
Their alignment with other evidence increased his conviction:

Mr. Furnay and Menage, Oliver concluded with a cold thrill of horror,
were not human beings at all but monsters.

       *       *       *       *       *

The pattern became even more disturbing when he considered various
stories of local saucer-sightings and fireballs, which linked
themselves with chilling germanity to the events of the day.

First there had been Champ's instant distrust of Mr. Furnay and
Bivins, and his attempt to rout them for the aliens they were. There
had been Bivins' anomalous scream when bitten--a raucous sound
certainly not human--and Mr. Furnay's grittily inconsonant order,
spoken in no identifiable earthly tongue. The isolation of the Furnay
estate took on a sinister and significant logic, as did its
understaffed condition; there was the evident but baffling reluctance
of Mr. Furnay and his myrmidons (with the notable exception of the
golden-voiced Pearl) to approach even safely caged beasts, and the
greater mystery of why a man so terrified of wild animals should have
bought a menagerie in the first place.

Considering the part played by Perrl-high-C-trill-and-A-above in a
scheme of things so fantastic left Oliver more disturbed than ever,
but for a different reason. That she was unarguably as alien as the
others made her equally mysterious, but connoted no share in whatever
devious plot occupied the Furnay faction; a reexamination of Mr.
Furnay's harshly dictatorial attitude toward her, coupled with
Oliver's own uncertain memory of the moment when the girl had come to
his rescue, convinced him that she was not ipso facto a member of the
extraterrestrial cabal but was its prisoner instead.

Visualizing the probable fate of a beautiful girl held captive by
aliens--and forced by them to train outlandish, half-remembered brutes
like the one behind the partition--rather strained Oliver's talent for
surmise, but at the same time moved him to the uneasy conviction that
it was his duty to rescue her in turn.

The thought that he might already be too late appalled him. The
slender blonde beauty of Perrl-high-C-trill-and-A-above was
distractingly fresh in his mind, the eager arpeggiation of her voice
an indelible memory. Recalling the smile she had given him in parting
stirred an internal warmth unguessed at before, an emotional ignition
certainly never kindled by his fiancee or family.

       *       *       *       *       *

Orella Simms, Glenna, his Aunt Katisha!

Thought of his obligations brought him back to reality with a jar; the
