"Remember, you may one day wish you had remained on Mars for your
training."

"I'll take my chances. Mars is driving me crazy. All I do is think of
Earth and Stephanie."

"Then come."

"Where are we going?"

"A long, long way off. It is unthinkably remote, this place called
Nowhere."

Temple felt suddenly like a kid playing hookey from school. "Lead on,"
he said, almost jauntily. He knew he was leaving Stephanie still
further behind, but had he been in prison on the next street to hers,
he might as well have been a million miles away.

As for Arkalion--the thought suddenly struck Temple--Arkalion wasn't
necessarily leaving his world further behind. Perhaps Arkalion was
going home....

       *       *       *       *       *

Stephanie picked up the phone eagerly. In the weeks since her first
meeting with Mrs. Draper of the C.E.L., the older woman had been a
fountain of information and of hope for her. Stephanie for her part
had taken over Mrs. Draper's job in her own section of Center City:
she was busy contacting the two hundred mothers and fifty sweethearts
of the Nowhere Journey which had taken Kit from her. And now Mrs.
Draper had called with information.

"We've successfully combined forces with some of the less militant
elements in both houses of Congress," Mrs. Draper told her over the
phone. "Do you realize, my dear, this marks the first time the C.E.L.
has managed to put something constructive through Congress? Until now
we've been content merely to block legislation, such as an increase in
the Nowhere contingent from...."

"Yes, Mrs. Draper. I know all that. But what about this constructive
thing you've done."

"Well, my dear, don't count your chickens. But we _have_ passed the
bill, and we expect the President won't veto it. You see, the
President has two nephews who...."

"I know. I know. What bill did you pass?"

"Unfortunately, it's somewhat vague. Ultimately, the Nowhere
Commission must do the deciding, but it does pave the way."

"For what, Mrs. Draper?"

"Hold onto your hat, my dear. The bill authorizes the Nowhere Commission
to make as much of a study as it can of conditions--wherever our boys are
sent."

"Oh." Stephanie was disappointed. "That won't get them back to us."

"No. You're right, it won't get them back to us. That isn't the idea
at all, for there is more than one way to skin a cat, my dear. The
Nowhere Commission will be studying conditions--"

[Illustration]

"How can they? I thought everything was so hush-hush, not even
Congress knew anything about it."

"That was the first big hurdle we have apparently overcome. Anyway,
they will be studying conditions with a view of determining if one
girl--just one, mind you--can embark on the Nowhere Journey as a pilot
study and--"

"But I thought they could make the journey only once every
seven-hundred-eighty days."

"Get Congress aroused and you can move mountains. It seems the expense
entailed in a trip at any but those times is generally prohibitive,
but when something special comes up--"

"It can be done! Mrs. Draper, how I love to talk with you!"

"See? There you go, my dear, counting your chickens. One girl will be
sent, if the study indicates she can take it. _One_ girl, Stephanie, and
only after a study. She'd merely be a pilot case. But afterwards.... Ah,
afterwards.... Perhaps someday soon qualified women will be able to join
their men in Nowhere."

"Mrs. Draper, I love you."

"Naturally, you will tell all this to prospective C.E.L. members. Now
we have something concrete to work with."

"I know. And I will, I will, Mrs. Draper. By the way, how are they
going to pick the girl, the one girl?"

"Don't count your chickens, for Heaven's sake! They haven't even
studied the situation yet. Well, I'll call you, my dear."

Stephanie hung up, dressed, went about her canvassing. She thought
happy thoughts all week.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Shh! Quiet," cautioned Arkalion, leading the way down a flight of
heavy-duty plastic stairs.

"How do you know your way around here so well?"

"I said quiet."

It was not so much, Temple realized, that Arkalion was really afraid
of making noise. Rather, he did not want to answer questions.

Temple smiled in the semi-darkness, heard the steady drip-drip-drip of
water off somewhere to his left. Eons before the coming of man on this
stopover point to Nowhere, the Martian waters had retreated from the
planet's ancient surface and seeped underground to carve, slow drop by
drop, the caverns which honey-combed the planet. "You know your way
around so well, I'd swear you were a Martian."

Arkalion's soft laugh carried far. "I said there was to be no noise.
Please! As for the Martians, the only Martians are here all around
you, the men of Earth. Ahh, here we are."

At the bottom of the flight of stairs Temple could see a door,
metallic, giving the impression of strength without great weight.
Arkalion paused a moment, did something with a series of levers, shook
his head impatiently, started all over again.

"What's that for?" Temple wanted to know.

"What do you think? It is a combination lock, with five million
possible combinations. Do you want to be here for all of eternity?"

"No."

"Then quiet."

Vaguely, Temple wondered why the door wasn't guarded.

"With a lock like this," Arkalion explained, as if he had read
Temple's thought, "they need no other precaution. It is assumed that
only authorized personnel know the combination."

Then had Arkalion come this way before? It seemed the only possible
assumption. But when? And how? "Here we are," said Arkalion.

The door swung in toward them.

Temple strode forward, found himself in a great bare hall,
surprisingly well-lighted. After the dimness of the caverns, he
hardly could see.

"Don't stand there scowling and fussing with your eyes. There is one
additional precaution--an alarm at Central Headquarters. We have about
five minutes, no more."

       *       *       *       *       *

At one end of the bare hall stood what to Temple looked for all the
world like an old-fashioned telephone booth, except that its walls
were completely opaque. On the wall adjacent to it was a single lever
with two positions marked "hold" and "transport". The lever stood
firmly in the "hold" position.

"You sure you want to come?" Arkalion demanded.

"Yes, I told you that."

"Good. I have no time to explain. I will enter the conveyor."

"Conveyor?"

"This booth. You will wait until the door is shut, then pull the lever
down. That is all there is to it, but, as you can see, it is a two-man
operation."

"But how do I--"

"Haste, haste! There are similar controls at the other end. You pull
the lever, wait two minutes, enter the conveyor yourself. I will fetch
you--if you are sure."

"I'm sure, dammit!"

"Remember, you go without training, without the opportunity everyone
else has."

"You already told me that. Mars is half-way to eternity. Mars is
limbo. If I can't go back to Earth I want to go--well, to Nowhere.
There are too many ghosts here, too many memories with nothing to do."

Arkalion shrugged, entered the booth. "Pull the lever," he said, and
shut the door.

Temple reached up, grasped the lever firmly in his hand, yanked it. It
slid smoothly to the position marked "transport." Temple heard
nothing, saw nothing, began to think the device, whatever it was, did
not work. Did Arkalion somehow get _moved_ inside the booth?

Temple thought he heard footfalls on the stairs outside. Soon,
faintly, he could hear voices. Someone banged on the door to the hall.
Licking dry lips, Temple opened the booth, peered inside.

Empty.

The voices clamored, fists pounded on the door. Something clicked.
Tumblers fell. The door to the great, bright hall sprung outward.
Someone rushed in at Temple, who met him savagely with a short,
chopping blow to his jaw. The man, temporarily blinded by the dazzling
light, stumbled back in the path of his fellows.

Temple darted into the booth, the conveyor, and slammed it shut.

Fingers clawed on the outside.

A sound almost too intense to be heard rang in Temple's ears. He lost
consciousness instantly.



CHAPTER VI

"What a cockeyed world," said Alaric Arkalion Sr. to his son. "You
certainly can't plan on anything, even if you do have more money than
you'll ever possibly need in a lifetime."

"Don't feel like that," said young Alaric. "I'm not in prison any
longer, am I?"

"No. But you're not free of the Nowhere Journey, either. There is an
unheralded special trip to Nowhere, two weeks from today, I have been
informed."

"Oh?"

"Yes, oh. I have also been informed that you will be on it. You didn't
escape after all, Alaric."

"Oh. Oh!"

"What bothers me most is that scoundrel Smith somehow managed to
escape. They haven't found him yet, I have also been informed. And
since my contract with him calls for ten million dollars 'for services
rendered,' I'll have to pay."

"But he didn't prevent me from--"

"I can't air this thing, Alaric! But listen, son: when you go where
you are going, you're liable to find another Alaric Arkalion, your
double. Of course, that would be Smith. If you can get him to cut his
price in half because of what has happened, I would be delighted. If
you could somehow manage to wring his neck, I would be even more
delighted. Ten million dollars--for nothing."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'm so excited," murmured Mrs. Draper. Stephanie watched her on one
of the new televiewers, recently installed in place of the telephone.

"What is it?"

"Our bill has been passed by a landslide majority in both houses of
Congress!"

"Ooo!" cried Stephanie.

"Not very coherent, my dear, but those are my sentiments exactly. In
two weeks there will be a Journey to Nowhere, a special one which will
include, among its passengers, a woman."

"But the study which had to be made--?"

"It's already been made. From what I gather, they can't take it very
far. Most of their conclusions had to be based on supposition. The
important thing, though, is this: a woman _will_ be sent. The way the
C.E.L. figures it, my dear, is that a woman falling in the twenty-one
to twenty-six age group should be chosen, a woman who meets all the
requirements placed upon the young men."

"Yes," said Stephanie. "Of course. And I was just thinking that I
would be--"

"Remember those chickens!" cautioned Mrs. Draper. "We already have one
hundred seventy-seven volunteers who'd claw each other to pieces for a
chance to go."

"Wrong," Stephanie said, smiling. "You now have one hundred
seventy-eight."

"Room for only one, my dear. Only one, you know."

"Then cross the others off your list. I'm already packing my bag."

       *       *       *       *       *

When Temple regained consciousness, it was with the feeling that no
more than a split second of time had elapsed. So much had happened so
rapidly that, until now, he hadn't had time to consider it.

Arkalion had vanished.

Vanished--he could use no other word. He was there, standing in the
booth--and then he wasn't. Simple as that. Now you see it, now you
don't. And goodbye, Arkalion.

But goodbye Temple, too. For hadn't Temple entered the same booth,
waiting but a second until Arkalion activated the mechanism at the
other end? And certainly Temple wasn't in the booth now. He smiled at
the ridiculously simple logic of his thoughts. He stood in an open
field, the blades of grass rising to his knees, as much brilliant
purple as they were green. Waves of the grass, stirred like tide by
the gentle wind, and hills rolling off toward the horizon in whichever
direction he turned. Far away, the undulating hills lifted to a half
soft mauve sky. A somber red sun with twice Sol's apparent disc but
half its brightness hung midway between zenith and horizon completing
the picture of peaceful other-worldliness.

Wherever this was, it wasn't Earth--or Mars.

Nowhere?

Temple shrugged, started walking. He chose his direction at random,
crushing an easily discernible path behind him in the surprisingly
brittle grass. The warm sun baked his back comfortably, the
soft-stirring wind caressed his cheeks. Of Arkalion he found not a
trace.

Two hours later Temple reached the hills and started climbing their
gentle slopes. It was then that he saw the figure approaching on the
run. It took him fully half a minute to realize that the runner was
not human.

       *       *       *       *       *

After months of weightless inactivity, things started to happen for
Sophia. The feeling of weight returned, but weight as she never had
felt it before. It was as if someone was sitting on every inch of her
body, crushing her down. It made her gasp, forced her eyes shut and,
although she could not see it, contorted her face horribly. She lost
consciousness, coming to some time later with a dreadful feeling of
loginess. Someone swam into her vision dimly, stung her arm briefly
with a needle. She slept.

She was on a table, stretched out, with lights glaring down at her.
She heard voices.

"The new system is far better than testing, comrade."

"Far more efficient, far more objective. Yes."

"The brain emits electromagnetic vibration. Strange, is it not, that
no one before ever imagined it could tell a story. A completely
accurate story two years of testing could not give us."

"In Russia we have gone far with the biological, psychological
sciences. The West flies high with physics. Give them Mars; bah, they
can have Mars."

"True, Comrade. The journey to Jupiter is greater, the time consumed
is longer, the cost, more expensive. But here on Jupiter we can do
something they cannot do on Mars."

"I know."

"We can make supermen. Supermen, comrade. A wedding of Nietzsche and
Marx."

"Careful. Those are dangerous thoughts."

"Merely an allusion, comrade. Merely a harmless allusion. But you take
an ordinary human being and train him on Jupiter, speeding his
time-sense and metabolic rate tremendously with certain endocrine
secretions so that one day is as a month to him. You take him and
subject him to big Jupiter's pull of gravity, more than twice
Earth's--and in three weeks you have, yes--you have a superman."

"The woman wakes."

"Shh. Do not frighten her."

Sophia stretched, every muscle in her body aching. Slowly, as in a
dream, she sat up. It required strength, the mere act of pulling her
torso upright!

"What have you done to me?" she cried, focussing her still-dim vision
on the two men.

"Nothing, comrade. Relax."

Sophia turned slowly on the table, got one long shapely leg draped
over its edge.

"Careful, comrade."

What were they warning her about? She merely wanted to get up and
stretch; perhaps then she would feel better. Her toe touched the
floor, she swung her other leg over, aware of but ignoring her
nakedness.

"A good specimen."

"Oh, yes, comrade. So this time they send a woman among the others.
Well, we shall do our work. Look--see the way she is formed, so lithe,
loose-limbed, agile. See the toning of the muscles? Her beauty will
remain, comrade, but Jupiter shall make an amazon of her."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sophia had both feet on the floor now. She was breathing hard, felt
suddenly sick to her stomach. Placing both her hands on the table
edge, she pushed off and staggered for two or three paces. She
crumpled, buckling first at the knees then the waist, and fell in a
writhing heap.

"Pick her up."

Hands under her arms, tugging. She came off the floor easily, dimly
aware that someone carried her hundred and thirty pounds effortlessly.
"Put me down!" she cried. "I want to try again. I am crippled,
crippled! You have crippled me...."

"Nothing of the sort, comrade. You are tired, weak, and Jupiter's
gravity field is still too strong for you. Little by little, though,
your muscles will strengthen to Jupiter's demands. Gravity will keep
them from bulging, expanding; but every muscle fibre in you will have
twice, three times its original strength. Are you excited?"

"I am tired and sick. I want to sleep. What is Jupiter?"

"Jupiter is a planet circling the sun at--never mind, comrade. You
have much to learn, but you can assimilate it with much less trouble
in your sleep. Go ahead, sleep."

Sophia retched, was sick. It had been years since she cried. But
naked, afraid, bewildered, she cried herself to sleep.

Things happened while she slept, many things. Certain endocrine
extracts accelerated her metabolism astonishingly. Within half an hour
her heart was pumping blood through her body two hundred beats per
minute. An hour later it reached its full rate, almost one thousand
contractions every sixty seconds. All her other metabolic functions
increased accordingly, and Sophia slept deeply for a week of
subjective time--in hours. The same machine which had gleaned
everything from her mind far more accurately than a battery of tests,
a refinement of the electro-encephalogram, was now played in reverse,
giving back to Sophia everything it had taken plus electrospool after
electrospool of science, mathematics, logic, economics, history
(Marxian, these last two), languages (including English), semantics
and certain specialized knowledge she would need later on the
Stalintrek.

Still sleeping, Sophia was bathed in a warm whirlpool of soothing
liquid; rubbed, massaged, her muscle-toning begun while she rested and
regained her strength. Three hours later, objective time, she awoke
with a headache and with more thoughts spinning around madly inside
her brain than she ever knew existed. Gingerly, she tried standing
again, lifting herself nude and dripping wet from a tub of steaming
amber stuff. She stood, stretched, permitted her fright to vanish with
a quick wave of vertigo which engulfed her. She had been fed
intravenously, but a tremendous hunger possessed her. Before eating,
however, she was to find herself in a gymnasium, the air close and
stifling. She was massaged again, told to do certain exercises which
seemed simple but which she found extremely difficult, forced to run
until she thought she would collapse, with her legs, dragging like
lead.

She understood, now. Somehow she knew she was on Jupiter, the fifth
and largest planet, where the force of gravity is so much greater than
on Earth that it is an effort even to walk. She also knew that her
metabolic rate had been accelerated beyond all comprehension and that
in a comparatively short time--objective time--she would have thrice
her original strength. All this she knew without knowing how she knew,
and that was the most staggering fact of all. She did what her curt
instructors bid, then dragged her aching muscles and her headache into
a dining room where tired, forlorn-looking men sat around eating.
Well, the food at least was good. Sophia attacked it ravenously.

       *       *       *       *       *

It did not take Temple long to realize that the creature running
downhill at him, leaving a crushed and broken wake in the purple and
green grass, was not human. At first Temple toyed with the idea of a
man on horseback, for the creature ran on four limbs and had two left
over as arms. Temple gaped.

The whole thing was one piece!

Centaur?

Hardly. Too small, for one thing. No bigger than a man, despite the
three pairs of limbs. And then Temple had time to gape no longer, for
the creature, whatever it was, flashed past him at what he now had to
consider a gallop.

More followed. Different. Temple stared and stared. One could have
been a great, sentient hoop, rolling downhill and gathering momentum.
If he carried the wheel analogy further, a huge eye stared at him from
where the hub would have been. Something else followed with kangaroo
leaps. One thick-thewed leg propelled it in tremendous, fifteen-foot
hopping strides while its small, flapper-like arms beat the air
prodigiously.

Legions of creatures. All fantastically different. _I'm going crazy_,
Temple thought, then said it aloud. "I'm going crazy."

Theorizing thus, he heard a whir overhead, whirled, looked up.
Something was poised a dozen feet off the ground, a large, box-like
object seven or eight feet across, rotors spinning above it. That, at
least, he could understand. A helicopter.

"I'm lowering a ladder, Kit. Swing aboard."

Arkalion's voice.

Stunned enough to accept anything he saw, Temple waited for the rope
ladder to drop, grasped its end, climbed. He swung his legs over a
sill, found himself in a neat little cabin with Arkalion, who hauled
the ladder in and did something to the controls. They sped away.
Temple had one quick moment of lucid thought before everything which
had happened in the last few moments shoved logic aside. What he had
