it by the females."

"Too dark, Effendi," Abdul said. "If we go out now, they will not only
chase us; they will catch us, for they are able to see very well in the
dark."

"_Who_ will catch us?"

"These people. They are worse than Tuaregs. For all I know, they may be
descended from the Tuaregs, and everyone knows that a Tuareg would as
soon cut a man's throat as kiss the hem of his burnoose."

"So now they are Tuaregs." Colonel Glinka nodded, with a slow, ferocious
smile. "Yet you have hinted that they are the spawn of Comrade
Stefanik's genius, the children of genetical science, stamped with 'Made
in the Seychelles' upon their bottoms. Perhaps they were grown in the
conservatory, from Tuareg seed."

Abdul grimaced. "I do not remember saying that, though sometimes I say
things that I don't remember later. Perhaps they are not Tuaregs, then.
To tell the truth, they were already living here when I came to work for
the Sidi Doctor Stephens, and so naturally I thought that he had made
them, for there were no people upon this island in the old days. Only
the seabirds and a few wild goats, perhaps."

Colonel Glinka clasped his hand to his forehead. "Stop, stop, or I shall
go mad!"

Abdul Hakkim obediently sat down and crossed his legs, starting to light
the second of the very bad cigarettes that he had cadged.

"What are you doing?" Colonel Glinka said softly.

"Nothing, Effendi."

"Get up! Get up and get moving, my boy, or make your peace with Allah!
Did you suppose for one moment that I had forgotten what we were talking
about?"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was quite dark by the time they had reached the summit of the ridge,
but Colonel Glinka still marched along behind Abdul, high good humor
restored, prodding him from time to time with the Malacca cane and
lecturing him upon social equalities and other Party doctrine.

"Are we nearly there?" he would interrupt himself to ask from time to
time.

"I do not know."

"Call out, then."

"I am afraid."

A savage poke with the cane, a war whoop from Abdul Hakkim ben Salazar.
No answer.

"We'll get him," Colonel Glinka would say. "Oh, my, yes."

But an hour had passed and still they had encountered no living thing
upon the path.

At last Abdul stopped abruptly. They were in a little, narrow ravine,
high above the sea, with looming red cliffs all about them, and the
booming of the surf upon the distant, windward shore of the island
plainly audible.

"Why have we stopped here?" Colonel Glinka said, bumping into him.

"Look there, Effendi!" Abdul whispered, gesturing toward a ledge not ten
yards above their heads, where a burnoosed figure stood looking down
upon them.

"And there--and there--and there!" Abdul pointed at other little ledges
where similar ghostly sentries stood, barely visible in the gloom.

Colonel Glinka looked behind him and saw that there were others that
they had passed within a very few feet of, standing upon every shelf and
ledge that afforded a foot-hold above the trail. Dozens and dozens of
them.

"Maybe we had better scram out of here, Joe," Abdul suggested.

"I perceive that you are trying to frighten me," Colonel Glinka said.
"It won't work."

A stone rattled behind them.

"What was that?" Colonel Glinka demanded, turning around quickly. "Who's
there?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Something moved in the shadows, edging into the deeper shadows of the
