
"Listen," he said aloud to Shearing. "Listen, I want to ask you. What
you said about latent impressions--you think I might have seen and heard
the killer even though I was unconscious?"

"Especially heard. Possible. With your increased power, and ours,
impressions received through sense-channels but not recognized at the
time or remembered later might be recovered." He shook his head. "Don't
bother me."

"I just wanted to know," said Hyrst. He thought of his son, and the two
daughters he hoped he would never see. He thought of Elena. It was too
late to do anything for her, but the others were still living. So was
he, and he intended to stay that way, at least until he had done what he
set out to do.

"Old Bellaver was behind that killing, wasn't he? Old Quentin, this
one's grandfather."

"Yes. Don't bother me."

"One thing more. Do we Lazarites live longer than men?"

Shearing gave him a curious, brief look. "Yes."

The tug was out of sight behind a massive rearing shape that seemed to
clutch a broken ship between its paws. Symbolic, perhaps, of space? Who
knew? Hyrst led Shearing in wild impala-like leaps across an open space,
and into a narrow way that twisted, filled with darkness, among the
bases of a group that resembled an outlandish procession following a
king.

"How much longer?"

"Humane Penalty first came in a hundred and fourteen years ago, right?
After Seitz' method was perfected for saving spacemen. I was one of the
first they used it on."

"My God," said Hyrst. Yet, somehow, he was not as surprised as he might
have been.

"I've aged," said Shearing apologetically. "I was only twenty-seven
then."

They crouched, beside a humped shape like a gigantic lizard with a long
tail. The tug swung overhead and slowly on.

Hyrst said, "Then it's possible the one who killed MacDonald is still
alive?"

"Possible. Probable."

Hyrst bared his teeth, in what was not at all like a smile. "Good," he
said. "That makes me happy."

They did not do any talking after that. They had had their helmet radios
operating on practically no power at all, so that they couldn't be
picked up outside a radius of a few yards, but even that might be too
close, now that Bellaver's men had had time to get suited and fan out.
They shut them off entirely, communicating by yanks and nudges.

       *       *       *       *       *

For what seemed to Hyrst like a very long time, but which was probably
less than half an hour in measured minutes, they dodged from one patch
of shadow to another, following an erratic course that Hyrst thought
would lead them away from the ships. Once more the tug went over, slow,
and then Hyrst didn't see it again. The idea that they might have given
up occurred to him but he dismissed it as absurd. With the helmet mike
shut off, the silence was beginning to get on his nerves. Once he looked
up and saw a piece of cosmic debris smash into a monolith. Dust and
splinters flew, and a great fragment broke off and fell slowly downward,
bumping and rebounding, and all of it as soundless as a dream. You
couldn't hear yourself walk, you couldn't hear anything but the roar of
your own breathing and the pounding of your own blood. The grotesque
rocky avenues could hide an army, stealthy, creeping--

There was a hill, or at least a higher eminence, crowned with what might
have been the cyclopean image of a man stretched out on a noble
catafalque, with hooded giants standing by in attitudes of mourning. It
seemed like the best place to stop that Hyrst had seen, with plenty of
cover and a view of the surrounding area. With luck, you might stay
hidden there a long time. He jogged Shearing's elbow and pointed, and
Shearing nodded. There was a wide, almost circular sweep of open rock
around the base of the hill. Hyrst looked carefully for the tug. There
was no sign of it. He tore out across the open, with Shearing at his
heels.

The tug swooped over, going fast this time. It could not possibly have
missed them. Shearing dropped the cloak with a grunt. "No use for that
any more," he said. They bounded up the hillside and in among the
mourning figures. The tug whipped around in a tight spiral and hung over
the hill. Hyrst shook the sweat out of his eyes. His mind was clear
again. The tug's skipper was babbling into his communicator, and in
another place on the asteroid Hyrst could mentally see a thin skirmish
line spread out, and in still another four men in a bunch. They all
picked up and began to move, toward the hill.

Shearing said, nodding spaceward, "Our friends are on the way. If we can
hold out--"

"Fat chance," said Hyrst. "They're armed, and all we've got is
flare-pistols." But he looked around. His eyes detected nothing but
rock, hard sunlight, and deep shadow, but his mind saw that one of the
black blots at the base of the main block, the catafalque, was more than
a shadow. He slid into a crack that resembled a passage, being rounded
rather than ragged. Shearing was right behind him. "I don't like this,"
he said, "but I suppose there's no help for it."

The crack led down into a cave, or chamber, too irregularly shaped to be
artificial, too smoothly surfaced and floored to be natural. There was
nothing in it but a block of stone, nine feet or so long and about four
feet wide by five feet high. It seemed to be a natural part of the
floor, but Hyrst avoided it. On the opposite, the sunward side, there
was a small windowlike aperture that admitted a ray of blinding
radiance, sharply defined and doing nothing to illumine the dark on
either side of it.

Vernon's thought came to them, hard, triumphant, peremptory. "Mr.
Bellaver says you have ten minutes to come out. After that, no mercy."




CHAPTER V


The minutes slid past, sections of eternity arbitrarily measured by the
standards of another planet and having no relevance at all on this tiny
whirling rock. The beam of light from the small aperture moved visibly
across the opposite wall. Hyrst watched it, blinking. Outside,
Bellaver's men were drawn up in a wide crescent across the hill in front
of the catafalque. They waited.

"No mercy," said Hyrst softly. "No mercy, is it?" He bent over and began
to loosen the clamps that held the lead weights to the soles of his
boots.

"It isn't mercy we need," said Shearing. "It's time."

"How much?"

"Look for yourself."

Hyrst shifted his attention to space. There was a ship in it, heading
toward the asteroid, and coming fast. Hyrst frowned, doing in his head
without thinking about it a calculation that would have required a
computer in his former life.

"Twenty-three minutes and seventeen seconds," he said, "inclusive of the
four remaining."

He finished getting the weights off his boots. He handed one to
Shearing. Then he half-climbed, half-floated up the wall and settled
himself above the entrance, where there was a slight concavity in the
rock to give him hold.

"Shearing," he said.

"What?" He was settling himself beside the mouth of the crack, where a
man would have to come clear inside to get a shot at him.

"A starship implies the intention to go to the stars. Why haven't you?"

"For the simplest reason in the world," said Shearing bitterly. "The
damn thing can't fly."

"But--" said Hyrst, in astonishment.

"It isn't finished. It's been building for over seventy years now, and a
long and painful process that's been, too, Hyrst--doing it bit by bit in
secret, and every bit having to be dreamed up out of whole cloth, and
often discarded and dreamed up again, because the principle of a
workable star-drive has never been formulated before. And it still isn't
finished. It can't be finished, unless--"

He stopped, and both men turned their attention to the outside.

"Bellaver's looking at his chrono," said Hyrst. "Go ahead, we've got a
minute."

Shearing continued, "unless we can get hold of enough Titanite to build
the hyper-shift relays. Nothing else has a fast enough reaction time,
and the necessary load-capacity. We must have burned out a thousand
different test-boards, trying."

"Can't you buy it?" asked Hyrst. The question sounded reasonable, but he
knew as he said it that it was a foolish one. "I mean, I know the stuff
is scarcer than virtue and worth astronomical sums--that's what
MacDonald was so happy about--but--"

"The Bellaver Corporation had a corner on the stuff before our ship was
even thought of. That's what brought this whole damned mess about. Some
of our people--not saying why they wanted it, of course--tried to buy
some from Bellaver in the usual way, and one of them must have been
incautious about his shield. Because a Lazarite working for Bellaver
caught a mental hint of the starship, and the reason for the Titanite,
and that was it. Three generations of Bellavers have been after us for
the star-drive, and it's developed into a secret war as bitter as any
ever fought on the battlefield. They hold all the Titanite, we hold the
ship, and perhaps now you're beginning to see why MacDonald was killed,
and why you're so important to both sides."

"Beginning to," said Hyrst. "But only beginning."

"MacDonald found a Titanite pocket. And as you know, a Titanite pocket
isn't very big. One man can break the crude stuff, fill a sack with it,
and tote it on his own back if he doesn't have a power-sled."

"MacDonald had a sled."

"And he used it. He cleaned out his pocket, afraid somebody else would
track him to it, and he hid the wretched ore somewhere. Then he began to
dicker. He approached the Bellaver Corporation, and we heard of it and
approached _him_. He tried playing us off against Bellaver to boost the
price, and suddenly he was dead and you were accused of his murder. We
thought you really had done it, because no Titanite turned up, and we
knew Bellaver hadn't gotten it from him. We'd watched too closely. It
wasn't until some years later that one of our people learned that
MacDonald had threatened a little too loudly to sell to us unless
Bellaver practically tripled his offer--and of course Bellaver didn't
dare do that. A price so much out of line even for Titanite would have
stirred all the rival shipbuilders to unwelcome curiosity. So, we
figured, Bellaver had had him killed."

"But what happened to the Titanite?"

"That," said Shearing, "is what nobody knows. Bellaver must have figured
that if his tame Lazarites couldn't find where MacDonald had put it, we
couldn't either. He was right. With all our combined mental probes and
conventional detectors we haven't been able to track it down. And we
haven't been able to find any more pockets, either. Bellaver Corporation
got exclusive mineral rights to the whole damned moon. They even own the
refinery now."

Hyrst shook his head. "Latent impressions or not, I don't see how I can
help on that. If MacDonald had given the killer any clue--"

       *       *       *       *       *

A beam of bright blue light no thicker than a pencil struck in through
the mouth of the passage. It touched the side of the large stone block.
The stone turned molten and ran, and then the beam flicked off, leaving
a place that glowed briefly red. Shearing said, "I guess our ten minutes
are up."

They were. For a second or two nothing more happened and then Hyrst saw
something come sailing in through the crack. His mind told him what it
was just barely in time to shut his eyes. There was a flash that dazzled
him even through his closed lids, and the flash became a glare that did
not lessen. Bellaver's men had tossed in a long-term flare, and almost
at once someone followed it, in the hope of catching Hyrst and Shearing
blinded and off guard. The eyes of Hyrst's mind, unaffected by light,
clearly showed him the suited figure just below him, with its bubble
helmet covered by a glare-shield. They directed him with perfect
accuracy in the downward sweep of the lead weight he had taken from his
boot, and which he still held in his hand. The bubble helmet was very
strong, and the gravity very light, but the concussion was enough to
drop the man unconscious. Just about thought Hyrst, what happened to me
there in the hoist tower, when MacDonald died. Shearing, who had by now
adjusted his own glare-shield stooped quickly and took the man's gun.

He said aloud, over the helmet communicator, "The next one that steps
through here gets it. Do you hear that, Bellaver?"

Bellaver's voice answered. "Listen, Shearing, I was wrong. I admit it.
Let's calm down and start over again. I--"

"Ten minutes ago it was no mercy."

"It's hard for me to behave reasonably about this business. You know
what it means to me, what it meant to my father and _his_ father. But
I'm willing to do anything, Shearing, if you'll make a deal."

"I'll make a deal. Readily. Eagerly. Give back what your grandfather
stole from us, and we'll call it square."

"Oh no we won't," said Hyrst grimly, breaking in. "Not until I find who
killed MacDonald."

"All right," said Bellaver. "Wilson, break out the grenades."

The entire surface of Hyrst's body burst into a flaring sweat. For one
panic-stricken second he wanted to rush out the crack pleading for
mercy. Then he got his feet against the wall and pushed hard, and went
plunging across the chamber in a sort of floating dive. Shearing got
there at the same time and helped to pull him down. They huddled
together on the floor, with the coffin-shaped block between them and the
crack. Hyrst sent out a frantic mental call to hurry, directed at the
spaceship of the brotherhood.

"They're all going to hurry," said Shearing. "Vernon has found the ship
now. He's telling Bellaver. Here comes the grenade--"

Small round glittering thing of death, curving light and graceful
through the airless gloom. It comes so slowly, and the flesh shrinks
quivering upon itself until it is nothing more than a handful of simple
fear. Outside the men are running away, and the one who has thrown the
grenade from the cramped, constructing vantage of the crack is running
after them, and Shearing is crying with his mind Will it to fall short,
_will it to fall sh_--

There is a great brilliance, and the rock leaps, but there is not the
slightest sound.




CHAPTER VI


