where the thing had stood, looking down at the four sleepers from above,
coldly deciding which of them to seize--was the only evidence they had
that they were now really in the same world with the demons. The world
of the demons they had sometimes looked down upon from the remote
vine-webs.

The footprint--and the skull.

By nightfall, they had ascended perhaps a hundred and fifty feet. It was
difficult to judge distances in the twilight, and the token vine bridges
from the attic world to the pink cliffs were now cut off from sight by
the intervening masses of the cliffs themselves. But there was no
possibility that they could climb higher today. Although Mathild had
born the climb surprisingly well, and Honath himself still felt almost
fresh, Alaskon was completely winded. He had taken a bad cut on one hip
from a serrated spike of volcanic glass against which he had stumbled.
The wound, bound with leaves to prevent its leaving a spoor which might
be followed, evidently was becoming steadily more painful.

Honath finally called a halt as soon as they reached the little ridge
with the cave in back of it. Helping Alaskon over the last boulders, he
was astonished to discover how hot the navigator's hands were. He took
him back into the cave and then came out onto the ledge again.

"He's really sick," he told Mathild in a low voice. "He needs water, and
another dressing for that cut. And we've got to get both for him
somehow. If we ever get to the jungle on the other side of the Range,
we'll need a navigator even worse than we need a needlesmith."

"But how? I could dress the cut if I had the materials, Honath. But
there's no water up here. It's a desert; we'll never get across it."

"We've got to try. I can get him water, I think. There was a big
cycladella on the slope we came up, just before we passed that obsidian
spur that hurt Alaskon. Gourds that size usually have a fair amount of
water inside them and I can use a piece of the spur to rip it open--"

A small hand came out of the darkness and took him tightly by the elbow.
"Honath, you can't go back down there. Suppose the demon that--that took
Charl is still following us? They hunt at night--and this country is all
so strange...."

"I can find my way. I'll follow the sound of the stream of blue lava or
whatever it is. You pull some fresh leaves for Alaskon and try to make
him comfortable. Better loosen those vines around the dressing a little.
I'll be back."

He touched her hand and pried it loose gently. Then, without stopping to
think about it any further, he slipped off the ledge and edged toward
the sound of the stream, travelling crabwise on all fours.

But he was swiftly lost. The night was thick and completely
impenetrable, and he found that the noise of the stream seemed to come
from all sides, providing him no guide at all. Furthermore, his memory
of the ridge which led up to the cave appeared to be faulty, for he
could feel it turning sharply to the right beneath him, though he
remembered distinctly that it had been straight past the first
side-branch, and then had gone to the left. Or had he passed the first
side-branch in the dark without seeing it? He probed the darkness
cautiously with one hand.

At the same instant, a brisk, staccato gust of wind came whirling up out
of the night across the ridge. Instinctively, Honath shifted his weight
to take up the flexing of the ground beneath him.

He realized his error instantly and tried to arrest the complex set of
motions, but a habit-pattern so deeply ingrained could not be frustrated
completely. Overwhelmed with vertigo, Honath grappled at the empty air
with hands, feet and tail and went toppling.

An instant later, with a familiar noise and an equally familiar cold
shock that seemed to reach throughout his body, he was sitting in the
midst of--

Water. Icy water. Water that rushed by him improbably with a menacing,
monkeylike chattering, but water all the same.

It was all he could do to repress a hoot of hysteria. He hunkered down
into the stream and soaked himself. Things nibbled delicately at his
calves as he bathed, but he had no reason to fear fish, small species of
which often showed up in the tanks of the bromelaids. After lowering his
muzzle to the rushing, invisible surface and drinking his fill, he
dunked himself completely and then clambered out onto the banks,
carefully neglecting to shake himself.

Getting back to the ledge was much less difficult. "Mathild?" he called
in a hoarse whisper. "Mathild, we've got water."

"Come in here quick then. Alaskon's worse. I'm afraid, Honath."

Dripping, Honath felt his way into the cave. "I don't have any
container. I just got myself wet--you'll have to sit him up and let him
lick my fur."

"I'm not sure he can."

But Alaskon could, feebly, but sufficiently. Even the coldness of the
water--a totally new experience for a man who had never drunk anything
but the soup-warm contents of the bromelaids--seemed to help him. He lay
back at last, and said in a weak but otherwise normal voice: "So the
stream was water after all."

"Yes," Honath said. "And there are fish in it, too."

"Don't talk," Mathild said. "Rest, Alaskon."

"I'm resting. Honath, if we stick to the course of the stream.... Where
was I? Oh. We can follow the stream through the Range, now that we know
it's water. How did you find that out?"

"I lost my balance and fell into it."

Alaskon chuckled. "Hell's not so bad, is it?" he said. Then he sighed,
and rushes creaked under him.

"Mathild! What's the matter? Is he--did he die?"

"No ... no. He's breathing. He's still sicker than he realizes, that's
all.... Honath--if they'd known, up above, how much courage you have--"

"I was scared white," Honath said grimly. "I'm still scared."

But her hand touched his again in the solid blackness, and after he had
taken it, he felt irrationally cheerful. With Alaskon breathing so
raggedly behind them, there was little chance that either of them would
be able to sleep that night; but they sat silently together on the hard
stone in a kind of temporary peace. When the mouth of the cave began to
outline itself with the first glow of the red sun, they looked at each
other in a conspiracy of light all their own.

_Let us unlearn everything we knew only by rote, go back to the
beginning, learn all over again, and continue to learn...._

With the first light of the white sun, a half-grown megatherium cub rose
slowly from its crouch at the mouth of the cave and stretched
luxuriously, showing a full set of saber-like teeth. It looked at them
steadily for a moment, its ears alert, then turned and loped away down
the slope.

How long it had been crouched there listening to them, it was impossible
to know. They had been lucky that they had stumbled into the lair of a
youngster. A full-grown animal would have killed them all, within a few
seconds after its cat's-eyes had collected enough dawn to identify them
positively. The cub, since it had no family of its own, evidently had
only been puzzled to find its den occupied and didn't want to quarrel
about it.

The departure of the big cat left Honath frozen, not so much frightened
as simply stunned by so unexpected an end to the vigil. At the first
moan from Alaskon, however, Mathild was up and walking softly to the
navigator, speaking in a low voice, sentences which made no particular
sense and perhaps were not intended to. Honath stirred and followed her.

Halfway back into the cave, his foot struck something and he looked
down. It was the thigh-bone of some medium-large animal, imperfectly
cleaned and not very recent. It looked like a keepsake the megatherium
had hoped to save from the usurpers of its lair. Along a curved inner
surface there was a patch of thick grey mold. Honath squatted and peeled
it off carefully.

"Mathild, we can put this over the wound," he said. "Some molds help
prevent wounds from festering.... How is he?"

"Better, I think," Mathild murmured. "But he's still feverish. I don't
think we'll be able to move on today."

Honath was unsure whether to be pleased or disturbed. Certainly he was
far from anxious to leave the cave, where they seemed at least to be
reasonably comfortable. Possibly they would also be reasonably safe, for
the low-roofed hole almost surely still smelt of megatherium, and
intruders would recognize the smell--as the men from the attic world
could not--and keep their distance. They would have no way of knowing
that the cat had only been a cub and that it had vacated the premises,
though of course the odor would fade before long.

Yet it was important to move on, to cross the Great Range if possible,
and in the end to wind their way back to the world where they belonged.
And to win vindication, no matter how long it took. Even should it prove
relatively easy to survive in Hell--and there were few signs of that,
thus far--the only proper course was to fight until the attic world was
totally regained. After all, it would have been the easy and the
comfortable thing, back there at the very beginning, to have kept one's
incipient heresies to oneself and remained on comfortable terms with
one's neighbors. But Honath had spoken up, and so had the rest of them,
in their fashions.
