things they drove Lee couldn't make out because the adjoining acres of
this underground hothouse for mushrooming machines were again shrouded
in darkness except for sparks which crossed the unfathomable expanse
like tracer bullets. Struck with a sort of word blindness caused by the
sensory impressions barrage, Lee could no longer grasp the meaning of
Vivian's voice as it went on and on explaining things like "crystal
cells," "selenoid cells," "grey matter pyramidal cells," powered somehow
by atomic fission, "nerve loops" and "synthesis gates" which were not to
be confused with "analysis gates" while they looked exactly the same....

Apart from this at least one half of his mental and physical energy had
to be expanded in suppressing nausea and bracing himself against the
gyrations which still jerked his feet from under him and made friction
disks of his shoulders as his body swayed from side to side. All of a
sudden he felt that he was being derailed. There was an opening in the
plastics wall of the cylinder; a curved metal shield like the blade of a
bulldozer jumped into his path, caught him, slowed down his momentum and
delivered him safely at a door marked "Apperception-Center 24." It
opened and within its frame there stood an angel neatly dressed in the
uniform of a registered nurse.

"_There_," said the angel, "at _last_. How did you like your little
Odyssey through The Brain, Dr. Lee?"

Lee pushed a hand through the mane of his hair; it felt moist and much
tangled up.

"Thanks," he said. "It was quite an experience. I enjoyed it; Ulysses,
too, probably enjoyed his trip between Scylla and Charybdis--after it
was over! It's Miss Leahy, I presume."

The reception room where he had landed, the long white corridor, the
instruments gleaming in built-in recesses behind crystal glass, the
nurse's uniform; all spelled clinic, a private one rather for the
well-to-do. Since the procedure was routine he might as well submit to
it, Lee thought. He felt the familiar taste of disinfectant as a
thermometer was stuck into his mouth and then the rubber tube around his
arm throbbing with the vigorous pumpings of the efficient Vivian.

"L. F. Mellish, M.D.--I. C. Bondy, M.D." was painted on the frosted
glass door where she led him afterward. The two medics received Lee with
a show of respect mixed with professional cordiality. Both Bondy, the
dark and oriental looking chap, and Mellish, blond and florid, were in
their middle twenties and both wore tweeds which depressed Lee with the
perfection of their cut. Seeing the professional table at the center of
the office, Lee frowned but started to undress; he wanted this thing
done and over with as soon as possible.

"No, no--that won't be necessary, Dr. Lee," they stopped him laughingly,
"We have already a complete medical report on you. Came in this morning
from the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Canberra on our request. You're an
old malaria man, Dr. Lee; your first attack occured in '42 during the
Pacific campaign. Pity you refused to return to the States for a
complete cure right then. As it is it's turned recurrent; left you a bit
anemic, liver's slightly affected. But in all other respects you're
sound of limb and wind; we've gone over the report pretty carefully."

"Then why bother with me at all?" Lee said irritably. He had been in
doctors' hands too often and had become a little impatient of them.

The freckled hand of Mellish patted his arm. "We do things different
over here," he said and Bondy chimed in. "Or rather The Brain does. Just
lie down on that table, Dr. Lee, and relax. We're going to enjoy a
little movie together, that's all."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lee did as he was bidden, but hesitant and suspiciously. He hated
medical exams, especially those where parts of one's body were hooked up
to a lot of impressive machinery. Of this there obviously was a good
deal. The two medics seemed determined literally to wall him in with
gadgetry. From the ceiling they lowered a huge, heavy-looking disk; not
lights, but more like an electro-magnet beset with protruding needles.
Lee couldn't see the cables but hoped they were strong, for the thing
weighed at least a ton and, overhanging him, looked much more ominous
than the sword of Damocles. They wheeled a silver screen to the foot of
the table and batteries of what appeared to be thermo-therapeutic
equipment to both sides. He wasn't being hooked up to anything, but
there was much activity with testing of circuits, button-pushings and
shiftings of relay-levers. And then all of a sudden lights went out in
the room.

"Say, what is the meaning of all this?" Lee raised his head uneasily
from the hard cushion. All he could see now were arrays of luminous
dials and the faint radiations from electronic tubes filtering through
metal screens inside the apparatus which fenced him in. From behind his
head a suave voice--was it Bondy's or Mellish's answered out of the
dark.

"This is a subconscious analysis and mental reactions test, Dr. Lee.
It's an entirely new method made possible only by The Brain. It has
tremendous possibilities; they might include your own work as well."

"Oh Lord," Lee moaned. "Something like psychoanalysis? Have you got it
mechanized by now? How terrible."

There was a low chuckle from the other side of his head; they both
appeared to have drawn up chairs beyond his field of vision. Lee didn't
like it; he liked none of it, in fact. He felt trapped.

"No, Dr. Lee," said the chuckling voice. "This isn't psychoanalysis in
the old sense at all. You are not exposed to any fanciful human
interpretation, and it isn't wholly mechanical either as you seem to
think. The Brain is going to show you certain images and by way of
spontaneous psychosomatic reaction you are going to produce certain
images in response. Results are visual, immediate and as convincing as a
reflection in a mirror; that's the new beauty of it. And now,
concentrate your mind upon your body. Do you feel anything touching
you?"

"Y-e-s," Lee said, "I think I do--it's--it's uncanny: it's like spiders'
feet--millions of them. It's running all over my skin. What is it?"

"I think he's warming up," whispered the second voice; then came the
first again.

"It's feeler rays, Dr. Lee; the first wave, low penetration surface
rays."

"Where do they come from?"

"From overhead; that is, from the teletactile centers of The Brain."

"What do they do to me?"

There was the low chuckle again. "They excite the surface nerves of your
body, open up the path for the deep-penetration rays; they proceed from
the lower organs to the higher ones; in the end they reach the conscious
levels of your brain. It's the tune-in as we call it, Dr. Lee."

A small movie projector began to purr; a bright rectangle was thrown
upon the silver screen and then, Lee stirred. Hands, soothing but firm
held him down. "Where did you get _those_." he exclaimed.

"From many sources," a calm answer came, "The papers, the newsreels, the
War-Department, old friends of yours...."

       *       *       *       *       *

What was unrolled on the silver screen were chapters from Lee's own
life. They were incomplete, they were hastily thrown together, they were
like leaves which a child tears from its picturebook. But knowing the
book of his life, every picture acted as a key unlocking the treasures
and the horrors amassed in the vaults of memory. It began with the old
homestead in Virginia. Mother had taken that reel of the new mechanical
cotton picker at work. There it was, a great big thing with the darkies
standing around scratching their heads. There he was himself, aged
twelve, with his .22 cal. rifle in hand and Musha, the coon dog, by his
side; Musha, how he had loved that dog--and how he had cried when it got
killed.

Pictures of the Alexander Hamilton Military Academy. Some of the worst
years of his life he had spent behind the walls of that imitation
castle.

The bombs upon Pearl Harbor.... He had enlisted the following day. On
his return from the induction center mother had said.... Her figure, her
movements, her voice loomed enormous in his memory.... But now the
pictures of the Pacific War flicked across the screen.... They were
picked from campaigns in which he, Lee had participated. They were also
picked from documentaries which the government had never dared to let
the public see ... close-ups of a torpedoed troop carrier, capsizing,
coming down upon the struggling survivors in the shark-infested sea. It
had been his own ship, the _Monticello_, but he had never known that an
automatic camera had operated in the nose of the plane which had circled
the scene....

Port Darwin--Guadacanal--Iwo Jima: close-ups of flame throwing tanks
advancing up a ridge. He had commanded one of them.... Antlike human
figures of fleeing Japs and the flames leaping at them.... So vivid was
the memory that the smell returned to his nostrils, the sickening stench
of burning human flesh. It tortured him. His voice was husky with
revulsion as he said:

"What's the good of all this; take it away."

"Oh, no," one of the medics answered. "We couldn't think of that. We've
got to see this to the end. What are your physical sensations now, Dr.
Lee?"

"It's fingers now--soft fingers. They are tapping me from all sides
like--like a vibration massage. It's strange though--they're tapping
from the inside--little pneumatic hammers at a furious pace. They seem
to work upon my diaphragm for a drum. But it doesn't pain."

"Good, very good; that was a fine description, Lee. That burning city
was Manilla wasn't it, when MacArthur returned? You were in that second
Philippine campaign too weren't you, Lee? That was when you won the
Congressional Medal of Honor."

Yes, it was Manila all right, and there was Mindanao where the Japs had
put up that suicide defence of the caves.

Lee's battalion had been in the attack; steeply uphill with no cover, it
had been murder.... And seeing his best men mowed down, he had turned
berserk. He had used a bulldozer for a battering ram, had driven it
single handed directly into the fire-spitting mouth of the objective,
raising its blade like a battle-axe. An avalanche of rocks and dirt had
come down from the top of the cave under the artillery barrage and he
had rammed the stuff down into the throat of the fiery dragon, again and
again. He never rightly knew he did it. It had all ended in a blackout
from loss of blood. It had been in a hospital that they pinned that
medal on him which he felt was undeserved....

Now the reel showed him what at the time he hadn't seen; the end of the
battle for the Philippines: Pulverised volcanic rock seen from the air,
battle planes swooping down upon little fumaroles, the ventilator shafts
of caves defeated but still unsurrendered. Big, plump canisters
plummeted from the bellies of the planes. And then the jellied gasoline
ignited, turning those thousands of lives trapped in the deep into one
vast funeral pyre.... For over fifteen years he had tried to forget, to
bury the war, to keep it jailed up in the dungeon of the subconscious.
Now those accursed medics had unleashed the monster of war and as it
stared at him from the screen it had that blood-freezing, that hypnotic
effect which the Greeks once ascribed to the monstrous Gorgon.

Mellish's voice--or was it Bondy's?--seemed to come through a fog and
over a vast distance as it asked: "What seems to be the matter, Lee?
You're sweating, your body shakes; what do you feel?"

"It's those rays," he tried to defend himself. "It's the vibrations--the
fingers. They are gripping the heart; it's like the whole body was
turned into a heart. It's like another life invading mine--it's ghostly.
Stop it, for heaven's sake."

"Not yet, Lee, not yet. Everything's under control, you're reacting
beautifully; you're really feeling fine, Lee, just fine."

"If only I could get at his throat," Lee thought. "I would squeeze the
oil of that voice and never be sorry I did." He tried to stir and found
that it couldn't be done; every muscle seemed tied in a cataleptic
state. Then he heard the other medic speak.

"You were shown this little movie Lee in order to stimulate your mind
into the production of a movie of its own. You have responded, you have
answered the call. While you saw the first, the sensory tactile rays
working in five layers of penetration have recorded and have carried
your every reaction to The Brain. The Brain, in a very real sense has
read your mind and it has retranslated these readings into visual
images. We are now going to watch the shapes of your own thoughts. Here
we go...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The projector which had stopped for a minute began to purr again. As the
first thought-image jumped upon the screen there was a low moan of
amazement mixed with acute pain. It escaped Lee's mouth, uncontrollably
as the abyss of the subconscious opened and he saw:

A monstrous animal shaped like an octopus crawling across a cotton
field. Nearer and nearer it crept, enormous, threatening; and suddenly
there was a sharp excited bark and a spotted coon dog raced across the
field toward the monster. He heard the voice of a small boy whimpering:
"Musha, oh Musha, don't, _please_ don't." But the dog wouldn't hear and
the monster flashed an enormous evil eye, just once and then it gripped
the dog with its tentacle arms tearing its body apart, chewing it up
between horrible sabre teeth.... As through an ether mask he heard the
two medics say: "That must have been a considerable shock to him," and
"With a sensitive nature like that, and at that sensitive age, such an
impression becomes permanent."

The Alexander Hamilton Military Academy appeared, not real, yet more
than real. It was a narrow court yard surrounded by huge walls slanting
toward the inside; it was huge and forbidding, fortress-towers standing
guard, it was enormous gates forever barred, it was the figure of a huge
Marine pacing fiercely back and forth in front of those gates, the same
ghostly Marine watching all gates so that nobody could escape....

"That's probably his father," the voices whispered behind his ears.
"Yes; the archetype. He'll bring up the Mother, too, I'll bet...."

As in those paintings of the primitives where kings and queens are very
tall and common folks are very small, Lee saw her now: Mother. That had
been just after induction when he had brought her what he thought was
joyous news. Her face filled the whole screen. It looked as if composed
from jagged ectoplasms, quite transparent except for the eyes. Deep and
burning with pain they were, boring into his own. And there was smoke
coming out of her mouth and it formed words: "But, Semper, you are still
a child. One mustn't use children for this sort of thing; one mustn't."
Every letter of these smoke-written words seemed to be flying toward him
on wings....

"Terrific," the voices murmured at Lee's back. "Remember the case
history? She died of cancer six months after he went overseas." "Yes, I
remember; he's never seen her again. He's probably built up a strong
complex out of that one, too."

On the screen now danced images almost totally abstracted from the
realities of the filmed documentaries from the war.

They were whirling columns of smoke; they were like the vast, dark
interior of a huge thunderhead cloud through which a glider soars,
illuminated only by the flashes of lightning as for split seconds they
revealed a fraction of some horrible reality: A burning ocean with
screaming human faces bobbing in the flames. The whirling tracks of a
tank going across some writhing human body and leaving it flat in its
tracks, sprawling like an empty coat dyed red. And then the swirling,
howling darkness closing in again....

"Interesting eh?" A voice broke through his cataleptic trance and the
other answered: "Beautiful; almost a classical case. Great plasticity of
imagination." "Yes; that's exactly what sets me wondering; the fellow
should have cracked up by all the rules of the game." "How do we know
that he hasn't? Maybe he was psycho and they didn't notice; they had
some godawful asses for psychiatrists in war medicine. It's quite a
possibility; well, his image production is ebbing now; I don't expect
anything new of significance, what do you think?" "Now; we've got what
we wanted anyway. Let's take him out of it; but go easy on the
rheostats."

The projector stopped. The masterful, the ghostly fingers which had been
playing on the keyboard of his mind very slowly receded from a furious
fortissimo to a pianissimo. At first only the flutterings of the
diaphragm eased, then the violent palpitations of a foreign pulse
slipped off the heart; the liberated lungs expanded; tremors were
running through the body as through the ice of a frozen river at spring;
and then at last the mind escaped from its captivity.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gradually as in a cinema after the show the lights reappeared. Blinking,
Lee stared at the man who stood over him taking his pulse; it was Bondy.
Mellish stood at the foot of the table with his back to Lee; he seemed
to watch some apparatus which made noises like a teletype machine.
Swinging his legs off the table Lee said:

"I'm okay; you needn't hold my hand."

But then he noticed that he wasn't. His head spun, his whole body was
wet with perspiration, he felt very weak and limp. He swayed and buried
his face in his hands trying to gain his balance, trying to shake off
the trance. "Excuse me," he said. "I'm a bit dizzy."

As he opened his eyes again the two medics were standing right in front
