It had happened too suddenly for any of the Earthmen to stop him, and
now they were unable to decide just what they should do. Most of them
turned to Bruckner.

To Sweets, it seemed that Bruckner had gone pale, but it was difficult
to be certain in the uneven light cast by the fire. His mouth opened
twice before he could speak. And when he did, Sweets almost laughed at
the staginess and absurdity of what he said.

"Unhand that woman!" Bruckner commanded.

Bruckner's voice was loud and it penetrated through the haze of
Majesky's drunken elation. He stopped his spinning and set the girl on
her feet, but he kept his right arm around her waist and glared back at
Bruckner.

"Go to hell," he said.

The natives apparently had been as surprised as the crew, for they had
not moved. Now, however, one of them rose and lunged at Majesky.

Majesky's face twisted into an expectant grin and he tossed the girl
aside and stood with wide-spread legs, waiting. As the native dived in
with his head lowered, Majesky brought his right fist up in a powerful
uppercut and smashed it into the tribesman's mouth.

The native continued his dive and landed face down. Natives and Earthmen
were on their feet now and moving toward Majesky. Sweets reached him
first.

The grin of pleasure was still on Majesky's face as he hit Sweets on the
left cheek and spun him half-around. He butted his head into the chest
of the next man to reach him, but they pulled him down then and held him
helpless.

The natives had paused when they saw the Earthmen grab Majesky.

Now Bruckner made his voice heard above the noise. "Bring him over
here!" he yelled.

Two men pinned Majesky's arms while a third held one kicking leg. They
dragged him over to Bruckner.

"You damn, dumb fool!" Bruckner cursed fervently. He raised his voice.
"All of you," he ordered, "back to the ship!"

The natives made no attempt to stop them.

Sweets glanced back over his shoulder at Chief Faffin as they went. He
was standing and intoning sadly, "_Lacigule, lacigule, lacigule_."

       *       *       *       *       *

The following day, Bruckner called Sweets to his quarters.

"That was a rotten piece of business last night," Bruckner said. "But
I'm proud of the way you acted. You did some mighty quick thinking
there."

Sweets grunted. He knew the flattery was leading to something.

"I've been giving the matter some deep thought since," Bruckner
continued, "and I don't think it's too late yet to patch things up. But
I need a man with guts." He laughed. "How brave do you feel this
morning?"

Sweets shrugged and regarded the other levelly.

"You can speak their language," Bruckner said. "And I don't believe
they're sure enough of themselves to risk bloodshed. How would you like
to bring another present to the chief? I'll see that you're--"

"I don't feel like being a hero this morning," Sweets interrupted. "Why
don't you go yourself?"

Bruckner's eyebrows raised. "My job is vital to the success of this
expedition to risk my life unnecessarily. I'd go myself except--"

"Except that it's too dangerous," Sweets finished for him.

Bruckner straightened and his lips grew narrower. "That will be enough
of that. We'll find some way to get along without your help."

The party Bruckner organized to visit the native village pointedly did
not include Sweets.

Each man carried a rifle and sidearms. Bruckner walked this time--at
their head. But Sweets made a small bet with himself that Bruckner would
stay close to the protection of his men. He was willing enough to send
