
"We can't. We've lost control."

"Lost control?"

"This is an experimental ship."

Gross took the radio. "This is Commander Gross, Security. We're being
carried into outer space. There's nothing we can do. Is there any way
that we can be removed from this ship?"

A hesitation. "We have some fast pursuit ships that could pick you up
if you wanted to jump. The chances are good they'd find you. Do you
have space flares?"

"We do," the Pilot said. "Let's try it."

"Abandon ship?" Kramer said. "If we leave now we'll never see it
again."

"What else can we do? We're gaining speed all the time. Do you propose
that we stay here?"

"No." Kramer shook his head. "Damn it, there ought to be a better
solution."

"Could you contact _him_?" Winter asked. "The Old Man? Try to reason
with him?"

"It's worth a chance," Gross said. "Try it."

"All right." Kramer took the microphone. He paused a moment. "Listen!
Can you hear me? This is Phil Kramer. Can you hear me, Professor. Can
you hear me? I want you to release the controls."

There was silence.

"This is Kramer, Professor. Can you hear me? Do you remember who I am?
Do you understand who this is?"

Above the control panel the wall speaker made a sound, a sputtering
static. They looked up.

"Can you hear me, Professor. This is Philip Kramer. I want you to give
the ship back to us. If you can hear me, release the controls! Let go,
Professor. Let go!"

Static. A rushing sound, like the wind. They gazed at each other.
There was silence for a moment.

"It's a waste of time," Gross said.

"No--listen!"

The sputter came again. Then, mixed with the sputter, almost lost in
it, a voice came, toneless, without inflection, a mechanical, lifeless
voice from the metal speaker in the wall, above their heads.

"... Is it you, Philip? I can't make you out. Darkness.... Who's
there? With you...."

"It's me, Kramer." His fingers tightened against the microphone
handle. "You must release the controls, Professor. We have to get back
to Terra. You must."

Silence. Then the faint, faltering voice came again, a little stronger
than before. "Kramer. Everything so strange. I was right, though.
Consciousness result of thinking. Necessary result. Cognito ergo sum.
Retain conceptual ability. Can you hear me?"

"Yes, Professor--"

"I altered the wiring. Control. I was fairly certain.... I wonder if I
can do it. Try...."

Suddenly the air-conditioning snapped into operation. It snapped
abruptly off again. Down the corridor a door slammed. Something
thudded. The men stood listening. Sounds came from all sides of them,
switches shutting, opening. The lights blinked off; they were in
darkness. The lights came back on, and at the same time the heating
coils dimmed and faded.

"Good God!" Winter said.

Water poured down on them, the emergency fire-fighting system. There
was a screaming rush of air. One of the escape hatches had slid back,
and the air was roaring frantically out into space.

The hatch banged closed. The ship subsided into silence. The heating
coils glowed into life. As suddenly as it had begun the weird
exhibition ceased.

"I can do--everything," the dry, toneless voice came from the wall
speaker. "It is all controlled. Kramer, I wish to talk to you. I've
been--been thinking. I haven't seen you in many years. A lot to
discuss. You've changed, boy. We have much to discuss. Your wife--"

The Pilot grabbed Kramer's arm. "There's a ship standing off our bow.
Look."

       *       *       *       *       *

They ran to the port. A slender pale craft was moving along with them,
keeping pace with them. It was signal-blinking.

"A Terran pursuit ship," the Pilot said. "Let's jump. They'll pick us
up. Suits--"

He ran to a supply cupboard and turned the handle. The door opened and
he pulled the suits out onto the floor.

"Hurry," Gross said. A panic seized them. They dressed frantically,
pulling the heavy garments over them. Winter staggered to the escape
hatch and stood by it, waiting for the others. They joined him, one by
one.

"Let's go!" Gross said. "Open the hatch."

Winter tugged at the hatch. "Help me."

They grabbed hold, tugging together. Nothing happened. The hatch
refused to budge.

"Get a crowbar," the Pilot said.

"Hasn't anyone got a blaster?" Gross looked frantically around. "Damn
it, blast it open!"

"Pull," Kramer grated. "Pull together."

"Are you at the hatch?" the toneless voice came, drifting and eddying
through the corridors of the ship. They looked up, staring around
them. "I sense something nearby, outside. A ship? You are leaving, all
of you? Kramer, you are leaving, too? Very unfortunate. I had hoped we
could talk. Perhaps at some other time you might be induced to
remain."

"Open the hatch!" Kramer said, staring up at the impersonal walls of
the ship. "For God's sake, open it!"

There was silence, an endless pause. Then, very slowly, the hatch slid
back. The air screamed out, rushing past them into space.

One by one they leaped, one after the other, propelled away by the
repulsive material of the suits. A few minutes later they were being
hauled aboard the pursuit ship. As the last one of them was lifted
through the port, their own ship pointed itself suddenly upward and
shot off at tremendous speed. It disappeared.

Kramer removed his helmet, gasping. Two sailors held onto him and
began to wrap him in blankets. Gross sipped a mug of coffee,
shivering.

"It's gone," Kramer murmured.

"I'll have an alarm sent out," Gross said.

"What's happened to your ship?" a sailor asked curiously. "It sure
took off in a hurry. Who's on it?"

"We'll have to have it destroyed," Gross went on, his face grim. "It's
got to be destroyed. There's no telling what it--what _he_ has in
mind." Gross sat down weakly on a metal bench. "What a close call for
us. We were so damn trusting."

"What could he be planning," Kramer said, half to himself. "It doesn't
make sense. I don't get it."

       *       *       *       *       *

As the ship sped back toward the moon base they sat around the table
in the dining room, sipping hot coffee and thinking, not saying very
much.

"Look here," Gross said at last. "What kind of man was Professor
Thomas? What do you remember about him?"

Kramer put his coffee mug down. "It was ten years ago. I don't
remember much. It's vague."

He let his mind run back over the years. He and Dolores had been at
Hunt College together, in physics and the life sciences. The College
was small and set back away from the momentum of modern life. He had
gone there because it was his home town, and his father had gone there
before him.

Professor Thomas had been at the College a long time, as long as
anyone could remember. He was a strange old man, keeping to himself
most of the time. There were many things that he disapproved of, but
he seldom said what they were.

"Do you recall anything that might help us?" Gross asked. "Anything
that would give us a clue as to what he might have in mind?"

Kramer nodded slowly. "I remember one thing...."

One day he and the Professor had been sitting together in the school
chapel, talking leisurely.

"Well, you'll be out of school, soon," the Professor had said. "What
are you going to do?"
