hidden somewhere in the sky, no one knew. They made no attempt to bomb
the ship, or to attack it in any way. This seemed ominous.

The Idaho carried four planes of her own. One had been lost. Before
dawn, Captain Higgins ordered another catapulted into the sky, to search
the surrounding area. This plane went aloft. It was not attacked or
molested. The pilot, by radio, reported the presence of a large body of
land very near. Navigators, consulting their charts, discovered that
this body of land was not on any of their maps.

Dawn, that hour of danger when an attack might reasonably be expected,
came. The crew of the Idaho stood by their guns, waiting. No attack
came.

The sun rose. Still there was no attack. The ship, moving very slowly,
entered an area where the surface of the sea seemed to have turned to
silver. This effect was caused by some oily substance that floated on
the water, a new phenomenon to officers and men alike.

On the horizon the land mass the pilot of the scouting plane had
reported was dimly visible, a range of forested hills sloping upward to
mountains in the background, the rim of some mighty continent of the old
time. Later, millions of years later, only the tops of these mountains
would remain above the sea, to form the thousands of islands of the
Pacific.

       *       *       *       *       *

Craig breakfasted below. He came on deck just as the alarm sounded. The
crew raced to their stations. He discovered the cause of the alarm.

Overhead, at a height of thirty to thirty-five thousand feet, was a
plane. It was shadowing the ship. It made no attempt to attack. Craig
went to the bridge. Captain Higgins had been on the bridge all night. He
was still there. He greeted Craig wanly.

"We're being watched," Higgins said. "I don't like it."

"Anything we can do about it?"

Higgins squinted upward through his glasses. "Too high for ack-ack. No,
there is nothing we can do about it. And I'm not sure we want to do
anything about it."

"What do you mean?"

"We're not fighting a war here in _this_ time," the captain answered.
"We don't want to fight, if we can possibly avoid it."

"It may be a problem to avoid fighting," Craig said. "Remember, they
shot down the pilot of your scouting plane."

"I remember," Higgins said grimly.

"Of course, we could surrender," Craig suggested.

"How would you like to go to hell?" Higgins said.

"It was only an idea," Craig grinned. "But I don't like this business.
We don't know what we're trying to avoid fighting, or what strength they
have, or how they will attack, if they attack."

"I don't like it either," Higgins answered. "But I didn't choose it.
Damn them, if they're going to attack, I wish they would get on with
it!"

Over the huge ship the tiny plane circled. Every man on the Idaho knew
the situation was nasty. They were being watched. There was nothing they
could do to stop it. The shadowing plane was above anti-aircraft fire.
The warship could not hide from it. There was no protecting destroyer to
lay a friendly smoke screen to shield them from the eyes in the sky.
Meanwhile, somewhere around them a hidden enemy might be marshalling
forces to destroy them.

"Have you tried to contact them?" Craig asked.

"I tried to reach them by radio all last night," Higgins answered.
"There was no answer. The radio operators say there are no signals in
the air. This, plus the fact that they have not attempted to answer our
signals, forces me to the conclusion that they have not discovered
radio. Of course they may use wave bands beyond the range of out
receivers--Hello! What's that?"

From somewhere near them a shout had sounded.

Leaning over the edge of the bridge, Craig saw a sailor on the lower
deck. The man was also leaning over pointing down toward the sea. He
shouted again and turned upward toward the bridge. His face was white
with terror.

"What is it?" Captain Higgins demanded.

"It's--It's that silver stuff on the surface, sir," the sailor answered.
"It's--it's eating the sides of the ship sir. It's eating the ship."

The Idaho was still in the area of the bright substance that floated on
the surface of the sea. Captain Higgins raced from the bridge down to
the main deck. Craig followed him. By the time they reached the spot
where the sailor was standing several other officers had gathered. They
were all staring down at the sea.

Craig leaned over the rail, looked down. Horror tightened an iron band
around his heart.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the waterline, a great gash had been eaten into the steel hull of the
Idaho. The plates of the ship were the best grade of chrome steel,
heat-treated and hardened. They were designed to withstand the battering
of sixteen-inch shells. The steel in them was the toughest metal that
had ever come out of Pittsburgh.

Where the oily, shiny substance touched it, the steel was crumbling
away.

"Acid!" Craig heard an officer gasp. "That's what the silver stuff is.
Acid! They sprayed it on the sea."

"They plotted our course and set a booby-trap for us."

"That can't be an acid," someone protested. "It is impossible to secure
a concentration of acid on the surface of the sea strong enough to eat
holes in steel."

"Maybe it's impossible but it sure as hell has happened!"

Each passing wave tossed the oily liquid against the hull of the Idaho.
It hissed softly when it struck and promptly began its deadly work. What
was happening below the waterline was not visible. Probably no damage
was being done there because the acid was on the surface and did not
touch the areas below the waterline. But enough damage was being done
above the water! Pits two inches deep were already appearing in the
steel sides of the ship.

"Full speed ahead!" Captain Higgins ordered.

Their hope was to get out of the area covered by the acid and to get out
of it quickly. But--the patch of silver was miles in extent. And there
was no way to determine exactly how much damage had been done to the
ship. The line of corrosion extending around the hull might have
weakened her so badly that she was unseaworthy.

Captain Higgins took the only possible course. He ordered the ship to
make for land.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours later the Idaho was resting in a natural harbor between low
hills. A river emptied into the sea here. Captain Higgins had grown
years older as he took the ship into the mouth of the harbor. He had no
charts of the place, no way of knowing how much water was available, or
whether there were hidden reefs waiting to rip the bottom out of the
ship. He took her in blind, the hardest job any ship's master ever has
to face.

Like a wounded lion, the Idaho was seeking a place where she could lie
up and determine how badly she had been hurt. In entering the harbor she
was going into what might easily be a death trap but if she stayed
outside, her weakened hull might give away and she might go down with
all hands.

Higgins sent his engineers in boats to determine how much damage had
been done to the hull. With his officers, he waited on the bridge for
the engineers to report. There was none of the acid on the surface of
the harbor.

Craig heard the chief engineer report.

"The hull is so weak that the ship may sink at any moment, sir. An
effort to move her might crumble the plates. Holes in the sides six to
eight inches deep, sir."

The captain's hands on the rail of the bridge tightened until the
knuckles showed white.

"Very well," he said. "Beach her."

"Beach her, sir?"

"Yes. If we stay here, we may find more of that acid sprayed on the
water, in which case the ship will sink."

The crew began preparations to carry out the orders. The Idaho was done,
finished, ended.

High overhead the single watchful plane still circled.

Higgins shook his fist at it. "Damn you--" he said. "Damn you--"

The Idaho was carefully brought into the mouth of the river until she
touched bottom. Fortunately the bottom was sandy mud. The ship sighed
and settled herself into it like a tired sea monster coming out of the
ocean to die. Everyone on board her knew that this was the ship's last
resting place. Her steel bones would remain here until they rusted away.
As the ship's keel grated on the bottom, Captain Higgins looked like a
man who is hearing his own death sentence but his back was stiff as a
ramrod and his chin was high.




CHAPTER V

The Ogrum


"Exploring parties ashore," Captain Higgins ordered.

"With your permission," Craig said, "I should like to be a member of one
of those parties."

"Certainly," the captain said. "I'll do even better than that--I'll put
you in charge of one of them."

"Thank you, sir," Craig said. In accordance with the best naval
tradition, he kept his voice emotionless, but his heart leaped at the
thought. He was going to lead a squad of blue-jackets ashore!

He was assembling his group when Michaelson, wildly excited, came
dashing up. "I understand you are taking a squad ashore!" the scientist
excitedly panted.

"That's right," Craig answered.

"I want to go along."

"You want to go along?" Craig glanced toward the nearby shore. Above
the swamps bordering the river one of the lizard-birds was flapping. It
was carrying in its taloned claws something that looked like a small
monkey. Now and then coughing grunts came from the swamp, evidence of
the beasts lurking there. "You want to go into _that_?" Craig
questioned.

"Certainly," the scientist vigorously answered. "This is the opportunity
of a life-time. We shall have a perfect chance to observe the flora and
fauna of this time. We shall see them alive. No other scientist ever had
a chance like this."

"You mean you will have a fine chance to be gobbled up," Craig said
grimly, nodding toward the shore. "That's jungle country."

"You are taking these men into it," Michaelson protested.

"They volunteered," Craig answered.

"So do I volunteer," Michaelson said.

"All right," Craig said, grinning in spite of himself at the impetuous
way this scientist flung himself into what at best could only be a nasty
situation. "Get yourself a gun and come along--" He broke off to stare
at the second person who was approaching him.

It was Margy Sharp. She went directly to the point. "How about me
volunteering too?" she asked.

"Well, I'm damned," Craig said.

"Does that mean I can go?"

"It does not!" Craig said emphatically. "It means I'm astonished that
you should have taken such sudden leave of your senses."

"Why can't I go?" she challenged.

"Because you're a girl," he answered. "And because you would be in the
way. No sale, Margy. Not today and not any other day if I have anything
to say about it. You stay here where you belong."

"You damned men have _all_ the fun," the girl said bitterly, turning on
her heel. Craig watched her walk directly to Captain Higgins and make
the same request and he observed the astonishment of that naval officer.
But in spite of his astonishment, the captain was quite able to say
"No."

The last he saw of her, she was leaning over the rail watching the small
boat put out for shore. He waved at her. She thumbed her nose in reply.

Looking back as they neared the shore, Craig saw she was still standing
at the rail. He also heard the boom of the ship's catapult and saw a
plane launched into the air. Captain Higgins was sending out a plane to
scout the surrounding area. Craig knew what the captain was worried
about--the place from which those cursed silent airplanes came.

High in the sky, he could see one of the silent floaters keeping its
vigil over the Idaho.

"We'll cross the swamp and reach the hills," Craig directed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shots roared in the distance as they forced the boat through the pools
of stagnant water. Apparently the shots came from the other exploring
parties shooting flying lizards or other creatures. Once a flying lizard
swooped over their boat but it changed its mind and went on to attack
something else. And, as they forced the boat through a clump of reeds
and into a clear channel, something monstrous snorted near them. Loud
crashes sounded in the swamp tangle.

"It looks as big as an elephant," Craig shouted. "Get your guns ready."

He could see the movement of the reeds as the beast crashed toward them.
Small trees were shaking, marking its passage, then it thrust its head
out of the tangle not fifty feet from them.

"It's a dinosaur!" Michaelson shouted. The scientist was wildly
excited. "It's a live dinosaur."

"It's going to be a dead one if it comes any closer," Craig said grimly.

"No, don't shoot," the scientist said. "It's one of the herbivorous
dinosaurs, a vegetation eater. It won't harm us."

The sailors in the boat were nervously fingering their tommy-guns and
staring at the mountain of flesh that was half-hidden by the jungle
growth. It, in turn, stared at them. It was bigger than any elephant
that ever walked the earth, and Craig, as he estimated the size of the
beast, was wondering whether the tommy-guns would stop it if it chose to
attack.

"If we have to shoot, aim at the head," he whispered.

In comparison to the rest of the body, the head was small. It would
present a difficult target but a hit in the head might stop the beast
whereas a hit in the huge body would pass unnoticed. The dinosaur stared
at them. Seconds ticked into minutes. It moved its head in a circle,
sniffing the air. Michaelson wanted to get out of the boat and swim to
shore so he could examine it closely.

"You stay in this boat," Craig said vigorously. "You will probably get a
chance to examine all the dinosaurs you want."

Muttering to himself, the scientist subsided.

Slowly, as though it had seen all it wanted to, the dinosaur turned and
went back into the swamp. The shaking of the shrubs marked the direction
it had taken. Craig breathed a sigh of relief.

"I told you it wasn't dangerous," Michaelson said bitterly. "You should
have let me examine it."

"Never mind," Craig said soothingly. "After we get ourselves settled
here, you can have a dinosaur for a pet. Push on, men," he said to the
crew. "I want to climb one of those hills and take a look around."

       *       *       *       *       *

Reaching the spot where the boat could pass no farther, they left two
men to guard it and pushed ahead on foot. The swamp gave way to rising,
rocky ground covered with a thin growth of huge trees. There was a
whistle in the air. Looking quickly up, Craig saw a flying lizard swoop
through an opening in the trees and dive head-long at something hidden
in the rocks ahead.

A scream sounded as the dragon bird dived to the attack.

There was a human element in the scream.

"That bird is after somebody!" Craig shouted. "Come on."

If he had not known it was impossible, he would have been certain that
the scream he had heard had come from the throat of a woman. But there
were no women here in this mad world. Dashing forward he climbed to the
top of a huge rock--and looked down at an incredible scene.

He was on the lip of a rocky ravine. Across on the other side of the
ravine was a hole in the rock, a shallow cave. Crouching in the back of
the shallow depression was a woman. She was shielding something with her
body.

In front of the shallow cave was--a man. He was not the type of man to
grace the pages of a fashion magazine, but in spite of bulging muscles
and heavy, uncombed hair, there was a lithe alertness about him that was
appealing.

There was something else that was more appealing.

The way he was facing the dragon.

The lizard bird, all claws and fanged mouth and hooked wings, was trying
to knock the man down. He was fighting it desperately. His only weapon
was a heavy club. He struck heavily with the club, leaped back out of
danger. The bird lunged at him. He hit it across the head and knocked it
backward. The bird was on the ground. It lunged again, screaming
shrilly. The man struck at it, dodged to one side, hit it again. The
bird came back to the attack.

No matter how valiant the defense, there could be only one ending. The
dragon was too big, too fierce, too impervious to pain, too hard to
kill, to be stopped by a man with a club. It lunged again. The man
struck at it, slipped, fell. Hissing with triumph, leathery wings
flapping, the lizard bird leaped at him.

[Illustration: The dragon was too big, too hard, to be killed by a man
with a club ... there could be but one ending]

_Rat-tat-tat-tat_--Craig let go with his tommy-gun.

_Rat-tat-tat-tat_--The other men joined in, pouring a murderous fury of
cross-fire down into the ravine. The bird was almost as big as a horse.
It was a fierce fighter. It would relinquish a meal when it was dead and
