
Mrs. Johns-Hayes beamed, as did all the other officers of the
Daughters. "Well, your faith and heroism have been rewarded,
great-great-great-great-grandfather. I know you'll be proud to know
that these ladies whom you see before you are the present guardians of
the ideals that you fought for."

"Well, now, is that so, ma'am? Is that so?" Peter Johns looked around
the convention hall in amazement.

"And that I, your descendant, have just been elected their President!"

"Well, what do you know about that! Maybe all the hard times and the
danger we been going through is worth it if you folks still remember
the way we felt about things."

"It's too bad," Decker whispered to MacCulloch, "that we can't let him
see what the country is really like. I'm not sure these ladies are
representative."

There was a worried look on the Professor's face. "That's impossible.
The reintegration is good for only an hour or so. I hope nothing goes
wrong here."

Mrs. Appleby-Simpkin took charge of the Colonel and ushered him to a
seat of honor near the podium while the new President prepared to
deliver her speech. Decker and the professor managed to obtain seats
on either side of Johns just as Rebecca started. He managed to whisper
to them, "I'm sure amazed! I'm sure amazed! All these nice old ladies
feeling the same way about things as we do."

       *       *       *       *       *

Decker had a premonition of trouble as Mrs. Hayes' words poured forth.
He had hoped for a cut and dried acceptance speech with nothing but
the usual patriotic platitudes, but, as she went on his worst fears
were realized. Inspired by the presence of her ancestor, the woman was
going into superlatives about the purposes and aims of the Patriot
Daughters. She covered everything from the glories of her ancestry to
the morals of the younger generation and women in politics.

Decker watched the Colonel's face, saw it changed from puzzlement to
painful boredom as word after word floated from the battery of
speakers overhead.

MacCulloch was whispering in Johns' ear in an attempt to draw his
attention from the woman's booming voice but the man disregarded him.
"Am I really responsible for that?" The Colonel jerked his head in the
direction of Mrs. Johns-Hayes.

"I'm afraid, Colonel, that you're getting a distorted idea of what
America is like in our time," Decker said. The Colonel didn't even
turn to look at him. He was scowling at his Amazonian descendant as
her screeching reached new heights.

"... and we hold that this is true! Our simple motto, as you all know,
is: One race, one creed, one way of thinking!"

Colonel Johns began to squirm violently in his seat. The professor
found it necessary to grasp him firmly by one arm while Decker held
him by the other.

The president of the Patriot Daughters had finished her speech amidst
thunderous applause and started to present suggestions for the
formation of new committees, for the passing of new by-laws and for
resolutions.

"A committee should be formed to see that the public parks are
properly policed to prevent so-called 'spooners' from pursuing their
immoral behaviour.

"A new by-law is needed," and here Mrs. Hayes glanced aside at Mrs.
Tolman, "to prevent members being accepted unless their forebears were
lieutenants or of higher rank in the glorious Continental army."

The Colonel was a strong man and both Decker and MacCulloch were older
than he. With something between a snort and a roar he shook them loose
and started for the exit.

"Oh my," MacCulloch moaned, "I was afraid that this whole thing was a
mistake."

Colonel Johns had taken only two steps toward the door when he seemed
