
"That does it, Pops!" Bubs shrilled.

"Yeah--maybe so," John Endlich agreed almost optimistically. He felt
really tender toward his kids, just then. They'd really helped him, for
once.

Yes--almost he was hopeful. Until he glanced at the rapidly declining
sun. An all-night vigil. No. Probably worse. Oh Lord--how long could he
last like this? Even if he managed to keep Neely and Company at bay?
Night after night.... All that he had accomplished seemed useless. He
just had so much more that could be wrecked--pushed over with a harsh
laugh, as if it really was something funny.

John Endlich's flesh crawled. And in his thinking, now, he went a little
against his own determinations. Probably because, in the present state
of his disgust, he needed a drink--bad.

"Nuts!" he growled lugubriously. "If I'd only been a little more
sociable.... That was where the trouble started. I might have got broke,
but I would've made friends. They think I'm snooty."

Rose's jaw hardened, as if she took his regrets as an accusation that
she had led him along the straight and narrow path, which--by an
exasperating shift in philosophical principle--now seemed the shortest
route to destruction. But he felt very sorry for her, too; and he didn't
believe that what he had just said was entirely the truth.

So he added: "I don't mean it, Honey. I'm just griping."

She softened. "You've got to eat, Johnny," she said. "You haven't eaten
all day. And tonight you've got to sleep. I'll keep watch. Maybe it'll
be all right...."

Well, anyway it was nice to know that his wife was like that.
Yeah--gentle, and fairminded. After they had all eaten supper, he tried
hard to keep awake. Fear helped him to do so more than ever. Their tent
was now covered by the rising plastic roof--but beyond the clear
substance, he could still watch for starlight to be stopped by prowling
forms, out there at the jagged rim of Vesta. It was hell to feel your
skin puckering, and yet to have exhaustion pushing your eyelids down
inexorably....

Somewhere he lost the hold on himself. And he dreamed that Alf Neely and
he were fighting with their fists. And he was being beaten to a pulp.
But he was wishing desperately that he could win. Then they could have a
drink, and maybe be friends. But he knew hopelessly that things weren't
quite that simple, either.

       *       *       *       *       *

He awoke to blink at blazing sunshine. Then his whole body became clammy
with perspiration, as he thought of his lapse from responsibility;
glancing over, he saw that Rose was sleeping as soundly as the kids. His
wide eyes searched for the disaster that he knew he'd find....

But the wide roof was all the way up, now--intact. It made a great,
squarish bubble, the skin of which was specially treated to stop the
hard and dangerous part of the ultra-violet rays of the sun, and also
the lethal portion of the cosmic rays. It even had an inter-skin layer
of gum that could seal the punctures that grain-of-sand-sized meteors
might make. But meteors, though plentiful in the asteroid belt, were
curiously innocuous. They all moved in much the same direction as the
large asteroids, and at much the same velocity--so their relative speed
had to be low.

The walls of the small tent around Endlich sagged, where they had bulged
tautly before--showing that there was now a firm and equal pressure
beyond them. The electrolysis apparatus had been left active all night,
and the heating units. This was the result.

John Endlich was at first almost unbelieving when he saw that nothing
had been wrecked during the night. For a moment he was elated. He woke
up his family by shouting: "Look! The bums stayed away! They didn't
come! Look! We've got five acres of ground, covered by air that we can
breathe!"

His sense of triumph, however, was soon dampened. Yes--he'd been left
unmolested--for one night. But had that been done only to keep him at a
fruitless and sleepless watch? Probably. Another delicate form of
hazing. And it meant nothing for the night to come--or for those to
follow. So he was in the same harrowing position as before, pursued only
by a wild and defenseless drive to get things done. To find some slight
illusion of security by working to build a sham of normal, Earthly life.
To shut out the cold vacuum, and a little of the bluntness of the voidal
stars. To make certain reassuring sounds possible around him.

"Got to patch up the pieces of the house, first, and bolt 'em together,
Rose," he said feverishly. "Kids--maybe you could help by setting out
some of the hydroponic troughs for planting. We gotta break plain
ground, too, as soon as it's thawed enough. We gotta...." His words
raced on with his flying thoughts.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a mad day of toil. The hours were pitifully short. They couldn't
be stretched to cover more than a fraction of all the work that Endlich
wanted to get done. But the low gravity reduced the problem of heavy
lifting to almost zero, at least. And he did get the house assembled--so
that Rose and the kids and he could sleep inside its sealed doors.
Sealed, that is, if Neely or somebody didn't use a blaster or an
explosive cap or bullet--in an orgy of perverted humor.... He still had
no answer for that.

Rose and the children toiled almost as hard as he did. Rose even managed
to find a couple of dozen eggs, that--by being carefully packed to
withstand a spaceship's takeoff--had withstood the effects of Neely's
idea of fun. She set up an incubator, and put them inside, to be
hatched.

But, of course, sunset came again--with the same pendent threat as
before. Nerve-twisting. Terrible. And a vigil was all but impossible.
John Endlich was out on his feet--far more than just dog-tired....

"That damned Neely," he groaned, almost too weary even to swallow his
food, in spite of the luxury of a real, pullman-style supper table. "He
doesn't lose sleep. He can pick his time to come here and raise hob!"

Rose's glance was strange--almost guilty. "Tonight I think he might have
to stay home--too," she said.

John Endlich blinked at her.

"All right," she answered, rather defensively. "So to speak, Johnny, I
called the cops. Yesterday--with the small radio transmitter. When you
and Bubs and Evelyn were up in those old buildings. I reported Neely and
his companions."

"Reported them?"

"Sure. To Mr. Mahoney, the boss at the mining camp. I was glad to find
out that there is a little law and order around here. Mr. Mahoney was
nice. He said that he wouldn't be surprised if they were cooled in the
can for a few days, and then confined to the camp area. Matter of fact,
I radioed him again last night. It's been done."

John Endlich's vast sigh of relief was slightly tainted by the idea that
to call on a policing power for protection was a little bit on the timid
side.

"Oh," he grunted. "Thanks. I never thought of doing that."

"Johnny."

"Yeah?"

"I kind of got the notion, though--from between the lines of what Mr.
Mahoney said--that there was heavy trouble brewing at the camp. About
conditions, and home-leaves, and increased profit-sharing. Maybe there's
danger of riots and what-not, Johnny. Anyhow, Mr. Mahoney said that we
should 'keep on exercising all reasonable caution.'"

"Hmm-m--Mr. Mahoney is _very_ nice, ain't he?" Endlich growled.

"You stop that, Johnny," Rose ordered.

But her husband had already passed beyond thoughts of jealousy. He was
thinking of the time when Neely would have worked out his sentence, and
would be free to roam around again--no doubt with increased annoyance at
the Endlich clan for causing his restraint. If a riot or something
didn't spring him, beforehand. John Endlich itched to try to tear his
head off. But, of course, the same consequences as before still
applied....

       *       *       *       *       *

As it turned out, the Endlichs had a reprieve of two months and fourteen
days, almost to the hour and figured on a strictly Earth-time scale.

For what it was worth, they accomplished a great deal. In their great
plastic greenhouse, supported like a colossal bubble by the humid,
artificially-warmed air inside it, long troughs were filled with pebbles
and hydroponic solution. And therein tomatoes were planted, and lettuce,
radishes, corn, onions, melons--just about everything in the vegetable
line.

There remained plenty of ground left over from the five acres, so John
Endlich tinkered with that fifty-million-year-old tractor, figured out
its atomic-power-to-steam principle, and used it to help harrow up the
ancient soil of a smashed planet. He added commercial fertilizers and
nitrates to it--the nitrates were, of course, distinct from the gaseous
nitrogen that had been held, spongelike, by the subsoil, and had helped
supply the greenhouse with atmosphere. Then he harrowed the ground
again. The tractor worked fine, except that the feeble gravity made the
lugs of its wheels slip a lot. He repeated his planting, in the
old-fashioned manner.

Under ideal conditions, the inside of the great bubble was soon a mass
of growing things. Rose had planted flowers--to be admired, and to help
out the hive of bees, which were essential to some of the other plants,
as well. Nor was the flora limited to the Earthly. Some seeds or spores
had survived, here, from the mother world of the asteroids. They came
out of their eons of suspended animation, to become root and tough,
spiky stalk, and to mix themselves sparsely with vegetation that had
immigrated from Earth, now that livable conditions had been restored
over this little piece of ground. But whether they were fruit or weed,
it was difficult to say.

Sometimes John Endlich was misled. Sometimes, listening to familiar
sounds, and smelling familiar odors, toward the latter part of his
reprieve, he almost imagined that he'd accomplished his basic desires
here on Vesta--when he had always failed on Earth.
