badges of the Brotherhood of the Door."

Sturt, the helmsman, leaned toward the inspector. "We've rounded North
Foreland, sir," he cried. "Head straight south along the coast,"
Campbell ordered. "Chandra Dass must have gone this way. No doubt he
thinks he's shaken us off, and is making for the gathering-place of the
Brotherhood, wherever that may be."

"The cutter isn't built for seas like this," Sturt said, shaking his
head. "But I'll do it."

They were now following the coast southward, the lights of Ramsgate
dropping back on their right. The waters out here in the Channel were
wilder, great black waves tossing the cutter to the sky one moment, and
then dropping it sickeningly the next. Frequently its screws raced
loudly as they encountered no resistance but air.

Ennis, clinging precariously on the foredeck, turned the searchlight's
stabbing white beam back and forth on the heaving dark sea ahead, but
without any sign of their quarry disclosed.

White foam of breaking waves began to show around them like bared teeth,
and there was a humming in the air.

"Storm coming up the Channel," Sturt exclaimed. "It'll do for us if it
catches us out here."

"We've got to keep on," Ennis told him desperately. "We must come up
with them soon!"

The coast on their right was now one of black, rocky cliffs, towering
all along the shore in a jagged, frowning wall against which the waves
dashed foamy white. The cutter crept southward over the wild waters,
tossed like a chip upon the great waves. Sturt was having a hard time
holding the craft out from the rocks, and had its prow pointed obliquely
away from them.

The humming in the air changed to a shrill whistling as the outrider
winds of the storm came upon them. The cutter tossed still more wildly
and black masses of water smashed in upon them from the darkness, dazing
and drenching them.

Suddenly Ennis yelled, "There's the lights of a boat ahead! There,
moving in toward the cliffs!"

He pointed ahead, and Campbell and the helmsman peered through the
blinding spray and darkness. A pair of low lights were moving at high
speed on the waters there, straight toward the towering black cliffs.
Then they vanished suddenly from sight.

"There must be a hidden opening or harbor of some kind in the cliffs!"
Inspector Campbell exclaimed. "But that can't be Chandra Dass' boat, for
it carried no lights."

"It might be others of the Brotherhood going to the meeting-place!"
Ennis exclaimed. "We can follow and see."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sturt thrust his head through the flying spray and shouted, "There are
openings and water-caverns in plenty along these cliffs, but there's
nothing in any of them."

"We'll find out," Campbell said. "Head straight toward the cliffs in
there where that boat vanished."

"If we can't find the opening we'll be smashed to flinders on those
cliffs," Sturt warned.

"I'm gambling that we'll find the opening," Campbell told him. "Go
ahead."

Sturt's face set stolidly and he said, "Yes, sir."

He turned the prow of the cutter toward the cliffs. Instantly they
dashed forward toward the rock walls with greatly increased speed, wild
waves bearing them onward like charging stallions of the sea.

Hunched beside the helmsman, the searchlight stabbing the dark wildly as
the cutter was flung forward by the waves, Ennis and the inspector
watched as the cliffs loomed closer ahead. The brilliant white beam
struck across the rushing, mountainous waves and showed only the
towering barriers of rock, battered and smitten by the raving waters
that frothed white. They could hear the booming thunder of the raging
ocean striking the rock.

Like a projectile hurled by a giant hand, the cutter fairly flew now
toward the cliffs. They now could see even the little streams that ran
off the rough rock wall as each giant wave broke against it. They were
almost upon it.

Sturt's face was deathly. "I don't see any opening!" he yelled. "And
we're going to hit in a moment!"

"To your left!" screamed Inspector Campbell over the booming thunder.
"There's an arched opening there."

Now Ennis saw it also, a huge arch-like opening in the cliff that had
been concealed by an angle of the wall. Sturt tried frantically to head
the cutter toward it, but the wheel was useless as the great waves bore
the craft along. Ennis saw they would strike a little to the side of the
opening. The cliff loomed ahead, and he closed his eyes to the impact.

There was no impact. And as he heard a hoarse cry from Inspector
Campbell, he opened his eyes.

The cutter was flying in through the mighty opening, snatched into it by
powerful currents. They were whirled irresistibly forward under the huge
rock arch, which loomed forty feet over their heads. Before them
stretched a winding water-tunnel inside the cliff.

And now they were out of the wild uproar of the storming waters outside,
and in an almost stupefying silence. Smoothly, resistlessly, the current
bore them on in the tunnel, whose winding turns ahead were lit up by
their searchlight.

"God, that was close!" exclaimed Inspector Campbell.

His eyes flashed. "Ennis, I believe that we have found the
gathering-place of the Brotherhood. That boat we sighted is somewhere
ahead in here, and so must be Chandra Dass, and your wife."

Ennis' hand tightened on his gun-butt. "If that's so--if we can just
find them----"

"Blind action won't help if we do," said the inspector swiftly. "There
must be all the number of the Brotherhood's members assembled here, and
we can't fight them all."

His eyes suddenly lit and he took the blazing jeweled stars from his
pocket. "These badges! With them we can pose as members of the
Brotherhood, perhaps long enough to find your wife."

"But Chandra Dass will be there, and if he sees us----"

Campbell shrugged. "We'll have to take that chance. It's the only course
open to us."

The current of the inflowing tide was still bearing them smoothly onward
through the winding water-tunnel, around bends and angles where they
scraped the rock, down long straight stretches. Sturt used the motors to
guide them around the turns. Meanwhile, Inspector Campbell and Ennis
quickly ripped from the cutter its police-insignia and covered all
evidences of its being a police craft.

Sturt suddenly snicked off the searchlight. "Light ahead there!" he
exclaimed.

Around the next turn of the water-tunnel showed a gleam of strange, soft
light.

"Careful, now!" cautioned the inspector. "Sturt, whatever we do, you
stay in the cutter. And try to have it ready for a quick getaway, if we
leave it."

Sturt nodded silently. The helmsman's stolid face had become a little
pale, but he showed no sign of losing his courage.

       *       *       *       *       *

The cutter sped around the next turn of the tunnel and emerged into a
huge, softly lit cavern. Sturt's eyes bulged and Campbell uttered an
exclamation of amazement. For in this mighty water-cavern there floated
in a great mass, scores of sea-going craft, large and small.

All of them were capable of breasting storm and wind, and some were so
large they could barely have entered. There were small yachts, big
motor-cruisers, sea-going launches, cutters larger than their own, and
among them the gray motor-launch of Chandra Dass.

They were massed together here, those with masts having lowered them to
enter, floating and rubbing sides, quite unoccupied. Around the edges of
the water-cavern ran a wide rock ledge. But no living person was visible
and there was no visible source for the soft, strange white light that
filled the astounding place.

"These craft must have come here from all over earth!" Campbell
muttered. "The Brotherhood of the Door has assembled here--we've found
their gathering-place all right."

"But where are they?" exclaimed Ennis. "I don't see anyone."

"We'll soon find out," the inspector said. "Sturt, run close to the
ledge there and we'll get out on it."

Sturt obeyed, and as the cutter bumped the ledge, Campbell and Ennis
leaped out onto it. They looked this way and that along it, but no one
was in sight. The weirdness of it was unnerving, the strangely lit,
mighty cavern, the assembled boats, the utter silence.

"Follow me," Campbell said in a low voice. "They must all be somewhere
near."

He and Ennis walked a few steps along the ledge, when the American
stopped. "Campbell, listen!" he whispered.

Dimly there whispered to them, as though from a distance and through
great walls, a swelling sound of chanting. As they listened, hearts
beating rapidly, a square of the rock wall of the cavern abruptly flew
open beside them, as though hinged like a door. Inside it was the mouth
of a soft-lit, man-high tunnel, and in its opening stood two men. They
wore over their clothing shroud-like, loose-hanging robes of gray,
asbestos-like material. They wore hoods of the same gray stuff over
their heads, pierced with slits at the eyes and mouth. And each wore on
his breast the blazing star-badge.

Through the eye-slits the eyes of the two surveyed Campbell and Ennis as
they halted, transfixed by the sudden apparition. Then one of the hooded
men spoke measuredly in a hissing, Mongolian voice.

"Are you who come here of the Brotherhood of the Door?" he asked,
