Ten minutes after hearing about _Mozart's Lady_, without fanfare, Mayhem
blasted off in pursuit.

       *       *       *       *       *

Maintaining top speed all the way, House Bartock brought _Mozart's Lady_
across almost two billion miles of space from Neptune's to Pluto's orbit
in three days. He was delighted with the speed. It would have taken the
average space-tub ten days to two weeks and, since as far as Bartock
knew there were nothing but average space-tubs on Neptune, that gave him
a considerable head-start.

It was Jane Cummings-First Violin who discovered Bartock's identity.
Bartock was studying the star-map at the time and considered himself
safe from discovery because he kept the control door of _Mozart's Lady_
locked. However, Jane Cummings had established something of a liaison
with the pilot outward bound from Earth and Mars, so she had been given
a spare key which she'd kept, secretly, all the time the symphony was on
Triton. Now, curious about the new pilot for the same reason that the
miners on Triton had been curious about the symphony, Jane made her way
forward, inserted her key in the lock, and pushed open the control door.

"Hello there," she said.

House Bartock whirled. The turning of a key in the lock had so unnerved
him--it was the last thing he expected--that he forgot to shut off the
star-map. Its tell-tale evidence glowed on the wall over his head.

"What do you want?" he managed to ask politely.

"Oh, just to say hello."

"You already said it."

Jane Cummings pouted. "You needn't bite my head off. What's your name?
Mine's Jane, and I play the violin. It wouldn't hurt you to be polite."

Bartock nodded, deciding that a little small talk wouldn't hurt if he
could keep the girl from becoming suspicious. That was suddenly
important. If this girl had a key to the control room, for all he knew
there could be others.

"My, you have been hurrying," Jane said. "I could tell by the
acceleration. You must be trying to break the speed records or
something. I'll bet we're almost to Earth--"

Her voice trailed off and her mouth hung open. At first Bartock didn't
know what was the matter. Then he saw where she was staring.

The star-map.

"We're not heading for Earth!" she cried.

Bartock walked toward her. "Give me that key," he said. "You're going to
have to stay here with me. Give me that key."

Jane backed away. "You--you couldn't be our pilot. If you were--"

"The key. I don't want to hurt you."

Bartock lunged. Jane turned and ran, slamming the door behind her. It
clanged, and echoed. The echo didn't stop. Bartock, on the point of
opening the door and sprinting down the companionway after her, stopped.

It wasn't the echo of metal slamming against metal. It was the radar
warning.

Either _Mozart's Lady_ was within dangerous proximity of a meteor, or a
ship was following them.

Bartock ran to the radar screen.

The pip was unmistakable. A ship was following them.

A ship as fast--or faster--than _Mozart's Lady_.

Cursing, Bartock did things with the controls. _Mozart's Lady_, already
straining, increased its speed. Acceleration flung Bartock back in the
pilot's chair. Pluto loomed dead ahead.

       *       *       *       *       *

Johnny Mayhem knew at what precise moment he had been discovered, for
suddenly the speed of _Mozart's Lady_ increased. Since this had occurred
an hour and a half after Mayhem had first got a clear pip of the bigger
ship on his radar, it meant he'd been spotted.

Prone with his hands stretched forward in the coffin-like experimental
ship, Mayhem worked the controls, exactly matching speed with _Mozart's
Lady_.

He tried to put himself in the position of the escaped convict. What
would he do? His best bet would be to swing in close around Pluto, as
close as he dared. Then, on the dark side of the planet, to change his
orbit abruptly and come loose of its gravitational field in a new
direction. It was a dangerous maneuver, but since the escaped convict
now knew for sure that the tiny ship could match the speed of _Mozart's
Lady_, it was his only hope. The danger was grave: even a first-rate
pilot would try it only as a last resort, for the gravitational pull of
Pluto might upset _Mozart's Lady_'s orbit. If that happened, the best
the convict could hope for was an emergency landing. More likely, a
death-crash would result.

Seconds later, Mayhem's thinking was confirmed. _Mozart's Lady_ executed
a sharp turn in space and disappeared behind the white bulk of Pluto.

Mayhem swore and followed.

"He's trying to kill us all!"

"He doesn't know how to pilot a ship! We're helpless, helpless!"

"Do something, Mrs. Moriarity!"

"Now girls, whatever happens, you must keep calm. We can only assume
that Jane was right about what she saw, but since none of us can pilot a
spaceship, we'll have to bide our time...."

"Bide our time!"

"We're all as good as dead!"

One of the girls began screaming.

Mrs. Moriarity slapped her. "I'm sorry, dear. I had to hit you. Your
behavior bordered on the hysterical. And if we become hysterical we are
lost, lost, do you understand?"

"Yes'm."

"Good. Then we wait and see what happens."

       *       *       *       *       *

What was happening was an attempt at what test-pilots term
planet-swinging. Moving in the direction of Pluto's orbit, _Mozart's
Lady_ swung in very close behind the planet. Then, as the rotation of
Pluto on its axis hurled it forth again, as a sling-shot hurls a pellet,
_Mozart's Lady_'s rockets would alter the expected direction of flight.
Unless a pursuing ship followed exactly the same maneuver, it would be
flung off into space at top-speed in the wrong direction. It might be
hours before the first ship's trail could be picked up again--if ever.

House Bartock, aware of all this--and one other factor--sat sweating it
out at the controls.

The one other factor was closeness to Pluto. For if you got too close,
