
"Watches?" said Gest. "I don't know. Hadn't thought of it."

"There are ten people here," said Keane. "And only one watch! Normally
at least eight of them would have had them, including the women with
their jeweled trinkets. But there's only one.... Do you remember who
owned this, and where he wore it?"

He picked up the watch, a man's with no chain.

"That's Weems' watch. He had it in his trousers pocket."

"Odd place for it," said Keane. "I see it has stopped."

He wound the watch. But the little second hand did not move, and he
could only turn the winding-stem a little, proving that it had not run
down.

The hands said eleven thirty-one.

"That was the time Weems was--paralyzed?" said Keane.

Gest nodded. "Funny. His watch stopped just when he did!"

"Very funny," said Keane expressionlessly. "Send this to a jeweler right
away and have him find out what's wrong with it. Now, you say your
assistant manager was struck dead just as he said something about the
roulette wheel?"

"Yes," said Gest. "It was as though this Doctor Satan were right there
with us and killed him with a soundless bullet just before he could
talk."

Keane's eyes glittered.

"I'd like to look over the roulette room."

"The police are here," said Grays, turning from his phone.

Keane stared at Gest. "Keep them out of the roulette room for a few
minutes."

He strode out to the elevators....

       *       *       *       *       *

His first concern, after locking himself into the room where nine people
had been stricken with something which, if it persisted, was worse than
any death, was the thing the assistant manager had mentioned before
death hit him. The roulette wheel.

He bent over this, with a frown of concentration on his face. And his
quick eyes caught at once a thing another person might have overlooked
for quite a while.

The wheel was dish-shaped, as all roulette wheels are. In its rounded
bottom were numbered slots, where the little ivory ball was to end its
journey and proclaim gambler's luck.

But the little ball was not in one of the bottom slots!

The tiny ivory sphere was half up the rounded side of the wheel, like a
pea clinging alone high up on the slant of a dish!

An exclamation came from Keane's lips. He stared at the ball. What in
heaven's name kept it from rolling down the steep slant and into the
rounded bottom? Why would a sphere stay on a slant? It was as if a bowl
of water had been tilted--and the water's surface had taken and retained
the tilt of the vessel it was in instead of remaining level!

He lifted the ball from the sloping side of the wheel. It came away
freely, but with an almost intangible resistance, as if an unseen rubber
band held it. When he released it, it went back to the slope. He rolled
it down to the bottom of the wheel. Released, it rolled back up to its
former position, like water running up-hill.

Keane felt a chill touch him. The laws of physics broken! A ball
clinging to a slant instead of rolling down it! What dark secret of
nature had Doctor Satan mastered now?

But the query was not entirely unanswered in his mind. Already he was
getting a vague hint of it. And a little later the hint was broadened.

The phone rang. He answered it.

"Mr. Keane? This is Doctor Grays. The autopsy on Wilson has been begun,
and already a queer thing has been disclosed. It's about his heart."

"Yes," said Keane, gripping the phone.

"His heart is ruptured in a hundred places--as though a little bomb had
exploded in it! Don't ask me why, because I can't even give a theory.
It's unique in medical history."

"I won't ask you why," Keane said slowly. "I think--in a little
while--I'll tell you why."

He hung up and strode toward the door. But at the roulette table he
paused and stared at the wheel with his gray eyes icily blazing.

_It seemed to him the wheel had moved a little!_

He had unconsciously lined up the weirdly clinging ball with the knob on
the outer door, as he examined it awhile ago. Now, as he stood in the
same place, the ball was not quite in that line. As if the wheel had
rotated a fraction of an inch!

"Yes, I think that's it," he whispered, with his face a little paler
than usual.

And a little later the words changed in his brain to: "I _know_ that's
it. A fiend's genius.... This is the most dangerous thing Doctor Satan
has yet mastered!"

He was talking on the phone to the jeweler to whom Weems' watch had been
sent.

"What did you do to that watch?" the jeweler was saying irritably.

"Why?" parried Keane.

"There doesn't seem to be anything wrong with it. And yet it simply
won't go. And I can't make it go."

"There's nothing wrong with it at all?"

"As far as I can find out--no."

       *       *       *       *       *

Keane hung up. He had been studying for the dozenth time the demand note
Doctor Satan had written the officials:

     "Gentlemen of the Blue Bay Development: This is to request that
     you pay me the sum of one million, eight hundred and two
     thousand, five hundred and forty dollars and forty-eight cents
     at a time and place to be specified later. As a sample of what
     will happen if you disregard this note, I shall strike at one
     of your guests, Mathew Weems, within a few minutes after you
     read this. I guarantee that disaster and horror shall be the
     chief, though uninvited, guests at your opening unless you
     comply with my request. Mathew Weems shall be only the first if
     you do not signify by one a. m. whether or not you will meet my
     demand. DOCTOR SATAN."

Keane gave the note back to Blue Bay's police chief, who fumbled
uncertainly with it for a moment and then stuck it in his pocket.
Normally a competent man, he was completely out of his depth here.

One man with a heart that seemed to have been exploded internally; ten
people who were dead, yet lived, and who stood or sat like frozen
statues....

He looked pleadingly at Ascott Keane, whom he had never heard of but who
wore authority and competence like a mantle. But Keane said nothing to
him.

"An odd extortion amount," he said to Gest. "One million, eight hundred
and two thousand, five hundred and forty dollars and forty-eight cents!
Why not an even figure?"

He was talking more to himself than to the president of Blue Bay. But
Gest answered readily.

"That happens to be the precise sum of the cash reserve of Blue Bay
Development."

Keane glanced at him sharply. "Is your financial statement made public?"

Gest shook his head. "It's strictly confidential. Only the bank, and
ourselves, know that cash reserve figure. I can't imagine how this crook
who signs himself Doctor Satan found it out."




_4. The Shell_

