
Some experiments require an external beam of protons, deuterons, or
alpha particles. A beam of this type can be brought out of the machine
by means of a LeCouteur regenerator (Fig. 7). The construction of the
regenerator is very simple. It is made of a number of steel laminations
of various sizes. What the regenerator does is perturb the magnetic
field of the cyclotron at one radial position. Each time the beam passes
through the regenerator it receives a kick. With each kick the beam
builds up its radial amplitude, until finally it enters a magnetic
channel. This channel focuses the beam and steers it outside the main
magnetic field. Once outside, the beam travels through an evacuated
tube, which is integral with the main vacuum tank. By means of a
steering magnet, the beam can be sent into either the physics cave or
the medical cave. (These experimental areas are called "caves" because
they are rooms inside the massive concrete shielding wall.)

Other experiments may require an external beam of mesons.[7] A meson
beam is obtained in the following way (Fig. 8): A movable target such as
a block of carbon is placed inside the cyclotron near the end of the
outward-spiraling proton beam. When the proton beam hits this target, a
shower of mesons is produced. These mesons are bent in various
directions by the main magnetic field. Some of them pass through a thin
metal window in the vacuum-tank wall and are focused by a magnetic lens
into a beam. This meson beam then travels through a hole in the concrete
shielding wall into the meson cave. The maximum intensity of this
extracted meson beam depends on both the charge and energy desired.
Beams of more than 100,000 mesons per second have been obtained through
an aperture 4 x 4 in. in the shielding wall.




CYCLOTRON EXPERIMENTS


_Nuclear Physics_

About 86% of the operating time of the 184-inch synchrocyclotron is
devoted to experiments in nuclear physics. Most of the experiments study
the production and interaction of [pi] mesons. These particles are
considered to be essential factors in the intense but short-range forces
that bind the nucleus together. The three types of [pi] mesons are
designated according to their electric charge as [pi]^+, [pi]^0, and
[pi]^-.[8] These mesons materialize only in high-energy nuclear
collisions.

[Illustration: Fig. 8. Method for obtaining external meson beam.]

Of great importance are those experiments that determine the
probability of producing each of the three types of mesons in a nuclear
collision. This type of experiment is repeated for different beam
energies and target elements. Other experiments measure the energy and
direction of emission of [pi] mesons from a target.

[Illustration: Fig. 9. A typical experiment. Scintillation counters at
A, B, C, D, and E record the passage of charged particles.]

A typical [pi]-meson experiment is represented in Fig. 9. The purpose
of this experiment was to detect the spin directions of protons as they
are knocked out of a liquid hydrogen target by a [pi]-meson beam. (Like
the earth, a proton spins on its axis.) An extracted proton beam from
the cyclotron enters the physics cave from the left, striking a
polyethylene target and producing [pi] mesons. A beam of these mesons is
formed by a series of two bending magnets and three focusing magnets.
This beam passes through a carbon absorber to remove unwanted particles.
The meson beam then strikes the liquid hydrogen target. A few of the
incoming mesons scatter, knocking protons out of the liquid hydrogen.
Scintillation counters at A and B record the passage of a proton, thus
defining its direction. The scattered mesons are counted by a
scintillation counter at C. A few of the protons scatter off the carbon
target and are detected by counters at E and D. From the detection of
such events, the spin directions (polarization) of the recoil protons
can be analyzed. In this way, more is learned about the fundamental
[pi]-proton interaction.

Further studies of the interactions of [pi] mesons are made in the meson
cave. Other experiments performed there are concerned with [mu] mesons.
The [mu] meson (muon) is a particle created in the decay of a [pi] meson
and is the principal constituent of cosmic rays striking the surface of
the earth. The muon is unstable, eventually undergoing a radioactive
decay into an electron. Although the muon does not experience nuclear
forces, it can interact weakly with nuclei. The behavior of the muon is
well understood, but its role as one of the elementary particles is
unknown. That is, if the muon did not exist, what effect would this have
on the structure of matter? The answer to this question, among others,
is being sought by physicists using the 184-inch cyclotron.


_Biophysics_

Experiments in biophysics are conducted in the medical cave. In these
the interest lies not in nuclear interactions but in the effect of
ionizing radiation on living tissue. High-energy beams of particles can
be used for selective destruction of specific areas of the brain. This
permits physiological mapping of the functions of the brain in
experimental animals. It further offers a therapeutic approach to the
treatment of brain tumors. One of the important investigational programs
is concerned with the relationship of the pituitary gland to the growth
rate of certain cancers and to some endocrine disorders.


_Nuclear Chemistry_

For techniques of radiochemistry to be employed successfully, high
interaction rates (and therefore high beam intensities) are needed. For
this reason, chemistry targets are usually inserted right into the
cyclotron so that they can be bombarded directly by the circulating
beam. After the bombardment is completed the target is removed from the
cyclotron. It is then taken to a chemistry laboratory and subjected to
detailed chemical procedures. Individual elements are removed, and the
radioactive isotopes of each element are identified by quantitative
counting techniques. In some cases a mass spectrometer is used to
analyze the products. Many deductions about the nature of the breakup of
the target nucleus can be drawn from the pattern of the observed
radioactive products. Sometimes the nucleus splits almost in half. This
is called fission. More frequently smaller parts of the nucleus are
split off. Two general types of reactions, known as spallation and
