life now present on this planet would be extinguished, and that speedily.
Much more would this be the case if the atmosphere were diminished to one
half the pressure on the summit of the highest earthly mountain.

The tenuity of the atmosphere on Mars has another consequence. Here water
freezes at 0 deg. C. and boils at 100 deg. C.; so that for one hundred degrees it
remains in a liquid condition. On Mars, under the assumed conditions,
water would boil at 53 deg. C., and the range of temperature within which it
would be liquid would be much curtailed. But it is only water in the
liquid state that is useful for sustaining life.

The above estimate of the density of the atmosphere of Mars is an outside
limit, for it assumes that Mars has retained an atmosphere to the full
proportion of its mass. But as the molecules of a gas are in continual
motion, and in every direction, the lighter, most swiftly moving molecules
must occasionally be moving directly outwards from the planet at the top
of their speed, and in this case, if the speed of recession should exceed
that which the gravity of the planet can control, the particle is lost to
the planet for ever. A small planet therefore is subject to a continual
drain upon its atmosphere, a drain of the lightest constituents. Hence it
is, no doubt, that free hydrogen is not a constituent of the atmosphere of
the Earth.

To what extent, then, has the atmosphere of Mars fallen below its full
proportion? Mr. Lowell has adopted an ingenious method of obtaining some
light on this question, by comparing the relative albedoes of the Earth
and Mars; that is to say the relative power of reflection possessed by the
two planets. Of course the method is rough; we have first of all no
satisfactory means of determining the albedo of the Earth itself, and Mr.
Lowell puts it higher than most astronomers would do; then there is the
difficulty of determining what portion of the total albedo is to be
referred to the atmosphere and what to the actual soil or surface of the
planet. But, on the whole, Mr. Lowell concludes that the amount of
atmosphere above the unit of surface of Mars is 0.222 of that above the
unit of surface of the Earth. This would bring down the pressure on each
square inch of Mars to 1.2 lb., and the aneroid barometer would read 2.5
inches; and water would boil at 44 deg. C. The range of temperature from day
to night, from summer to winter, at any place on the planet would be
increased, while the range within which water could retain its liquid form
would be diminished.

These statistics may seem rather dull and tiresome, but if we are to deal
with the problem before us at all, it is important to understand that one
factor in the condition of a planet cannot be altered and all the other
factors retained unchanged. It will be seen that in computing the density
of the atmosphere of Mars, we had to take into consideration not only the
diameter of the planet, but the surface, which varies as the square of the
diameter; the volume, which varies as the cube; the mass, which varies in
a higher power still; and various combinations of these numbers. Novelists
who write tales of journeys to other worlds or of the inhabitants of other
worlds visiting this one, usually assume that the atmosphere is of the
same density on all planets, and the action of gravity unchanged. In their
view it is only that men would have a little less ground to walk upon on
Mars, and a good deal more on Jupiter. Dean Swift, in _Gulliver's
Travels_, made the Lilliputians take a truer view of the effect of the
alteration of one dimension, for, finding that Gulliver was twelve times
as tall as the average Lilliputian, they did not appoint him the rations
of twelve Lilliputians, which would have been rather poor feeding for
that veracious mariner, but allotted him the cube of twelve, viz.
seventeen hundred and twenty-eight rations. Mr. J. Holt Schooling, in one
of his ingenious and interesting statistical papers, tried to bring home
the vast extent of the British Empire by supposing that it seceded, and
taking the portion of Earth that has fallen to it, set up a world of its
own--the planet "Victoria." He allots to the British Empire 21 per cent of
the land surface of the world. If the Earth were divided so as to form two
globes with surfaces in proportion of 21 to 79, the smaller globe, which
would correspond to Mr. Schooling's new planet "Victoria," would be less
than half the present Earth in diameter; it would be considerably smaller
than Mars. But "the rest of the world" would be 0.96 of the present Earth
in diameter, or very nearly the size of Venus, and it would contain just
eight-ninths of the substance of the Earth, leaving only one-ninth for
"Victoria." The statistics given above will suggest to the reader that,
could such a secession be carried out, the inhabitants of the British
Empire would not be happier for the change during the very short continued
existence that remained to them. The "rest of the world" could spare our
fraction of the planet much better than we could spare theirs.

This is a principle which applies to worlds anywhere; not merely within
the limits of the solar system but wherever they exist. Everywhere the
surface must vary with the square of the diameter; the volume with the
cube; everywhere the smaller planet must have the rarer atmosphere, and
with a rare atmosphere the extreme range of temperature must be great,
while the range of temperature within which water will flow will be
restricted. Our Earth stands as the model of a world of the right size for
the maintenance of life; much smaller than our Earth would be too small;
much larger, as we shall see later, would be too large.

So far we have dealt with Mars as if it received the same amount of light
and heat from the Sun that the Earth does. But, as the Table shows, from
its greater distance from the Sun, Mars receives per unit of surface only
about three-sevenths of the light and heat of that received by the Earth.

The inclination of the axis of Mars is almost the same as that of the
Earth, so that the general character of the seasons is not very different
on the two planets, and the torrid, temperate, and frigid zones have
almost the same proportions. The length of the day is also nearly the same
for both, the Martian day being slightly longer; but the most serious
factor is the greater distance of Mars, and the consequent diminution in
the light and heat received from the Sun. The light and heat received by
the Earth are not so excessive that we could be content to see them
diminished, even by 5 per cent, but for Mars they are diminished by 57 per
cent. How can we judge the effect of so important a difference?

The mean temperature of our Earth is supposed to be about 60 deg.F., or 16 deg.C.
Three-sevenths of this would give us 7 deg.C. as the mean temperature of Mars,
which would signify a planet not impossible for life. But the zero of the
Centigrade scale is not the absolute zero; it only marks the
freezing-point of water. The absolute zero is computed to be -273 deg. on the
Centigrade scale; the temperature of the Earth on the absolute scale
therefore should be taken as 289 deg., and three-sevenths of this would give
124 deg. of absolute temperature. But this is 149 deg. below freezing-point, and
no life could exist on a planet under such conditions.

But the mean temperature of Mars cannot be computed quite so easily. The
hotter a body is the more rapidly it radiates heat; the cooler it is the
slower its radiation. According to Stefan's Law, the radiation varies for
a perfect radiator with the 4th power of the absolute temperature; so that
if Mars were at 124 deg. abs., while the Earth were at 289 deg. abs., the Earth
would be radiating its heat nearly 30 times faster than Mars. The heat
income of Mars would therefore be in a much higher proportion than its
expenditure; and necessarily its heat capital would increase until income
and expenditure balanced. Prof. Poynting has made the temperature of the
planets under the 4th power law of radiation the subject of an interesting
enquiry, and the figures which he has obtained for Mars and other planets
are included in the Table.

The equatorial and average temperatures are given under the assumption
that Mars possesses an atmosphere as efficient as our own in equalizing
the temperature of the whole planet. If, on the other hand, its atmosphere
has no such regulating power, then under the zenith Sun the upper limit of
the temperature of a portion of its surface reflecting one-eighth would
be, as shown in the Table, 64 deg.C. This would imply that the temperature on
the dark side of the planet was very nearly at the absolute zero. "If we
regard Mars as resembling our Moon, and take the Moon's effective average
temperature as 297 deg. abs., the corresponding temperature for Mars is 240 deg.
abs., and the highest temperature is four-fifths of 337 deg. = 270 deg. abs. But
the surface of Mars has probably a higher coefficient of absorption than
the surface of the Moon--it certainly has for light--so that we may put
his effective average temperature, on this supposition, some few degrees
above 240 deg. abs., and his equatorial temperature some degrees higher still.
It appears as exceedingly probable, then, that whether we regard Mars as
like the Earth or, going to the other extreme, as like the Moon, the
temperature of his surface is everywhere below the freezing-point of
water."[14] As the atmospheric circulation on Mars must be languid, and
the atmosphere itself is very rare, the general condition of the planet
will approximate rather to the lunar type than to the terrestrial, and the
extremes, both of heat and cold, will approach those which would prevail
on a planet without a regulating atmosphere.

There is another way of considering the effect on the climate of Mars and
its great distance from the Sun, which, though only rough and crude, may
be helpful to some readers. If we take the Earth at noonday at the time of
the equinox, then a square yard at the equator has the Sun in its zenith,
and is fully presented to its light and heat. But, as we move away from
the equator, we find that each higher latitude is less fully presented to
the Sun, until, when we reach latitude 64-1/2 deg.--in other words just
outside the Arctic Circle--7 square yards are presented to the Sun so as
to receive only as much of the solar radiation as 3 square yards receive
at the equator. We may take, then, latitude 64-1/2 deg. as representing Mars,
while the equator represents the Earth. Or, we may take it that we should
compare the climate of Archangel with the climate of Singapore.

Now the mean temperature of latitude 64-1/2 deg., say the latitude of
Archangel, is just about freezing-point (0 deg.C.), while that of the equator
is about 28 deg.C. We should therefore expect from this a difference between
the mean temperatures of the Earth and Mars of 28 deg.; that is to say, as the
Earth stands at 16 deg.C, Mars would be at -12 deg.C. But, on the Earth, the
evaporation and precipitation is great, and the atmospheric circulation
vigorous. Evaporation is always going on in equatorial regions, and the
moisture-laden winds are continually moving polewards, carrying with them
vast stores of heat to be liberated as the rain falls. The oceanic
currents have the same effect, and how great the modification which they
introduce may be seen by comparing the climates of Labrador and Scotland.
There appear to be no great oceans on Mars. The difference of 28 deg. which we
find on the Earth between the equator and the edge of the Arctic Circle is
a difference which remains after the convection currents of air and sea
have done much to reduce the temperature of the equator and to raise that
of high latitudes. If we suppose that their effect has been to reduce this
difference to one half of what it would have been were each latitude
isolated from the rest, we shall not be far wrong, and we should get a
range of 56 deg. as the true equivalent difference between the mean
temperatures of Singapore and Archangel; i.e. of the Earth and Mars; and
Mars would stand at -40 deg.C. The closeness with which this figure agrees
with that reached by Prof. Poynting suggests that it is a fair
approximation to the correct figure.

The size of Mars taught us that we have in it a planet with an atmosphere
of but one half the density of that prevailing on the top of our highest
mountain; the distance of Mars from the Sun showed us that it must have a
mean temperature close to that of freezing mercury. What chance would
there be for life on a world the average condition of which would
correspond to that of a terrestrial mountain top, ten miles high and in
the heart of the polar regions? But Mars in the telescope does not look
like a cold planet. As we look at it, and note its bright colour, the
small extent of the white caps presumed to be snow, and the high latitudes
in which the dark markings--presumed to be water or vegetation--are seen,
it seems difficult to suppose that the mean temperature of the planet is
lower than that of the Earth. Thus on the wonderful photographs taken by
Prof. Barnard in 1909, the Nilosyrtis with the Protonilus is seen as a
dark canal. Now the Protonilus is in North Lat. 42 deg., and on the date of
observation--September 28, 1909--the winter solstice of the northern
hemisphere of Mars was just past. There would be nothing unusual for the
ground to be covered with snow and the water to be frozen in a
corresponding latitude if in a continental situation on the Earth. Then,
again, in the summer, the white polar caps of Mars diminish to a far
greater extent than the snow and ice caps of the Earth; indeed, one of the
Martian caps has been known to disappear completely.

Yet, as the accompanying diagram will show, something of this kind is
precisely what we ought to expect to see. The diagram has been constructed
in the following manner: A curve of mean temperatures has been laid down
for every 10 deg. of latitude on the Earth, derived as far as possible from
accepted isothermals in continental countries in the northern hemisphere.
From this curve ordinates have been drawn at each 10 deg., upward to show
average deviation from the mean temperature for the hottest part of the
day in summer, downward for the deviation for the coldest part of the
night in winter. Obviously, on the average, the range from maximum to
minimum will increase from the equator to the poles. The mean temperature
of the Earth has been taken as 16 deg.C, and as representing that prevailing
in about 42 deg. lat. The diagram shows that the maximum temperature of no
place upon the Earth's surface approaches the boiling-point of water, and
that it is only within the polar circle that the mean temperature is below
freezing-point. Water, therefore, on the Earth must be normally in the
liquid state.

In constructing a similar diagram for Mars, three modifications have to be
made. First of all, the mean temperature of the planet must be
considerably lower than that of the Earth. Next, since the atmospheric
circulation is languid and there are no great oceans, the temperatures of
different latitudes cannot be equalized to the same extent as on the
Earth. It follows, therefore, that the range in mean temperature from
equator to pole must be considerably greater on Mars than on the Earth.
Thirdly, the range in temperature in any latitude, from the hottest part
of the day in summer to the coldest part of the night in winter, must be
much greater than with us; partly on account of the very slight density of
the atmosphere, and partly on account of the length of the Martian year.


[Illustration: THERMOGRAPHS OF THE EARTH AND MARS]


We cannot know the exact figures to adopt, but the general type of the
thermograph for Mars as compared with that of the Earth will remain. The
mean temperature of Mars will be lower, the range of temperature from
equator to pole will be greater, and the extremes of temperature in any
given latitude more pronounced than upon the Earth. And the general lesson
of the diagram may be summed up in a sentence. The maximum temperature on
the planet is well above freezing-point, and the part of the planet at
maximum temperature is precisely the part that we see the best. But while
this is so, it is clear that water on Mars must normally be in the state
of ice; Mars is essentially a frozen planet; and the extremes of cold
experienced there, not only every year but every night, far transcend the
bitterest extremes of our own polar regions.

The above considerations do not appear to render it likely that there is
any vegetation on Mars. A planet ice-bound every night and with its mean
temperature considerably below freezing-point does not seem promising for
vegetation. If vegetation exists, it must be of a kind that can pass
through all the stages of its life-history during the few bright hours of
the Martian day. Every night will be for it a winter, a winter of
undescribable frost, which it could only endure in the form of spores. So
if there be vegetation it must be confined to some hardy forms of a low
type. At a distance of forty millions of miles it is not easy to
discriminate between the darkness of sheets of water and the darkness of
stretches of vegetation. Some of the so-called "seas" may possibly be
really of the latter class, but that there must be expanses of water on
the planet is clear, for if there were no water surfaces there would be no
evaporation; and if there were no evaporation from whence could come the
supply of moisture that builds up the winter pole cap?

The great American astronomer, Prof. Newcomb, gave in _Harper's Weekly_
for July 25, 1908, an admirable summary of the verdict of science as to
the character of the meteorology of Mars. "The most careful calculation
shows that if there are any considerable bodies of water on our
neighbouring planet they exist in the form of ice, and can never be
liquid to a depth of more than one or two inches, and that only within the
torrid zone and during a few hours each day.... There is no evidence that
snow like ours ever forms around the poles of Mars. It does not seem
possible that any considerable fall of such snow could ever take place,
nor is there any necessity of supposing actual snow or ice to account for
the white caps. At a temperature vastly below any ever felt in Siberia,
the smallest particles of moisture will be condensed into what we call
hoar frost, and will glisten with as much whiteness as actual snow....
Thus we have a kind of Martian meteorological changes, very slight indeed
and seemingly very different from those of our earth, but yet following
similar lines on their small scale. For snowfall substitute frostfall;
instead of feet or inches say fractions of a millimetre, and instead of
storms or wind substitute little motions of an air thinner than that on
the top of the Himalayas, and we shall have a general description of
Martian meteorology."

What we know of Mars, then, shows us a planet, icebound every night, but
with a day temperature somewhat above freezing-point. As we see it, we
look upon its warmest regions, and the rapidity with which it is cleared
of ice, snow, and cloud shows the atmosphere to be rare and the moisture
little in amount and readily evaporated. The seas are probably shallow
depressions, filled with ice to the bottom, but melted as to their
surfaces by day. From the variety of tints noted in the seas, and the
recurrent changes in their outlines, they are composed of congeries of
shallow pools, fed by small sluggish streams; great ocean basins into
which great rivers discharge themselves are quite unknown.




CHAPTER VIII

THE ILLUSIONS OF MARS


The two preceding chapters have led to two opposing, two incompatible
conclusions. In Chapter VI, a summary was given of Prof. Lowell's claim to
have had ocular demonstration of the handiwork of intelligent organisms on
Mars. In Chapter VII, it was shown that the indispensable condition for
living organisms, water in the liquid state, is only occasionally present
there, the general temperature being much below freezing-point, so that
living organisms of high development and more than ephemeral existence are
impossible.

Prof. Lowell argues that the appearance of the network of lines and spots
formed by the canals and oases, and its regular behaviour, "preclude its
causation on such a scale by any natural process," his assumption being
that he has obtained finality in his seeing of the planet, and that no
improvement in telescopes, no increase in experience, no better eyesight
will ever break up the perfect regularity of form and position, which he
gives to the canals, into finer and more complex detail.

But the history of our knowledge of the planet's surface teaches us a
different lesson. Two small objects appear repeatedly on the drawings
made by Beer and Maedler in 1830; these are two similar dark spots, the one
isolated, the other at the end of a gently curved line. Both spots
resemble in form and character the oases of Prof. Lowell, and the curved
line, at the termination of which one of the spots appears, represents
closely the appearance presented by several of the canals. In the year
1830 no better drawings of Mars had appeared; and in representing these
two spots as truly circular and the curved line as narrow, sharp, and
uniform, Beer and Maedler undoubtedly portrayed the planet as actually they
saw it. The one marking was named by Schiaparelli the Lacus Solis, the
other, the Sinus Sabaeus, and they are two of the best known and most
easily recognized of the planet's features; so that it is easy to trace
the growth of our knowledge of both of them from 1830 up to the present
time. They were drawn by Dawes in 1864, by Schiaparelli in 1877 and the
succeeding years, by Lowell in 1894 and since, and by Antoniadi in 1909
and 1911. But whereas the drawings of Beer and Maedler, made by the aid of
a telescope of 4 inches aperture, show the two spots as exactly alike, in
those of Dawes, made with a telescope of 8 inches, the resemblance between
the two has entirely vanished, and neither is shown as a plain circular
dot. Since then, observers of greater experience and equipped with more
powerful instruments have directed their attention to these two objects,
and a mass of complicated structure has been brought out in the regions
which were so simple in the sight of Beer and Maedler, so that not a trace
of resemblance remains between the two objects that to them appeared
indistinguishable.

Now the gradation in size, from the Lacus Solis down to the smallest oasis
of Lowell, is a complete one. If a future development in the power of
telescopes should equal the advance made from the 4-inch of Beer and
Maedler, to the 33-inch which Antoniadi used in 1909, is it reasonable to
suppose that Prof. Lowell's oases will refuse to yield to such
improvement, and will all still show themselves as uniform spots,
precisely circular in outline? It is clear that Beer and Maedler would have
been mistaken if they had argued that the apparently perfect circularity
of the two oases which they observed proved them to be artificial, because
the increase in telescopic power has since shown us that neither is
circular. The obvious reason why they appeared so round to Beer and Maedler
was that they were too small to be defined in their instruments; their
minor irregularities were therefore invisible, and their apparent
circularity covered detail of an altogether different form.

Beer and Maedler only drew two such spots; Lowell shows about two hundred.
Beer and Maedler's two spots seemed to them exactly alike; these two spots
as we see them to-day have no resemblance to each other. Prof. Lowell's
two hundred oases, with few exceptions, seem all of the same character; is
it possible to suppose, if telescopes develop in the future as they have
done in the past, that the two hundred oases will preserve their
uniformity of appearance any more than the Lacus Solis and the head of the
Sinus Sabaeus? If a novice begins to work upon Mars with a small telescope,
he will draw the Lacus Solis and the Sinus Sabaeus as two round, uniform
spots, and as he gains experience, and his instrumental power is
increased, he will begin to detect detail in them, and draw them as Dawes
and Schiaparelli and others have shown them later. It is no question of
planetary change; it is a question of experience and of "seeing."

There is a much simpler explanation of the regularity of the canals and
oases than to suppose that an industrious population of geometers have dug
them out or planted them; it is connected with the nature of vision.

A telegraph wire seen against a background of a bright cloud can be
discerned at an amazing distance--in fact, at 200,000 times the breadth of
the wire; a distance at which the wire subtends a breadth of a second of
arc. For average normal sight the perception of the wire will be quite
unmistakable, but at the same time it would be quite untrue to say that
the perception of the wire was of the nature of defined vision, as would
be seen at once if small objects of irregular shape were threaded on the
wire; these would have to be many times the breadth of the wire in order
to be detected. Again, if instead of a wire of very great length extending
right across the field of view of both eyes, a short, black line be drawn
on a white ground, it will be found that as the length of the line is
diminished below a certain point so its breadth must be increased. If the
observer is distant from the line 6000 times its length, then the breadth
must be increased to be equal to the length, and the object, whatever its
actual shape, can be just recognized as a small circular spot, which will
subtend about 34 seconds of arc.

But though a black spot, 34 seconds in diameter, can be perceived on a
white ground, we have not yet attained to defined vision. For if we place
two black spots each 34 seconds of arc in diameter, near each other, they
will not be seen as separate spots unless there is a clear space between
them of six times that amount. Nearer than that they will give the
impression that they form one circular spot, or an oval one, or even a
uniform straight line, according to the amount of separation. If two equal
round spots be placed so that the distance between their centres is equal
to two diameters, then the diameter of each spot must be, at least, 70
seconds of arc for them to be distinctly defined; that is to say for the
spots to be seen as two separate objects.

It will be seen that there is a wide range between objects that are large
enough to be quite unmistakably perceived, and objects which are large
enough to have their true outline really defined. It is a question of
seconds of arc in the one case and of minutes of arc in the other. Within
this range, between the limit at which objects can be just perceived and
that where they can be just defined, objects must all appear as of one of
two forms--the straight line and the circular dot.

This depends upon the structure of the eye and of the retina; the eye
being essentially a lens with its defining power necessarily limited by
its aperture, and the retina a sensitive screen built up of an immense
number of separate elements each of which can only transmit a single
sensation. Different eyes will have different limits, both for the
smallest objects which can be discerned and for the smallest objects that
can be defined, but for any sight the range between the two will be of the
order just indicated.

Prof. Lowell has drawn attention to the "strangely economic character of
both the canals and oases in the matter of form." It is true that straight
lines and circles are economic forms, but they are economic not only in
the construction of irrigation works but also in vision. "The circle is
the figure which encloses the maximum area for the minimum average
distance from its centre to any point situated within it;" therefore, if
a small spot be perceived by the sight but be too small to have its actual
outline defined, it will be recognized by the eye as being truly circular,
on the principle of economy of effort. So, again, a straight line is the
shortest that can be drawn between two points; and a straight line can be
perceived as such when of an angular breadth quite 40 times less than that
of the smallest spot. A straight line is that which gives the least total
excitement in order to produce an appreciable impression, and therefore
the smallest appreciable impression produces the effect of a straight
line.

It is sufficient, then, for us to suppose that the surface of Mars is
dotted over with minute irregular markings, with a tendency to aggregate
in certain directions, such as would naturally arise in the process of the
cooling of a planet when the outer crust was contracting above an
unyielding nucleus. If these markings are fairly near each other it is not
necessary, in order to produce the effect of "canals," that they should be
individually large enough to be seen. They may be of any conceivable
shape, provided that they are separately below the limit of defined
vision, and are sufficiently sparsely scattered. In this case the eye
inevitably sums up the details (which it recognizes but cannot resolve)
into lines essentially "canal-like" in character. Wherever there is a
small aggregation of these minute markings, an impression will be given
of a circular spot, or, to use Prof. Lowell's nomenclature, an "oasis." If
the aggregation be greater still and more extended, we shall have a shaded
area--a "sea."

The above remarks apply to observation with the unaided eye, but the same
principle applies yet more strongly to telescopic vision. No star is near
