While the still-distant sun sent thin light into the comet, Brinker and
Copeland removed the propulsion-tubes from the ship and welded them to
the central chunk of the nucleus. They had a number of other spare
jet-tubes. These they fastened to lesser masses.

Whenever, in the slow swirling of the nucleus, tubes pointed in the
calculated proper direction at right angles to the comet's course, they
were fired in long bursts. Thus, slowly, like a perfectly-balanced bank
vault door moved by a finger, the mass of the comet--slight by volume,
but still measuring many thousands of tons--was deflected in the
opposite direction. Astrogation-instruments showed the shift. Copeland
had expected such coarse deflection to be possible; still, it startled
him--this was the moving of a celestial body!

"Just a little--for now, Cope," Brinker said. "We'll leave the fine
aiming for later. Meanwhile we've got to pass the time, stay as well as
we can, and keep our heads on straight."

Sure--straight! If Brinker hadn't turned foolish before they had come,
they wouldn't be out here at all. In a month they were already thinning
down from malnutrition and strain. At first, thinking coldly, Copeland
was sure they'd wilt and die long before they got near the Moon.

Then, as they managed to steady themselves some by the diversions of
playing cards, and studying the intricacies of Martian equipment, he
began to fear once more that Brinker might succeed in his efforts--but
fail terribly in result.

Many times Copeland went over the same arguments, struggling to speak
calmly, and without anger: "I wonder if you realize it, Brinker--with
enough velocity one large meteor carries more energy than a fission
bomb. A whole comet would affect thousands of square miles of the lunar
surface, at least. Smash equipment, kill men. And if the comet happened
to miss the Moon and hit Earth--"

Sometimes Brinker's expression became almost fearful, as at an enormity.
But then he'd turn stubborn and grin. "There's plenty of room to avoid
hitting the Earth," he'd say. "On the Moon, astronomers will warn of the
shifted orbit of Brulow's Comet in plenty of time for everybody to get
out of danger. Most of what we've got to worry about now, is our lives,
or jail ..."

A moment later, as like as not, they'd be slamming at each other with
fists. Copeland found it hard to contain his fury for the man who had
brought him such trouble, and--without intent--was so determined to
extend it to many others.

Brinker kept winning the scraps. But Copeland's ten-year age-advantage
meant something when it came to enduring hardship and partial-starvation
over a long period. They didn't weaken equally.

This levelling of forces was one thing that Copeland waited for. Another
was that when Brulow's Comet was found to be off course, a ship might be
sent to investigate. He never mentioned it, certainly; but once Brinker
said: "I'm ready for what you're thinking, Cope. I've got weapons."

By then they spent much of their time in torpid sleep.

Another difficulty was that it was getting harder to keep one's mind
consistently on the same track. Space, tribulation, and the months, were
having their blurring effect.

Often, Copeland spent many hours in wistful reverie about his girl,
Frances, in Iowa. Sometimes he hated all people--on Earth, Moon, and
everyhere, and didn't care what happened to them. On other occasions
Brinker's basic desire to lessen the desolation of the lunar scene
looked supremely good to him--as of course it always had, in principle.
Then, briefly and perhaps madly, he was Brinker's pal, instead of
yearning to beat him to a pulp.

       *       *       *       *       *

Somehow, twenty months crept by, and the first spaceship hove
inquisitively close to Brulow's Comet. A shadow of his former self,
Brinker crept out of the cavern to man his weapons. But like a famished
beast seeking prey, Copeland followed him.

His victory, now, was almost easy. Then all he had to do was wait to be
picked up; the ship was coming nearer. Through the now much-brightened
glow of the comet, it had ceased to be a planetlike speck reflecting
sunlight; and showed its actual form.

Confusion whirled in Copeland's head; hunger gnawed in him. Yet he
looked down at Brinker--poor Brinker, beaten unconscious inside his
spacesuit. Brinker had tried to fight lifeless dreariness. Copeland,
weak of body and fogged of mind, was now close to maudlin tears.
Dreariness was the enemy--here as elsewhere. He tried to think; his
stubborn nature mixed itself with splinters of reason, and seemed to
make sense.

His twenty months of suffering out here had to be used--mean
something--didn't it? It couldn't be just a futile blank. You had to
follow a thing started through to the end, didn't you? Brinker wanted to
improve the Moon, which certainly needed that. Okay--finish the job that
had gone so far. Damn desolation everywhere! Fight it! Smash it! Sudden
rage made Copeland's thin blood pound. Dimly he realized that he was
driven by the same dreariness-disease that motivated Brinker. So what?
Who cared about smashed lunar equipment, after all. And beside
experience, prison would be paradise.

Copeland fired a Martian rocket-launcher, aiming behind the ship. He saw
the blaze of atomic fission. Jets flaming, the craft fled.

In his phones he heard a voice that he remembered: "That you, Brinker?
Trying your father's trick, eh? Idiot! You'll kill yourself, or be
executed. And now you even shoot!"

Fury at Krell clinched Copeland's decision. He did not answer him. But
when Brinker woke up he said savagely, without friendship or
forgiveness, yet with cooperation: "We're on the same side, now. Let's
aim Brulow's Comet."

Concentrating was hard, but they had their instruments and calculators.
Velocity, position, and course of both comet and Moon had to be
coordinated to make them arrive in the same place at the same moment. It
was a problem in astrogation, but a comet was not as easily directed as
a space ship. Copeland had once thought that the necessary fine guiding
couldn't be done. The jet-system they had rigged in that inconveniently
whirling nucleus was crude.

But one thing was in their favor; they had ample time. They could adjust
their course with the jets, check with instruments, and re-adjust--again
and again. Copeland found himself doing the vital part of the job; he
was better at math than Brinker.

