She saw his shadow bend, his body drop down beside the couch. She felt
his hands on her arm. The peculiar fright went through her.

"You won't listen, Madeleine, but whatever you're looking for
here--please forget it! The rituals will help you forget. Try it,
Madeleine! Please--"

Why did he, all at once, sound so desperate?

"With you?"

"Why not?"

"You're just an artificial dream, Don, that comes true seasonally for
people so sick that they can convince themselves you're real--for a
price."

"Well, Madeleine--are you so different?"

"I guess I am."

"You just want the impossible. The others--they want little dreams we
can give them easily."

There was a strain, a tension in him, in his hands, in his voice.
Suddenly, his hands held her, and his face was close above her lips.
"You're still young and beautiful to me," he whispered.

She turned her face away, and gazed at the tattered and splendid veils
of moonlight as Deimos and Phobos neared one another, with undying
eagerness to consummate the timeless ritual.

Dimly, she could hear the communal voices rising to desire.


    "_Twin Moons, Love Moons, whirling bright,
    Bring me Martian love tonight!_"


If you could expect too much from Mars, then where could one find the
answer to the intangible wish? Sirius. Far Centauris. And at the end of
it, the hucksters, the phony props, would be there first.

Some people should stay on Earth, she thought, those who are so hard to
please. There the veils of space and time might keep the last illusions
living. Once you find that even the farthest star is illusory, there's
no place left to go.

His lips were near her lips. His voice was low. "You are different!" His
throat trembled. "You really are. But--I wonder if you're different
enough."

She was aware of the awful gnawing emptiness within her that was only
intense desire too frightened to be free. And then his lips were
crushing to hers and she allowed it, for she knew what was to be her
only way out, and the promise of union was a haze in the room like the
veils of light from the moons of Mars that joined against the starlight
of heaven.

There was more than the ardent in his intensity. A kind of desperation,
his desire to please going beyond the line of duty. The old consuming
terror returned.

She pushed him away. His hands reached, his body crushed. Panic. She
felt unable to breathe, and she started to scream. His hand was over her
mouth.

"Don't look any deeper, don't probe any farther!" he said, like a
suddenly terrible threat. "I beg you, don't do it! You're
different--beautifully different, Madeleine. But not different enough!
None of them ever are!"

She squirmed away, onto the floor between the glass and the couch, and
scurried toward the door. She could hear the gasping, the sobbing
desperation in his voice, and his shadow lengthened across the walls.

Then, as she hesitated in the doorway, he was gone.

She put on a nylon hiking suit and left the room. The silence of the
hall was not real, and the emptiness was not really emptiness. It was
like waking and being exasperatingly aware of only the fleeting end of a
dream. And as she slipped out a side entrance, even the wailing of
exotic musical instruments seemed in a sense not real. Even the silence,
the feeling of being followed, watched, even that seemed artificial--it
was impossible to substantiate the suspicion.

Her palms were wet as she slipped along the wall toward the garage where
the sandsleds were kept. From the amphitheatre she could hear the
rituals, the intercessions, comminations, hymns, libations,
incense-burning, and who knew what else. She saw the reflection of
chrome and artificial glitter disguised as Martian authenticity, the
lights hanging like a grove of pastel moons, and the shrill empty
laughter of girls uncoiling as bright as tinsel through the sluggish
Martian evening. And in spite of the sound and elaborate pretension, it
all had the undying feel of lugubrious solitude.

It had, for a doomed generation driven into inescapable conformity, the
necessary quality of a dream in which a stubborn unconsciousness seeks
ever for truth. And later, back on Earth, in the rut and groove, it
would remain only a dream no one ever talked about to anyone else. After
all, it would simply be something that happened on another world.

She gave one brief, bitter laugh. And even on another world the last
desperate dream was false.

There might be something to be said for release through a pagan orgy
under the double moons; she had no moral scruples about it. But the
paganism would have to be real, that was the thing. Besides, it was too
late. For a moment she pressed her flattened hands against her face and
felt tears squeezing through the tightly-locked fingers. She felt as
though she might explode somewhere inside and realized how the invisible
edges of living had cut her soul to pieces.

It wasn't even self-pity any more. It had grown above self-pity to a
realism beyond tragedy.
