
Now, however, he was left alone most of the time. They brought him food,
and then went away. He was uneasy. Physically, he felt far from well.
The damp air made his throat and chest ache; and he feared that the long
deprivation of sunlight was hurting him. He could not understand.

Gathering his courage one day, he attempted to open the door. He reached
up and turned the knob the way he had seen the people do. But it would
not move when he pushed. He remembered the clicking sound he had heard
every time after they went out.

He became frightened. He did not understand this confinement. Why would
they not let him out?

There passed another day, of mental torture. Would they let him die in
this dark, dreary place? Had all his efforts merely led to a lonely,
purposeless death?

He wondered what they would do if he went out of his own accord; and
finally decided that he must do it, even at the risk of offending them.
Further inactivity he could not bear.

Within five minutes he had formed a plan of action. It was night--the
best time to work; for he must work undisturbed for a time.

He made his way to the bench, and collected three of the wound wire
coils, which he dropped to the floor. With a cutting tool that he found
he managed to get a length of wire from the large roll. The tool was
very heavy.

Next, he crawled to the corner, and selected a number of small pieces of
metal. He rested for a while, studying the light bulb which hung in the
center of the room. From the light it gave and the size of the filament,
he roughly estimated the power of the current.

Then, with a graphite writing instrument that he had found, he drew a
diagram on the floor. He took a very long time doing this, and labeled
it carefully. When he had finished, the little window at the end of the
room showed that dawn was breaking outside.

Hurriedly then, he set to work with the metal, the coils, and the
wire,--twisting, winding, connecting and cross-connecting--constantly
glancing at his diagram and at the window. Finally, when it was broad
daylight outside, he gave a sigh of satisfaction.

He had achieved an ugly, jumbled apparatus, vaguely cylindrical in shape
with a point of metal at one end. He laid it on the floor; and making
his way to the bench, secured two more lengths of wire. He crawled under
the bench to where the power line for the light ran down the wall, and
there connected them. Then, securing his cup of water, he dipped into it
the ends of his two wires, and observed them for a moment. Satisfied, he
carried them to his cylindrical apparatus, and connected one of them at
the end opposite the metal point. The other he did not immediately
connect.




CHAPTER IV.

The Circus


He was breathing hard now, and his face was flushed. For a long time he
sat very still and listened, but he heard no sound. At last, moving very
slowly, he carried his cylinder to the door. He raised it, and placed
the point against the metal lock, under the knob. He pressed his lips
tightly together, and set his jaw.... With the end of the wire which he
had not connected he touched a point on the cylinder.

There was no sound. There was no movement of the cylinder. Yet the metal
lock dissolved, and daylight shot through the place where it had been. A
cloud of light grey dust drifted lazily to the floor.

He disconnected the wires. Carefully he hid the thing under the cushions
of his bed. Then he pushed open the door, and crawled out into the
sunlight. The sun felt warm and pleasant on his back.

He heard a cry, and looked up fearfully. One of the men of Toon was
running towards him carrying a dish. It was the man that brought his
food.

His throat was tight, and he was trembling. He knew that this was the
supreme moment. He nodded his head and smiled. He raised one hand, palm
upward.

The man stopped directly in front of him, and growled--then raised an
arm, pointing at the door of his prison.

He made a little murmuring sound to the man; and raising his face to the
sun, smiled and nodded once more. The man pushed him backwards with one
foot, always pointing at the door.

He turned, and crawled back into the shed. Dully he watched the man; who
stood for a long time staring at the door where the lock had been--then
strode to the pile of metal and picked up a chain.

He did not move when he felt the chain around his body. He closed his
eyes, and did not open them until he heard the door shut. He did not
move all that day. He only watched the little window. When, finally, the
little window grew black, he drew his machine from under the cushions,
and connected it again at the wall. The chain was fastened to a leg of
the bench, and allowed him to do this. He destroyed a portion of the
chain, and loosened it from his body. He crawled to the wall farthest
from the house where the people lived. Moving the machine in a slow arc,
he cut a hole in the wall. Disconnecting the wires, he used them to
fasten the machine around his waist. Then he went out into the night.

He did not know where he was going--except that he was going away from
these beings that held him prisoner without a reason. At first they had
seemed kind--but they were kind no longer. Something had changed them,
he thought; but he could not guess what....

He had progressed less than a hundred yards when a sudden tumult of
sound froze him with terror. It was coming at him through the dark, a
hoarse, senseless, animal cry. And bounding toward him he saw the dark
shadow of a beast. He knew instinctively that here was an unreasoning
creature--and all the strength went out of him. He lay flat and limp on
his face. Now he heard its panting breath, and felt the heat of it on
his body....

At the same time, but only semi-consciously, he heard the loud shouts of
men. As in a dream, he felt himself grasped roughly and lifted from the
ground. Soon he knew that he was back in the shed again. He saw a man
standing above him holding his machine.

He felt strangely detached--as if he were not there at all. He saw the
man look at the machine; look at the door; look at the chain; look at
the hole in the wall; look at the light cord. He saw the man connecting
his machine to the light cord; he felt powerless to warn the man that he
might be connecting it wrong--that there were two ways: one right, one
wrong....

An explosion threw the man heavily against the wall. He could see the
man struggling slowly up--coming towards him--kicking him. But he could
hardly feel the kick at all--and everything got dark....

When light came back it was just a small square above him. That puzzled
him, until he reached out and found wooden walls all around him--very
close. He was in a box. He became suddenly fully conscious of the fact.
Looking down at him from above he saw the faces of two of the men of
Toon.

He cried out involuntarily, struggling to escape. One of the creatures
shook a heavy piece of metal threateningly over his head. He cowered
down, shuddering, at sight of the merciless gleam in its eyes. The light
was blotted out, as they placed a cover over him; and he was deafened by
a long and thunderous pounding.

Then began a time of horror in the darkness. His active mind had nothing
to feed upon but fear. Only too clearly was it brought to him that he
did not know the ways of these creatures of Toon. What was deadly fear
to him might be commonplace to them. He had hoped to find them friendly,
merciful--yet friendship and mercy were qualities of his own experience
in a world different from theirs. Why had he thought to find them here?

       *       *       *       *       *

He had no measure of time. For endless hours he lay there in the dark,
bracing himself against the sides to protect his head and body as much
as possible; for the box seemed almost constantly in motion--jolting,
tilting, and bumping until he was weak and breathless from the strain.

His mind, worn out by its relentless self-torture, sank at last to
semi-consciousness.

Suddenly light returned, and he was dragged roughly from his prison. He
was in a large room where the combination of odor, heat, and noise was
overpowering. Great numbers of the men of Toon were there, hurrying in
all directions, seemingly very busy. He noted immediately that their
clothing was different from that which he had seen, and wondered what
the significance of that might be.... He felt strangely calm, now.

Before him was an immense, bulky man, who stood with legs apart and arms
folded, staring at him with wide, unwinking eyes. This man had a face
that was light red in color and rounded, almost swollen-looking in
shape. He nodded, and his cheeks shook loosely. He nodded several times,
