time, if nothing goes wrong."

"I don't see what could go wrong," replied Holden, "since that madman is
out of the way."

Eagerly he watched the dead, dust-covered surface approach, marveling at
the huge craters and precipitous peaks.

In two hours the five thousand miles had been reduced to less than that
many yards, and in a few more minutes the three great ships were
settling softly on the smooth surface of the plain at the foot of Mount
Julian.

Space suits were rapidly donned, the air-locks set in operation, and the
men hastily began unloading the first four charges of _hexoxen_ and
Europium. Holden called a meeting of the ship commanders in the pilot
room of the _San Francisco_.

"Commander Huges," he addressed the man in charge of the _Los Angeles_,
"you will proceed toward Mount Locke, and continue in that line until
you reach the spot marked on this chart, which is directly opposite our
present position. Rogers, you take the _Ganymede_, and go at an angle of
120 degrees to Huges' course, toward Mount Zoga. I will continue over
the Crater of Aristotle. We will keep in constant communication with
each other by means of the space phone. Time the charges so that they
will commence to react on the afternoon of the twenty-eighth, thus
giving a sufficient margin of time in case of delays due to parties
getting lost. That's all."

The _Ganymede_ and the _Los Angeles_ left almost immediately, while men
from the _San Francisco_ set out to plant the first charges. There were
four men to each cartridge, since it was necessary that they travel
fast.

Holden smiled as the lean figure of Professor Erickson, almost lost in
his space-suit, bounded away in great leaps at the head of his party. In
five hours they returned, having had no trouble at all. Edwards
manipulated the controls, and the ship rose quickly to an altitude of
about five thousand feet and headed for the rim of the Crater of
Aristotle, barely visible in the distance. As they neared the rim, they
rose higher and higher. The mammoth cliffs of black rock towered above
them, and the meters registered a height of five miles as they passed
through a crack in the cliffs and looked down on the level floor beneath
them.

Suddenly Holden, who had been inspecting the country from one of the bow
ports, uttered an exclamation of astonishment.

"A tiny ship is rising toward us from the floor of the crater, near the
cliffs!"

There it was, a speck rapidly growing larger, headed straight for them,
and gaining velocity with every foot it covered.

Edwards worked frantically with the controls, diving in a zig-zag path
toward the strange craft. Captain Linet rushed in, carrying one of the
light _hexoxen_ guns. Holden hurried to help him place it in a specially
designed aperture in the bow, while Erickson and the regular radio man
endeavored to establish communications with the intruder. A voice
suddenly spoke from their instrument.

"You will consider yourselves our captives. Land at once as close as
possible to the white spot you see at the base of the cliff. If you do
not obey instructions, we will ram you immediately."

"Don't reply for a moment," Holden commanded, focusing his glasses in
the direction indicated. As the powerful lenses brought out every detail
of the scene below, he paled visibly.

"What's the matter?" demanded Erickson.

"Matter enough," was the amazing reply. "We've run into a den of some
bandits. They must be the fiends who have been preying on the Earth-Mars
shipping!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The tremendous speed of the dive had brought them so close that all
could see, without the aid of binoculars, the great skeletons of wrecked
ships piled up at the base of the precipice.

"Tell those rats to go to hell," snapped Holden, "and get in touch with
our own ships; use code and tell them to get here as quickly as
possible, prepared for a fight. Get near enough to this pirate ship to
open on it with the _hexoxen_ guns. Can you keep them from ramming us,
Edwards?"

"I think so, for a time, at least."

The enemy's craft was now only a few hundred yards away, and Holden
scrutinized it closely for any sign that might give a clue to the
original builders or present owners. Not over a hundred and fifty feet
in length, with no visible openings, it looked like a slightly fattened
steel needle. Its stern tubes were of the ordinary type; they glowed red
against the silvery background, as the enemy swooped and circled, trying
to get into position for a final, crushing blow.

"Every man in space suits," Holden ordered. "Good work, Linet," he
cried, as he saw a sudden pock-mark appear in the pirate's side, where
the devastating _hexoxen_ bullet had struck.

"They've certainly got thick plates," remarked the Captain, as another
direct hit failed to do more than scratch the metal. "Probably heavier
up in front, if they mean what they say about ramming. I'm going to
concentrate on the stern."

The dull red surface of the moon, the black walls of the crater, and the
twinkling stars of outer space mingled in a fantastic whirl as Edwards
skilfully kept the _San Francisco_ out of the enemy's reach, at the same
time giving Linet and the men in the observation compartment sufficient
opportunity to train their guns on vital spots. It was a hopeless game,
though, for the smaller ship was incredibly fast.

Erickson straightened up from his position behind the operator of the
space-phone. "We can't make any connections with either the _Ganymede_
or the _Los Angeles_. Probably these pirates have developed a shield
which, thrown around their victims, prevents any message from getting to
the outside."

That looked bad. Erickson switched the receiver back to the wave-length
of the enemy. A continual stream of taunts and threats came from the
loudspeaker.

"Why don't you surrender?" the gruff voice barked. "You haven't a chance
against us, but if you surrender you may be allowed to work with us, for
your own benefit as well as ours."

"Go to hell," the formerly meek Erickson roared into the transmitter,
surprised at his own rage.

Then finally, with a desperate dash, the tiny pirate ship darted in.
Edwards did his best to swerve away from the needle-point, but in vain.
There was a shattering crash; Holden felt himself hurled through the
air, but his heavy space-suit saved him from being crushed as he hit the
wall of the room. Edwards stayed with the controls, somehow, cursing
savagely.

"Only a glancing blow, but it smashed all the main stern tubes, and
evidently disabled the anti-gravitational shield transmitter. We're
going down."

Holden dashed to a port and glanced out. A welcome sight met his eyes.
The enemy, also injured, was heading for home as fast as his disabled
engines permitted.

"Those _hexoxen_ bombs must have weakened his plating, so that it sprang
when he rammed us," Edwards exclaimed when he saw what was happening.

Slowly the _San Francisco_ sank toward the red and black volcanic ash of
the crater floor. A hasty inspection revealed that Edwards had been
correct in his diagnosis of the trouble. Extensive repairs would be
necessary before they could proceed, but, fortunately, no one was
seriously hurt, and the main shell showed no signs of strains or leaks.

As soon as Edwards had brought them safely to rest on the ground, Holden
called a council of war.

"From the way these chaps fight, it's evident that they have no weapons,
other than the bow of their ship, and possibly some short-range ray
