night came on, however, they made a try for the hotel's garage, achieved
it without accident, and between them, rolled one of the cars to the
door.

"Wait," said Murray, as Gloria got in, "what was that?"

"This dam' starter." She stirred her foot vigorously. "It won't work."

"No. Wait." He held out a restraining hand. A sudden gust of wind bore a
dash of rain down against them and with it, from the northeast, a
far-away scream, then a tapping and a heavy thud.

"Hot dog!" ejaculated Murray. "They're getting after the crowd. And at
night, too."

The car jerked forward suddenly as the starter caught. "Hold it," cried
Murray. "Douse those headlights." They dodged the wreck of a street car,
swung round a corner and headed for First Avenue, gathering speed.
Another corner, taken on two wheels in the darkness, the way to the
Institute lay before them.

Suddenly a great flame of light sprang out in the sky, throwing the
whole scene into sharpest relief. There was a crash of rifle-fire from
window and door of the building and across the front of it one of the
birds coasted past. Crash! In the street before them something like a
bomb burst, vomiting pennons of fire. Gloria swung the wheel, swung it
back; they had a mad glimpse of brilliantly burning flames inside one of
the buildings across the street from the Institute, and then they were
tumbling out of the car with rifle-fire beating all around them and the
thud of dropping objects on either side.

       *       *       *       *       *

Murray stumbled, but the door was flung open and they were jerked in,
just as one of the huge bird forms flung itself down past them.

"Thank God, you're safe," said Ben Ruby's voice. "They got Dearborn and
Harris and they're besieging us here." He pointed out of the window
across the street, where the rapidly-gaining fire was engulfing the
building.

"Did the birds do that little trick?" asked Gloria.

"I hope to tell you, sister. You ain't seen nothing yet, either. They're
shedding incendiary bombs all over the shop. How about Kevitz and
Farrelly?"

"Got them, too. At the Plaza--and the little Jap. Too bad; I liked that
little sprout."

"I thank gracious lady for kindly expressed sentiment, but oversize
avians have not yet removed me," said a voice and Gloria looked down to
see Yoshio bowing at her side.

"Why, how did they come to let you off? Last I saw you were doing a
headspin over Central Park."

"I was fortune," replied the little man. "Removing sword I operate on
said bird to such extent that he drop me as hot customer, plosh in large
tree. To get home is not so easy but I remember armored car provided by
intelligent corporation for transport of bankroll, so here I am. Cat's
Meow!"

"Bright boy," said Gloria. "Listen!" Above their heads came another
crash, a tramp of feet and shouts. Roberts dashed into the room, rifle
in hand. "They've got the place on fire," he said. "We'll have to clear
out."

Ben Ruby fumbled at his waist, drew forth a whistle and blew a piercing
blast, which was answered by shouts, as members of the colony began to
pour into the room from various points.

Another bomb burst in a fluff of light, just outside the window,
throwing weird shadows across the gathering and splitting a pane here
and there by the force of its impact.

"Hot stuff," remarked Gloria. "What are they trying to do--take us all
at one gulp?"

"Beeville says they never thought it up on their own," Ben assured her.
"Not smart enough. He thinks somebody doesn't like us and is sending
them around to tell us so. Listen, everybody!"

The room quieted down.

"We've got to go at once. Our destination is the Times Square subway
station. They can't get us there. Anybody who gets separated meet the
rest there. We'll go in groups of three to a car; one to carry a gun,
one a sword and one a light. Everybody got it?... Good.... Somebody give
Gloria one of those express rifles.... Here's the list then. First
party--Miss Rutherford, gun; Yoshio, sword; O'Hara, light. Go ahead."

A coil of smoke drifted across the room from somewhere above--the sough
of the burning made the only background to his words. With a quick
handshake the three made ready; a volley from the windows flashed out,
and they dashed off. Those inside caught a glimpse of the dark form of
their car as it rolled into the night. They were safe at all events. The
second carload, in Yoshio's armored vehicle, also got free, but the
third had trouble. They had hardly made half the distance to the parked
cars before there was a whir of wings, a scream, and the quick burst of
a bomb, luckily too far behind them to do damage. Those inside saw the
light-man stop suddenly, flashing his beam aloft, saw an orange flame
spring from the gun and then their view of the three was blotted out in
a whirl of wings and action.

"Everybody out!" yelled Ben. "Now! While they're busy." In a concerted
rush the colonists poured through the door.

Nobody could remember clearly what did happen. Someone was down--hurt
somewhere--but was flung into a car. Through the turmoil the tossing
form of one badly-wounded bird struggled on the ground, and with a roar
of motors the cavalcade started.




CHAPTER VI

The Terror by Night


It would be futile--and impossible--to chronicle all the events of that
wild ride; to tell how the light-bombs dropped unceasingly from above;
how the driver of one car, blinded by the glare, hurtled his vehicle
through the plate-glass window of a store, and how McAllister, the
artilleryman, fought off the birds with a huge shard of glass from the
window; how the passengers in another car, wrecked by a bomb, got a
fire-engine and cleared their way to Times Square with clanging bell and
clouds of malodorous fire-extinguisher chemicals; or how Mrs. Roberts
decapitated one of the monsters with a single blow of the cleaver she
carried.

Dawn found them, a depressed group of fourteen, gathered in the
protection of the underground passages.

"Well, what next?" asked Gloria, who seemed to have preserved more of
her normal cheerfulness than anyone. "Do we stay here till they come for
us, or do we go get 'em?"

"We get out," said Ben Ruby. "No good here. They know too much for us."

"Right," declared Beeville. "The usual methods of dealing with animals
won't work this time. They are all based on the fact that animals are
creatures of habit instead of intelligence, and unless I am much wrong,
these birds are intelligent and have some bigger intelligence backing
them."

"You mean they'll try to bomb us out of here?" asked Roberts.

McAllister looked up from the dice he was throwing. "You bet your sweet
life they will. Those babies know their stuff. The one that was after me
was onto the manual of the bayonet like he'd been raised on it."

"That's nice," said Gloria, "but what are we going to do about it?"

"Get an anti-aircraft gun from the Island and shell hell out of them
when they come round again," suggested the artilleryman.

"Said gun would be considerable weight for individual to transport in
pocket," said Yoshio doubtfully, as Ben raised his hand for silence amid
the ensuing laughter.

"There's a good deal in that idea," he said, "but I don't think it will
do as it stands. The birds would bomb our gun to blazes after they had a
dose or two from it. They're not so slow themselves you know. How about
some of the forts? Aren't there some big ones around New York?"

McAllister nodded. "There's Hancock. We could get a ship through."

"Say!" Gloria leaped suddenly to her feet. "While we're about it, can't
we get a warship--a battleship or something? Those babies would have a
hot time trying to bomb one of Uncle Sam's battleships apart and there's
all kinds of anti-aircraft guns on them."

"There's a destroyer in the Hudson," said someone.

"How many men does it take to run her?"

"Hundred and fifty."

"But," put in Gloria, "that's a hundred and fifty of the old style men
who had to have their three squares and eight hours' sleep every day,
and they did a lot of things like cooking that we won't have to. What do
you say, Dictator, old scout? Shall we give it a whirl?"

"O. K.--unless somebody has something better to offer," declared Ben,
and in fifteen minutes more the colonists were cautiously poking their
way out of the subway station en route to take command of U. S. S.
_Ward_.

Cleaning up the ship before the start took the colonists a whole day. A
sooty dust, like the product of a particularly obnoxious factory, had
settled over everything, and dealing with the cast-iron bodies of the
sailors, wedged in the queer corners where they had fallen at the moment
of the change, was a job in itself.

As night shut down, the whole crew, with the exception of Beeville and
Murray Lee, who had spent some time in small boats and had therefore
been appointed navigators, was busy going over the engine-room, striving
to learn the complex detail of handling a warship.

Murray and Beeville were poring over their navigating charts when a step
sounded outside the chartroom and the wire-frizzled head of Gloria was
thrust in.

"How goes it, children?" she asked. "Do we sail for the cannibal islands
at dawn?"

"Not on your life," replied Murray. "This hooker is going to pull in at
the nearest garage until we learn what it's all about. Talk about
arithmetic! This is worse than figuring out a time-table."

Gloria laughed, then her face became serious. "Do you think they'll bomb
us again, Mr. Beeville?"

"I don't see why not. They were clear winners in the last battle. But
what gets me is where they come from. Why, they're a living refutation
of the laws of evolution on the earth! Four wings and two legs!
Although ..." the naturalist looked at the sliding parts of his own arm,
"they are rather less incredible than the evolution that has overtaken
mankind, unless we're all off our heads. Do you know any way to account
for it?"

"Not me," said Murray, "that's supposed to be your job; all we do is
believe you when--" Bang! The anti-aircraft gun had gone off just
outside with an earsplitting report. With a common impulse the three
made for the door and looked upward to see the shell burst in a puff of
white smoke, outlined against the dark clouds of evening, while above
and beyond it sailed a black dot with whirring wings.

"That settles it," said Murray. "Whether we like it or not, we're going
away from here. I wish those nuts hadn't fired though. Now the birds
know what we've got. Trot down and tell them to get up steam, that's a
good girl, Gloria."

The lone tetrapteryx seemed no more than a scout, for the attack was not
followed up. But it takes time to get steam up on long disused marine
engines and all hands were below when the real attack was delivered.

It began with the explosion of a bomb somewhere outside and a dash of
water against the vessel's side that threw all of them off their feet.
There was a clang of metal and a rush for the deck--cut across by Ben's
voice. "Take it easy! Everybody to the engines but McAllister, O'Hara
and the navigators."

The four sprang for the ladder, Murray in the lead. Crash! A sound like
the thunder of a thousand tons of scrap iron on a sidewalk and the
destroyer pitched wildly.

Murray's head came level with the deck. Instead of the darkness he had
expected it was flung into dazzling illumination by a flare burning on
the water not fifty yards away, with a light so intense that it seemed
to have physical body. There was a perceptible wave of heat from it and
the water round it boiled like a cauldron.

[Illustration: Instead of the darkness he had expected, the deck was
flung into dazzling illumination.]

He tumbled onto the deck, running forward to trip the release of the
anchor chain. At the break of the forecastle, he stumbled, and the
stumble saved him, for at that moment another of the bombs fell, just in
front of the fore-deck gun. The whole bow of the ship seemed to burst
into intense, eye-searing flame. Deafened and blinded, Murray lay face
down on the deck, trying to recover his senses; behind him the others,
equally overwhelmed, tumbled on the iron surface, rolling over and over,
blindly.

But the birds, apparently unaware of how heavy a blow they had struck,
seemed wary of the gun. The four groveling on the deck heard scream and
answering scream above them as the monsters discussed the question on
the wing. If they reached a decision it was too late, for McAllister and
O'Hara, blind, drunk and sick though they were, staggered to the gun and
sent a shot shrieking at wild venture into the heavens. Beeville, nearer
to the blinding blaze of light, recovered more slowly, but found his way
to the bridge where he fumblingly pulled the engine-room telegraph over
to "Full Speed Ahead."

Below, in the bowels of the vessel, there was a rumble of activity; a
rapid whoosh of steam came from an exhaust pipe, a dash of sparks from
the destroyer's funnels, and slowly and haltingly she began to move.
Bang! went the anti-aircraft gun. Beeville heard Murray climbing the
bridge behind him and then his cry, "The anchor!"

Too late--with a surge that changed to a rattle, the destroyer moved,
tearing the anchor from its ground and swinging slowly half-way round as
the weight dragged the damaged bow to one side. At that moment came
another bomb which, but for their motion, would have struck fair and
square amidships. Bang! Bang! went the anti-aircraft gun. Murray dragged
at the wheel, then swung the engine-room telegraph back to "Stop." Just
in time--the destroyer's bottom grated on something, her prow rent the
side of a big speed-boat and she came to rest, pointing diagonally
upstream.

Fortunately the attack broke off as rapidly as it had begun. A few
screams, lost in the darkness of the night were the only answer to
another shell from the gun. But there was no assurance that this was
more than a temporary respite. Murray and Beeville strove desperately to
bring the warped bridge mechanism into running order while O'Hara
routed out a blow-torch from somewhere and attacked the anchor chain,
now welded into a solid mass with the deck by the force of the
light-bomb. Finally, weaving to and fro in the hands of the
inexperienced mariners, she was gotten round and pointed downstream and
out to sea. If the birds sought them again in the darkness there was no
sign of it.

Day found them stumbling down the Jersey coast, the foredeck a mass of
wreckage and the ship leaking badly.

"Well, where are we now?" called a cheerful voice, as Murray Lee stood
at the wheel. "Australia in sight yet?"

He looked up to see Gloria's head emerging from the companion.

"Come on up," he said, "I'm just going to turn the wheel over to
Beeville and get busy with this radio. Don't think the bomb knocked it
out. It did everything else, though. Look at that."

He indicated the prow of the ship, where the big gun hung down like a
tired candle and the whole fore part of the vessel had dissolved into
tears of metal.

"Golly," said Gloria, "that was some egg those birds laid. What was it,
anyway?"

"Don't know. Never saw anything like it before. Must be some kind of
new-fangled high-power incendiary bomb to melt steel down like butter.
Why, even thermit wouldn't do that."

"I hope our friends don't think of looking us up here, then, or we'll be
finding out what it's like to walk under water."

"You said something, sister," declared Murray. "Wait! I think I got
something."

He fumbled with the radio dials before him, swinging them this way and
that: then clamped on the headset. "Oh, boy, there's something coming
through ... we're not alone in the world then.... Yes, there she is....
Damn, I wish they wouldn't send so fast.... AAM2 calling.... Now who is
AAM2?" His fingers pressed the key in reply as the others watched him
with bated breath. "Position, seventy-three, fifty-three west longitude;
forty, o-three, north latitude. Here ..." he wrote the figures down.
"Take this, one of you and dope it out. Ssh, there's more coming. Oh, he
wants to know who we are and where. Call Ben, will you Gloria?"

She dashed off to return with the dictator of the colonists just as
Beeville, who had been fumbling over the charts with one hand, called
suddenly, "Why, the position they give is right near here--hardly a
hundred miles away. I don't know just what ours is, but it can't be far
from this spot. Tell them that."

"Find out who they are first," Ben put in, practically. "After what
they've done, I wouldn't put it past the tetrapteryxes to handle a radio
set."

"... His Majesty's Australian ship _Brisbane_, they say," said Murray.
"Wait a minute, since they're so near, I think I can switch them over to
the radiophone." He ticked the key a moment, then twisted more dials and
leaned back as a full and fruity voice, with a strong English accent,
filled the room.

"Compliments of Captain Entwhistle of the Royal Australian Navy to the
commander of the U. S. S. _Ward_, and can we arrange a meeting? The
Comet appears to have done a good deal of damage in your part of the
world and you are the first people we have encountered."

"Where's your microphone?" asked Ben. "Oh, there.... Compliments of
Benjamin Franklin Ruby, temporarily in command of U. S. S. _Ward_ to
Captain Entwhistle of the Royal Australian Navy, and none of us are
sailors. We just borrowed this ship, and if you want to see us you'll
have to pick us up. We'll keep along the coast toward Cape May. Can you
meet us?"

A chuckle was audible from the radiophone. "I think we can manage it.
Are there any of the big birds about in your part of the world? They
have been bothering us all summer."

"Yes," replied Ben, "that's what we're running away from now. They've
got some bombs that are pure poison and they've been making regular war
on us--or probably you know about it?"

"We haven't seen anything like that yet," declared the voice from the
loud-speaker, "but we've had plenty of trouble with them. Hold on a
moment. Our lookout reports sighting smoke from your funnels. Hold your
course and speed. We'll pick you up."

The voice ceased with a snap, and the four in the control room of the
destroyer looked at each other.

"I'm glad he came around," remarked Ben. "This destroyer is getting
shopworn. Besides with a good warship on hand we'll be able to give
those birds what they're looking for. I hope he's got some airplanes."

"And somebody to fly them," continued Murray. "What'll we do if he
has--go back and give them hell?"

"If we can. Apparently he doesn't like the birds any too well himself.
It was the first thing he mentioned."

They ceased speaking as the thin pennon of smoke, followed by two tall
masts, became visible over the horizon. In a few minutes more the
_Brisbane_ swept up, swung a circle and came to rest near them, while
out from her side dropped a boat that began to move toward them with
dipping oars.

A moment later she was alongside. Ben stepped out on the deck, and as he
did so, there was a mutual exclamation of horrified amazement--for
Captain Entwhistle of the Royal Australian Navy was as much flesh and
blood as any man they had seen in the old days, but a pale blue in
