watching the air traffic go by the window, bending over the sill,
looking down into the street fifty floors below....

... and then he reached slowly and quietly for his atomic gun.

       *       *       *       *       *

AN EXPLANATION: You may have wondered why I placed the Technocrat story
and article in FuFa. Well, it's because I think Technocracy combines all
of the hopes and dreams of science-fiction. We've been dreaming about it
for years--now, in a short time it may become reality. It surely
deserves support from any serious fictioneer. And you can't say this mag
isn't balanced!--first I give you Yorke's article on Tech., then I give
you a satire on the same thing, jabbing at it in a good-humoured way,
and then--when you read Ackerman's article, you'll see almost the
complete annihilation of EARTH. So, whether you are an optimist or a
pessimist about the future of humanity, you'll find either side in FuFa.
(But on the side, I'm all for the Technate, aegh!)

Ye Editor....

       *       *       *       *       *

     This being the first issue of FuFa I feel fortunate in being able
     to offer a piece of scientifiction by the field's most famous fan.

     THE RECORD was written first in 1929, scarcely more than a sketch,
     on two pages. Ackerman was thirteen. ED EARL REPP, LA author of THE
     RADIUM POOL, said of it: "I found it delighting and exceptionally
     interesting for the writing of a boy so young." Ackerman re-wrote
     it into a three page story, later, the present product. It has not
     been touched since. It is not being retouched now. Allow me to
     present THE RECORD as a _record_ of how Forrie wrote, spelled and
     punctuated six years ago at the age of sixteen. _ED._




THE RECORD

by FORREST J. ACKERMAN


For twenty years--for twenty long, horror filled, war laden years the
Earth had not known peace.

Hovering over the metropolises of the world came long, lean battle
projectiles, glinting silver in the sunlight or coming like gaunt
mirages of grey out of the midnight sky to blast man's civilization from
its cultural foundations. Man against man, ship against ship--a
ceaseless and useless orgy of slaughter. Men, at their battle stations
in the ships, pressed buttons, releasing radio bombs that blistered
space and lifted whole cities up in shattered pieces and flung them
down, grim ruins, reminders of man's ignorant hatreds and suspicions.

And gas--thick black clouds of it--billowing over the cities, seeking
every possible egress, pushed forward by colossal Wind machines. But
even when Victory came for the one side, often Nature, in one of her
vengeful moments, would send the black gas flowing back to annihilate
its senders.

Rays cut the air! Power bombs exploded incessantly! Evaporays robbed the
Earth of its water--shot it up into the atmosphere and made of it a fog
that condensed only after many months. And heat rays made deserts out of
fertile terrain.

Rays that hypnotized caused even the strong minded to commit suicide or
reveal military secrets. Rays that effected the optical nerves swept
cities and left the population groping and blind, unable to find food.

It was a war that destroyed almost all of humanity. And why were they
fighting? _For pleasure and amusement!_

In the middle of the twenty-second century, every nation had a standard
defense. The weapons of war of each were equal--not in proportion to
size, but actually, since man-power no longer counted high. Pacifism had
done its best, but the World was armed to the hilt. And now--though
illogically--it felt safe--for every nation meant the same as if all had
nothing.

Another thing--there was no work to be done. Robots did it. And there
seemed nothing left to discover, invent or enjoy. Art was at its
perfection, poetry was mathematically correct and unutterably
beautiful--worked out by the Esthetic machines. Sculptoring had been
given the effect complete, artists hands guided by wonderful pieces of
machinery. Huge museums were crammed with art put out synthetically.

And thus it was with the many Arts and their creators who grew stagnent
in their perfection. And it was that way with the many sciences
also....

Paleontologists had found, and articulated, and catalogued every fossil.
The ancestor of the Eohippus, the little four-toed Dawn Horse, was
discovered; the direct line between man and ape established in skeletal
remains; the seat of _life_ itself definitely proved Holarctica. And
great bio-chemists, skilled in the science of vital processes, had
created synthetic tissues and muscles and flesh, built upon the frames
that had been recovered bodies with skillful modeling ... even supplied
them with blood and given them the spark of LIFE ... so that
Paleobotonists recreated the flora of a prehistoric era. Again the
ponderous amphibious brontosaur pushed through marshes. Fish emerged
upon the land, and the first bird archaeopteryx tried his imperfect
wings for flight. In the regulated climates of long dead ages, fish,
amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals lived again for the edification
of those interested in the very ancient--or who were amused with queer
animals.

But that was only paleontologically speaking. There were the heavens to
be considered. They had been: the stars and planets weighed and
measured, their composition noted, courses plotted with super-accuracy.
