paralysis of horror gripped her, for where there should have been the
immobility of death, there was movement: a slow twitching, a flexing and
writhing of ebon limbs--an awful scream burst from her lips as she broke
the bonds that held her mute and motionless. At her shriek Conan shot
erect, teeth gleaming, sword lifted.

'The statues! The statues!--_Oh my God, the statues are coming to
life!_'

And with the cry she sprang through a crevice in the wall, burst madly
through the hindering vines, and ran, ran, ran--blind, screaming,
witless--until a grasp on her arm brought her up short and she shrieked
and fought against the arms that caught her, until a familiar voice
penetrated the mists of her terror, and she saw Conan's face, a mask of
bewilderment in the moonlight.

'What in Crom's name, girl? Did you have a nightmare?' His voice sounded
strange and far away. With a sobbing gasp she threw her arms about his
thick neck and clung to him convulsively, crying in panting catches.

'Where are they? Did they follow us?'

'Nobody followed us,' he answered.

She sat up, still clinging to him, and looked fearfully about. Her blind
flight had carried her to the southern edge of the plateau. Just below
them was the slope, its foot masked in the thick shadows of the woods.
Behind them she saw the ruins looming in the high-swinging moon.

'Did you not see them?--The statues, moving, lifting their hands, their
eyes glaring in the shadows?'

'I saw nothing,' answered the barbarian uneasily. 'I slept more soundly
than usual, because it has been so long since I have slumbered the night
through; yet I don't think anything could have entered the hall without
waking me.'

'Nothing entered,' a laugh of hysteria escaped her. 'It was something
there already. Ah, Mitra, we lay down to sleep among them, like sheep
making their bed in the shambles!'

'What are you talking about?' he demanded. 'I woke at your cry, but
before I had time to look about me, I saw you rush out through the crack
in the wall. I pursued you, lest you come to harm. I thought you had a
nightmare.'

'So I did!' she shivered. 'But the reality was more grisly than the
dream. Listen!' And she narrated all that she had dreamed and thought
to see.

Conan listened attentively. The natural skepticism of the sophisticated
man was not his. His mythology contained ghouls, goblins, and
necromancers. After she had finished, he sat silent, absently toying
with his sword.

'The youth they tortured was like the tall man who came?' he asked at
last.

'As like as son to father,' she answered, and hesitantly: 'If the mind
could conceive of the offspring of a union of divinity with humanity, it
would picture that youth. The gods of old times mated sometimes with
mortal women, our legends tell us.'

'What gods?' he muttered.

'The nameless, forgotten ones. Who knows? They have gone back into the
still waters of the lakes, the quiet hearts of the hills, the gulfs
beyond the stars. Gods are no more stable than men.'

'But if these shapes were men, blasted into iron images by some god or
devil, how can they come to life?'

'There is witchcraft in the moon,' she shuddered. '_He_ pointed at the
moon; while the moon shines on them, they live. So I believe.'

'But we were not pursued,' muttered Conan, glancing toward the brooding
ruins. 'You might have dreamed they moved. I am of a mind to return and
see.'

'No, no!' she cried, clutching him desperately. 'Perhaps the spell upon
them holds them in the hall. Do not go back! They will rend you limb
from limb! Oh, Conan, let us go into our boat and flee this awful
island! Surely the Hyrkanian ship has passed us now! Let us go!'

So frantic was her pleading that Conan was impressed. His curiosity in
regard to the images was balanced by his superstition. Foes of flesh and
blood he did not fear, however great the odds, but any hint of the
supernatural roused all the dim monstrous instincts of fear that are the
heritage of the barbarian.

He took the girl's hand and they went down the slope and plunged into
the dense woods, where the leaves whispered, and nameless night-birds
murmured drowsily. Under the trees the shadows clustered thick, and
Conan swerved to avoid the denser patches. His eyes roved continuously
from side to side, and often flitted into the branches above them. He
went quickly yet warily, his arm girdling the girl's waist so strongly
that she felt as if she were being carried rather than guided. Neither
spoke. The only sound was the girl's quick nervous panting, the rustle
of her small feet in the grass. So they came through the trees to the
edge of the water, shimmering like molten silver in the moonlight.

'We should have brought fruit for food,' muttered Conan; 'but doubtless
we'll find other islands. As well leave now as later; it's but a few
hours till dawn--'

His voice trailed away. The painter was still made fast to the looping
root. But at the other end was only a smashed and shattered ruin, half
submerged in the shallow water.

A stifled cry escaped Olivia. Conan wheeled and faced the dense shadows,
a crouching image of menace. The noise of the night-birds was suddenly
silent. A brooding stillness reigned over the woods. No breeze moved the
branches, yet somewhere the leaves stirred faintly.

Quick as a great cat Conan caught up Olivia and ran. Through the shadows
he raced like a phantom, while somewhere above and behind them sounded a
curious rushing among the leaves, that implacably drew closer and
closer. Then the moonlight burst full upon their faces, and they were
speeding up the slope of the plateau.

At the crest Conan laid Olivia down, and turned to glare back at the
gulf of shadows they had just quitted. The leaves shook in a sudden
breeze; that was all. He shook his mane with an angry growl. Olivia
crept to his feet like a frightened child. Her eyes looked up at him,
dark wells of horror.

'What are we to do, Conan?' she whispered.

He looked at the ruins, stared again into the woods below.

'We'll go to the cliffs,' he declared, lifting her to her feet.
'Tomorrow I'll make a raft, and we'll trust our luck to the sea again.'

'It was not--not _they_ that destroyed our boat?' It was half question,
half assertion.

He shook his head, grimly taciturn.

Every step of the way across that moon-haunted plateau was a sweating
terror for Olivia, but no black shapes stole subtly from the looming
ruins, and at last they reached the foot of the crags, which rose stark
and gloomily majestic above them. There Conan halted in some
uncertainty, at last selecting a place sheltered by a broad ledge,
nowhere near any trees.

'Lie down and sleep if you can, Olivia,' he said. 'I'll keep watch.'

But no sleep came to Olivia, and she lay watching the distant ruins and
the wooded rim until the stars paled, the east whitened, and dawn in
rose and gold struck fire from the dew on the grass-blades.

She rose stiffly, her mind reverting to all the happenings of the night.
In the morning light some of its terrors seemed like figments of an
overwrought imagination. Conan strode over to her, and his words
electrified her.

'Just before dawn I heard the creak of timbers and the rasp and clack of
cordage and oars. A ship has put in and anchored at the beach not far
away--probably the ship whose sail we saw yesterday. We'll go up the
cliffs and spy on her.'

Up they went, and lying on their bellies among the boulders, saw a
painted mast jutting up beyond the trees to the west.

'An Hyrkanian craft, from the cut of her rigging,' muttered Conan. 'I
wonder if the crew--'

A distant medley of voices reached their ears, and creeping to the
southern edge of the cliffs, they saw a motley horde emerge from the
fringe of trees along the western rim of the plateau, and stand there a
space in debate. There was much flourishing of arms, brandishing of
swords, and loud rough argument. Then the whole band started across the
plateau toward the ruins, at a slant that would take them close by the
foot of the cliffs.

'Pirates!' whispered Conan, a grim smile on his thin lips. 'It's an
Hyrkanian galley they've captured. Here--crawl among these rocks.

'Don't show yourself unless I call to you,' he instructed, having
secreted her to his satisfaction among a tangle of boulders along the
crest of the cliffs. 'I'm going to meet these dogs. If I succeed in my
plan, all will be well, and we'll sail away with them. If I don't
succeed--well, hide yourself in the rocks until they're gone, for no
