over New York.

Some high-flying skywriters were at work. _Welcome Superior--Drink
Pepsi-Cola_ their message said.

Don dressed quickly and hurried to the brink. Alis Garet was there among
a little crowd, bundled up in a parka.

"Is that the Hudson River?" she asked him. "Where's the Empire State
Building?"

"Yes," he said. "Haven't you ever been to New York? I can't quite make
it out. It's somewhere south of that patch of green--that's Central
Park."

"No, I've never been out of Ohio. I thought New York was a big city."

"It's big enough. Don't forget we're four miles up. Have you seen any
planes besides the skywriters?"

"Just some airliners, way down," she said. "Were you expecting someone?"

"Seeing how it's our last port of call, I thought there might be some
Federal boys flying around. I shouldn't think they'd want a chunk of
their real estate exported to Europe."

"Are we going to Europe?"

"Bound to if we don't change course."

"Why?"

"My very next words were going to be 'Don't ask me why.' I ask you.
You're closer to the horse's mouth than I am."

"If you mean Father," Alis said, "I told you I don't enjoy his
confidence."

"Haven't you even got an inkling of what he's up to?"

"I'm sure he's not the Master Mind, if that's what you mean."

"Then who is? Rubach? Civek? The chief of police? Or the bubble gum
king, whoever he is?"

"Cheeky McFerson?" She laughed. "I went to grade school with him and if
he's got a mind I never noticed it."

"McFerson? He's just a kid, isn't he?"

"His father died a couple of years ago and Cheeky's the president on
paper, but the business office runs things. We call him Cheeky because
he always had a wad of company gum in his cheek. Supposed to be an
advertisement. But he never gave me any and I always chewed Wrigley's
for spite."

"Oh." Don chewed the inside of his own cheek and watched the coastline.
"That's Connecticut now," he said. "We're certainly not slowing down for
customs."

A speck, trailing vapor through the cold upper air, headed toward them
from the general direction of New England. As it came closer Don saw
that it was a B-58 Hustler bomber. He recognized it by the mysterious
pod it carried under its body, three-quarters as long as the fuselage.

"It's not going to shoot us down, is it?" Alis asked.

"Hardly. I'm glad to see it. It's about time somebody took an interest
in us besides Bobby Thebold and his leftover Lightnings."

The B-58 rapidly closed the last few miles between them, banked and
circled Superior.

"Attention people of Superior," a voice from the plane said. The
magnified words reached them distinctly through the cold air. "Inasmuch
as you are now leaving the continental United States, this aircraft has
been assigned to accompany you. From this point on you are under the
protection of the United States Air Force."

"That's better," Don said. "It's not much, but at least somebody's doing
something."

The B-58 streaked off and took up a course in a vast circle around them.

"I'm not so sure I like having it around," Alis said. "I mean suppose
they find out that Superior's controlled by--I don't know--let's say a
foreign power, or an alien race. Once we're out over the Atlantic where
nobody else could get hurt, wouldn't they maybe consider it a small
sacrifice to wipe out Superior to get rid of the--the alien?"

Don looked at her closely. "What's this about an alien? What do you
know?"

"I don't _know_ anything. It's just a feeling I have, that this is
bigger than Father and Mayor Civek and all the self-important VIP's in
Superior put together." She squeezed his arm as if to draw comfort from
him. "Maybe it's seeing the ocean and realizing the vastness of it, but
for the first time I'm beginning to feel a little scared."

"I won't say there's nothing to be afraid of," Don said. He pulled her
hand through his arm. "It isn't as though this were a precedented
situation. But whatever's going on, remember there are some pretty good
people on our side, too."

"I know," she said. "And you're one of them."

He wondered what she meant by that. Nothing, probably, except "Thank you
for the reassurance." He decided that was it; the mechanical
eavesdropper he wore under his collar was making him too self-conscious.
He tried to think of something appropriate to say to her that he
wouldn't mind having overheard in the Pentagon.

Nothing occurred to him, so he drew Alis closer and gave her a quick,
quiet kiss.

       *       *       *       *       *

The crowd of people looking over the edge had grown. Judging by their
number, few people were in school or at their jobs today. Yesterday they
had seemed only mildly interested in what their town was up to but
today, with the North American continent about to be left behind, they
were paying more attention. Yet Don could see no signs of alarm on their
faces. At most there was a reflection of wonder, but not much more than
there might be among a group of Europeans seeing New York Harbor from
shipboard for the first time. An apathetic bunch, he decided, who would
be resigned to their situation so long as the usual pattern of their
lives was not interfered with unduly. What they lacked, of course, was
leadership.

"It's big, isn't it?" Alis said. She was looking at the Atlantic, which
was virtually the only thing left to see except the bright blue sky, a
strip of the New England coast, and the circling bomber.

"It's going to get bigger," Don said. "Shall we go across town and take
a last look at the States?" He also wanted to see what, if anything, was
going on in town.

"Not the last, I hope. I'd prefer a round trip."

An enterprising cab driver opened his door for them. "Special excursion
rate to the west end," he said. "One buck."

"You're on," Don said. "How's business?"

"Not what you'd call booming. No trains to meet. No buses. Hi, Alis.
This isn't one of your father's brainstorms come to life, is it?"

"Hi, Chuck," she said. "I seriously doubt it, though I'm sure you'd
never get him to admit it. How are your wife and the boy?"

"Fine. That boy, he's got some imagination. He's digging a hole in the
back yard. Last week he told us he was getting close to China. This week
it's Australia. He said at supper last night that they must have heard
about this hole and started digging from the other end. They've
connected up, according to him, and he had quite a conversation with a
kangaroo."

"A kangaroo?" Don sat up straight.

"Yeah. You know how kids are. I guess he's studying Australia in
geography."

"What did the kangaroo tell your son?"

The cab driver laughed defensively. "There's nothing wrong with the boy.
He's just got an active mind."

"Of course. When I was a kid I used to talk to bears. But what did he
say the kangaroo talked about?"

"Oh, just crazy stuff--like the kangaroos didn't like it Down Under any
more and were coming up here because it was safer."

       *       *       *       *       *

Later that morning, at about the time Don Cort estimated that Superior
had passed the twelve-mile limit--east from the coast, not up--the
Superior State Bank was held up.

A man clearly recognized as Joe Negus, a small-time gambler, and one
other man had driven up to the bank in Negus' flashy Buick convertible.
They walked up to the head teller, threatened him with pistols and
demanded all the money in all the tills. They stuffed the bills in a
sack, got into their car and drove off. They took nothing from the
customers and made no attempt to take anything from the vault.

The fact that they ignored the vault made Don feel better. He thought
when he first heard about the robbery that the men might have been after
the brief case he'd stored there, which would have meant that he was
under suspicion. But apparently the job was a genuine heist, not a
cover-up for something else.

Police Chief Vincent Grande reached the scene half an hour after the
criminals left it. His car had frozen up and wouldn't start. He arrived
by taxi, red-faced, fingering the butt of his holstered service
automatic.

Negus and his confederate, identified as a poolroom lounger named Hank
Stacy, had gotten away with a hundred thousand dollars.

"I didn't know there was that much money in town," was Grande's comment
on that. While he was asking other questions the telephone rang and
someone told the bank president he'd seen Negus and Stacy go into the
poolroom. In fact, the robbers' convertible was parked blatantly in
front of the place.

Grande, looking as if he'd rather be dog catcher, got back into the
taxi.

Joe Negus and Hank Stacy were sitting on opposite sides of a pool table
when the police chief got there, dividing the money in three piles. A
third man stood by, watching closely. He was Jerry Lynch, a lawyer. He
greeted Grande.

"Morning, Vince," he said easily. "Come to shoot a little pool?"

"I'll shoot some bank robbers if they don't hand over that money,"
Grande said. He had his gun out and looked almost purposeful.

Negus and Stacy made no attempt to go for their guns, Stacy seemed
nervous but Negus went on counting the money without looking up.

"Is it your money, Vince?" Jerry Lynch asked.

"You know damn well whose money it is. Now let's have it."

"I'm afraid I couldn't do that," the lawyer said. "In the first place I
wouldn't want to, thirty-three and a third per cent of it being mine,
and in the second place you have no authority."

"I'm the chief of police," Grande said doggedly. "I don't want to spill
any blood--"

"Don't flash your badge at me, Vince," Lynch said. Negus had finished
counting the money and the lawyer took one of the piles and put it in
various pockets. "I said you had no authority. Bank robbery is a federal
offense. Not that I admit there's been a robbery. But if you suspect a
crime it's your duty to go to the proper authorities. The FBI would be
indicated, if you know where they can be reached."

"Yeah," Joe Negus said. "Go take a flying jump for yourself, Chief."

"Listen, you cheap crook--"

"Hardly cheap, Vince," Lynch said. "And not even a crook, in my
professional opinion. Mr. Negus pleads extra-territoriality."

       *       *       *       *       *

That was the start of Superior's crime wave.

Somebody broke the plate-glass window of George Tocher's dry-goods store
and got away with blankets, half a dozen overcoats and several sets of
woolen underwear.

A fuel-oil truck disappeared from the street outside of Dabney Brothers'
and was found abandoned in the morning. About nine hundred gallons had
been drained out--as if someone had filled his cellar tank and a couple
of his neighbors'.

The back door of the supermarket was forced and somebody made off with
a variety of groceries. The missing goods would have just about filled
one car.

Each of these crimes was understandable--Superior's growing food and
fuel shortage and icy temperatures had led a few people to desperation.

But there were other incidents. Somebody smashed the window at
Kimbrough's Jewelry Store and snatched a display of medium-priced
watches.

Half a dozen young vandals sneaked into the Catholic Church and began
toppling statues of the saints. When they were surprised by Father Brian
they fled, bombarding him with prayer books. One of the books shattered
a stained-glass window depicting Christ dispensing loaves and fishes.

Somebody started a fire in the movie-house balcony and nearly caused a
panic.

Vincent Grande rushed from place to place, investigating, but rarely
learned enough to make an arrest. The situation was becoming unpleasant.
Superior had always been a friendly place to live, where everyone knew
everyone else, at least to say hello to, but now there was suspicion and
fear, not to mention increasing cold and threatened famine.

Everyone was cheered up, therefore, when Mayor Hector Civek announced a
mass meeting in Town Square. Bonfires were lit and the reviewing stand
that was used for the annual Founders' Day parade was hauled out as a
speaker's platform.

Civek was late. The crowd, bundled up against the cold, was stamping
their feet and beginning to shout a bit when he arrived. There was a
medium-sized cheer as the mayor climbed to the platform.

"Fellow citizens," he began, then stopped to search through his overcoat
pockets.

"Well," he went on, "I guess I put the speech in an inside pocket and
it's too cold to look for it. I know what it says, anyway."

This brought a few laughs. Don Cort stood near the edge of the crowd
and watched the people around him. They mostly had a no-nonsense look
about them, as if they were not going to be satisfied with more oratory.

Civek said, "I'm not going to keep you standing in the cold and tell you
what you already know--how our food supplies are dwindling, how we're
using up our stocks of coal and fuel oil with no immediate hope of
replacement--you know all that."

"We sure do, Hector," somebody called out.

"Yes; so, as I say, I'm not going to talk about what the problem is. We
don't need words--we need action."

He paused as if he expected a cheer, or applause, but the crowd merely
waited for him to go on.

"If Superior had been hit by a flood or a tornado," Civek said, "we
could look to the Red Cross and the State or Federal Government for
help. But we've been the victims of a far greater misfortune, torn from
the bosom of Mother Earth and flung--"

"Oh, come on, Hector," an old woman said. "We're getting froze."

"I'm sorry about that, Mrs. Potts," Civek said. "You should be home
where it's warm."

"We ran out of coal for the furnace and now we're running out of logs.
Are you going to do something about that?"

"I'll tell you what I'm going to do, Mrs. Potts, for you and all the
other wonderful people here tonight. We're going to put a stop to this
lawlessness we never had before. We're going to make Superior a place to
be proud of. Superior has changed--risen, you might say, to a new
status. We're more than a town, now. We're free and separate, not only
from Ohio, but from the United States.

"We're a sovereign place, a--a sovereignty, and we need new methods to
cope with new conditions, to restore law and order, to see that all our
subjects--our citizen-subjects--are provided for."

The crowd had become hushed as Civek neared his point.

"To that noble end," Civek went on, "I dedicate myself, and I take this
momentous step and hereby proclaim the existence of the Kingdom of
Superior"--he paused to take a deep breath--"and proclaim myself its
first King."

He stopped. His oratory had carried him to a climax and he didn't quite
know where to go from there. Maybe he expected cheers to carry him over,
but none came. There was complete silence except for the crackling of
the bonfires.

But after a moment there was a shuffling of feet and a whispering that
grew to a murmur. Then out of the murmur came derisive shouts and
catcalls.

"King Hector the First!" somebody hooted. "Long live the king!"

The words could have been gratifying but the tone of voice was all
wrong.

"Where's Hector's crown?" somebody else cried. "Hey, Jack, did you
forget to bring the crown?"

"Yeah," Jack said. "I forgot. But I got a rope over on my truck. We
could elevate him that way."

Jack was obviously joking, but a group of men in another part of the
crowd pushed toward the platform. "Yeah," one of them said, "let's
string him up."

A woman at the back of the crowd screamed. Two hairy figures about five
feet tall appeared from the darkness. They were kangaroo-like, with long
tails. No one tried to stop them, and the creatures reached the platform
and pulled Hector down. They placed him between them and, their way
clear now, began to hop away.

Their hops grew longer as they reached the edge of the square. Their
leaps had become prodigious as they disappeared in the direction of
North Lake, Civek in his heavy coat looking almost like one of them.

Don Cort couldn't tell whether the creatures were kidnaping Civek or
rescuing him.




VIII


Hector Civek hadn't been found by the time Judge Helms' court convened
at 10:00 A.M.

Joe Negus was there, wearing a new suit and looking confident. His
confederate, Hank Stacy, was obviously trying to achieve the same poise
but not succeeding. Jerry Lynch, their lawyer, was talking to Ed Clark.

Don Cort took a seat the editor had saved for him in the front row. Alis
Garet came in and sat next to him. "I cut my sociology class," she told
him. "Anybody find His Majesty yet?"

"No," Don said. "Who gave him that crackpot idea?"

"He's had big ideas ever since he ran for the State Assembly. He got
licked then, but this is the first time he's been kidnaped. Or should it
be kanganaped? Poor Hector. I shouldn't joke about it."

Judge Helms, who was really a justice of the peace, came in through a
side door and the clerk banged his gavel. But the business of the court
did not get under way immediately. Someone burst in from the street and
shouted:

"He's back! Civek's back!"

The people at the rear of the room rushed out to see. In a moment they
were crowding back in behind Hector Civek's grand entrance.

"Oh, no," Alis said. "Don't tell me he made it this time!"

Civek was wearing the trappings of royalty. He walked with dignity down
the aisle, an ermine robe on his shoulders, a crown on his head and a
scepter in his right hand.

He nodded benignly about him. "Good morning, Judge," he said. To the
clerk he said, "Frank, see to our horses, will you?"

"Horses?" the clerk said, blinking.

"Our royal coach is without, and the horses need attending to," Civek
said patiently. "You don't think a king walks, do you?"

The clerk went out, puzzled. Judge Helms took off his pince-nez and
regarded the spectacle of Hector Civek in ermine.

"What is all this, Hector?" he asked. "You weren't serious about that
king business, were you? Nice to see you back safe, by the way."

"We would prefer to be addressed the first time as Your Majesty, Judge,"
Civek said. "After that you can call us sir."

"Us?" the judge asked. "Somebody with you?"

"The royal 'we,'" Civek said. "I see I'll have to issue a proclamation
on the proper forms of address. I mean, _we'll_ have to. Takes a bit of
getting used to, doesn't it?"

"Quite a bit," the judge agreed. "But right now, if you don't mind, this
court is in session and has a case before it. Suppose you make your
royal self comfortable and we'll get on with it--as soon as my clerk is
back from attending to the royal horses."

The clerk returned and whispered in the judge's ear. Helms looked at
Civek and shook his head. "Six of them, eh? I'll have a look later.
Right now we've got a bank robbery case on the calendar."

Vincent Grande talked and Jerry Lynch talked and Judge Helms listened
and looked up statutes and pursed his lips thoughtfully. Joe Negus
cleaned his nails. Hank Stacy bit his.

Finally the judge said, "I hate to admit this, but I'm afraid I must
agree with you, counselor. The alleged crime contravened no local
statute, and in the absence of a representative of the Federal
Government I must regretfully dismiss the charges."

Joe Negus promptly got up and began to walk out.

"Just a minute there, varlet!"

It was Hector Civek doing his king bit.

Negus, who probably had been called everything else in his life, paused
and looked over his shoulder.

"Approach!" Civek thundered.

"Nuts, Your Kingship," Negus said. "Nobody stops me now." But before he
got to the door something stopped him in mid-stride.

Civek had pointed his scepter at Negus in that instant. Negus, stiff as
a stop-action photograph, toppled to the floor.

"Now," Civek said, motioning to Judge Helms to vacate the bench, "we'll
dispense some royal justice."

He sat down, arranging his robes and shifting his heavy crown. "Mr.
Counselor Lynch, we take it you represent the defendants?"

"Yes, Your Majesty," said the lawyer, an adaptable man. "What happened
to Negus, sir? Is he dead?"

"He could have been, if we'd given him another notch. No, he's just
suspended. Let him be an example to anyone else who might incur our
royal wrath. Now, counselor, we are familiar enough with the case to
render an impartial verdict. We find the defendants guilty of bank
robbery."

"But Your Majesty," Lynch said, "bank robbery is not a crime under the
laws of Superior. I submit that there has been no crime--inasmuch as the
incident occurred after Superior became detached from Earth, and
therefore from its laws."

"There is the King's Law," Civek said. "We decree bank robbery a crime,
together with all other offenses against the county, state and country
which are not specifically covered in Superior's statutes."

"Retroactively?" Lynch asked.

"Of course. We will now pronounce sentence. First, restitution of the
money, except for ten per cent to the King's Bench. Second, indefinite
paralysis for Negus. We'll straighten out his arms and legs so he'll
take up less room. Third, probation for Hank Stacy here, with a warning
to him to stay out of bad company. Court's adjourned."

Civek wouldn't say where he'd got the costume or the coach-and-six or
the paralyzing scepter. He refused to say where the two kangaroo-like
creatures had taken him. He allowed his ermine to be fingered, holding
the scepter out of reach, talked vaguely about better times to come now
that Superior was a monarchy, then ordered his coach.

By royal decree Hank Stacy, who had been inching toward the door, became
royal coachman, commanded to serve out his probation in the king's
custody. Stacy drove Civek home. No one seemed to remember who had been
at the reins when the coach first appeared.




IX


Ed Clark was setting type for an extra when Don and Alis visited his
shop.

KING'S IN BUSINESS, the headline said.

"You don't sound like a loyal subject," Don said.

"Can't say I am," Clark admitted. "Guess I won't get to be a royal
printer."

"What's the story about?" Alis asked. "The splendid triumph of justice
in court this morning?"

"No. Everybody knows all about that already. I've got the inside
story--what happens next. Just like _The New York Times_."

"Where'd you get it?" Don asked.

Clark winked. "Like Scotty Reston, I am not at liberty to divulge my
sources. Let's just say it was learned authoritatively."

"Well," Alis said, "what does happen next?"

"'His Unconstitutional Majesty, King Hector I, will attempt to prop up
his shaky monarchy by seeking an ambassador from the United States, the
