the one which came into Manila declared that when the other vessel was
no more than two miles away, white foam suddenly appeared on the sea
just in front of her. A geyser of unsubstantial white stuff spouted up
and spread, shooting up about thirty feet on the water. The bow of the
other sailing ship entered the foam patch. And suddenly her bow tilted
downward, her masts swayed forward, and the entire ship vanished into
the white stuff, exactly as if she had sailed over a precipice. She did
not sink. She dropped. She "fell" under water--under the foam--her sails
still spread. One instant she sailed proudly. The next instant she was
gone.

The position of such an incredible happening was roughly given. It was
almost exactly the same as the position written on the photograph of
foam taken from the air. At the margin of the Luzon Deep.

Terry found that his indignation had evaporated. The reason for it still
remained, but now he wanted to know more about this happening and about
the spheres of plastic with those deftly designed but enigmatic
inclusions. The plastic objects had a purpose. He wanted to know what.
And the news clipping....

Having announced crossly that he would ask to be set ashore as soon as
the fish-driving unit was tested, he was ashamed to take it back. He
stayed below, now angry at himself again. Nobody came below. Deirdre did
not descend to cook. Night fell. Well after nightfall he heard movements
on deck, and presently a voice which sounded oddly distant. The
_Esperance's_ course changed abruptly. The quality of her motion altered
once more.

He went abovedecks. Twilight was long over, but the moon was not yet up.
Here and there a wave-tip frothed, and blue luminescence appeared. Here
and there a streak of dim blue light could be seen under water, where
some fish darted. But those dartings were rare. Despite the yacht's
shining wake and the curling wave-tips, the sea was darker than usual.

Nick's voice came from aloft, faint and eerie and seeming to come from
the stars.

"... farther to port.... Two points ..."

Terry could see the masthead weaving and swaying against the stars, with
a small dark silhouette clinging to it: Nick. The yacht began to swing.
On one bearing she pounded heavily. The seas could hit her squarely, and
they did. Figures moved swiftly about the deck, loosening sheets or
tightening them. Nick's voice again, from overhead.

"Stea-a-a-dy!"

The _Esperance_ ceased to turn. Rushing, pounding water sprayed in the
air. The waves splashed upon the hull of the yacht, which was sweeping
along on a quartering wind.

For a while no one talked. Tony stood at the wheel, with Davis nearby,
by the binnacle light. Terry could see Davis glancing into the binnacle,
then gazing at the horizon ahead, and then aloft, where Nick seemed to
swing among low-hanging stars.

"Ri-i-i-ght!" he called from high overhead. "Steady as she goes."

The _Esperance_ sailed on, over the surging seas. Waves came out of
nowhere, leaped beside the yacht and then went by--to nowhere. It was
hard to believe that the yacht actually moved forward. She seemed to
stay perpetually in the one spot. But there was a winding, sinuous wake,
and there was froth under her forefoot.

Then a vague brightness appeared on the sea, at the limit of vision. It
spread out more widely as the _Esperance_ approached. Presently it was
clearly visible.

Dead ahead, the beam of the headlight suddenly revealed an incredible
spectacle. Until then there had been just a few flashes in the water,
where some fish darted away from the yacht's bulk. But here the entire
surface of the water shone with thousands and thousands of fish. They
were packed in a sharply delimited circle about a mile wide. When the
_Esperance_ got close enough, she hauled up into the wind to look.

From a spot fifty yards ahead, the sea was alive with a million frantic
dartings of swimming things. They were crowded, packed almost
fin-to-fin. And it was not a surface phenomenon only. From the yacht's
deck the streaks of light were visible deep down, as far as the clear
water would let them be seen. They formed a column of glittering chaos.
The vast circle, to an indefinite depth, was packed solid with agitated
fish. At that edge of brightness the thronging creatures were splashing
in a mad frenzy. Solid shining shapes leaped crazily from the water.
Some leaped again and again, until they reached the spot where the
flashes were thickest, and got lost in the multitude of their fellows. A
few escaped to the darker surrounding sea. They seemed to run away in
stark terror. But those were only a few. The greatest mass of fish
milled crazily inside the circle. There were even porpoises, darting
about as if frightened beyond all normal behavior, not even trying to
feed on the equally fear-maddened creatures all about them.




_Three_


Terry stared incredulously. Someone moved beside him. It was Davis. He
spoke in a dry voice.

"I would think," he said detachedly, "that _La Rubia_ could catch a
boatload of fish in that water with a single haul of her nets. Certainly
with two."

Terry turned his head.

"But what is it? What makes these fish gather like this?"

"An interesting question," said Davis. "We'll try to find out how it
happens. Even more interesting, I'd like to know why."

He moved away along the deck. Terry went close to the side rail. A few
minutes later the startling glare of one of the side searchlights smote
upon the water away from the incredible scene. It moved slowly back and
forth. Where the light struck, the sea seemed totally commonplace. No
fish could be seen. Then the white beam swept here and there in jerky
leapings. There was nothing unusual on the surface, nothing beyond the
limit of brightness, where the sea turned dark.

Deirdre said at Terry's side, "We didn't really expect this! I'm going
to get a sample of the water, Terry. Want to help?"

She ignored his haughty withdrawal of the afternoon, and he could not
stand on his dignity in the presence of such an incredible phenomenon.
She got a water bucket from the nearby rack. A wave sprung up as she
tried to fill the bucket overside. It touched her hand and she cried
out. Terry jerked her back by the shoulder. The bucket bumped against
the _Esperance's_ side, hanging on the line attached to the rail.

"What's the matter?"

"It stung! The water stung! Like a nettle!" Shaking a little, Deirdre
rubbed her wet hand with the other. "It doesn't hurt now, but it was
like a stinging nettle--or an electric shock!"

Terry hauled in the bucket and set it down. He leaned far over the rail.
He plunged his hand into a lifting pinnacle of the sea. Instantly, his
skin felt as if pricked by ten thousand needles. But his muscles did not
contract as they would in an electric shock. The sensation was on the
surface of his skin alone.

He shook his head impatiently. He put his finger in the bucket he'd
lifted to the deck. There was no unusual sensation. He dipped overside
again. Again acute and startling hurt, from the mere contact with the
water.

Deirdre still rubbed her hand. She said in a queer, surprised voice,

"Like pins and needles. It's like--like the fish-driving paddle! But
worse! Much worse!"

Terry looked again at the sea glittering with the swarms of fish in
hopeless, panicked agitation, confined in a specific narrow compass by
something unguessable. The searchlight continued to flick here and
there. The _Esperance_ drifted away from the edge of brightness. Terry
put his hand overside once more, and once more he felt the stinging,
nettle-like sensation. He got a fresh bucket of water from overside. On
deck, there was no strange sensation when he dipped his hand in it.

The searchlight went out abruptly and only a faint and quickly dimming
reddish glow came from it. That too died.

Davis' voice gave orders. Terry said sharply, "Wait a minute!" He began
to explain about the stinging of the water. But then he said, "Deirdre,
you tell him! I'm going to put a submarine ear overboard. At the least
we'll get fish noises on a new scale. But I've got an idea ... don't
sail into the bright circle yet."

He got out the submarine ear and the recorder he'd made ready that
afternoon. He started the recorder. Then he trailed the microphone
overside. The sounds would be heard live through the speaker and they
would be taped at the same time. At first, a blaring, confused sound
came through. Terry turned down the volume.

He heard gruntings and chirpings and rustlings. Fish made those
noises--not all fish, but certain species. These shrill, squeaking
noises were the protests of frightened porpoises. But under and through
all other sounds, a steady, unvarying hum could be easily detected.
Terry had never heard anything quite like it. Its pitch was the same as
that of a sixty-cycle frequency, but its tone quality was somehow
sardonic and snarling. The word that came into Terry's mind was "nasty."
Yes, it was a nasty sound. One didn't like it. One would want to get
away from it. In the air the same unpleasant sensation is produced by
noises that make one's flesh crawl.

Terry straightened up from where the recorder played upon the wet deck.
Davis and Deirdre had come to listen, in the strange darkness under the
sails of the _Esperance_.

"I've got a sort of hunch," said Terry slowly. "Let's sail across the
bright patch. I'll record the sea noises all the way. I've a feeling
that that hum means something."

"It's not what you'd call an ordinary sound," said Davis.

He raised his voice. One of the crew-cuts was at the schooner's wheel.
He spun it. The sails filled, and the rattling of flapping canvas died
away. The _Esperance_ gathered way and moved swiftly from the glittering
circle, came about, and sailed again toward the shining area. She got
closer and closer to the boundary.

The recorder continued to give out the confused and frightened noises of
the sea creatures, but under and through their sounds there remained the
nasty and sardonic hum. It grew louder and more unpleasant--much louder
in proportion to the fish sounds. At the very boundary of the bright
space it was loudest of all.

But as the yacht went on, the hum dimmed. At the very center of the
circle where the glitterings were brightest, the humming sound was
overwhelmed by the submarine tumult of senseless fish voices. Terry
dipped his hand here. The tingling was almost tolerable, but not quite.

Davis hauled more buckets of water to the deck. In two of them he found
some fish, so dense was the finny multitude. Then the yacht neared the
farthest limit of the bright circle. The hum from the recording
instrument grew progressively louder. Again, at the very edge of the
shining water, it was loudest.

The _Esperance_ sailed across the live boundary and into the dark sea.
As the boat went on, the sound dimmed....

"Definitely loudest," said Terry absorbedly, "at the edge of the circle
of fish. At the line the fish couldn't cross to escape. It is if there
were an electric fence in the sea. It felt like that, too. But there
isn't any fence."

Davis asked evenly, "Question: what holds them crowded?"

Terry said again, groping in his mind, "They act like fish in a closing
net. I've seen something like this once, when a purse-seine was hauled.
Those fish were frantic because they couldn't get away. Just like
these."

"Why can't they get away?" asked Davis grimly. "We haven't seen anything
holding them."

"But we heard something," pointed out Deirdre. "The hum. That may be
what closes them in."

Her father made a grunting noise. "We'll see about that."

He moved away, back to the stern. In moments, the _Esperance_ was
beating upwind. Presently, she headed back toward her previous position,
but outside the brightness. Terry could see dark silhouettes moving
about near the yacht's wheel. Then he saw another brightness at the
eastern horizon, but that was in the sky. Almost as soon as he noticed
it, the moon peered over the edge of the world, and climbed slowly to
full view, and then swam up among the lower-hanging stars.

Immediately, the look of the sea was different. The waves no longer
seemed to race the darkness with only star glitters on their flanks. The
figures at the _Esperance's_ stern were now quite distinct in the
moonlight.

"You said a very sensible thing, Deirdre," said Terry. "I thought of the
fish-driving paddle and its effects, but I was ashamed to mention it. I
thought it would sound foolish. But when you said it, it didn't."

"I have a talent," said Deirdre, "for making foolish things sound
sensible. Or perhaps the reverse. I'm going to say a sensible thing now.
We haven't had dinner. I'm going to fix something to eat."

"You won't get anybody to go belowdecks right now!" said Terry.

"I thought of that," she told him. "Sandwiches."

She went below. Terry continued to watch, while figures at the stern of
the schooner went through an involved process of visual measurement. It
was not simple to determine the dimensions of a patch of shimmering
light flashes from a boat in motion. But presently, Davis came toward
him.

"It's thirteen hundred yards across," he told Terry. "Plus or minus
twenty."

"I didn't expect all this," Davis said, frowning. "I've been making
guesses and hoping fervently that I was wrong. And I have been, but each
time the proof that I was wrong has led to new guesses, and I'm afraid
to think those guesses may be right."

"I can't begin to guess yet," said Terry.

"You will!" Davis assured him. "You will! You try to add up things.... A
half-mile-wide patch of foam that piles up thirty feet above the
sea...."

"And into which," Terry interrupted, "a sailing ship does not sink but
drops out of sight as if there were a hole in the sea."

Davis turned sharply toward him.

"There were some photographs and a newspaper clipping on the cabin
table," explained Terry. "I suspected they might have been put there for
me to see."

"Deirdre, perhaps," said Davis. "She's resolved to involve you in this.
You've got scruples, so she suspects you of having brains. Yes. You'll
add those things up. You'll include the remarkable success of a fishing
boat named _La Rubia_ and the fact that she sometimes brings in very
strange fish ... And then you'll add ..."

His eyes flickered aloft. A shooting star streaked across one-third of
the sky leaving a trail of light behind it. Then it went out.

"You'll even be tempted," said Davis, "to include something like that in
your guesses! And then you'll try to come up with a total for the lot.
Then you'll be as troubled as I am."

He paused a moment.

"You said you wanted to be put ashore as soon as the gadget you made
today was tested. I hope you've changed your mind, or will. That
tape-recording may mean something to somebody. We wouldn't have heard
that very singular noise but for you."
