battle raged over five acres. Ten. Thousands upon thousands of black,
glistening, stinking creatures tore at each other in murderous ferocity.
Whining, squealing battle-cries arose and almost drowned out the deeper
notes of larger but invisible creatures off in the mist.

Moran and Harper got back to the _Nadine_ by a wide detour past warriors
preoccupied with each other just before the battle reached its most
savage stage. In that stage, the space-yacht was included in the
battleground. Fights went on about its landing-fins. Horrifying duels
could be followed by scrapings and bumpings against its hull. From the
yacht's ports the fighting ants looked like infuriated machines, engaged
in each other's destruction. One might see a warrior of unidentified
allegiance with its own abdomen ripped open, furiously rending an enemy
without regard to its own mortal wound. There were those who had
literally been torn in half, so that only head and thorax remained, but
they fought on no less valiantly than the rest.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the edges of the fighting such cripples were more numerous. Ants with
antenna shorn off or broken, with legs missing, utterly doomed,--they
sometimes wandered forlornly beyond the fighting, the battle seemingly
forgotten. But even such dazed and incapacitated casualties came upon
each other. If they smelled alike, they ignored each other. Every
ant-city has its particular smell which its inhabitants share.
Possession of the national odor is at once a certificate of citizenship
in peacetime and a uniform in war. When such victims of the battle came
upon enemy walking wounded, they fought.

And the giant praying mantis remained placidly and invulnerably still.
It plucked single fighters from the battle and dined upon them while
they struggled, and plucked other fighters, and consumed them. It
ignored the battle and the high purpose and self-sacrificing patriotism
of the ants. Immune to them and disregarded by them, it fed on them
while the battle raged.

Presently the gray light overhead turned faintly pink, and became a
deeper tint and then crimson. In time there was darkness. The noise of
battle ended. The sounds of the day diminished and ceased, and other
monstrous outcries took their place.

There were bellowings in the blackness without the _Nadine_. There were
chirpings become baritone, and senseless uproars which might be
unbelievable modifications of once-shrill and once-tranquil night-sounds
of other worlds. And there came a peculiar, steady, unrhythmic pattering
sound. It seemed like something falling upon the blanket-like upper
surface of the soil.

Moran opened the airlock door and thrust out a torch to see. Its
intolerably bright glare showed the battlefield abandoned. Most of the
dead and wounded had been carried away. Which, of course, was not
solicitude for the wounded or reverence for the dead heroes. Dead ants,
like dead centipedes, were booty of the only kind the creatures of this
world could know. The dead were meat. The wounded were dead before they
were carried away.

Moran peered out, with Carol looking affrightedly over his shoulder. The
air seemed to shine slightly in the glare of the torch. The pattering
sound was abruptly explained. Large, slow, widely-separated raindrops
fell heavily and steadily from the cloud-banks overhead. Moran could see
them strike. Each spot of wetness glistened briefly. Then the rain-drop
was absorbed by the ground.

But there were other noises than the ceaseless tumult on the ground.
There were sounds in the air; the beating of enormous wings. Moran
looked up, squinting against the light. There were things moving about
the black sky. Gigantic things.

Something moved, too, across the diminishingly lighted surface about the
yacht. There were glitterings. Shining armor. Multi-faceted eyes. A
gigantic, horny, spiked object crawled toward the torch-glare,
fascinated by it. Something else dived insanely. It splashed upon the
flexible white surface twenty yards away, and struggled upward and took
crazily off again. It careened blindly.

       *       *       *       *       *

It hit the yacht, a quarter-ton of night-flying beetle. The air seemed
filled with flying things. There were moths with twenty-foot wings and
eyes which glowed like rubies in the torch's light. There were beetles
of all sizes from tiny six-inch things to monsters in whom Moran did not
believe even when he saw them. All were drawn by the light which should
not exist under the cloud-bank. They droned and fluttered and performed
lunatic evolutions, coming always closer to the flame.

Moran cut off the torch and closed the lock-door from the inside.

"We don't load bessendium tonight," he said with some grimness. "To have
no light, with what crawls about in the darkness, would be suicide. But
to use lights would be worse. If you people are going to salvage the
stuff in that wreck, you'll have to wait for daylight. At least then you
can see what's coming after you."

They went into the yacht proper. There was no longer any question about
the planet's air. If insects which were descendents of terrestrial forms
could breathe it, so could men. When the first insect-eggs were brought
here, the air had to be fit for them if they were to survive. It would
not have changed.

Burleigh sat in the control-room with a double handful of purple
crystals before him.

"This," he said when Moran and Carol reentered, "this is bessendium past
question. I've been thinking what it means."

"Money," said Moran drily. "You'll all be rich. You'll probably retire
from politics."

"That wasn't exactly what I had in mind," said Burleigh distastefully.
"You've gotten us into the devil of a mess, Moran!"

"For which," said Moran with ironic politeness, "there is a perfect
solution. You kill me, either directly or by leaving me marooned here."

Burleigh scowled.

"We have to land at space-ports for supplies. We can't hope to hide you,
it's required that landed ships be sterilized against infections from
off-planet. We can't pass you as a normal passenger. You're not on the
ship's papers and they're alteration-proof. Nobody's ever been able to
change a ship's papers and not be caught! We could land and tell the
truth, that you hijacked the ship and we finally overpowered you. But
there are reasons against that."

"Naturally!" agreed Moran. "I'd be killed anyhow and you'd be subject to
intensive investigation. And you're fugitives as much as I am."

"Just so," admitted Burleigh.

Moran shrugged.

"Which leaves just one answer. You maroon me and go on your way."

       *       *       *       *       *

Burleigh said painfully;

"There's this bessendium. If there's more--especially if there's
more--we can leave you here with part of it. When we get far enough
away, we charter a ship to come and get you. It'll be arranged.
Somebody will be listed as of that ship's company, but he'll slip away
from the space-port and not be on board at all. Then you're picked up
and landed using his name."

"If," said Moran ironically, "I am alive when the ship gets here. If I'm
not, the crew of the chartered ship will be in trouble, short one man on
return to port. You'll have trouble getting anybody to run that risk!"

"We're trying to work out a way to save you!" insisted Burleigh angrily.
"Harper would have been killed but for you. And--this bessendium will
finance the underground work that will presently make a success of our
revolution. We're grateful! We're trying to help you!"

"So you maroon me," said Moran. Then he said; "But you've skipped the
real problem! If anything goes wrong, Carol's in it! There's no way to
do anything without risk for her! That's the problem! I could kill all
you characters, land somewhere on a colonized planet exactly as you
landed here, and be gone from the yacht on foot before anybody could
find me! But I have a slight aversion to getting a girl killed or
killing her just for my own convenience. It's settled. I stay here. You
can try to arrange the other business if you like. But it's a bad
gamble."

Carol was very pale. Burleigh stood up.

"You said that, I didn't. But I don't think we should leave you here. Up
near the ice-cap should be infinitely better for you. We'll load the
rest of the bessendium tomorrow, find you a place, leave you a beacon,
and go."

He went out. Carol turned a white face to Moran.

"Is that--is that the real trouble? Do you really--"

Moran looked at her stonily.

"I like to make heroic gestures," he told her. "Actually, Burleigh's a
very noble sort of character himself. He proposes to leave me with
treasure that he could take. Even more remarkably, he proposes to divide
up what you take, instead of applying it all to further his political
ideals. Most men like him would take it all for the revolution!"

"But--but--."

Carol's expression was pure misery. Moran walked deliberately across the
control-room. He glanced out of a port. A face looked in. It filled the
transparent opening. It was unthinkable. It was furry. There were
glistening chitinous areas. There was a proboscis like an elephant's
trunk, curled horribly. The eyes were multiple and mad.

It looked in, drawn and hypnotized by the light shining out on this
nightmare world from the control-room ports.

Moran touched the button that closed the shutters.


III.

When morning came, its arrival was the exact reversal of the coming of
night. In the beginning there was darkness, and in the darkness there
was horror.

The creatures of the night untiringly filled the air with sound, and the
sounds were discordant and gruesome and revolting. The creatures of this
planet were gigantic. They should have adopted new customs appropriate
to the dignity of their increased size. But they hadn't. The manners and
customs of insects are immutable. They feed upon specific prey--spiders
are an exception, but they are not insects at all--and they lay their
eggs in specific fashion in specific places, and they behave according
to instincts which are so detailed as to leave them no choice at all in
their actions. They move blindly about, reacting like automata of
infinite complexity which are capable of nothing not built into them
from the beginning. Centuries and millenia do not change them. Travel
across star-clusters leaves them with exactly the capacities for
reaction that their remotest ancestors had, before men lifted off
ancient Earth's green surface.

The first sign of dawn was deep, deep, deepest red in the cloud-bank no
more than fifteen hundred feet overhead. The red became brighter, and
presently was as brilliant as dried blood. Again presently it was
crimson over all the half-mile circle that human eyes could penetrate.
Later still--but briefly--it was pink. Then the sky became gray. From
that color it did not change again.

Moran joined Burleigh in a survey of the landscape from the
control-room. The battlefield was empty now. Of the thousands upon
thousands of stinking combatants who'd rent and torn each other the
evening before, there remained hardly a trace. Here and there, to be
sure, a severed saw-toothed leg remained. There were perhaps as many as
four relatively intact corpses not yet salvaged. But something was being
done about them.

There were tiny, brightly-banded beetles hardly a foot long which
labored industriously over such frayed objects. They worked agitatedly
in the yeasty stuff which on this world took the place of soil. They
excavated, beneath the bodies of the dead ants, hollows into which those
carcasses could descend. They pushed the yeasty, curdy stuff up and
around the sides of those to-be-desired objects. The dead warriors sank
little by little toward oblivion as the process went on. The up-thrust,
dug-out material collapsed upon them as they descended. In a very
little while they would be buried where no larger carrion-eater would
discover them, and then the brightly-colored sexton beetles would begin
a banquet to last until only fragments of chitinous armor remained.

       *       *       *       *       *

But Moran and Burleigh, in the _Nadine's_ control-room, could hardly
note such details.

"You saw the cargo," said Burleigh, frowning. "How's it packed? The
bessendium, I mean."

"It's in small boxes too heavy to be handled easily," said Moran.
"Anyhow the _Malabar's_ crew broke some of them open to load the stuff
on their lifeboats."

"The lifeboats are all gone?"

"Naturally," said Moran. "At a guess they'd have used all of them even
if they didn't need them for the crew. They could carry extra food and
weapons and such."

"How much bessendium is left?"

"Probably twenty boxes unopened," said Moran. "I can't guess at the
weight, but it's a lot. They opened six boxes." He paused. "I have a
suggestion."

"What?"

