Plagiarism?

In some cases, the authors do put some good science into their
stories, although, for the most part, they write the stf stories, and
forget to explain the method of science used. Others put some science
in, but make it as brief as possible. And in no case, is the author's
name given in the magazines. Evidently they believe in playing safe,
because there ARE copyright laws in that country!




MY SCIENCE FICTION COLLECTION

by Forrest J. Ackerman


(It is well-known that Mr. Ackerman is the most active science fiction
fan. His collection is the most unique, if not the largest in the
world. You will be surprised to learn of the various things beside the
stories themselves that can be collected.)

My files of the stf publications edited by Gernsback, Bates, Dr.
Sloane, and Rose Bolton (Miracle Stories) are complete. I think that
covers in a breath the 230 copies of standard stf. magazines.

In the line of further written material I have: the Amazing Stories
booklet, "Vanguard of Venus"; Gernsback's 18 stf. booklets, and the
one Science Fiction Classic; "Guests of the Earth," the first
Fantastic Fiction Library publication; all of the Science Fiction
Library's releases; thirty-two booklets, mostly English, including
such titles as "A Round Trip to the Year 2000, The Robot Man, Invaders
from Mars," etc; the illustrated Buck Rogers book of the 25th century;
164 bound amazing stories from Argosy, Weird Tales, Popular,
Excitement, etc, with a quarter of a hundred more in the process of
being made into books--including such stories of outstanding interest
as "The Blind Spot, Men from Space, The Girl in the Golden Atom,
Return of George Washington, Snake Mother," and other tales of
considerable value and popularity; the science fiction from Science
and Invention bound from as far back as 1921, the stories being,
besides the thirty or more Dr. Hackensaw's Secrets, Ray Cummings'
"Around the Universe," and a number of short stf tales. The special
science fiction edition of this publication is also included. Copies
of the futuristic cartoon strip, Buck Rogers, and such other newspaper
stf. as the illustrated interplanetaryarn "Rocketing thru the
Universe," another called "Into the Deeps of Space," Clinton
Constantinescu's "The Martian Menace" and other miscellaneous works
finish up that part of my collection.

As for books themselves, I am not so interested in them, but do have
"The Day of the Brown Horde", "Moon Terror", "Ralph 124C 41+", "Ship
of Ishtar", "Purple Sapphire", "Conquest of Space" autographed,
"Planet of Peril" and works of Burroughs, Rockwood, etc.

(Next month Mr. Ackerman continues and tells about the more singular
sections of his collections--don't miss it.)




MY FAVORITE FANTASY STORY

by Allen Glasser


The first worthwhile work of scientific fantasy which I read was H. G.
Wells' "Time Machine." I encountered it a good many years ago, and I
have since read countless other scientales; but my affection and
esteem for "The Time Machine" has not wavered, nor do I believe I will
ever have occasion to revise my opinion of it as the finest piece of
science fiction ever written.

"The Time Machine" is outstanding as the most original of all
time-travelling stories, and also as a fictional forerunner of
Einstein's concept of the fourth dimension. But even were it not
famous on these two accounts, it would live because of its tense
drama, its superb imagination.




ABOUT AUTHORS


The two authors with the most stories to their credit are Dr. David H.
Keller and Clark Ashton Smith, with Edmond Hamilton and Seabury Quinn
about tie for third place.... "An Adventure on Eros" in the September,
1931 Wonder Stories by J. Harvey Haggard was the shortest story ever
to cop a cover, and C. Siodmak's "Eggs From Lake Tanganyika" in the
July, 1926 Amazing was the next shortest.... Out of about thirty
stories written by Robert E. Howard, two have appeared in Strange
Tales and the rest in Weird.... Five fantasy authors are Nard, Neil
R., Ralph T., T. R., and W. Knapp Jones. Keller has collaborated on
only one story; "The Time Projector" with David Lasser in Wonder....
Raymond Knight, 'Ambrose J. Weims' of the KUKU radio program wrote the
only play Amazing ever published: "Just Around the Corner" in the
July, 1928 issue.... After having several stories published, W. K.
Mashburn, Jr., changed his name to Kirk Mashburn.... Philip Francis
Nowlan's yarns in Amazing: "Armageddon, 2419, A.D." (August, 1928)
and "Airlords of Han" (March, 1929) were the forerunners of the Buck
Rogers comic strip and the radio program.... Fletcher Pratt's stories,
except for "The War of the Giants," "The Mad Destroyer," and "The
Onslaught From Rigel," are all collaborations.... Seabury Quinn has
the honor of having the longest series of stories to his credit. Jules
de Grandin, the little French detective has been a favorite of fantasy
readers for more than eight years, and has appeared in more than forty
stories.... Victor Rousseau was the only author to have more than one
story in Miracle, Science and Fantasy Stories.... "The Moon Doom" in
Wonder was written by four authors, and was surpassed by the Science
Fiction Digest's super-serial composed by seventeen authors.... More
next month....




EARTHLING SPURNS MARTIAN!

Inhabitant of Neighboring Planet

Doubts Visitor's Origin

(Special rocket dispatch to Martian News)

by Allen Glasser, Terrestrial Correspondent


SANFRAN-SISKO, Earth, Aug. 10: [delayed by meteors]--An amusing
incident occurred here today when Sahr Kastik, Martian explorer who is
