story "The Color of Space."

That Forrest J. Ackerman used to correspond regularly with 115 fans.

That Jack Williamson is a cowboy.

That Charles Cloukey was fifteen years old when he sold his first
story.

That the mystery novel, "The 13th Murder," refers to Amazing Stories
and Weird Tales as "detective and mystery fiction"--and they ring
Saturn!

That the story, "Warriors of Space," featured in the first issue of
Science Wonder Stories, was a sequel to "The World in the Balance," in
an old Argosy.

That Hugo Gernsback conducted a contest in Science & Invention to
obtain a name for his projected magazine--named Amazing Stories after
the winner was announced.

That P. Schuyler Miller had a B.S. and an M.S. degree before he was 21.




MY SCIENCE FICTION COLLECTION

by Forrest J. Ackerman

Part Five


More for my own satisfaction than anything else, is the second part of
this last division of my collection; "stills." These are scenes from a
score of fantasy pictures ranging in size from 5" x to 11" x 14", and
in subjects from prehistoric monsters of 10,000,000 years ago to
exploring interplanetary parties of the future. There are many scenes
from "Metropolis" of the vast, shining electricity, of the inside
furnishings of the buildings, of the costumes of the people of that
time; and there are pictures of the machinery to run the city, the
underground world, the robotrix, the televisors. From "King Kong" I
have 9 stills: a brontosaurus, an allosaur about to eat a man, Kong on
exhibition in New York, in the jungle with the girl, smashing in a
building, atop the Empire State, etc.

Secured from 'Frankenstein' are pictures of the monster, and his
making in the laboratory. "Just Imagine" offers scenes of
heaven-scraped New York in 1980, of the rocket for Mars, of the nifty
little earthplanes. I have seven interesting pictures from "The Most
Dangerous Game." Laboratories and the death ray of "The Mask of
Fu-Manchu" are included. From Wells' "Island of Lost Souls" there are
photos of the evoluted animals of a hundred thousand years hence;
ape-men, the panther-woman, wolf-creatures, etc. "High Treason" offers
numerous stills: television, the European city, war in 1940, a dance
hall of seven years ahead, the English Channel sub-sea express, a
broadcasted trial, and more. "The Mummy" is shown returning to life,
prehistoric monsters from "The Mystery of Life" are present.
Machinery, experiments, scientists--all from the stf-detective tale,
"Doctor X." I also have several stills from "By Rocket to the Moon,"
such as those showing the model rocket and its trip--also pictures of
Mars, Saturn, the end of the world, and an ethership from "Our
Heavenly Bodies" a scene from "The Lost World," "The Stellar Express,"
and many others.

[In part six, next month, Mr. Ackerman concludes his interesting
article.]




HOW TO COLLECT FANTASY FICTION

by Julius Schwartz

Part Five--Conclusion


Fantasy booklets have appeared at lesser intervals. _Amazing Stories_
put out Landell Bartlet's "Vanguard of Venus" in 1928. Gernsback has
put out 18 science fiction booklets, of which only the last six are
now in print. He likewise issued a reprint of Garret Smith's "Between
Worlds". Mimeographed booklets were put out by Carl Swanson (Edmond
Hamilton's "The Metal Giants", a reprint) and by the Fantasy Fiction
Publications ("Guests of the Earth" by Hugh Langley). The Arra
Printers have put out A. Merritt's "Thru the Dragon Glass," "The
Cavemen of Venus," "The Price of Peace," and Dr. Keller's "Wolf Hollow
Bubbles."

This article wouldn't be complete without mention of the hard-covered
fantasies. It's a hopeless task to try and muster even a tenth of all
the fantasy books. The best way to go about it, however, is to "haunt"
the second-hand book stores and scrutinize any book whose title sounds
promising or inviting.

There's one tantalizing feature connected with the collection of
fantastic fiction: your collection will Never be complete! But this
misfortune has one commendable merit. The collector's interest in
Fantasy fiction will never wane.


The End




SUPERNATURAL HORROR IN LITERATURE

Part Four

by H. P. Lovecraft

(copyright 1927, by W. Paul Cook)

II The Dawn of the Horror Tale


As may naturally be expected of a form so closely connected with
primal emotion, the horror tale is as old as human thought and speech
themselves.

Cosmic terror appears as an ingredient of the earliest folklore of all
races, and is crystalized in the most archaic ballads, chronicles, and
sacred writings. It was, indeed, a prominent feature of the elaborate
ceremonial magic, with its rituals for the evocation of demons and
spectres which flourished from prehistoric times, and which reached
its highest development in Egypt and the Semetic nations. Fragments
like the Book of Enoch and the Claviculae of Solomon well illustrate
the power of the weird over the ancient Eastern mind, and upon such
things were based enduring systems and traditions, whose echoes extend
obscurely even to the present time. Touches of this transcendental
fear are seen in classic literature and there is evidence of its still
greater emphasis in a balled literature which paralleled the classic
stream, but vanished for lack of a written medium. The Middle Ages,
steeped in fanciful darkness, gave it an enormous impulse toward
expression; and East and West alike were busy preserving and
amplifying the dark heritage, both of random folklore and of
academically formulated magic and cabalism, which had descended to
them. Witch, werewolf, vampire, and ghoul brooded ominously on the
lips of bard and grandam, and needed but little encouragement to take
the final step across the boundary that divides the chanted tale or
