a moment, and then went on racing up and down feverishly.

I tried to stop him--grabbed his arm and jerked it--but Ross was a much
bigger and stronger fellow than I am, and he went on without noticing
me. He didn't shake me off, you understand, but just tore on as if he
hadn't even felt my hand. I didn't say anything because I had lost my
voice looking at the terrible picture of his face twisted in some agony
of his mind.

Then he began to speak, throwing his hands about hopelessly, and
swinging his head like a maniac. While I--I just stood there, out of
the path of his walk, panting like I had run ten miles, and listened.

"Great God in Heaven," he cried in a voice that I hope never to hear
again in reality, although I hear it every night in my tortured dreams.

"It can't be ... it's impossible ... I'm going mad ... I _am_ mad!...
what did I ever do to deserve this?... how can it be? oh! how _can_ it
be?"

For a while he just repeated those things until I wanted to scream
out in frenzy. But I didn't do a thing. I could see he was beyond my
reach--beyond anybody's reach.

Then his voice changed, it became low, full of intense energy,
ominously quiet. "What did he say? He said the weather had become
frigidly cold ... that it would not be long ... that soon the Ice would
cover the whole earth...."

Then he stopped a moment, his eyes burned maniacally. "But ... I
know something about geology ... that was over fifty thousand years
ago ... do you hear me?"--he wasn't talking to me, he was talking to
himself--"do you get that?... _fifty thousand years ago!_"

His voice became low and intense again so that my blood turned to
water: "What did he say?... he said to his friend that the land was
being flooded with creatures--maddened men and frenzied animals--that
were retreating before the Ice ... retreating before the Ice ... the
_ice_ ... but good God! I tell you that was fifty thousand years ago!"

Then his voice became high-pitched and sobbing: "Oh! Dear Mary and
Our One God! release me from this mad dream ... save me from the
destruction that will overwhelm me ... how can it be?... it's
impossible ... how _can_ it be?"

He repeated that dozens of times while he rumpled his hair and ground
his teeth.

I mustered up courage and grabbed him by the shoulders. Next moment I
was spinning backward and hit the wall with a thump. I fell down and
stayed there, looking up at Ross with an expression that I sometimes
wonder could be. I know my eyes became salty with tears of mental
agony--maybe it was blood that I sweated out that night.

Then I heard him again, head to one side, staggering like a drunken
man: "The radio was only invented twenty-five years ago ... _this_
was fifty thousand years ago ... what did he say?... he said to his
friend that this would probably be his last broadcast as the heat
coils were running out ... goodbye ... he said ... goodbye, my friend
... civilization is doomed ... the Ice will cover all ... but I know
something about geology, I tell you!... that was over fifty thousand
years ago!... do you see what that means?"

He paused as if expecting an answer, but I knew--my chilled brain told
me--that he wasn't talking to me, didn't know I was there. He was still
arguing with himself.

"You see?... it means that I have received a message broadcast fifty
thousand years ago just before the Ice came! ... that's what it means
... do you hear me?"

Then he fell into a senseless jargon that I knew meant the coming of
the end of his mind's fortitude. It would collapse soon.

"And then," came his voice to me, a bloodcurdling knife of a voice,
"and then, how can you explain that I _understood_ that voice?... tell
me that ... I never heard that language before ... it was just a jumble
at first ... and then ... and then ... in a flash ... I _understood_ it
... just as if I had lived there ... lived there fifty thousand years
ago."

His voice became a wild shriek, a voice that a ghost might have: "Ah!
Saviour! God! How can it be?... how _can_ it be?"

That was all. I sprang to my feet joyfully--as joyfully as I could
after passing through that--and ran to him. The light of madness had
died out of his eyes. He had seen me and recognized me. His shoulders
drooped as if he carried the weight of a world on them.

With a babble of sobs and broken cries I threw my arms around him and
thanked the Lord he had been saved.

He gently disengaged me.

"O.K. Bob," he said weakly. "I'm over it now."

"Darn right you are!" I said more calmly, realizing I must show a
braver front than I had. "And what's more, we're going to get out of
here!"

I took him to the door of his uncle's house and left him there,
satisfied that the crisis was over. Then I went back to the station
and finished up my calls. How I had the courage and fortitude to do
it, I don't know. Before the day shift came in, before I did a lot of
explaining how Ross had been suddenly taken sick in the stomach and had
to go home, I picked up a crumpled piece of paper from the floor, tore
it into little bits, and threw the confetti in a waste paper basket.

I got the news when I went to my room. Norman Ross had committed
suicide at seven o'clock in the morning. That was an hour after I left
him at his door.

       *       *       *       *       *

I told Hegstrom plain out that I wouldn't work that night shift anymore
for love or money. He said he'd have me transferred but would I stay
one more night until he got a new man? Like a fool, I agreed.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was three a.m. that next night that I turned the dial to where the
China Station should come in that had failed once. I sat petrified for
five seconds while I listened to a muffled voice that spoke in hisses
and sharp consonants.

Then I tore the earphones off my head, smashed them against the panel
with all my strength, and dashed out of the room. I remembered seeing
the other operator--the one who had taken my calls--popping his eyes
out. Then I was out in the cool air, panting like I had been running
for hours.

       *       *       *       *       *

So it is that I wonder if I shouldn't escape it all--tossing nights,
cold sweats of stark terror, a tortured, fevered brain? It would be so
easy: a dark night, real dark, you know, so no one would see me and
try to stop me, then the cool water to moisten my feverish brow--nice
cool water, inviting water--just one little splash, not a noisy one--no
one would know--no one would care--no one would understand--just one
splash--and then peace.

       *       *       *       *       *

My friends tell me not to take on so over the death of my one and only
pal. They do not know the story. I have told no one. My friends, they
