remained in place upon the shoulders for what seemed like seconds
before the body toppled and the arteries spurted crimson jets.

He didn't have to hit so hard, then. Good. Nobody could last very long,
the way he had started out. Wherefore the next blow, a vertical chop,
merely split a man to the chin instead of to the navel: and the third,
a back-hand return, didn't quite cut the victim's head clear off.

And the blows his steel was taking, aimed at head or neck or shoulder,
were doing no harm at all. In fact, except for the noise, they scarcely
bothered him. He had been designing and building armor for five years,
and this was his masterpiece. The helmet was heavily padded: the
shoulders twice as much so. He had sacrificed some mobility--he could
not turn his head very far in either direction--but the jointing was
such that the force of any blow on the helmet, from whatever direction
coming, was taken by his tremendously capable shoulders.

The weapons of the mercenaries could not dent, could not even nick,
that case-hardened high-alloy steel. Swords bent, broke, twisted;
hammers and axes bounced harmlessly off. Nevertheless the attackers
pressed forward; and, even though each blow of his devastating sword
took a life, Tedric was forced backward up the stairs, step by step.

Then there came about that for which he had been waiting. A copper-clad
priest appeared behind the last rank of mercenaries, staring upward at
something behind the ironmaster, beckoning frantically. The priest had
split his forces; had sent part of them by another way to the second
floor to trap him between two groups; had come in close to see the trap
sprung. This was it.

Taking a couple of quick, upward, backward steps, he launched himself
into the air with all the power of his legs. And when two hundred and
thirty pounds of man, dressed in eighty or ninety or a hundred pounds
of steel, leaps from a height of eight or ten feet upon a group of
other men, those other men go down.

Righting himself quickly, Tedric sprang toward the priest and swung;
swung with all the momentum of his mass and speed and all the power
of his giant frame; swung as though he were concentrating into the
blow all his hatred of Sarpedion and everything for which Sarpedion
stood--which in fact he was.

And what such a saber-scimitar, so driven, did to thin, showy copper
armor and to the human flesh beneath it, is simply nothing to dwell
upon here.

"HOLD!" he roared at the mercenaries, who hadn't quite decided whether
or not to resume the attack, and they held.

"Bu ... bub ... but you're dead!" the non-com stuttered. "You _must_
be--the great Sarpedion would...."

"A right lively corpse I!" Tedric snarled. "Your Sarpedion, false god
and coward, drinker of blood and slayer of the helpless, is weak,
puny, and futile beside my Llosir. Hence, under Llosir's shield and at
Llosir's direction, I shall this day kill your foul and depraved god;
shall send him back to the grisly hell from whence he came.

"Nor do I ask you to fight for me. Nor would I so allow; for I trust
you not, though you swore by all your gods. Do you fight for pleasure
or for pay?"

A growl was the only answer, but that was answer enough.

"He of Sarpedion who paid your wages lies there dead. All others of
his ilk will die ere this day's sunset. Be advised, therefore; fight
no more until you know who pays. Wouldst any more of you be split like
white-fish ere I go? Time runneth short, but I would stay and oblige if
pressed."

He was not pressed.

Tedric whirled and strode away. Should he get his horse, or not? No. He
had never ridden mighty Dreegor into danger wearing armor less capable
than his own, and he wouldn't begin now.

The Temple of Sarpedion was a tall, narrow building, with a far-flung
outside staircase leading up to the penthouse-like excrescence in which
the green altar of sacrifice was.

Tedric reached the foot of that staircase and grimly, doggedly, cut his
way up it. It was hard work, and he did not want to wear himself out
too soon. He might need a lot, and suddenly, later on, and it would be
a good idea to have something in reserve.

As he mounted higher and higher, however, the opposition became less
and less instead of greater and greater, as he had expected. Priests
were no longer there--he hadn't seen one for five minutes. And in the
penthouse itself, instead of the solid phalanx of opposition he had
_known_ would bar his way, there were only half a dozen mercenaries,
who promptly turned tail and ran.

"The way is clear! Hasten!" Tedric shouted, and his youthful squire
rushed up the ramp with his axe and hammer.

And with those ultra-hard, ultra-tough implements Tedric mauled and
chopped the image of the god.

       *       *       *       *       *

Devann, Sarpedion's high priest, was desperate. He believed thoroughly
in his god. Equally thoroughly, however, he believed in the actuality
and in the power of Tedric's new god. He had to, for the miracle he had
performed spoke for itself.

While Sarpedion had not appeared personally in Devann's lifetime,
he had so appeared many times in the past; and by a sufficiently
attractive sacrifice he could be persuaded to appear again,
particularly since this appearance would be in self-defense.

No slave, or any number of slaves, would do. Nor criminals. No ordinary
virgin of the common people. This sacrifice must be of supreme quality.
The king himself? Too old and tough and sinful. Ah ... the king's
daughter....

At the thought the pit of his stomach turned cold. However, desperate
situations require desperate remedies. He called in his henchmen and
issued orders.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus it came about that a towering figure clad in flashing golden
armor--the king himself, with a few courtiers scrambling far in his
wake--dashed up the last few steps just as Tedric was wrenching out
Sarpedion's liver.

"Tedric, attend!" the monarch panted. "The priests have taken Rhoann
and are about to give her to Sarpedion!"

"They can't, sire. I've just killed Sarpedion, right here."

"But they _can_! They've taken the Holiest One from the Innermost
Shrine; have enshrined him on the Temple of Scheene. Slay me those
