arbiter of the Guild of Lawyers, and the High Arbiter has been sent
for."

It was the last thing said that alarmed Snubnose, and he looked at his
sister and saw that for the first time her face was tight with unease.
The High Arbiter was an old friend of their mother's, which was not
likely to make him a friend of theirs today. He moved in the same
snobbish society as their mother and had many times clucked with her
about Proudwalk's "infatuation for that lowborn young man."

Snubnose would have liked to leave his place in the circle of
scientists and join Proudwalk, but it was against Acknowledged Custom
to change position once the circle was formed.

Everyone now was shuffling uncomfortably in the hot sun, except the
godsman who was exposed to the cooling air and had the godsmen's secret
of escaping sunburn. And Bump-arch, who looked as uncomfortable as
anybody else but did not shuffle. He stood still and straight while
sweat ran down his face into the tight black neckband of an apprentice.
Once he seemed to look at Snubnose and wink, or perhaps he was only
winking the sweat away.

An elephant moved slowly down the Street of Ward and onto the Field
of Proof. It was a ponderous metal ovoid bearing on its roof a velvet
pavilion with the curtains drawn. The circle of scientists parted and
opened, and the elephant, with much grinding, came to a stop a few feet
from the group in the center of the Field.

The driver, an apprentice lawyer, climbed from his hole and parted the
curtains of the pavilion. The High Arbiter looked out at the world with
a sour expression. He did not descend.

"I will hear the holy one first," he said from his roost.

The godsman raised his hands to the sun, and spoke.

"Wise one! The Candidate and his master, abetted by the Grandmaster
of the Guild of Scientists, are shamelessly defying the Principles.
The Candidate is preparing to demonstrate the accelerated movement of
matter into the future. That is a mystery of matter. Only the gods
can know the path that things take from the dimming past to the dark
future. Scientists must confine themselves to their arts and not try to
steal the mysteries belonging to the gods.

"The gods grant knowledge of mysteries to godsmen who have humbly
supplicated, not to thieves. Let the scientists work to improve the
fire-wheels that spin through the night seeking out the encampments of
the Bowmen. Let them mix better fertilizers to sell to the Lords of the
West. Let them keep in repair the ancient elephants for the honor of
our exalted citizens."

The High Arbiter looked slightly less sour, and he nodded shortly. "I
will hear the Grandmaster of the Guild of Scientists," he said.

The Grandmaster lifted his head.

"Wise one!" he said. "The godsman jibes, and with some basis.
Generation to generation, the fire-wheels spin more slowly and seek
less surely. The fertilizers grow leaner. The ceremonial elephants
are fewer and worse. Perhaps the godsmen are not supplicating hard
enough for solutions to mysteries of matter--solutions which would
enable the scientists to control matter. In the impious days before the
Principles, matter served mystery and mystery served matter, and by
some inexplicable mercy of the gods, things went very well."

Years of banality, years of caution, years of looking to his retirement
offering had, for a little while, lost their hold on him.

Snubnose was silently raging. What a place, he thought, for the
Grandmaster to burst out with that kind of thing. True, scientists
sometimes talked that way in the Guild social rooms, especially
after drinking illegal grain distillate, but here it could only hurt
Bump-arch's cause.

Snubnose looked at his friend. Bump-arch was trying to suppress a
jubilant smile. Surprised, Snubnose looked at his sister. She was
jumping up and down with pleasure, as he hadn't seen her do for at
least two years.

"Romantics," he said to himself.

The High Arbiter had a talent for looking displeased, and now he did
not stint.

"I note the Grandmaster's improper tone," he said stiffly.
"Furthermore, his remarks are irrelevant to the issue. The holy one
says that the demonstration treats of a mystery of matter in violation
of the Principles. In view of the Grandmaster's failure to refute
that, it is highly probable. However, it will have to be established
by authority and precedent--unless the demonstration involves an idea
specifically forbidden, which would be conclusive. I will hear the holy
one."

"There is indeed a forbidden idea. It is known from tradition and old
texts that the mathematic of accelerated movement through time involves
imaginary numbers. At the conference of 1480 DRC it was confirmed that
imaginary numbers are a metaphysical concept forbidden to scientists."

"I will hear the Candidate's master."

A light cloud was filtering the sunlight, and the old man seemed cool
and calm. He took a step to a little mound of good grass as if he were
climbing to a rostrum.

"Wise one! Neither the holy one nor our own Grandmaster--both devoted
patriots with their minds on the welfare of the City--thought to
bring one very important fact to your attention. My apprentice's
demonstration is not an original experiment; it is a reconstructed
experiment. By Acknowledged Custom, reconstructed experiments are
permitted regardless of mysteries and ideas so long as the experimenter
does not comprehend any impious theory but merely follows the practical
directions of old texts.

"I declare that my apprentice is ignorant of the theory of his
