he could not feel it, he knew that a powerful stream of radiation
was passing through his body and that a count was being made of the
radioactivity he had absorbed. The lieutenant studied his meters, then
looked up at Zen.

"You're all right, sir." He seemed puzzled.

"Not hot, eh?"

"No, sir, you're not. Frankly, I don't understand it. Oh, you've got a
little exposure, but nothing serious."

"I was in one of the old mines when the blast went off," Zen explained.

"Then that accounts for it. You were lucky as hell, sir. Next."

Catching Nedra's arm, Zen swung her in front of the scope. The
experience with higher levels of consciousness had been forced out of
his mind, and he was all intelligence officer.

"But I'm all right! I mean, there's nothing wrong. Are you out of your
mind again?"

"Yes," Zen said. "But I've got the rank to make my decisions stick
whether I'm out of my mind or not. Lieutenant, check this woman. This
is an order!" Zen snapped out the words with all the precision and
authority of a drill-field sergeant training recruits.

"Yes, sir," the startled medical officer said.

Ignoring Nedra's protests, Zen held her in place while the equipment
was put into operation. Behind them, West watched. The faintest trace
of an approving smile showed on the craggy man's face.

The lieutenant looked up from his meters. "She's all right too, sir."

"Sure of that?"

"Of course I'm sure. This counter doesn't lie!" The medical officer was
indignant.

So was Nedra. The violet eyes shot sparks of anger at the colonel. Zen
was unimpressed. Deep inside, he was tremendously relieved. She had
come down alive! She was unharmed! This was enough to make him feel
good all over. He also knew what she was. No ordinary mortal could have
remained in the hot zone for the length of time she had been there and
emerged unharmed. He did not mind her anger. Instead he turned to West.

"You're next!"

He did not know what response to expect from the craggy man. It might
be anything. To his surprise, West smiled.

"Glad to, colonel. I was hoping I would get tested, so I would know
where I stood."

Without hesitation, West stepped in front of the scope. "While I am
certain I did not receive enough exposure to do any damage, still it
is best to follow your example and make certain." The deep voice was
suave, with tiny overtones of amusement in it somewhere.

Again the lieutenant studied his meters and again he looked up. Real
perplexity was on his face. "Three okays in a row. I didn't have a
single okay up until now." His gaze went up the slope in the direction
where the bomb had exploded.

"Does that mean I'm all right?" West asked.

"Yes. Definitely all right," the lieutenant answered. "And I don't
pretend to understand it."

"I was in a hole, too," West said. He seemed to be amused at some joke
known only to him.

The lieutenant brightened. "Then I understand it."

"I wish I did," Zen said, to himself. There was no longer any doubt in
his mind that Nedra was one of the new people. As to West, the man was
an enigma. Not knowing how long West had been exposed to the radiation,
Zen did not know what to make of his freedom from it. But there was
certainly something peculiar about him.

"Colonel, it was good to meet you." West was coming toward him with
outstretched hand. Zen had the impression that the man's hand could
turn into a veritable bear trap, if West chose. "Perhaps we shall meet
again, sir." The words were a statement, not a question. An enigmatical
smile played over the craggy man's face.

"Who knows whether we shall meet again?" Zen answered, shrugging.
"Generally, when people say goodbye these days, they mean goodbye
forever."

"I know." Sadness showed on the craggy, lined face. "It is too bad that
things have to be this way. Well, experience is a difficult school,
but _homo sapiens_ seems incapable of learning in any other."

"It is war," Zen said.

"I disagree with you there," West said. "War is only a symptom of the
disease, it is only an expression of humanity. War itself is not at
fault, but man. Nor can man really be regarded as being at fault, since
what he is now going through is only a stage of growth."

Momentarily the memory of the contact with the race mind flicked
through Zen's consciousness. "I know that," he said. Then he hesitated.
"Or I knew it once."

"Ah? When?"

"Up the slope there, I knew it. But I have forgotten now what I knew."
Zen spoke slowly. He was trying hard to remember--or to forget--he
wasn't sure which.

"Ah?" West repeated. "Goodday, sir. Nedra, I would like to speak with
you for a moment, before I leave. With your permission, of course,
Colonel Zen."

"Certainly," Zen said. He watched the nurse and the craggy man move up
the trail a few steps. They carried on a conversation in tones too low
for him to overhear, then parted. West went down to the bottom of the
ravine and crossed to the other side of the gulch, where he began to
climb the opposite slope, staying as far away from the radioactive zone
as possible. Nedra returned to Zen beside the truck.

"Does he live back there?" the intelligence agent asked.

"I really don't know," the nurse answered. "I think he does, but I'm
not certain."

"It's rough country to live in."

"From what I have seen of him, he seems capable of living almost
anywhere."

"Do you know him well?"

The violet eyes regarded him thoughtfully. "You are asking a great many
questions, sir."

"I'm going to ask more."

"My telephone number, no doubt. I'm sorry, but I don't have a
telephone." The violet eyes grew pensive. "But if I did have a
telephone number, there is no one I would rather give it to than you."

He felt a warm glow at her words. The dream that he had once shared
with millions of other men, of a wife and kids, came into his mind
again, a yearning that was as old as history. If he had his free
choice, he would go with this dream.

He knew he did not have a free choice. Indeed, he doubted if he had any
choice at all. Nor had any other man. History had moved past the day
when this dream could be realized. Fate was sweeping it into the dust
heap of good things that were gone forever.




V


"She is immune to radiation!" Zen thought after Nedra had left to
rejoin her unit. This in itself was of sufficient importance to attract
and hold the interest of the top military and scientific minds. Perhaps
soldiers could also be immunized. Perhaps, by some impossible freak
of chance, a way might be found for workers to return to abandoned
factories, to long-closed shops and forges. This might mean a new flow
of goods and materials to troops that were desperately short of them
and to a civilian population that, at a conservative estimate, was more
than half starved.

A human being who had achieved immunity to radiation was important
enough to command his complete attention. Also, the probability was
very great that she was one of the mysterious new people. Something
else about her interested him even more. He could not put his finger
on this something else but he suspected it had to do with the future,
with another world than the one he knew. Or with another universe.
Again the memory of his contact with the race mind flicked through his
consciousness.

Now he knew what he was going to do insofar as Nedra was concerned. He
had a hunch what her next move would be. He would wait for her to make
it.

Finding a carbine was not difficult. On this trail, the weapons were
to be had for picking them up. A dead man's ammunition pouches were
filled with cartridges. He took the pouches. Carrying the carbine, he
slid down the bank toward the mountain stream that talked to itself at
the bottom of the canyon. The water was clear and cool but dead trout
floating in it warned him not to drink.

Seeking a place from which he could watch the canyon, he moved upward.
A dim trail was visible through the pines here.

"An old narrow-gauge railroad," he thought. The rails had been removed
long since, the ties had rotted away, and the roadbed itself was hardly
a trail through the growth of trees. He had barely settled himself in a
spot from which to watch the ravine below, than a stone turned on the
old roadbed.

Nedra was coming along the trail.

He let her pass without challenge. Sliding out of hiding, he followed
her.

Twisting and turning, the trail climbed slowly upward. When it reached
the edge of the timber, Zen caught a glimpse of a slide of yellow rock
far ahead, an old mine dump, which told him why the road had been
constructed in the first place. A ghost town was probably ahead.

He caught a glimpse of Nedra moving steadily ahead along the old road
bed.

"If she doesn't know exactly where she is going, then I'm missing my
guess," he thought, as he followed her. Elation was rising in him. She
was leading him straight to the hiding place of the new people.

Here in these mountains a small group could remain in hiding forever.
Food might eventually become a problem, but there was plenty of game in
the ranges: deer, elk, and bear, and some of the high valleys had been
in cultivation before the war. A few hardy pioneers had always managed
to find a living in this wilderness. If they could do it, so could this
new group.

Of course, they would have to evade Cuso's roving patrols, raiding for
food, supplies and women. But that ought not to be too difficult. The
ghost town was in sight.

Surrounding an old mine, a crusher, and a concentrator, the ghost town
was also in ruins. Unlike so many small cities, the ruin here had not
come from attack but from nature. The snows of winter had piled their
burden on flimsy roofs, the seepage of spring had rotted the timbers,
with the result that many of the houses had simply collapsed. Weeds
grew in the doorways and scrub cedars had found roots in the streets.

Nedra was walking down the middle of what had once been the main
street. Her stride was still certain and she seemed to know exactly
where she was going.

The ragged man appeared in the door of the garage on her left. He spoke
to the nurse, calling to her. She jumped at the sound of the voice,
glanced at the man, then continued walking.

"Hey, wait a minute, cutie!" the fellow shouted, loud enough for Zen to
hear him. He lunged out of the doorway toward her. She turned to face
him.

Kurt Zen lifted the carbine, then dropped the muzzle. He not only had
great confidence in Nedra's ability to protect herself, but he wanted
to see what would happen.

The loop of rope, thrown with all the skill of a cowboy, came from the
opposite side of the street. It settled over her shoulders, pinned her
arms to the side, and was instantly jerked tight. She was pulled to the
ground.

The man who had lunged out of the doorway of the garage leaped toward
her. Throwing her on her stomach, face down, he jerked both hands
behind her back, then began to search her for a weapon.

The man who had thrown the rope came out of hiding to help his
companion. He was short, with bow legs.

Together, they held the nurse down.

Zen raised the carbine to his shoulders. Although he had not previously
fired this weapon, at this distance he could not miss.

Her scream came to his ears.

"Colonel! Watch out!"

In startled surprise, he slid the carbine from his shoulder. She had
known he was following her and that he was somewhere near! Thoughts
like startled hornets flicked through his consciousness. How had she
known he was following her? Why had she let him do it? More important,
where was she leading him? Most important of all, why was she trying to
save him when her own life was in danger?

Even if she had known he was following her, obviously she hadn't known
these men were here. She hadn't been coming to meet them. Then what
was her purpose in climbing to this old ghost town which lay just at
timberline on the edge of a mountain wilderness where Cuso was held at
bay?

The first ruffian was standing erect. Zen brought the sights of the
carbine to bear on the center of his ragged coat.

"_Drop the gun!_" a voice said behind him.

Even more surprising than the command was the fact that he knew the
voice that had spoken. Or he thought he did. He let the carbine slide
from his fingers.

"Now get 'em up."

He raised his hands. "Hello, Jake," he called out.

An exclamation of surprise came from behind him. "How the hell did you
know me?"

"Recognized your voice," Zen answered. "Can I turn around now?"

"Sure. Sure. But what the hell are you doing up here?"

Turning, Zen saw the automatic rifle that covered him. The muzzle was
