thinnest tin-foil which we could procure (.02 to .03 mm., or .00012 to
.00079 of an inch in thickness), and placed a radicle close above, in such
a position that it grew almost perpendicularly downwards. When the apex
came into contact with the polished level surface it turned at right angles
and glided over it without leaving any impression; yet the tin-foil was so
flexible, that a little stick of soft wood, pointed to the same degree as
the end of the radicle and gently loaded with a weight of only a quarter of
an ounce (120 grains) plainly indented the tin-foil.

Radicles are able to penetrate the ground by the force due to their
longitudinal and transverse growth; the seeds themselves being held down by
the weight of the superincumbent soil. In the case of the bean the apex,
protected by the root-cap, is sharp, and the growing part, from 8 to 10 mm.
in length, is much more rigid, as Sachs has proved, than the part
immediately above, which has ceased to increase in length. We endeavoured
to ascertain the downward pressure of the growing part, by placing
germinating beans between two small metal plates, the upper one of which
was loaded with a known weight; and the
[page 74]
radicle was then allowed to grow into a narrow hole in wood, 2 or 3 tenths
of an inch in depth, and closed at the bottom. The wood was so cut that the
short space of radicle between the mouth of the hole and the bean could not
bend laterally on three sides; but it was impossible to protect the fourth
side, close to the bean. Consequently, as long as the radicle continued to
increase in length and remained straight, the weighted bean would be lifted
up after the tip had reached the bottom of the shallow hole. Beans thus
arranged, surrounded by damp sand, lifted up a quarter of a pound in 24 h.
after the tip of the radicle had entered the hole. With a greater weight
the radicles themselves always became bent on the one unguarded side; but
this probably would not have occurred if they had been closely surrounded
on all sides by compact earth. There was, however, a possible, but not
probable, source of error in these trials, for it was not ascertained
whether the beans themselves go on swelling for several days after they
have germinated, and after having been treated in the manner in which ours
had been; namely, being first left for 24 h. in water, then allowed to
germinate in very damp air, afterwards placed over the hole and almost
surrounded by damp sand in a closed box.

Fig. 55. Outline of piece of stick (reduced to one-half natural size) with
a hole through which the radicle of a bean grew. Thickness of stick at
narrow end .08 inch, at broad end .16; depth of hole .1 inch.
We succeeded better in ascertaining the force exerted transversely by these
radicles. Two were so placed as to penetrate small holes made in little
sticks, one of which was cut into the shape here exactly copied (Fig. 55).
The short end of the stick beyond the hole was purposely split, but not the
opposite
[page 75]
end. As the wood was highly elastic, the split or fissure closed
immediately after being made. After six days the stick and bean were dug
out of the damp sand, and the radicle was found to be much enlarged above
and beneath the hole. The fissure which was at first quite closed, was now
open to a width of 4 mm.; as soon as the radicle was extracted, it
immediately closed to a width of 2 mm. The stick was then suspended
horizontally by a fine wire passing through the hole lately filled by the
radicle, and a little saucer was suspended beneath to receive the weights;
and it required 8 lbs. 8 ozs. to open the fissure to the width of 4 mm.--
that is, the width before the root was extracted. But the part of the
radicle (only .1 of an inch in length) which was embedded in the hole,
probably exerted a greater transverse strain even than 8 lbs. 8 ozs., for
it had split the solid wood for a length of rather more than a quarter of
an inch (exactly .275 inch), and this fissure is shown in Fig. 55. A second
stick was tried in the same manner with almost exactly the same result.

Fig. 56. Wooden pincers, kept closed by a spiral brass spring, with a hole
(.14 inch in diameter and .6 inch in depth) bored through the narrow closed
part, through which a radicle of a bean was allowed to grow. Temp. 50o -
60o F.

We then followed a better plan. Holes were bored near the narrow end of two
wooden clips or pincers (Fig. 56), kept closed by brass spiral springs. Two
radicles in damp sand were allowed to grow through these holes. The
[page 76]
pincers rested on glass-plates to lessen the friction from the sand. The
holes were a little larger (viz..14 inch) and considerably deeper (viz..6
inch) than in the trials with the sticks; so that a greater length of a
rather thicker radicle exerted a transverse strain. After 13 days they were
taken up. The distance of two dots (see the figure) on the longer ends of
the pincers was now carefully measured; the radicles were then extracted
from the holes, and the pincers of course closed. They were then suspended
horizontally in the same manner as were the bits of sticks, and a weight of
1500 grams (or 3 pounds 4 ounces) was necessary with one of the pincers to
open them to the same extent as had been effected by the transverse growth
of the radicle. As soon as this radicle had slightly opened the pincers, it
had grown into a flattened form and had escaped a little beyond the hole;
its diameter in one direction being 4.2 mm., and at rightangles 3.5 mm. If
this escape and flattening could have been prevented, the radicle would
probably have exerted a greater strain than the 3 pounds 4 ounces. With the
other pincers the radicle escaped still further out of the hole; and the
weight required to open them to the same extent as had been effected by the
radicle, was only 600 grams.

With these facts before us, there seems little difficulty in understanding
how a radicle penetrates the ground. The apex is pointed and is protected
by the root-cap; the terminal growing part is rigid, and increases in
length with a force equal, as far as our observations can be trusted, to
the pressure of at least a quarter of a pound, probably with a much greater
force when prevented from bending to any side by the surrounding earth.
Whilst thus increasing in length it increases in thickness, pushing away
the damp
[page 77]
earth on all sides, with a force of above 8 pounds in one case, of 3 pounds
in another case. It was impossible to decide whether the actual apex
exerts, relatively to its diameter, the same transverse strain as the parts
a little higher up; but there seems no reason to doubt that this would be
the case. The growing part therefore does not act like a nail when hammered
into a board, but more like a wedge of wood, which whilst slowly driven
into a crevice continually expands at the same time by the absorption of
water; and a wedge thus acting will split even a mass of rock.

Manner in which Hypocotyls, Epicotyls, etc., rise up and break through the
ground.--After the radicle has penetrated the ground and fixed the seed,
the hypocotyls of all the dicotyledonous seedlings observed by us, which
lift their cotyledons above the surface, break through the ground in the
form of an arch. When the cotyledons are hypogean, that is, remain buried
in the soil, the hypocotyl is hardly developed, and the epicotyl or plumule
rises in like manner as an arch through the ground. In all, or at least in
most of such cases, the downwardly bent apex remains for a time enclosed
within the seed-coats. With Corylus avellena the cotyledons are hypogean,
and the epicotyl is arched; but in the particular case described in the
last chapter its apex had been injured, and it grew laterally through the
soil like a root; and in consequence of this it had emitted two secondary
shoots, which likewise broke through the ground as arches.

Cyclamen does not produce any distinct stem, and only a single cotyledon
appears at first;* its petiole

* This is the conclusion arrived at by Dr. H. Gressner ('Bot. Zeitung,'
1874, p. 837), who maintains that what has been considered by other
botanists as the first true leaf is really the second cotyledon, which is
greatly delayed in its development.
[page 78]

breaks through the ground as an arch (Fig. 57). Abronia has only a single
fully developed cotyledon, but in this case it is the hypocotyl which first
emerges and is arched. Abronia umbellata, however, presents this
peculiarity, that the enfolded blade of the one developed cotyledon (with
the enclosed endosperm) whilst still beneath the surface has its apex
upturned and parallel to the descending leg of the arched hypocotyl; but it
is dragged out of the ground by the continued growth of the hypocotyl, with
the apex pointing downward. With Cycas pectinata the cotyledons are
hypogean, and a true leaf first breaks through the ground with its petiole
forming an arch.

Fig. 57. Cyclamen Persicum: seedling, figure enlarged: c, blade of
cotyledon, not yet expanded, with arched petiole beginning to straighten
itself; h, hypocotyl developed into a corm; r, secondary radicles.

Fig. 58. Acanthus mollis: seedling with the hypogean cotyledon on the near
side removed and the radicles cut off; a, blade of first leaf beginning to
expand, with petiole still partially arched; b, second and opposite leaf,
as yet very imperfectly developed; c, hypogean cotyledon on the opposite
side.

In the genus Acanthus the cotyledons are likewise hypogean. In A. mollis, a
single leaf first breaks through the ground with its petiole arched, and
with the opposite leaf much less developed, short, straight, of a yellowish
colour, and with the petiole at first not half as thick as that of the
other. The undeveloped leaf is protected by standing beneath its arched
fellow; and it is an instruc-
[page 79]
tive fact that it is not arched, as it has not to force for itself a
passage through the ground. In the accompanying sketch (Fig. 58) the
petiole of the first leaf has already partially straightened itself, and
the blade is beginning to unfold. The small second leaf ultimately grows to
an equal size with the first, but this process is effected at very
different rates in different individuals: in one instance the second leaf
did not appear fully above the ground until six weeks after the first leaf.
As the leaves in the whole family of the Acanthaceae stand either opposite
one another or in whorls, and as these are of equal size, the great
inequality between the first two leaves is a singular fact. We can see how
this inequality of development and the arching of the petiole could have
been gradually acquired, if they were beneficial to the seedlings by
favouring their emergence; for with A. candelabrum, spinosus, and
latifolius there was a great variability in the inequality between the two
first leaves and in the arching of their petioles. In one seedling of A.
candelabrum the first leaf was arched and nine times as long as the second,
which latter consisted of a mere little, yellowish-white, straight, hairy
style. In other seedlings the difference in length between the two leaves
was as 3 to 2, or as 4 to 3, or as only .76 to .62 inch. In these latter
cases the first and taller leaf was not properly arched. Lastly, in another
seedling there was not the least difference in size between the two first
leaves, and both of them had their petioles straight; their laminae were
enfolded and pressed against each other, forming a lance or wedge, by which
means they had broken through the ground. Therefore in different
individuals of this same species of Acanthus the first pair of leaves
breaks through the ground by two widely different methods; and if
[page 80]
either had proved decidedly advantageous or disadvantageous, one of them no
doubt would soon have prevailed.

Asa Gray has described* the peculiar manner of germination of three widely
different plants, in which the hypocotyl is hardly at all developed. These
were therefore observed by us in relation to our present subject.

Delphinium nudicaule.--The elongated petioles of the two cotyledons are
confluent (as are sometimes their blades at the base), and they break
through the ground as an arch. They thus resemble in a most deceptive
manner a hypocotyl. At first they are solid, but after a time become
tubular; and the basal part beneath the ground is enlarged into a hollow
chamber, within which the young leaves are developed without any prominent
plumule. Externally root-hairs are formed on the confluent petioles, either
a little above, or on a level with, the plumule. The first leaf at an early
period of its growth and whilst within the chamber is quite straight, but
the petiole soon becomes arched; and the swelling of this part (and
probably of the blade) splits open one side of the chamber, and the leaf
then emerges. The slit was found in one case to be 3.2 mm. in length, and
it is seated on the line of confluence of the two petioles. The leaf when
it first escapes from the chamber is buried beneath the ground, and now an
upper part of the petiole near the blade becomes arched in the usual
manner. The second leaf comes out of the slit either straight or somewhat
arched, but afterwards the upper part of the petiole,--certainly in some,
and we believe in all cases,--arches itself whilst forcing a passage
through the soil.

* 'Botanical Text-Book,' 1879, p. 22.
[page 81]

Megarrhiza Californica.--The cotyledons of this Gourd never free themselves
from the seed-coats and are hypogean. Their petioles are completely
confluent, forming a tube which terminates downwards in a little solid
point, consisting of a minute radicle and hypocotyl, with the likewise
minute plumule enclosed within the base of the tube. This structure was
well exhibited in an abnormal specimen, in which one of the two cotyledons
failed to produce a petiole, whilst the other produced one consisting of an
open semicylinder ending in a sharp point, formed of the parts just
described. As soon as the confluent petioles protrude from the seed they
bend down, as they are strongly geotropic, and penetrate the ground. The
seed itself retains its original position, either on the surface or buried
at some depth, as the case may be. If, however, the point of the confluent
petioles meets with some obstacle in the soil, as appears to have occurred
with the seedlings described and figured by Asa Gray,* the cotyledons are
lifted up above the ground. The petioles are clothed with root-hairs like
those on a true radicle, and they likewise resemble radicles in becoming
brown when immersed in a solution of permanganate of potassium. Our seeds
were subjected to a high temperature, and in the course of three or four
days the petioles penetrated the soil perpendicularly to a depth of from 2
to 2 ½ inches; and not until then did the true radicle begin to grow. In
one specimen which was closely observed, the petioles in 7 days after their
first protrusion attained a length of 2 ½ inches, and the radicle by this
time had also become well developed. The plumule, still enclosed within the
tube, was now

* 'American Journal of Science,' vol. xiv. 1877, p. 21.
[page 82]

.3 inch in length, and was quite straight; but from having increased in
thickness it had just begun to split open the lower part of the petioles on
one side, along the line of their confluence. By the following morning the
upper part of the plumule had arched itself into a right angle, and the
convex side or elbow had thus been forced out through the slit. Here then
the arching of the plumule plays the same part as in the case of the
petioles of the Delphinium. As the plumule continued to grow, the tip
became more arched, and in the course of six days it emerged through the 2
½ inches of superincumbent soil, still retaining its arched form. After
reaching the surface it straightened itself in the usual manner. In the
accompanying figure (Fig. 58, A) we have a sketch of a seedling in this
advanced state of development; the surface of the ground being represented
by the line G...........G.

Fig. 58, A. Megarrhiza Californica: sketch of seedling, copied from Asa
Gray, reduced to one-half scale: c, cotyledons within seed-coats; p, the
two confluent petioles; h and r, hypocotyl and radicle; p1, plumule;
G..........G, surface of soil.

The germination of the seeds in their native Californian home proceeds in a
rather different manner, as we infer from an interesting letter from Mr.
Rattan, sent to us by Prof. Asa Gray. The petioles protrude from the seeds
soon after the autumnal rains, and penetrate the ground, generally in a
vertical direction, to a depth of from 4 to even 6 inches. they were found
in this state by Mr. Rattan during the Christmas vacation, with the plu-
[page 83]
mules still enclosed within the tubes; and he remarks that if the plumules
had been at once developed and had reached the surface (as occurred with
our seeds which were exposed to a high temperature), they would surely have
been killed by the frost. As it is, they lie dormant at some depth beneath
the surface, and are thus protected from the cold; and the root-hairs on
the petioles would supply them with sufficient moisture. We shall hereafter
see that many seedlings are protected from frost, but by a widely different
process, namely, by being drawn beneath the surface by the contraction of
their radicles. We may, however, believe that the extraordinary manner of
germination of Megarrhiza has another and secondary advantage. The radicle
begins in a few weeks to enlarge into a little tuber, which then abounds
with starch and is only slightly bitter. It would therefore be very liable
to be devoured by animals, were it not protected by being buried whilst
young and tender, at a depth of some inches beneath the surface. Ultimately
it grows to a huge size.

Ipomoea leptophylla.--In most of the species of this genus the hypocotyl is
well developed, and breaks through the ground as an arch. But the seeds of
the present species in germinating behave like those of Megarrhiza,
excepting that the elongated petioles of the cotyledons are not confluent.
After they have protruded from the seed, they are united at their lower
ends with the undeveloped hypocotyl and undeveloped radicle, which together
form a point only about .1 inch in length. They are at first highly
geotropic, and penetrate the ground to a depth of rather above half an
inch. The radicle then begins to grow. On four occasions after the petioles
had grown for a short distance vertically downwards, they
[page 84]
were placed in a horizontal position in damp air in the dark, and in the
course of 4 hours they again became curved vertically downwards, having
passed through 90o in this time. But their sensitiveness to geotropism
lasts for only 2 or 3 days; and the terminal part alone, for a length of
between .2 and .4 inch, is thus sensitive. Although the petioles of our
specimens did not penetrate the ground to a greater depth than about ½
inch, yet they continued for some time to grow rapidly, and finally
attained the great length of about 3 inches. The upper part is
apogeotropic, and therefore grows vertically upwards, excepting a short
portion close to the blades, which at an early period bends downwards and
becomes arched, and thus breaks through the ground. Afterwards this portion
straightens itself, and the cotyledons then free themselves from the
seed-coats. Thus we here have in different parts of the same organ widely
different kinds of movement and of sensitiveness; for the basal part is
geotropic, the upper part apogeotropic, and a portion near the blades
temporarily and spontaneously arches itself. The plumule is not developed
for some little time; and as it rises between the bases of the parallel and
closely approximate petioles of the cotyledons, which in breaking through
the ground have formed an almost open passage, it does not require to be
arched and is consequently always straight. Whether the plumule remains
buried and dormant for a time in its native country, and is thus protected
from the cold of winter, we do not know. The radicle, like that of the
Megarrhiza, grows into a tuber-like mass, which ultimately attains a great
size. So it is with Ipomoea pandurata, the germination of which, as Asa
Gray informs us, resembles that of I. leptophylla.

The following case is interesting in connection with
[page 85]
the root-like nature of the petioles. The radicle of a seedling was cut
off, as it was completely decayed, and the two now separated cotyledons
were planted. They emitted roots from their bases, and continued green and
healthy for two months. The blades of both then withered, and on removing
the earth the bases of the petioles (instead of the radicle) were found
enlarged into little tubers. Whether these would have had the power of
producing two independent plants in the following summer, we do not know.

In Quercus virens, according to Dr. Engelmann,* both the cotyledons and
their petioles are confluent. The latter grow to a length "of an inch or
even more;" and, if we understand rightly, penetrate the ground, so that
they must be geotropic. The nutriment within the cotyledons is then quickly
transferred to the hypocotyl or radicle, which thus becomes developed into
a fusiform tuber. The fact of tubers being formed by the foregoing three
widely distinct plants, makes us believe that their protection from animals
at an early age and whilst tender, is one at least of the advantages gained
by the remarkable elongation of the petioles of the cotyledons, together
with their power of penetrating the ground like roots under the guidance of
geotropism.

The following cases may be here given, as they bear on our present subject,
though not relating to seedlings. The flower-stem of the parasitic Lathraea
squamaria, which is destitute of true leaves, breaks through the ground as
an arch;** so does the flower-

* 'Transact. St. Louis Acad. Science,' vol. iv. p. 190.

** The passage of the flower-stem of the Lathraea through the ground cannot
fail to be greatly facilitated by the extraordinary quantity of water
secreted at this period of the year by the subter-
[[page 86]]
ranean scale-like leaves; not that there is any reason to suppose that the
secretion is a special adaptation for this purpose: it probably follows
from the great quantity of sap absorbed in the early spring by the
parasitic roots. After a long period without any rain, the earth had become
light-coloured and very dry, but it was dark-coloured and damp, even in
parts quite wet, for a distance of at least six inches all round each
flower-stem. The water is secreted by glands (described by Cohn, 'Bericht.
Bot. Sect. der Schlesischen Gesell.,' 1876, p. 113) which line the
longitudinal channels running through each scale-like leaf. A large plant
was dug up, washed so as to remove the earth, left for some time to drain,
and then placed in the evening on a dry glass-plate, covered with a
bell-glass, and by next morning it had secreted a large pool of water. The
plate was wiped dry, and in the course of the succeeding 7 or 8 hours
another little pool was secreted, and after 16 additional hours several
large drops. A smaller plant was washed and placed in a large jar, which
was left inclined for an hour, by which time no more water drained off. The
jar was then placed upright and closed: after 23 hours two drachms of water
were collected from the bottom, and a little more after 25 additional
hours. The flower-stems were now cut off, for they do not secrete, and the
subterranean part of the plant was found to weigh 106.8 grams (1611
grains), and the water secreted during the 48 hours weighed 11.9 grams (183
grains),--that is, one-ninth of the whole weight of the plant, excluding
the flower-stems. We should remember that plants in a state of nature would
probably secrete in 48 hours much more than the above large amount, for
their roots would continue all the time absorbing sap from the plant on
which they were parasitic.
[page 86]

stem of the parasitic and leafless Monotropa hypopitys. With Helleborus
niger, the flower-stems, which rise up independently of the leaves,
likewise break through the ground as arches. This is also the case with the
greatly elongated flower-stems, as well as with the petioles of Epimedium
pinnatum. So it is with the petioles of Ranunculus ficaria, when they have
to break through the ground, but when they arise from the summit of the
bulb above ground, they are from the first quite straight; and this is a
fact which deserves notice. The rachis of the bracken fern (Pteris
aquilina), and of some, probably many, other ferns, likewise rises above
ground under the form of an arch. No doubt other analogous instances could
be found by careful search. In all ordinary cases of bulbs, rhizomes,
[page 87]
root-stocks, etc., buried beneath the ground, the surface is broken by a
cone formed by the young imbricated leaves, the combined growth of which
gives them force sufficient for the purpose.

With germinating monocotyledonous seeds, of which, however, we did not
observe a large number, the plumules, for instance, those of Asparagus and
Canna, are straight whilst breaking through the ground. With the Gramineae,
the sheath-like cotyledons are likewise straight; they, however, terminate
in a sharp crest, which is white and somewhat indurated; and this structure
obviously facilitates their emergence from the soil: the first true leaves
escape from the sheath through a slit beneath the chisel-like apex and at
right angles to it. In the case of the onion (Allium cepa) we again meet
with an arch; the leaf-like cotyledon being abruptly bowed, when it breaks
through the ground, with the apex still enclosed within the seed-coats. The
crown of the arch, as previously described, is developed into a white
conical protuberance, which we may safely believe to be a special
adaptation for this office.

The fact of so many organs of different kinds--hypocotyls and epicotyls,
the petioles of some cotyledons and of some first leaves, the cotyledons of
the onion, the rachis of some ferns, and some flower-stems--being all
arched whilst they break through the ground, shows how just are Dr.
Haberlandt's* remarks on the importance of the arch to seedling plants. He
attributes its chief importance to the upper, young, and more tender parts
of the hypocotyl

* 'Die Schutzeinrichtungen in der Entwickelung der Keimpflanze,' 1877. We
have learned much from this interesting essay, though our observations lead
us to differ on some points from the author.
[page 88]

or epicotyl, being thus saved from abrasion and pressure whilst breaking
through the ground. But we think that some importance may be attributed to
the increased force gained by the hypocotyl, epicotyl, or other organ by
being at first arched; for both legs of the arch increase in length, and
both have points of resistance as long as the tip remains enclosed within
the seed-coats; and thus the crown of the arch is pushed up through the
earth with twice as much force as that which a straight hypocotyl, etc.,
could exert. As soon, however, as the upper end has freed itself, all the
work has to be done by the basal leg. In the case of the epicotyl of the
common bean, the basal leg (the apex having freed itself from the
seed-coats) grew upwards with a force sufficient to lift a thin plate of
zinc, loaded with 12 ounces. Two more ounces were added, and the 14 ounces
were lifted up to a very little height, and then the epicotyl yielded and
bent to one side.

With respect to the primary cause of the arching process, we long thought
in the case of many seedlings that this might be attributed to the manner
in which the hypocotyl or epicotyl was packed and curved within the
seed-coats; and that the arched shape thus acquired was merely retained
until the parts in question reached the surface of the ground. But it is
doubtful whether this is the whole of the truth in any case. For instance,
with the common bean, the epicotyl or plumule is bowed into an arch whilst
breaking through the seed-coats, as shown in Fig. 59 (p. 92). The plumule
first protrudes as a solid knob (e in A), which after twenty-four hours'
growth is seen (e in B) to be the crown of an arch. Nevertheless, with
several beans which germinated in damp air, and had otherwise been treated
in an unnatural manner, little
[page 89]
plumules were developed in the axils of the petioles of both cotyledons,
and these were as perfectly arched as the normal plumule; yet they had not
been subjected to any confinement or pressure, for the seed-coats were
completely ruptured, and they grew in the open air. This proves that the
plumule has an innate or spontaneous tendency to arch itself.

In some other cases the hypocotyl or epicotyl protrudes from the seed at
first only slightly bowed; but the bowing afterwards increases
independently of any constraint. The arch is thus made narrow, with the two
legs, which are sometimes much elongated, parallel and close together, and
thus it becomes well fitted for breaking through the ground.

With many kinds of plants, the radicle, whilst still enclosed within the
seed and likewise after its first protrusion, lies in a straight line with
the future hypocotyl and with the longitudinal axis of the cotyledons. This
is the case with Cucurbita ovifera: nevertheless, in whatever position the
seeds were buried, the hypocotyl always came up arched in one particular
direction. Seeds were planted in friable peat at a depth of about an inch
in a vertical position, with the end from which the radicle protrudes
downwards. Therefore all the parts occupied the same relative positions
which they would ultimately hold after the seedlings had risen clear above
the surface. Notwithstanding this fact, the hypocotyl arched itself; and as
the arch grew upwards through the peat, the buried seeds were turned either
upside down, or were laid horizontally, being afterwards dragged above the
ground. Ultimately the hypocotyl straightened itself in the usual manner;
and now after all these movements the several parts occupied the same
position relatively to one another and to the centre of the earth, which
they
[page 90]
had done when the seeds were first buried. But it may be argued in this and
other such cases that, as the hypocotyl grows up through the soil, the seed
will almost certainly be tilted to one side; and then from the resistance
which it must offer during its further elevation, the upper part of the
hypocotyl will be doubled down and thus become arched. This view seems the
more probable, because with Ranunculus ficaria only the petioles of the
leaves which forced a passage through the earth were arched; and not those
which arose from the summits of the bulbs above the ground. Nevertheless,
this explanation does not apply to the Cucurbita, for when germinating
seeds were suspended in damp air in various positions by pins passing
through the cotyledons, fixed to the inside of the lids of jars, in which
case the hypocotyls were not subjected to any friction or constraint, yet
the upper part became spontaneously arched. This fact, moreover, proves
that it is not the weight of the cotyledons which causes the arching. Seeds
of Helianthus annuus and of two species of Ipomoea (those of 'I. bona nox'
being for the genus large and heavy) were pinned in the same manner, and
the hypocotyls became spontaneously arched; the radicles, which had been
vertically dependent, assumed in consequence a horizontal position. In the
case of Ipomoea leptophylla it is the petioles of the cotyledons which
become arched whilst rising through the ground; and this occurred
spontaneously when the seeds were fixed to the lids of jars.

It may, however, be suggested with some degree of probability that the
arching was aboriginally caused by mechanical compulsion, owing to the
confinement of the parts in question within the seed-coats, or to friction
whilst they were being dragged upwards. But
[page 91]
if this is so, we must admit from the cases just given, that a tendency in
the upper part of the several specified organs to bend downwards and thus
to become arched, has now become with many plants firmly inherited. The
arching, to whatever cause it may be due, is the result of modified
circumnutation, through increased growth along the convex side of the part;
such growth being only temporary, for the part always straightens itself
subsequently by increased growth along the concave side, as will hereafter
be described.

It is a curious fact that the hypocotyls of some plants, which are but
little developed and which never raise their cotyledons above the ground,
nevertheless inherit a slight tendency to arch themselves, although this
movement is not of the least use to them. We refer to a movement observed
by Sachs in the hypocotyls of the bean and some other Leguminosae, and
which is shown in the accompanying figure (Fig. 59), copied from his
Essay.* The hypocotyl and radicle at first grow perpendicularly downwards,
as at A, and then bend, often in the course of 24 hours, into the position
shown at B. As we shall hereafter often have to recur to this movement, we
will, for brevity sake, call it "Sachs' curvature." At first sight it might
be thought that the altered position of the radicle in B was wholly due to
the outgrowth of the epicotyl (e), the petiole (p) serving as a hinge; and
it is probable that this is partly the cause; but the hypocotyl and upper
part of the radicle themselves become slightly curved.

The above movement in the bean was repeatedly seen by us; but our
observations were made chiefly on Phaseolus multiflorus, the cotyledons of
which are like-

* 'Arbeiten des bot. Instit. Würzburg,' vol. i. 1873, p. 403.
[page 92]

wise hypogean. Some seedlings with well-developed radicles were first
immersed in a solution of permanganate of potassium; and, judging from the
changes of colour (though these were not very clearly defined), the
hypocotyl is about .3 inch in length. Straight, thin, black lines of this
length were now drawn from the bases of the short petioles along the
hypocotyls

Fig. 59. Vicia faba: germinating seeds, suspended in damp air: A, with
radicle growing perpendicularly downwards; B, the same bean after 24 hours
and after the radicle has curved itself; r. radicle; h, short hypocotyl; e,
epicotyl appearing as a knob in A and as an arch in B; p, petiole of the
cotyledon, the latter enclosed within the seed-coats.

of 23 germinating seeds, which were pinned to the lids of jars, generally
with the hilum downwards, and with their radicles pointing to the centre of
the earth. After an interval of from 24 to 48 hours the black lines on the
hypocotyls of 16 out of the 23 seedlings became distinctly curved, but in
very various degrees (namely, with radii between 20 and
[page 93]
80 mm. on Sachs' cyclometer) in the same relative direction as shown at B
in Fig. 59. As geotropism will obviously tend to check this curvature,
seven seeds were allowed to germinate with proper precautions for their
growth in a klinostat,* by which means geotropism was eliminated. The
position of the hypocotyls was observed during four successive days, and
they continued to bend towards the hilum and lower surface of the seed. On
the fourth day they were deflected by an average angle of 63o from a line
perpendicular to the lower surface, and were therefore considerably more
curved than the hypocotyl and radicle in the bean at B (Fig. 59), though in
the same relative direction.

It will, we presume, be admitted that all leguminous plants with hypogean
cotyledons are descended from forms which once raised their cotyledons
above the ground in the ordinary manner; and in doing so, it is certain
that their hypocotyls would have been abruptly arched, as in the case of
every other dicotyledonous plant. This is especially clear in the case of
Phaseolus, for out of five species, the seedlings of which we observed,
namely, P. multiflorus, caracalla, vulgaris, Hernandesii and Roxburghii
(inhabitants of the Old and New Worlds), the three last-named species have
well-developed hypocotyls which break through the ground as arches. Now, if
we imagine a seedling of the common bean or of P. multiflorus, to behave as
its progenitors once did, the hypocotyl (h, Fig. 59), in whatever position
the seed may have been buried, would become so much arched that the upper
part would be doubled down parallel to the lower part; and

* An instrument devised by Sachs, consisting essentially of a slowly
revolving horizontal axis, on which the plant under observation is
supported: see 'Würzburg Arbeiten,' 1879, p. 209.
[page 94]

this is exactly the kind of curvature which actually occurs in these two
plants, though to a much less degree. Therefore we can hardly doubt that
their short hypocotyls have retained by inheritance a tendency to curve
themselves in the same manner as they did at a former period, when this
movement was highly important to them for breaking through the ground,
though now rendered useless by the cotyledons being hypogean. Rudimentary
structures are in most cases highly variable, and we might expect that
rudimentary or obsolete actions would be equally so; and Sachs' curvature
varies extremely in amount, and sometimes altogether fails. This is the
sole instance known to us of the inheritance, though in a feeble degree, of
movements which have become superfluous from changes which the species has
undergone.

Rudimentary Cotyledons.--A few remarks on this subject may be here
interpolated. It is well known that some dicotyledonous plants produce only
a single cotyledon; for instance, certain species of Ranunculus, Corydalis,
Chaerophyllum; and we will here endeavour to show that the loss of one or
both cotyledons is apparently due to a store of nutriment being laid up in
some other part, as in the hypocotyl or one of the two cotyledons, or one
of the secondary radicles.

Fig. 60. Citrus aurantium: two young seedlings: c, larger cotyledon; c',
smaller cotyledon; h, thickened hypocotyl; r, radicle. In A the epicotyl is
still arched, in B it has become erect.
[page 95]

With the orange (Citrus aurantium) the cotyledons are hypogean, and one is
larger than the other, as may be seen in A (Fig. 60). In B the inequality
is rather greater, and the stem has grown between the points of insertion
of the two petioles, so that they do not stand opposite to one another; in
another case the separation amounted to one-fifth of an inch. The smaller
cotyledon of one seedling was extremely thin, and not half the length of
the larger one, so that it was clearly becoming rudimentary,* In all these
seedlings the hypocotyl was enlarged or swollen.

Fig. 61. Abronia umbellata: seedling twice natural size: c cotyledon; c',
rudimentary cotyledon; h, enlarged hypocotyl, with a heel or projection
(h') at the lower end; r, radicle.

With Abronia umbellata one of the cotyledons is quite rudimentary, as may
be seen (c') in Fig. 61. In this specimen it consisted of a little green
flap, 1/84th inch in length, destitute of a petiole and covered with glands
like those on the fully developed cotyledon (c). At first it stood opposite
to the larger cotyledon; but as the petiole of the latter increased in
length and grew in the same line with the hypocotyl (h), the rudiment
appeared in older seedlings as if seated some way down the hypocotyl. With
Abronia arenaria there is a similar rudiment, which in one

* In Pachira aquatica, as described by Mr. R. I. Lynch ('Journal Linn. Soc.
Bot.' vol. xvii. 1878, p. 147), one of the hypogean cotyledons is of
immense size; the other is small and soon falls off; the pair do not always
stand opposite. In another and very different water-plant, 'Trapa natans',
one of the cotyledons, filled with farinaceous matter, is much larger than
the other, which is scarcely visible, as is stated by Aug. de Candolle,
'Physiologie Veg.' tom. ii. p. 834, 1832.
[page 96]

specimen was only 1/100th and in another 1/60th inch in length; it
ultimately appeared as if seated halfway down the hypocotyl. In both these
species the hypocotyl is so much enlarged, especially at a very early age,
that it might almost be called a corm. The lower end forms a heel or
projection, the use of which will hereafter be described.

 In Cyclamen Persicum the hypocotyl, even whilst still within the seed, is
enlarged into a regular corm,* and only a single cotyledon is at first
developed (see former Fig. 57). With Ranunculus ficaria two cotyledons are
