
"In proportion you get any time or distance you may desire with
absolute accuracy.  The distance of any planet from the sun gives
its time, or its time gives its distance--when that of any of
the others is known.  This law applies throughout the universe;
in everything and everywhere.  It is not a law of orbital
revolution alone, but a law of all motion.

"Our moon has a time of 29 days and a speed of about 50,000 miles
per day.  If the speed were greater it would leave us, if less it
would wind up, falling to the earth in the form of a spiral.

"At what distance would it have to be to have a time of fourteen
days? Divide 240,000 miles by 1.6.  A seven-day moon, would be
1.6 that distance.  And the exact distance for a one-day moon,
for a moon that would always be in the same place in the heavens,
moving as the earth revolved on its axis, would be about 24,998
miles.

"This gives us the line of 24-hour axial rotation, the true
surface of the earth, and the sheer-line of prakritic matter.
Beyond that line is the ether;  within that line is prakriti.

"It is the line of no weight, where gravity and apergy exactly
balance.  Inside that line gravity exceeds apergy and everything
revolving in less time, or that time, must fall to the centre.
It is the true surface of any 24-hour globe of this size and
weight.  A moon to revolve around the earth in less than one day
must move faster than the earth to develop enough apergy to
overcome the attraction.  That phenomenon we see in the moons of
Mars, which are within its atmosphere;  within the planet itself.

"We of the East learned this true size of the earth over six
thousand years ago, from observing the moons of Jupiter.  The
times of the first three are doubled.  We asked ourselves what
this meant and found that their distance was increased by the
cube root of 4 when their times were increased by the square root
of 4;  that time was to distance as 1.6 was to 2.  Then we
applied the key, and found it unlocked many mysteries.

"The first lesson this taught us was that we did not live on the
earth, but within the earth, at the line of liquid and gaseous
changes, where the three forms of matter meet and mingle and
interchange with each other.  We lived at the bottom of a gaseous
ocean 21,000 miles above us, and 4,000 miles from the centre of
the globe.  It gave us an entirely new conception of the earth,
and of our place in it.

"We saw that we lived in a narrow belt, or skin, of the earth,
not more than 100 miles thick, perhaps not more than ten miles.
Within this belt the prakritic elementary substances varied their
condition, combined, and made forms by increasing or decreasing
vibration.  It was the creative and destructive zone, the
evolutionary "mother"--the liquid level of the prakriti--the
seat of all physical phenomena.  Fifty miles above, the masses of
nitrogen and oxygen and argon were too cold to change their rate
of vibration.  Fifty miles below the surface of the earth all
things were too hot for changes in vibration.  In this kinetic
belt, between two static masses our bodies had been made, and
also, in all probability, all combinations of the elementary
substances.  It was four thousand miles to the centre of the
static prakritic mass beneath us;  twenty-one thousand miles to
the surface of the static prakritic mass above us, and the small
kinetic belt between was only one hundred miles thick.  But we
had one consolation, the prakriti we had was all kinetic, and the
best in the whole mass.

"The second lesson it taught us was that as the earth had been
made in the etheric globe, in a corresponding skin or plane of
kinetic etheric energy, with our ether the best of the solar
output, that we ourselves were subject through our ether to the
phenomena of that kinetic solar plane in precisely the same way
we now are to the phenomena of the kinetic prakritic plane.  Once
rid of the fallacious notion that we were creatures of the
surface of the earth, once clearly conscious that we were
creatures of the interior, of the bottom of this gaseous ocean,
then we could understand not only how the earth could be created
in this etheric globe, but how we could be creatures of the solar
globe living on it.

"When we learned that lesson, and learned it well, it dawned upon
us that we were living in the pranic globe at the same kinetic
level or plane of that globe, the line where its solids and
liquids and gases mingled and passed from one state to another,
the kinetic belt in which our solar globe has been made, and that
we were living as truly on that globe as we were on this
prakritic globe.  Our position on each globe was the same.

"And then the great truth came that we lived in the manasic
globe, at the same kinetic level;  and that we lived our lives on
the four globes simultaneously.  Our bodies are fourfold.  Every
atom is fourfold, ready to respond in our minds to the vibrations
of the Manasic world, in our vitality to the pranic vibrations of
the pranic world, in our nerves to the etheric vibrations of the
etheric world, and in our prakriti to vibrations of the prakritic
world.  Each one of our bodies lived on its own earth globe, for
there were four globes of this earth--in coadunition--in its
corresponding kind of globe.

"The four earth globes became one globe, as our four bodies were
one body;  and the chain of four kinds of globes in matter became
one globe, as the manasic with the others on it.

"These four kinds of globes were the beginning and the end of
matter, as we distinguish and know matter.  They were not the end
of vibration;  or of planes of vibration;  or of realms beyond
this material universe;  but they were the limits of all that is
common to each and every atom of this lower plane of vibration.

"It is upon this solid and perfect foundation of physics, that
accounts for and explains every kind of phenomena, we have
constructed our metaphysics.  All that belongs to these four
lower planes we consider and treat as physics.  All that relates
to the planes beyond we consider metaphysics.  Can you teach a
child equation of payments before he knows the first four rules?
You would not attempt such a task.  The first four rules are the
physics of arithmetic;  all beyond is the metaphysics of
arithmetic.  It flows out of them.  Can you comprehend our system
of metaphysics until you have clearly and completely mastered our
physics?  Would you not get into a fog at the very start?

"There can be no system of metaphysics without a solid foundation
of physics.  The idea is unthinkable.  The one grows out of the
other.  It is its life;  its fruit, its flower.

"You have no western system of physics.  Your physics are without
form and void;  patchwork, constantly changing.  There is no
substantial foundation for any system of metaphysics.  What you
say or do in physics is fragmentary or chaotic.

"It is perfectly true, so far as you have gone through the first
invisible world of ether, you are much more masters of detail
than we are.

"We have not cared particularly for the minor details by which
explosives are made, or metals obtained from oxides.  We have
preferred to push on into realms beyond as fast as we could,
seeking first the Kingdom of Heaven and its Righteousness,
knowing that when it was found all these things would be added
unto us."




Chapter Seven

The Four Globes


That we live in the earth, not on the earth, is one of the most
important of the facts of eastern physics in the study of its
metaphysics.  The mathematical and physical proof that the
physical earth is 50,000 miles in diameter should not be
passed over lightly in our haste to get on, for the perfect
understanding of all this fact implies makes easy the
comprehension of how we live etherically in the solar etheric
globe, of how we live pranically in the stellar pranic globe, and
how we live manasically in the manasic globe.

As we live within the narrow "skin" of phenomena, not more than
100 miles thick, of this prakritic globe, with the whole earth
within the corresponding skin of phenomena of the solar etheric
globe, within the kinetic belt in which it was made, the ether
which surrounds each prakritic molecule is not merely any and
every kind of ether, but that particular kind of kinetic ether,
which, by changing its rate of vibration through an octave,
creates phenomena.  The ether of all prakritic matter belongs to
the kinetic or creative belt of the solar etheric globe.  It is
not static ether.  The ether in our prakriti is in touch with all
the prakritic kinetic ether of the solar globe, subject to all
solar laws of change;  and all our prak-solar laws of change;
and all our prakritic matter, a mere detail of it, is a part of
the solar phenomena.  "Our father, the sun," or "Dyaus pitar"
("heavenly father"--Latin, Jupiter) meant more once than it does
now.  Then the solar globe was the first heaven, and to live
under its laws, puttings off the coat of skin, was an object
which men believed to be worth striving for.  They recognized, as
we do not, that our prakritic laws were not all they had to obey;
that the higher law of the solar globe on which they lived, of
which the lower prakritic laws were merely an outcome and detail,
was worthy of the closest study.  And they recognized that these
higher laws of the etheric globe were metaphysical as well as
physical;  that our moral law flows out of the moral law of the
solar etheric world, as our physics flow from and out of solar
physics.  Religion is correct in its assumption of this higher
law of morals;  incorrect only in its grasp and explanation.
Science is correct in holding only in its assumption that it is
physical science;  incorrect only in its assumption that it is
physical science of this plane and globe only.  There is no
quarrel between science and religion when the full knowledge of
one stands beside the full knowledge of the other.  They are
twin-sisters.

This solar-etheric globe in which we are interested revolves
around Alcyone within that kinetic belt or skin of prana which is
subject to phenomena or vibration through one octave--else it
would never have been formed.  All prana in the solar-etheric
globe is of this particular kind of kinetic prana, which creates
life of all kinds--which is subject to vibration through one
octave.  The solar globe is a detail of kinetic prana only, one
of its phenomena.  Necessarily, all our prana is of this kinetic
kind, and our earth a minor detail of it in the Alcyone globe.
All the changes and combinations possible in kinetic prana on the
pranic globe are possible here, in our kinetic prana, as all the
phenomena of the etheric world are possible here in our kinetic
ether.

As our earth is a globe of ether and a globe of prana as well as
a globe of prakriti;  we are actually living on a small "cabbage"
of that pranic globe, and subject to all its laws.

In the vast manasic globe that includes this whole material
universe there is the same kinetic belt or skin of "phenomena" or
vibration similar to that kinetic belt in which we live on the
earth, and the manasa which permeates the Alcyonic globe, the
solar globe, and the earth is that kinetic manasa which is
involving and evolving.  This involving and evolving kinetic
manasa of the Alcyonic globe is that which surrounds every atom
of ether of the solar globe and every atom of prakriti of this
earth globe.  In the great manasic globe this earth of ours is a
minute village of Helios (sun) county, in the state of Alcyone.
We are actually and literally living in this manasic globe
precisely as we live in this earth, and as in the village we are
subject to all the laws of the manasic world, we can study them
here in this village as well as we could elsewhere.  We can study
them as easily as we study our prakritic village laws, or our
etheric county laws, for all the forms of manasa subject to them
anywhere are here with us.  We are not limited to a study of the
prakritic laws of the village fathers, nor yet to the etheric
laws of the supervisors of Helios county, as scientists say, nor
even to the state laws of Alcyone;  only the manasic laws of the
Universe limit our material studies in that direction.  As some
men on this earth never leave their native village and never know
or care for any matters outside of it, so in this little earth
village, in the kinetic belt of the manasic globe, there are men
who do not care to know anything which relate to matters outside
its boundaries.  As some men may pass the boundaries of their
village, but not of their county, caring only for the matters
concerning it, so the western scientists of this earth village on
the manasic globe do not pass the boundaries of Helios county,
caring only for etheric matters.  The philosophers and wise men
of the East are broader minded and from time immemorial have
taken greater interest in the pranic affairs of Alcyone and the
manasic condition of the universe in which Alcyone is a state
than in the rustic murmur of their village or the gossip of their
county.

There is nothing lacking in our manasic earth-village, nothing
that is in more abundant measure in our county, state, and
nation.  We are of the best.

We of this village may imagine, if we like, that there is nothing
beyond the village limits, and nothing in it but that which
relates to the village.  We have the right to be silly, if we
wish to be.  And it is no sign of wisdom to say that there is a
county beyond, but that the county boundaries end all, and only
village and county politics may be studied.  The European who
believed--no Asiatic or African or American could have believed
--that the earth rested on an elephant and the elephant on
a turtle was wise, in comparison.  Nor is it any sign of
intelligence to say that we may learn something of the village
and county while we live, but that to learn anything about the
state and nation we must wait until we are dead.  There are too
many in the village who are familiar with both state and nation,
and who have studied their laws, for this to be anything but
idiotic.




Chapter Eight

The Battle Ground


Each and every one of our eighty-odd elementary substances owe
their condition--whether solid, liquid, or gas--to their rate
of vibration.  We have reduced all gases to a liquid and nearly
all to a solid form.  Conversely, we have raised all solids to a
liquid and nearly all to a gaseous condition.  This has been done
by reducing or raising the vibration of each within one octave
--each one of the eighty odd having a special octave, a tone or
half-tone different from any other.  Normally, the solids,
vibrating in the lower notes, gather together under Attraction;
while the gases, vibrating in the higher notes, diffuse under
Repulsion.  Between them, created by the interchange of these two
forces, is our "skin" of phenomena, or kinetics.

Broadly, the attraction of the universe comes from its vibration
at certain centres in the three higher notes;  the repulsion
comes from its vibration everywhere else in the three higher
