limestones with less clay. Ordinary limestones are, as you know,
calcined in a kiln. The material which comes from the kiln is called
quicklime, and, on being dosed with water, it slakes, and crumbles to
powder, and in the state of slaked lime is mixed up with mortar. Cement
stones are also calcined; but the resulting material will not fall to
pieces or slake under water. It must be ground very fine, and when
moistened sets rapidly, and as well under water as in air, and becomes
very hard and is very tenacious. Brickwork in mortar will always settle
and compress to some extent. Not so brickwork in cement, which
occasionally expands, but is never to be compressed. This quality and
the rapid setting, tenacity, and strength of brickwork in cement make it
a most valuable material to use in those buildings or parts of a
building where great steadiness and strength are wanted, and in sewage
and dock work, where there is water to contend with. A good many cements
made from natural stones used to be employed, such as Medina, Harwich,
Atkinson's, or Roman cement. The last named is the only one which is now
much employed, except locally. It has the quality of setting with
exceptional rapidity, and is on that account sometimes the best material
to employ; but for almost every purpose the artificial compound known as
Portland cement is preferable.

Portland cement is made largely near Rochester. Its materials are simple
and cheap. They may, without much departure from the truth, be said to
be Thames mud and chalk; but the process of manufacture requires care
and thoroughness. The article supplied, when of the best quality, has
great strength, and is quick setting, and is far better than what was
manufactured from stones in which the ingredients existed in a state of
nature. In England we slake our lime and make use of it while it is
fresh; but it may interest you to know that the custom in Italy and
parts of France is different. There it is customary to slake the lime
long before it is wanted, and to deposit it in a pit and cover it up
with earth. In this condition it is left for months--I believe in Italy
for a year--and when taken out it is stiff, but still a pasty substance.
It is beaten, and more water added, and it is then made into mortar with
sand. It is claimed for mortar made in this way that is exceptionally
strong.

Now that we have considered bricks and partly considered mortar, it
remains to pay some attention to brickwork. The simplest and most
familiar work for a bricklayer to do is to build a wall. In doing this
his object should be to make it as stout as possible for the thickness,
and this stoutness can only be obtained by interlacing the bricks. If
they were simply laid on the top of each other, the wall would be no
more than a row of disconnected piles of bricks liable to tumble down.
When the whole is so adjusted that throughout the entire wall the joints
in one course shall rest on solid bricks and shall be covered by solid
bricks again--in short, when the whole shall break joint--then this wall
is said to be properly bonded, and has as much stability given to it as
it can possibly possess. There are two systems of bonding in use in
London, know as English bond and Flemish bond. English bond is the
method which we find followed in ancient brickwork in this country.

In this system a course of bricks is laid across the wall, showing their
heads at the surface, hence called "headers," and next above comes a
course of bricks stretching lengthways at the wall, called stretchers,
and so on alternately. With the Dutch fashions came in Flemish bond, in
which, in each course, a header and a stretcher alternate. In either
case, at the corners, a quarter-brick called a closer has to be used in
each alternate course to complete the breaking joint. There is not much
to choose between these methods where the walls are only one brick
thick. But where they are thicker the English has a decided advantage,
for in walls built in Flemish bond of one and a half brick thickness or
more there must be a few broken bricks, or bats, and there is a strong
temptation to make use of many. If this takes place, the wall is
unsound.

Many of the failures of brickwork in London houses arise from the
external walls, where they are 11/2 bricks thick, being virtually in two
skins; the inner 9 in. does the whole of the work of supporting floors
and roof, and when it begins to fail, the outer face bulges off like a
large blister. I have known cases where this had occurred, and where
there was no header brick for yards, so that one could pass a 5 ft. rod
into the space between the two skins and turn it about. This is rather
less easy to accomplish with English bond, and there are other
advantages in the use of that bond which make it decidedly preferable,
and it is now coming back into very general use. There are some odd
varieties of bond, such as garden bond and chimney bond. But of these I
only wish to draw your attention to what is called cross bond. The name
is not quite a happy one. Diagonal bond is hardly better. The thing
itself is to be often met with on the Continent, and it is almost
unknown here. But it would be worth introducing, as the effect of it is
very good.

French cross bond, otherwise diagonal bond _(liaison en croix)_, is
English bond, but with the peculiarity that in every fourth course one
header is made use of in the stretcher course at the quoin. The result
is that the stretchers break joint with each other, and all the joints
range themselves in diagonal lines, and if in any part of the work
headers of a different brick are introduced, the appearance of a cross
is at once brought out; and even without this the diagonal arrangement
of joints is very perceptible and pleasing.

Besides wall building, the bricklayer has many other works to perform.
He has to form fireplaces, flues, chimneys, and the flat trimmer arches
which support the hearth, and has to set the stove, kitchen range,
copper, etc., in a proper manner. He has to form various ornamental
features and much else, some of which we shall have an opportunity of
noticing rather later. The strangest business, however, which is
intrusted to the bricklayer is building downward--by the method known as
underpinning--so that if a foundation has failed, a sounder one at a
greater depth may be reached; or if a basement is required under an
existing building which has none, the space may be excavated and the new
walls built so as to maintain the old.

This work has to be done with great caution, and bit by bit, and is
usually left to experienced hands. The mode in which the mortar joints
of a brick wall are finished where they show on the external or internal
face is a matter worth a moment's attention. It is important that the
joints of the work shall be so finished as to keep out wet and to be as
durable as possible, and it is desirable that they should improve, or at
any rate not disfigure, the appearance of the work.

The method which architects strongly advocate is that the joints shall
be struck as the work proceeds--that is, that very shortly after a brick
is laid, and while the mortar is yet soft, the bricklayer shall draw his
trowel, or a tool made for the purpose, across it, to give it a smooth
and a sloping surface. This is best when the joint is what is called a
weather joint--i.e., one in which the joint slopes outward. Sloping it
inward is not good, as it lets in wet; finishing it with a hollow on the
face is often practiced, and is not bad. Bricklayers, however, most of
them prefer that the mortar joints should be raked out and pointed--that
is to say, an inch or an inch and a half of the mortar next the outer
face be scratched out and replaced with fresh mortar, and finished to a
line.

In cases where the brickwork is exposed to frost, this proceeding cannot
be avoided, because the frost damages the external mortar of the joints.
But the bricklayers prefer it at all seasons of the year, partly because
brickwork is more quickly done if joints are not struck at the time;
partly because they can, if they like, wash the whole surface of the
work with ocher, or other color, to improve the tint; and partly
because, whether the washing is done or not, it smartens up the
appearance of the work. The misfortune is that this pointing, instead of
being the edge of the same mortar that goes right through, is only the
edge of a narrow strip, and does not hold on to the old undisturbed
mortar, and so is far less sound, and far more liable to decay. There is
a system of improving the appearance of old, decayed work by raking out
and filling up the joint, and then making a narrow mortar joint in the
middle of this filling in, and projecting from the face. This is called
tuck pointing. It is very specious, but it is not sound work.

Brick arches are constantly being turned, and of many sorts. An arch
consists of a series of wedge shaped blocks, known as voussoirs,
arranged in a curve, and so locking one another together that unless the
abutments from which the arch springs give way, it will not only carry
itself, but sustain a heavy load. It is a constant practice to cut
bricks to this shape and build them into an arch, and these are
sometimes cut and rubbed; sometimes, when the work is rougher, they are
axed. But in order to save the labor of cutting, arches are sometimes
turned with the bricks left square, and the joints wedge shaped. In this
case the rings should be only half a brick each, so that the wedge need
not be so very much wider at back than at face, and they are set in
cement, as that material adheres so closely and sets so hard. Arches of
two or more half-brick rings in cement are good construction, and are
also used for culvert work.

A less satisfactory sort of arch is what is called the flat arch. Here,
instead of being cambered as it ought to be, the soffit is straight; but
the brickwork being deep, there is room enough for a true arch that does
the work, and for useless material to hang from it. These arches are
generally rubbed or axed, and are very common at the openings of
ordinary windows. But no one who has studied construction can look at
them without a kind of wish for at least a slight rise, were it only two
inches. Sometimes when these straight arches are to be plastered over
they are constructed in a very clumsy manner, which is anything but
sound, and from time to time they give way. The weight of brickwork, of
course, varies with the weight of the individual bricks. But stock
brickwork in mortar weighs just about one hundred weight per cubic foot,
or 20 cubic feet to the ton. In cement it is heavier, about 120 lb. to
the cubic foot.

The strength of brickwork depends of course on the strength of the
weakest material--i.e., the mortar--though when it is in cement the
strength of brickwork to withstand a weight probably approaches that of
the individual bricks. Some experiments quoted in Rivington's Notes give
the following as the crushing weight per foot--that is to say, weight at
which crushing began--of piers having a height of less than twelve times
their diameter:

                                             Tons per
                                               foot.
  Best stocks, set in Portland cement and
    sand 1 to 1, and three months old.          40
  Ordinary good stocks, three months old.       30
  Hard stocks, Roman cement and sand 1 to 1,
    three months old.                           28
  Hard stocks, lias lime, and sand 1 to 2,
    and six months old.                         24
  Hard stocks, gray chalk lime, and sand,
    six months old.                             12

The rule given in popular handbook, that brickwork in mortar should not
have to carry more than three tons per superficial foot, and in cement
more than five tons, is probably sound, as in no building ought the load
to approach the crushing point, and, indeed, there are many sorts of
foundations on which such a load as five tons per foot would be too
great to be advisable.

It is a rather interesting inquiry, whenever we are dealing with a
building material, if we ask what can we best do with it, and for what
is it ill fitted. The purposes for which brick can be best used depend,
of course, upon its qualities. Speaking generally, such purposes are
very numerous and very various, especially the utilitarian purposes,
though rich and varied ornamental work can also be executed in
brickwork.

Perhaps the most remarkable quality of brickwork is that it can be
thrown into almost any shape. It is in this respect almost like a
plastic material, and this peculiarity it owes chiefly to the very small
size of each brick as compared with the large masses of the brickwork of
most buildings. Stone is far less easily dealt with than brick in this
respect. Think for a moment of the great variety of walls, footings,
piers, pilasters, openings, recesses, flues, chimney breasts, chimney
shafts, vaults, arches, domes, fireproof floors, corbels, strings,
cappings, panels, cornices, plinths, and other features met with in
constant use, and all formed by the bricklayer with little trouble out
of the one material--brickwork! A little consideration will convince you
that if the same material furnishes all these, it must be very plastic.
As a limitation we ought to note that this almost plastic material
cannot be suddenly and violently dealt with--that is to say, with the
exception of some sorts of arches, you cannot form any abrupt or
startling feature in brickwork, and you are especially limited as to
projections.

If you wish to throw out any bold projection, you may support it on a
long and sloping corbel of brickwork. But if there is not room for that,
you must call in some other material, and form the actual support in
stone, or terra cotta, or iron, and when you have gained your
projection, you may then go on in brickwork if you like.

Brick cornices should be steep, but cannot be bold, and so with other
ornamental and structural features. A noteworthy property of brickwork,
and one of immense value, is that it is thoroughly fireproof; in fact,
almost the only perfectly fireproof material. There is an interesting
account of the great fire of London by one of the eye witnesses, and
among the striking phenomena of that awful time he notes that the few
brick buildings which existed were the only ones able to withstand the
raging fire when it reached them.

In our own day a striking proof of the same thing was given in the great
fire in Tooley street, when Braidwood lost his life. I witnessed that
conflagration for a time from London Bridge, and its fury was something
not to be described. There were vaults under some of the warehouses
stored with inflammable materials, the contents of which caught fire and
burnt for a fortnight, defying all attempts to put them out. Yet these
very vaults, though they were blazing furnaces for all that time, were
not materially injured. When the warehouses came to be reinstated, it
was only found necessary to repair and repoint them a little, and they
were retained in use. The fact is that the bricks have been calcined
already, so has the lime in the mortar, and the sand is not affected by
heat, so there is nothing in brickwork to burn. Against each of these
good qualities, however, we may set a corresponding defect.

If brickwork is easily thrown into any shape, it is also easily thrown
out of shape. It has little coherence or stability, less than masonry
and very considerably less than timber. If any unequal settlement in the
foundation of a brick building occurs, those long zigzag cracks with
which we in London are only too familiar set themselves up at once; and
if any undue load, or any variation in load, exists, the brickwork
begins to bulge. Any serious shock may cause a building of ordinary
brickwork to collapse altogether, and from time to time a formidable
accident occurs owing to this cause. The fact is, the bricks are each so
small compared to the mass of the work, and the tenacity or hold upon
them of even fairly good lime mortar is so comparatively slight, that
there is really but little grip of one put upon another.

Persons who have to design and construct brick buildings should never
forget that they have to be handled with caution, and are really very
ticklish and unstable. One or two of the methods of overcoming this to
some extent may be mentioned. The first is the introduction of what is
called bond. At the end of the last century it was usual to build in, at
every few feet in height, bond timbers, which were embedded in the heart
of the walls. If these had always remained indestructible, they would no
doubt have served their purpose to some extent. Unfortunately, timber
both rots and burns, and this bond timber has brought down many a wall
owing to its being destroyed by fire, and has in other cases decayed
away, and caused cracks, settlements, and failures.

The more modern method of introducing a strong horizontal tie is to
build into the wall a group of bands of thin iron, such as some sorts of
barrels are hooped with--hence called hoop iron. The courses of bricks
where this occurs must be laid in cement, because iron in contact with
cement does not perish as it does in contact with mortar.

If in every story of a building four or five courses are thus laid and
fortified, a great deal of strength is given to the structure. Another
method, which has rather fallen into disuse, is grouting. This is
pouring liquid mortar, about the consistency of gruel, upon the work at
about every fourth course. The result is to fill up all interstices and
cavities, and to delay the drying of the mortar, and brickwork so
treated sets extremely hard. I have seen a wall that had been so treated
cut into, and it was quite as easy to cut the bricks (sound ones though
they were) as the mortar joints.

Grouting is objected to because it interferes with the good look of the
work, as it is very difficult to prevent streaks of it from running down
the face, and it is apt to delay the work. But it is a valuable means of
obtaining strong brickwork. Another and a more popular method is to
build the work in cement, now usually Portland cement. This, of course,
makes very strong, sound work, and does not involve any delay or dirt
like grouting, or the introduction of any fresh material like hoop iron.
But it, of course, adds to the expense of the work considerably, as
cement is much more costly than lime. I ought to add that the advocates
of Scott's selenitic mortar claim that it not only sets quickly and
hard, but that it is extremely tenacious, and consequently makes a much
more robust wall than ordinary mortar. I dare say this is true; but I
have not happened to see such a wall cut into, and this is the best test
of solidity.

The second deficiency in brickwork which I am bound to notice is that,
though it is very fireproof, it is far from being waterproof. In an
exposed situation rain will drive completely through a tolerably stout
brick wall. If water be allowed to drop or fall against it, the wall
will become saturated like a sponge. If the foot of a wall becomes wet,
or if the earth resting against the lower parts of it be moist, water
will, if not checked, rise to a great height in it, and if the upper
part of the wall be wet, the water will sink downward. With most sorts
of brick the outer face absorbs moisture whenever the weather is moist;
and in time the action of the rain, and the subsequent action of frost
upon the moisture so taken up, destroys the mortar in the joints, which
are to be seen perfectly open, as if they had been raked out, in old
brickwork, and in some cases (happily not in many) the action of weather
destroys the bricks themselves, the face decaying away, and the brick
becoming soft.

Against this serious defect in our staple building material a series of
precautions have been devised. Damp rising from the foot of the wall, or
from earth lying round its base, is combated by a damp course--a bed of
some impervious material going through the wall. Damp earth may be kept
off by surrounding the walls with an open area or a closed one--usually
termed a dry area. Damp against the face of the walls may be partly
combated by a careful selection of a non-absorbent brick with a hard
face and by struck joints. But it is most effectually kept at bay by the
expedient of building the wall hollow; that is to say, making the
external wall of the house to consist of two perfectly distinct walls,
standing about 2 in. apart, and held together by ties of earthenware or
iron. The result is that the moisture blowing through the outer skin
does not pass the cavity, but trickles down on the inner face of the
outer wall, while the inner wall remains dry. The ties are constructed
of shapes to prevent their conducting water themselves from without to
the inner wall. In addition to this, a series of slates forming an
intermediate protection is sometimes introduced, and forms an additional
and most valuable screen against weather. Sometimes, the two skins of
the wall are closer together--say 3/4 in.--and the space is filled with a
bituminous material.

A substance of a bituminous nature, called hygeian rock, has been of
late years introduced, and is being extensively used for this purpose;
it is melted and poured into the open space hot, and quickly hardens.
The use of such a material is open to the objection that no air can pass
through it. The rooms of our houses are receiving air constantly through
the walls, and much of the constant current up our chimneys is supplied,
to our great advantage, in this very imperceptible manner. The house
breathes, so to speak, through the pores of its brickwork. When this is
rendered impossible, it seems clear that fiercer draughts will enter
through the chinks and crevices, and that there will be a greater demand
upon flues not in use, occasioning down draught in the chimneys.

Another mode of keeping out weather is to cement the face of the
brickwork. But this hides up the work, and so tends to promote bad work,
besides being often very unsightly.

Among other peculiarities of brickwork are the facilities for
introducing different colors and different textures of surface which it
presents, the ease with which openings and arches can be formed in it,
the possibility of executing ornament and even carving, and the ease
with which brickwork will combine with other building materials. It
cannot be well made use of for columns, though it may readily enough be
turned into piers or pilasters. It cannot, generally speaking, with
advantage be made use of for any large domes, though the inner dome of
St. Paul's and the intermediate cone are of brick, and stand well. But
it is an excellent material for vaulting arcades and all purposes
involving the turning of arches.

Brickwork must be said to be durable, but it requires care. If not of
the best, brickwork within the reach of the constant vibration caused by
the traffic on a railway seems to be in danger of being shaken to
pieces, judging from one or two instances that have come under my own
observation. The mortar, and even in some cases the bricks themselves,
will rapidly deteriorate if moisture be allowed to get into the heart of
a brick wall, and in exposed situations this is very apt to happen. Care
should always be taken to keep the pointing of external brickwork in
good order, and to maintain all copings and other projections intended
to bar the access of water coming down from above, and to stop the
overflowing of gutters and stack pipes, which soon soaks the wall
through and through.

Of course, if there is a failure of foundations, brickwork, as was
pointed out earlier, becomes affected at once. But if these be good, and
the materials used be sound ones, and if the other precautions just
recommended be taken, it will last strong and sturdy for an immense
length of time. In some cases, as for example in the Roman ruins, it has
stood for 1,500 years under every possible exposure and neglect, and
still shows something of a sturdy existence after all, though sadly
mutilated. If we now return to the question, What can be well done in
brickwork? no better answer can be given than to point to what has been
and is being done, especially in London and within our own reach and
observation.

Great engineering works, such as railway viaducts, the lining of railway
tunnels, the piers and even the arches of bridges, sewage works, dock
and wharf walls, furnace chimneys, and other works of this sort are
chiefly done in brickwork. And notwithstanding that iron is far more
used by the engineer for some purposes and concrete for others now than
formerly, still there is a great field for brickwork. The late Mr.
Brunel, who was fond of pushing size to extremes, tried how wide a span
he could arch over with brickwork. And I believe the bridge which
carries the G.W.R. over the Thames at Maidenhead has the widest arch he
or any other engineer has successfully erected in brick. This arch has,
it is stated, a span of 128 ft. It is segmental, the radius being 169
ft., and the rise from springing to crown 24 ft., and the depth of the
arch 5 ft. 3 in. Nowadays, of course, no one would dream of anything but
an iron girder bridge in such a position. Mr. Brunel's father, when he
constructed the Thames Tunnel, lined it with brickwork foot by foot as
he went on, and that lining sustained the heavy weight of the bed of the
river and the river itself.

If you leave London by either of the southern lines, all of which are at
a high level, you go for miles on viaducts consisting of brick arches
carried on brick walls. If you leave by the northern lines, you plunge
into tunnel after tunnel lined with brickwork, and kept secure by such
lining. Mile after mile of London streets, and those in the suburbs,
present to the eye little but brick buildings; dwelling houses, shops,
warehouses, succeed one another, all in brickwork, and even when the eye
seems to catch a change, it is more apparent than real.

The white mansions of Tyburnia, Belgravia, South Kensington, and the
neat villas of the suburbs are only brickwork, with a thin coat of
stucco, which serves the purpose of concealing the real structure--often
only too much in need of concealment--with a material supposed to be a
little more sightly, and certainly capable of keeping the weather out
rather more effectually than common brickwork would.

More than this, such fine structures, apparently built entirely of
