solution of borax. For small specimens, this answered well, and a
signboard treated in that way (experiment No. 13) was preserved a long
time; but when applied to large timber, the process was found very
tedious and slow, and no headway has been made in introducing it.

Experiment No. 14 was brought about by accident. Some years age it was
discovered that there was a strip of road in the track of the Union
Pacific Railroad, in Wyoming Territory, about ten miles in length, where
the ties do not decay at all. The Chief Engineer, Mr. Blinkinsderfer,
kindly took up a cotton wood tie in 1882, which had been laid in 1868,
and sent a, piece of it to the committee. It is as sound and a good deal
harder than when first laid, 14 years before, while on some other parts
of the road cottonwood ties perish in two or five years.

The character of the soil where these results have been observed is
light and soapy, and Mr. E. Dickinson, Superintendent of the Laramie
Division, furnishes the following analysis:

  Sodium chloride     10.64
  Potassium            4.70
  Magnesium sulphate   1.70
  Silica               0.09
  Alumina              1.94
  Ferric oxide         5.84
  Calcium carbonate   22.33
  Magnesium            3.39
  Organic matter       4.20
  Insoluble matter   941.47
  Loss in analysis     4.00
  Traces of phosphorous acid and ammonia.

The following remarks made by the chemists who made the analysis may be
of interest:

"The decay of wood arises from the presence in the wood of substances
which are foreign to the woody fiber, but are present in the juices of
the wood while growing, and consist of albuminous matter, which, when
beginning to decay, causes also the destruction of the other
constituents of the wood."

"One of the means adopted to prevent the destruction of wood by decay is
by the chemical alteration of the constituents of the sap."

"This is brought about by impregnating the wood with some substance
which either enters into combination with the constitutents of the sap
or so alters their properties as to prevent the setting up of
decomposition."

"The analysis of this soil shows that it contains large quantities of
the substances (sodium, potassium chloride, calcium, and iron) most used
in the different processes of preserving or kyanizing wood. It also
contains much inorganic matter, which also acts as a preserving agent."

Some of the ties so preserved have been transferred to other portions of
the track, and some of the soil has also been transported to other
localities, so that it is hoped that in the discussion that may be
expected to follow this report, some further light will be thrown on the
subject by an account of the results of these experiments.

Experiments Nos. 15, 16, 17, and 18 are most instructive, and convey a
useful lesson.

In 1865 Mr. B.S. Foreman patented the application of a dry powder for
preserving wood, which was composed of certain proportions of salt,
arsenic, and corrosive sublimate. This action was based upon an
experience which he had had when, as a working mechanic of Ellisburg,
Jefferson County, N.Y., in 1838, he had preserved a water-wheel shaft by
inserting such a compound in powder in the body of the wood, and
ascertained that it was still sound some 14 years later.

His theory of the action of his compound upon timber was briefly this:

"That all wood before it can decay must ferment; that fermentation
cannot exist without heat and moisture; that the chemical property or
nature of his compound, when inserted dry into wood, is to attract
moisture, and this moisture, aided by fermentation, liquefies the
compound; that capillary attraction must inevitably convey it through
the sap ducts and medullary rays to every fiber of the stick.... Were
these crystallizations salt alone, they would soon dissolve, but the
arsenic and corrosive sublimate have rendered them insoluble; hence they
remain intact while any fiber of the wood is left."

"The antiseptic qualities of arsenic are also well known, and have been
known for centuries. Chemical analysis of the _mummies of Egypt_ to-day
shows the presence of arsenic in large quantities in every portion of
their substance. Whatever other ingredients may have entered into the
compound that has been so potent in preserving from decay the bodies of
the old kings of Egypt, and even the linen vestments of their tombs,
arsenic was most certainly one."

The mode of application used by Mr. Foreman was to bore holes two inches
in diameter three-fourths of the way through sticks of square timber,
four feet apart, to fill them with the dry powder, and to plug them up
with a bung. For railroad ties he bored two holes two inches in
diameter, six inches inside of the rails, and filled and plugged them.
Fresh cut lumber and shingles were prepared by piling layers upon each
other with the dry powder sprinkled between in the ratio of twenty
pounds to the thousand feet of lumber. This was allowed to remain at a
temperature of at least 458 deg. F. until fermentation took place, when the
lumber was considered fully "foremanized."

The process was first applied to the timber and lumber for a steamboat,
and in 1879 the result was reported to be favorable. It was then applied
to some ties on the Illinois Central Railroad, where it did not succeed,
and to some on the Chicago and Northwestern, where they seem to have
been lost sight of, being few in number, so that your committee has not
been able to learn the result.

Great expectations were, however, entertained, and a conditional sale
was made to various parties of the right of using the process, notably,
it is said, to the Memphis and Charleston Railroad for $50,000; and some
ten miles of ties were prepared on that road, when the poisonous nature
of the ingredients used brought about disaster.

Some shingles were prepared for a railroad freight house at East St.
Louis, but all the carpenters who put them on were taken very ill, and
one of them died.

The arsenic and corrosive sublimate effloresced from the ties along the
Memphis and Charleston Railroad. Cattle came and licked them for the
sake of the salt, and they died, so that the track for ten miles was
strewed with dead cattle. The farmers rose up in arms, and made the
railroad take up and burn the ties. The company promoting foremanizing
was sued and cast in heavy damages, and it went out of business.

In 1870 Mr. A.B. Tripler patented a mixture of arsenic and salt, and the
succeeding year a specimen of wood prepared under that patent was
submitted to the Board of Public Works of Washington, D.C., and examined
by its chemist, Mr. W.C. Tilden (experiment 19). He found the
impregnation uneven, and the absorptive power high, but he did not find
any arsenic, though its use was claimed.

The Samuel process (experiment 20) consisted in the injection, first, of
a solution of sulphate of iron, and afterward of common burnt lime. Mr.
Tilden reported the wood to be brittle, and the water used to test the
absorptive power to have been filled with threads of fungi in
forty-eight hours.

The Taylor process (experiment No. 21) used a solution of sulphide of
calcium in pyroligneous acid. It was condemned by Mr. Tilden.

The Waterbury process (experiment 22) consisted in forcing in a solution
of common salt, followed by dead oil or creosote. It was also condemned
by Mr. Tilden.

The examinations of Mr. Tilden extended to some fourteen different
processes, most of which have already been noticed in this report, and
their practical results given.

The Board of Public Works, however, laid down a considerable amount of
prepared wood pavement in Washington, all of which is understood to have
proved a dismal failure. After a good deal of inquiry, your committee
has been enabled to obtain information of the results of three of these
experiments.

The pine paving blocks upon Pennsylvania Avenue (experiment 23) were
first kiln-dried, and then immersed in a hot solution of sulphate of
iron.

The spruce blocks on E Street (experiment 24) were treated with chloride
of zinc, or, in other words, burnettized; but the mode of application is
not stated.

The pine blocks upon Sixteenth Street (experiment 25) were treated with
the residual products of petroleum distillation. It is stated that this
was the only process in which pressure was used.

In from three and a half to four and a half years the blocks were badly
decayed, and large portions of the streets were almost impassable, while
other streets paved in the same year with untreated woods remained in
fair condition.

It has been stated to your committee that this result, which did much
toward bringing all wood preserving processes into contempt, was chiefly
owing to the very dishonest way in which the preparation was done; that
in fact there was a combination between the officials and the
contractors by which the latter were chiefly interested "how not to do
it," and that the above results, therefore, prove very little on the
subject of wood preservation.

Through the kindness of the United States Navy Department your committee
is enabled to give the results of a series of experiments (Nos. 26 to 41
inclusive) which have been carried on at the Norfolk, Va., Navy Yard,
for a series of years, by Mr. P.C. Asserson, Civil Engineer, U.S.N., to
test the effect of various substances as a protection against the
_Teredo navalis_. It will be noticed that the application of two coats
of white zinc paint, of two coats of red lead, of coal tar and plaster
of Paris mixed, of kerosene oil, of rosin and tallow mixed, of fish oil
and tallow mixed and put on hot, of verdigris, of carbolic acid, of coal
tar and hydraulic cement, of Davis' patent insulating compound, of
compressed carbolized paper, of anti-fouling paint, of the Thilmany
process, and of "vulcanized fiber," have proved failures.

The only favorable results have been that oak piles cut in the month of
January and driven with the bark on have resisted four or five years, or
till the bark chafed or rubbed off, and that cypress piles, well
charred, have resisted for nine years.

This merely confirms the general conclusion which has been stated under
the head of creosoting, that nothing but the impregnation with creosote,
and plenty of it, is an effectual protection against the _teredo_.
Numberless experiments have been tried abroad and in this country, and
always with the same result.

There are quite a number of other experiments which your committee has
learned about which are here passed in silence. The accounts of them are
vague, or the promised results of such slight importance as not to
warrant cumbering with them this already too voluminous report.

The committee also forbears from discussing the merits of the many
patents which have been taken out for wood preservation. It had prepared
a list of them, and investigated the probable success of many of them,
but has concluded that it is better to confine itself to the results of
actual tests, and to stick to ascertained facts.

Neither does the committee feel called upon to point out the great
importance of the subject, and the economical advantages which will
result from the artificial preparation of wood as its price advances.
They hope, however, that the members of this Society, in discussing this
report, will dwell upon this point.

We shall instead give as briefly as possible the general conclusions
which we have reached as the result of our protracted investigation.


DECAY OF TIMBER.

Pure woody fiber is said by chemists to be composed of 52.4 parts of
carbon, 41.9 parts of oxygen, and 5.7 parts of hydrogen, and to be the
same in all the different varieties. If it can be entirely deprived of
the sap and of moisture, it undergoes change very slowly, if at all.

Decay originates with the sap. This varies from 35 to 55 per cent. of
the whole, when the tree is felled, and contains a great many
substances, such as albuminous matter, sugar, starch, resin, etc., etc.,
with a large portion of water.

Woody fiber alone will not decay, but when associated with the sap,
fermentation takes place in the latter (with such energy as may depend
upon its constituent elements), which acts upon the woody fiber, and
produces decay. In order that this may take place, it is believed that
there must be a concurrence of four separate conditions:

1st. The wood must contain the elements or germs of fermentation when
exposed to air and water.

2d. There must be water or moisture to promote the fermentation.

3d. There must be air present to oxidize the resulting products.

4th. The temperature must be approximately between 50 deg. and 100 deg. F. Below
32 deg. F. and above 150 deg. F., no decay occurs.

When, therefore, wood is exposed to the weather (air, moisture, and
ordinary temperatures), fermentation and decay will take place, unless
the germs can be removed or rendered inoperative.

Experience has proved that the coagulation of the sap retards, but does
not prevent, the decay of wood permanently.[1] It is therefore necessary
to poison the germs of decay which may exist, or may subsequently enter
the wood, or to prevent their intrusion, and this is the office
performed by the various antiseptics.

[Footnote 1: Angus Smith, 1869, "Disinfectants." S.B. Boulton, 1884,
Institution Civil Engineers, "On the Antiseptic Treatment of Timber."]

We need not here discuss the mooted question between chemists, whether
fermentation and decay result from slow combustion (eremacausis) or from
the presence of living organisms (bacteria, etc.); but having in the
preceding pages detailed the results of the application of various
antiseptics, we may now indicate under what circumstances they can
economically be applied.

_(To be continued)_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SPAN OF CABIN JOHN BRIDGE.


_To the Editor of the Scientific American Supplement:_

Your issue of 17th October contains the fifth or sixth imprint of Mr. B.
Baker's, C.E., recent address at the British Association of Aberdeen
which has come into my hands.

In speaking of stone bridges, he alludes to the bridge over the Adda as
500 years old. It was never more than 39 years old as stated in the same
address, and he belittles the American Cabin John Bridge by making its
span _"after all only 215 ft."_ As the builder of this greatest American
stone arch, I regret that on so important and public an occasion the
writer was not accurate.

The clear span of Cabin John Bridge is 220 ft. The difference is not
great, but in the length of a bridge span it is the last foot that
counts, as in an international yacht race to be beaten by one minute is
to fail to capture the cup.

M.C. MEIGS.

Washington, D.C., Oct. 16, 1885.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE GERMAN CORVETTE AUGUSTA.


On the 3d of June of this year, the German cruising corvette Augusta
left the island of Perrin, in the Straits of Bab el Mandeb, for
Australia; and as nothing has been heard of her since that day, the
report that she was destroyed in the typhoon on June 3 is probably
correct. The vessel left Kiel on April 28, with the crews for the
cruisers of the Australian squadron; 283 men were on board, including
the commander, Corvette Captain Von Gloeden. There is still a
possibility that the Augusta was dismasted, and is drifting somewhere in
the Indian Ocean, or has stranded on an island; but this is not very
probable, as the Augusta was not well adapted to weather a typhoon.
During her cruise of 1876 to 1878, all the upper masts, spars, etc, had
to be removed, that she might be better adapted to weather a cyclone or
like storm. If the Augusta had not met with an accident, she would have
arrived at Port Albany in Australia by the 30th of June or beginning of
July. She was due June 17.

The Augusta was built at Armands' ship yards at Bordeaux, and was bought
in 1864 by Prussia. She was a screw steamer with ship's rigging, 2371/2
feet long, 351/2 feet beam, 16 feet draught, and 1,543 tons burden. Her
engines had 400 horse-power, and her armament consisted of 14 pieces.

[Illustration: THE GERMAN CORVETTE AUGUSTA.]

During the Franco-German war of 1870-71, she was commanded by Captain
Weikhmann, and captured numerous vessels on the French coast. January 4,
1871, she captured the French brig St. Marc, in the mouth of the
Gironde; the brig was sailing from Dunkirken to Bordeaux with flour and
bread for the Third French Division. The Augusta then captured the
Pierre Adolph, loaded with wheat, which was being carried from Havre to
Bordeaux. Then the French transport steamer Max was captured and burned.
The French men of war finally forced the Augusta to retreat into the
Spanish port of Vigo, from which she sailed Jan. 28, and arrived March
28 at Kiel, with the captured brig St. Marc in tow.--_Illustrirte
Zeitung_.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVEMENT IN METAL WHEELS.


In the Inventions Exhibitions may be seen a good form of metal wheel,
the invention of Mr. H.J. Barrett, of Hull, Eng., and which we
illustrate.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. FIG. 2. FIG. 3.]

Fig. 1 is a perspective view of the wheel, Fig. 2 a transverse section,
and Fig. 3 a longitudinal section of the boss. These wheels are made in
two classes, A and B. Our engraving illustrates a wheel of the former
class, these wheels being designed for use on rough and uneven roads,
and when very great jolting strains may be met with, being stronger than
those of class B design. The wheels are made with mild steel spokes,
which are secured by metal straps in the recesses cut in the annular
flanges on the boss, and by a taper bolt or rivet through the tire and
rim. These spokes can be easily taken out and renewed when necessary by
any unskilled person in a few minutes. The spokes being twisted midway
of their length give greater strength to the wheel and power to resist
side strains in pulling out of deep ruts or holes, without increasing
the weight. The bosses and straps are made of malleable iron, in which
the metal bushes are secured by means of a key with a washer screwed up
on the front end. They are also fitted with steel oil caps to the end of
the bushes, which are provided with a small set screw, so that the cap
need not be taken off when it is necessary to lubricate the wheel, as by
simply taking out the set screw oil may be poured through the hole into
the cap. The set screw also forms a fulcrum for a key, so that the cap
can be taken off or put on when required, as well as a means of
preventing the cap being lost by shaking loose on rough roads. In all
hot and dry climates, the continued shrinking of wood wheels and
loosening of the tires is a constant source of expense and
inconvenience. This wheel having a tire and rim entirely of metal does
away with the difficulty, as the expansion and contraction are equal,
consequently the tires need only be removed when worn out, and others
can be supplied, drilled complete, ready for putting on, which can be
done by any unskilled person. The wheels of class B design are the same
in principle of construction as those of class A, but they have cast
metal bosses or naves, without loose bushes, and are suitable for
general work and ordinary roads where the strains are not so severe. The
bosses or naves are readily removed in case of breakage, and they can be
fitted with steel oil caps for lubricating.--_Iron_.

       *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS FOR THE PRODUCTION OF WATER GAS.


The apparatus shown in the accompanying engraving is designed for the
manufacture of water gas for heating purposes, and is described in a
communication, by Mr. W.A. Goodyear, to the American Institute of Mining
Engineers.

The generator, A, is lined with refractory bricks and is filled with
fuel, which may be coal, coke, or any suitable carbonaceous material. B
and B' are two series of regenerating chambers lined with refractory
brick, and, besides, filled with refractory bricks piled up as shown in
the figure. The partitions, C and C', are likewise of refractory brick,
and are rendered as air-proof as possible. Apertures, D and D', are
formed alternately at the base of one partition and the top of the
adjacent one, in order to oblige the gases that traverse the series of
chambers to descend in one of them and to rise in the following,
whatever be the number of chambers in use.

The two flues, E and E', lead from the bottom of the two nearest
regenerator on each side to the bottom of the generator A, and serve to
bring the current of air or steam into contact with the fuel. Valves, F
and F', placed in these flues, permit of regulating the current in the
two directions. Pipes, M and M', provided with valves, G and G', put the
upper part of the generator in communication with the contiguous
chambers, T and T'. Other pipes, N and N', with valves, H and H', permit
of the introduction of a current of air from the outside into the
chambers, T and T'. The pipes, O and O', and the valves, I and I',
connected with a blower, serve for the same purpose. The pipes, P and
P', and their valves, J and J', lead a current of steam. The conduits, Q
and Q', and their valves, K and K', direct the gases toward the
purifiers and the gasometer. Finally, the pipes, R and R', provided with
valves, L and L', are connected with a chimney.

The generator, A, is provided at its upper part with a feed hopper. The
doors, S and S', of the ash box close the apertures through which the
ashes are removed.

When it is desired to use the apparatus, the pipes, P, Q, and R, are
