stopped when we commence to look in the direction of such a theory with the
cynical question, What do you mean by explaining a property of matter? As
to being stopped by any such question, all I can say is that if engineering
were to be all and to end all physical science, we should perforce be
content with merely finding properties of matter by observation, and using
them for practical purposes. But I am sure very few, if any, engineers are
practically satisfied with so narrow a view of their noble profession. They
must and do patiently observe, and discover by observation, properties of
matter and results of material combinations. But deeper questions are
always present, and always fraught with interest to the true engineer, and
he will be the last to give weight to any other objection to any attempt to
see below the surface of things than the practical question, Is it likely
to prove wholly futile? But now, instead of imagining the question, What do
you mean by explaining a property of matter? to be put cynically, and
letting ourselves be irritated by it, suppose we give to the questioner
credit for being sympathetic, and condescend to try and answer his
question. We find it not very easy to do so. All the properties of matter
are so connected that we can scarcely imagine one _thoroughly explained_
without our seeing its relation to all the others, without in fact having
the explanation of all; and till we have this we cannot tell what we mean
by "explaining a property" or "explaining the properties" of matter. But
though this consummation may never be reached by man, the progress of
science may be, I believe will be, step by step toward it, on many
different roads converging toward it from all sides. The kinetic theory of
gases is, as I have said, a true step on one of the roads. On the very
distinct road of chemical science, St. Claire Deville arrived at his grand
theory of dissociation without the slightest aid from the kinetic theory of
gases. The fact that he worked it out solely from chemical observation and
experiment, and expounded it to the world without any hypothesis whatever,
and seemingly even without consciousness of the beautiful explanation it
has in the kinetic theory of gases, secured for it immediately an
independent solidity and importance as a chemical theory when he first
promulgated it, to which it might even by this time scarcely have attained
if it had first been suggested as a probability indicated by the kinetic
theory of gases, and been only afterward confirmed by observation. Now,
however, guided by the views which Clausius and Williamson have given us of
the continuous interchange of partners between the compound molecules
constituting chemical compounds in the gaseous state, we see in Deville's
theory of dissociation a point of contact of the most transcendent interest
between the chemical and physical lines of scientific progress.

To return to elasticity: if we could make out of matter devoid of
elasticity a combined system of relatively moving parts which, in virtue of
motion, has the essential characteristics of an elastic body, this would
surely be, if not positively a step in the kinetic theory of matter, at
least a fingerpost pointing a way which we may hope will lead to a kinetic
theory of matter. Now this, as I have already shown,[1] we can do in
several ways. In the case of the last of the communications referred to, of
which only the title has hitherto been published, I showed that, from the
mathematical investigation of a gyrostatically dominated combination
contained in the passage of Thomson and Tait's "Natural Philosophy"
referred to, it follows that any ideal system of material particles, acting
on one another mutually through massless connecting springs, may be
perfectly imitated in a model consisting of rigid links jointed together,
and having rapidly rotating fly wheels pivoted on some or on all of the
links. The imitation is not confined to cases of equilibrium. It holds also
for vibration produced by disturbing the system infinitesimally from a
position of stable equilibrium and leaving it to itself. Thus we may make a
gyrostatic system such that it is in equilibrium under the influence of
certain positive forces applied to different points of this system; all the
forces being precisely the same as, and the points of application similarly
situated to, those of the stable system with springs. Then, provided proper
masses (that is to say, proper amounts and distributions of inertia) be
attributed to the links, we may remove the external forces from each
system, and the consequent vibration of the points of application of the
forces will be identical. Or we may act upon the systems of material points
and springs with any given forces for any given time, and leave it to
itself, and do the same thing for the gyrostatic system; the consequent
motion will be the same in the two cases. If in the one case the springs
are made more and more stiff, and in the other case the angular velocities
of the fly wheels are made greater and greater, the periods of the
vibrational constituents of the motion will become shorter and shorter, and
the amplitudes smaller and smaller, and the motions will approach more and
more nearly those of two perfectly rigid groups of material points moving
through space and rotating according to the well known mode of rotation of
a rigid body having unequal moments of inertia about its three principal
axes. In one case the ideal nearly rigid connection between the particles
is produced by massless, exceedingly stiff springs; in the other case it is
produced by the exceedingly rapid rotation of the fly wheels in a system
which, when the fly wheels are deprived of their rotation, is perfectly
limp.

[Footnote 1: Paper on "Vortex Atoms," _Proc_. R.S.E. February. 1867:
abstract of a lecture before the Royal Institution of Great Britain, March
4, 1881, on "Elasticity Viewed as possibly a Mode of Motion"; Thomson and
Tait's "Natural Philosophy," second edition, part 1, Sec.Sec. 345 viii. to 345
xxxvii.; "On Oscillation and Waves in an Adynamic Gyrostatic System" (title
only), _Proc_. R.S.E. March, 1883.]

The drawings (Figs. 1 and 2) before you illustrate two such material
systems.[1] The directions of rotation of the fly-wheels in the gyrostatic
system (Fig. 2) are indicated by directional ellipses, which show in
perspective the direction of rotation of the fly-wheel of each gyrostat.
The gyrostatic system (Fig. 2) might have been constituted of two
gyrostatic members, but four are shown for symmetry. The inclosing circle
represents in each case in section an inclosing spherical shell to prevent
the interior from being seen. In the inside of one there are fly-wheels, in
the inside of the other a massless spring. The projecting hooked rods seem
as if they are connected by a spring in each case. If we hang any one of
the systems up by the hook on one of its projecting rods, and hang a weight
to the hook of the other projecting rod, the weight, when first put on,
will oscillate up and down, and will go on doing so for ever if the system
be absolutely unfrictional. If we check the vibration by hand, the weight
will hang down at rest, the pin drawn out to a certain degree; and the
distance drawn out will be simply proportional to the weight hung on, as in
an ordinary spring balance.

[Footnote 1: In Fig. 1 the two hooked rods seen projecting from the sphere
are connected by an elastic coach-spring. In Fig. 2 the hooked rods are
connected one to each of two opposite corners of a four-sided jointed
frame, each member of which carries a gyrostat so that the axis of rotation
of the fly-wheel is in the axis of the member of the frame which bears it.
Each of the hooked rods in Fig. 2 is connected to the framework through a
swivel joint, so that the whole gyrostatic framework may be rotated about
the axis of the hooked rods in order to annul the moment of momentum of the
framework about this axis due to rotation of the fly-wheels in the
gyrostat.]

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

[Illustration: FIG. 2]

Here, then, out of matter possessing rigidity, but absolutely devoid of
elasticity, we have made a perfect model of a spring in the form of a
spring balance. Connect millions of millions of particles by pairs of rods
such as these of this spring balance, and we have a group of particles
constituting an elastic solid; exactly fulfilling the mathematical ideal
worked out by Navier, Poisson, and Cauchy, and many other mathematicians,
who, following their example, have endeavored to found a theory of the
elasticity of solids on mutual attraction and repulsion between a group of
material particles. All that can possibly be done by this theory, with its
assumption of forces acting according to any assumed law of relation to
distance, is done by the gyrostatic system. But the gyrostatic system does,
besides, what the system of naturally acting material particles cannot
do--it constitutes an elastic solid which can have the Faraday
magneto-optic rotation of the plane of polarization of light; supposing the
application of our solid to be a model of the luminiferous ether for
illustrating the undulatory theory of light. The gyrostatic model spring
balance is arranged to have zero moment of momentum as a whole, and
therefore to contribute nothing to the Faraday rotation; with this
arrangement the model illustrates the luminiferous ether in a field
unaffected by magnetic force. But now let there be a different rotational
velocity imparted to the jointed square round the axis of the two
projecting hooked rods, such as to give a resultant moment of momentum
round any given line through the center of inertia of the system; and let
pairs of the hooked rods in the model thus altered, which is no longer a
model of a mere spring balance, be applied as connections between millions
of pairs of particles as before, with the lines of resultant moment of
momentum all similarly directed. We now have a model elastic solid which
will have the property that the direction of vibration in waves of
rectilinear vibrations propagated through it shall turn round the line of
propagation of the waves, just as Faraday's observation proves to be done
by the line of vibration of light in a dense medium between the poles of a
powerful magnet. The case of wave front perpendicular to the lines of
resultant moment of momentum (that is to say, the direction of propagation
being parallel to these lines) corresponds, in our mechanical model, to the
case of light traveling in the direction of the lines of force in a
magnetic field.

In these illustrations and models we have different portions of ideal rigid
matter acting upon one another, by normal pressure at mathematical points
of contact--of course no forces of friction are supposed. It is exceedingly
interesting to see how thus, with no other postulates than inertia,
rigidity, and mutual impenetrability, we can thoroughly model not only an
elastic solid, and any combination of elastic solids, but so complex and
recondite a phenomenon as the passage of polarized light through a magnetic
field. But now, with the view of ultimately discarding the postulate of
rigidity from all our materials, let us suppose some to be absolutely
destitute of rigidity, and to possess merely inertia and incompressibility,
and mutual impenetrability with reference to the still remaining rigid
matter. With these postulates we can produce a perfect model of mutual
action at a distance between solid particles, fulfilling the condition, so
keenly desired by Newton and Faraday, of being explained by continuous
action through an intervening medium. The law of the mutual force in our
model, however, is not the simple Newtonian law, but the much more complex
law of the mutual action between electro magnets--with this difference,
that in the hydro-kinetic model in every case the force is opposite in
direction to the corresponding force in the electro-magnetic analogue.
Imagine a solid bored through with a hole, and placed in our ideal perfect
liquid. For a moment let the hole be stopped by a diaphragm, and let an
impulsure pressure be applied for an instant uniformly over the whole
membrane, and then instantly let the membrane be dissolved into liquid.
This action originates a motion of the liquid relatively to the solid, of a
kind to which I have given the name of "irrotational circulation," which
remains absolutely constant however the solid be moved through the liquid.
Thus, at any time the actual motion of the liquid at any point in the
neighborhood of the solid will be the resultant of the motion it would have
in virtue of the circulation alone, were the solid at rest, and the motion
it would have in virtue of the motion of the solid itself, had there been
no circulation established through the aperture. It is interesting and
important to remark in passing that the whole kinetic energy of the liquid
is the sum of the kinetic energies which it would have in the two cases
separately. Now, imagine the whole liquid to be inclosed in an infinitely
large, rigid, containing vessel, and in the liquid, at an infinite distance
from any part of the containing vessel, let two perforated solids, with
irrotational circulation through each, be placed at rest near one another.
The resultant fluid motion due to the two circulations, will give rise to
fluid pressure on the two bodies, which, if unbalanced, will cause them to
move. The force systems--force-and-torques, or pairs of forces--required to
prevent them from moving will be mutual and opposite, and will be the same
as, but opposite in direction to, the mutual force systems required to hold
at rest two electromagnets fulfilling the following specification: The two
electro magnets are to be of the same shape and size as the two bodies, and
to be placed in the same relative positions, and to consist of infinitely
thin layers of electric currents in the surfaces of solids possessing
extreme diamagnetic quality--in other words, infinitely small permeability.
The distribution of electric current on each body may be any whatever which
fulfills the condition that the total current across any closed line drawn
on the surface once through the aperture is equal to 1/4 [pi] of the
circulation[1] through the aperture in the hydro-kinetic analogue.

[Footnote 1: The integral of tangential component velocity all round any
closed curve, passing once through the aperture, is defined as the
"cyclic-constant" or the "circulation" ("Vortex Motion," Sec. 60 (a), _Trans_.
R.S.E., April 29, 1867). It has the same value for all closed curves
passing just once through the aperture, and it remains constant through all
time, whether the solid body be in motion or at rest.]

It might be imagined that the action at a distance thus provided for by
fluid motion could serve as a foundation for a theory of the equilibrium,
and the vibrations, of elastic solids, and the transmission of waves like
those of light through an extended quasi-elastic solid medium. But
unfortunately for this idea the equilibrium is essentially unstable, both
in the case of magnets and, notwithstanding the fact that the forces are
oppositely directed, in the hydro-kinetic analogue also, when the several
movable bodies (two or any greater number) are so placed relatively as to
be in equilibrium. If, however, we connect the perforated bodies with
circulation through them in the hydro-kinetic system, by jointed rigid
connecting links, we may arrange for configurations of stable equilibrium.
Thus, without fly-wheels, but with fluid circulations through apertures, we
may make a model spring balance or a model luminiferous ether, either
without or with the rotational quality corresponding to that of the true
luminiferous ether in the magnetic fluid--in short, do all by the
perforated solids with circulations through them that we saw we could do by
means of linked gyrostats. But something that we cannot do by linked
gyrostats we can do by the perforated bodies with fluid circulation: we can
make a model gas. The mutual action at a distance, repulsive or attractive
according to the mutual aspect of the two bodies when passing within
collisional distance[1] of one another, suffices to produce the change of
direction of motion in collision, which essentially constitutes the
foundation of the kinetic theory of gases, and which, as we have seen
before, may as well be due to attraction as to repulsion, so far as we know
from any investigation hitherto made in this theory.

[Footnote 1: According to this view, there is no precise distance, or
definite condition respecting the distance, between two molecules, at which
apparently they come to be in collision, or when receding from one another
they cease to be in collision. It is convenient, however, in the kinetic
theory of gases, to adopt arbitrarily a precise definition of collision,
according to which two bodies or particles mutually acting at a distance
may be said to be in collision when their mutual action exceeds some
definite arbitrarily assigned limit, as, for example, when the radius of
curvature of the path of either body is less than a stated fraction (one
one-hundredth, for instance) of the distance between them.]

There remains, however, as we have seen before, the difficulty of providing
for the case of actual impacts between the solids, which must be done by
giving them massless spring buffers or, which amounts to the same thing,
attributing to them repulsive forces sufficiently powerful at very short
distances to absolutely prevent impacts between solid and solid; unless we
adopt the equally repugnant idea of infinitely small perforated solids,
with infinitely great fluid circulations through them. Were it not for this
fundamental difficulty, the hydro-kinetic model gas would be exceedingly
interesting; and, though we could scarcely adopt it as conceivably a true
representation of what gases really are, it might still have some
importance as a model configuration of solid and liquid matter, by which
without elasticity the elasticity of true gas might be represented.

But lastly, since the hydro-kinetic model gas with perforated solids and
fluid circulations through them fails because of the impacts between the
solids, let us annul the solids and leave the liquid performing
irrotational circulation round vacancy,[1] in the place of the solid cores
which we have hitherto supposed; or let us annul the rigidity of the solid
cores of the rings, and give them molecular rotation according to
Helmholtz's theory of vortex motion. For stability the molecular rotation
must be such as to give the same velocity at the boundary of the rotational
fluid core as that of the irrotationally circulating liquid in contact with
it, because, as I have proved, frictional slip between two portions of
liquid in contact is inconsistent with stability. There is a further
condition, upon which I cannot enter into detail just now, but which may be
understood in a general way when I say that it is a condition of either
uniform or of increasing molecular rotation from the surface inward,
analogous to the condition that the density of a liquid, resting for
example under the influence of gravity, must either be uniform or must be
greater below than above for stability of equilibrium. All that I have said
in favor of the model vortex gas composed of perforated solids with fluid
circulations through them holds without modification for the purely
hydro-kinetic model, composed of either Helmholtz cored vortex rings or of
coreless vortices, and we are now troubled with no such difficulty as that
of the impacts between solids. Whether, however, when the vortex theory of
gases is thoroughly worked out, it will or will not be found to fail in a
manner analogous to the failure which I have already pointed out in
connection with the kinetic theory of gases composed of little elastic
solid molecules, I cannot at present undertake to speak with certainty. It
seems to me most probable that the vortex theory cannot fail in any such
way, because all I have been able to find out hitherto regarding the
vibration of vortices,[2] whether cored or coreless, does not seem to imply
the liability of translational or impulsive energies of the individual
vortices becoming lost in energy of smaller and smaller vibrations.

[Footnote 1: Investigations respecting coreless vortices will be found in a
paper by the author, "Vibrations of a Columnar Vortex," _Proc_. R.S.E.,
March 1, 1880; and a paper by Hicks, recently read before the Royal
Society.]

[Footnote 2: See papers by the author "On Vortex Motion." _Trans_. R.S.E.
April, 1867, and "Vortex Statics," _Proc_. R.S.E. December, 1875; also a
paper by J.J. Thomson, B.A., "On the Vibrations of a Vortex Ring," _Trans_.
R.S. December, 1881, and his valuable book on "Vortex Motion."]

As a step toward kinetic theory of matter, it is certainly most interesting
to remark that in the quasi-elasticity, elasticity looking like that of an
India-rubber band, which we see in a vibrating smoke-ring launched from an
elliptic aperture, or in two smoke-rings which were circular, but which
have become deformed from circularity by mutual collision, we have in
reality a virtual elasticity in matter devoid of elasticity, and even
devoid of rigidity, the virtual elasticity being due to motion, and
generated by the generation of motion.

       *       *       *       *       *




APPLICATION OF ELECTRICITY TO TRAMWAYS.

By M. HOLROYD SMITH.


Last year, when I had the pleasure of reading a paper before you on my new
system of electric tramways, I ventured to express the hope that before
twelve months had passed, "to be able to report progress," and I am happy
to say that notwithstanding the wearisome delay and time lost in fruitless
negotiations, and the hundred and one difficulties within and without that
have beset me, I am able to appear before you again and tell you of
advance.

[Illustration: FIG. 1]

Practical men know well that there is a wide difference between a model and
a full sized machine; and when I decided to construct a full sized tramcar
and lay out a full sized track, I found it necessary to make many
alterations of detail, my chief difficulty being so to design my work as to
facilitate construction and allow of compensation for that inaccuracy of
workmanship which I have come to regard as inevitable.

In order to satisfy the directors of a tramway company of the practical
nature of my system before disturbing their lines, I have laid, in a field
near the works of Messrs. Smith, Baker & Co., Manchester, a track 110 yards
long, 4 ft. 81/2 in. gauge, and I have constructed a full sized street
tramcar to run thereon. My negotiations being with a company in a town
where there are no steep gradients, and where the coefficient of friction
of ordinary wheels would be sufficient for all tractive purposes, I thought
it better to avoid the complication involved in employing a large central
wheel with a broad surface specially designed for hilly districts, and with
which I had mounted a gradient of one in sixteen.

[Illustration: FIG. 2]

But as the line in question was laid with all the curves unnecessarily
quick, even those in the "pass-bies," I thought it expedient to employ
differential gear, as illustrated at D, Fig. 1, which is a sketch plan
showing the mechanism employed. M is a Siemens electric motor running at
650 revolutions per minute; E is a combination of box gearing, frictional
clutch, and chain pinion, and from this pinion a steel chain passes around
the chain-wheel, H, which is free to revolve upon the axle, and carries
within it the differential pinion, gearing with the bevel-wheel, B squared, keyed
upon the sleeve of the loose tram-wheel, T squared, and with the bevel-wheel, B,
keyed upon the axle, to which the other tram-wheel, T, is attached. To the
other tram-wheels no gear is connected; one of them is fast to the axle,
and the other runs loose, but to them the brake is applied in the usual
manner.

The electric current from the collector passes, by means of a copper wire,
and a switch upon the dashboard of the car, and resistance coils placed
under the seats, to the motor, and from the motor by means of an adjustable
clip (illustrated in diagram, Fig. 2) to the axles, and by them through the
four wheels to the rails, which form the return circuit.

[Illustration: FIG. 3]

I have designed many modifications of the track, but it is, perhaps, best
at present to describe only that which I have in actual use, and it is
illustrated in diagram, Fig. 3, which is a sectional and perspective view
of the central channel. L is the surface of the road, and SS are the
sleepers, CC are the chairs which hold the angle iron, AA forming the
longitudinally slotted center rail and the electric lead, which consists of
two half-tubes of copper insulated from the chairs by the blocks, I, I. A
special brass clamp, free to slide upon the tube, is employed for this
purpose, and the same form of clamp serves to join the two ends of the
copper tubes together and to make electric contact. Two half-tubes instead
of one slotted tube have been employed, in order to leave a free passage
for dirt or wet to fall through the slot in the center rail to the drain
space, G. Between chair and chair hewn granite or artificial stone is
employed, formed, as shown in the drawing, to complete the surface of the
road and to form a continuous channel or drain. In order that this drain
may not become choked, at suitable intervals, in the length of the track,
sump holes are formed as illustrated in diagram, Fig. 4 These sump holes
have a well for the accumulation of mud, and are also connected with the
main street drain, so that water can freely pass away. The hand holes
afford facility for easily removing the dirt.

In a complete track these hand holes would occasionally be wider than shown
here, for the purpose of removing or fixing the collector, Fig. 5, which
consists of two sets of spirally fluted rollers free to revolve upon
spindles, which are held by knuckle-joints drawn together by spiral
springs; by this means the pressure of the rollers against the inside of
the tube is constantly maintained, and should any obstruction occur in the
tube the spiral flute causes it to revolve, thus automatically cleansing
the tubes.

[Illustration: FIG. 4]

The collector is provided with two steel plates, which pass through the
slit in the center rail; the lower ends of these plates are clamped by the
upper frame of the collector, insulating material being interposed, and the
upper ends are held in two iron cheeks. Between these steel plates
insulated copper strips are held, electrically connected with the collector
and with the adjustable clip mounted upon the iron cheeks; this clip holds
the terminal on the end of the wire (leading to the motor) firmly enough
for use, the cheeks being also provided with studs for the attachment of
leather straps hooked on to the framework of the car, one for the forward
and one for backward movement of the collector. These straps are strong
enough for the ordinary haulage of the collector, and for the removal of
pebbles and dirt that may get into the slit; but should any absolute block
occur then they break and the terminal is withdrawn from the clip; the
electric contact being thereby broken the car stops, the obstruction can
then be removed and the collector reconnected without damage and with
little delay.

[Illustration: FIG. 5]

In order to secure continuity of the center rail throughout the length of
the track, and still provide for the removal of the collector at frequent
intervals, the framework of the collector is so made that, by slackening
the side-bolts, the steel plates can be drawn upward and the collector
itself withdrawn sideways through the hand holes, one of the half-tubes
being removed for the purpose.
