logwood, fustic, cudbear, etc., as to fastness against light, and
excellently stand fulling. We allude to the alizarine dyestuffs, which
have long since been introduced and are largely employed in cotton dyeing
and printing.

Alizarine, which has been extensively discussed in various articles in
our journal, is the coloring matter contained in the madder root. In
1869, two German chemists, Graebe and Liebermann, succeeded in
artificially producing this dyestuff from anthracene, a component of
coal-tar. The artificial dyestuff being perfectly pure and free from
those contaminations which render the use of madder difficult, it soon
was preferred to the latter, which it has at present nearly completely
displaced.

The discovery of alizarine red was soon followed by those of alizarine
orange, galleine, coeruleine, and, in 1878, of alizarine blue.

The slow adoption of these dyestuffs in the wool-dyeing industry is
principally attributable to the deep-rooted distrust of wool dyers
against any innovation. This resistance, however, is speedily
disappearing, as every manufacturer and dyer trying the new dyestuffs
invariably finds that they are in no respect inferior to his fastest dyes
produced with indigo and madder, but are simpler to apply and more
advantageous for wool.

The alizarine colors are dyed after an old method which is known to every
wool dyer. The wool is first boiled for 11/2 hours with chromate of potash
and tartar, then dyed upon a fresh bath by 21/2 to 3 hours' boiling. All
alizarine colors (such as those of the Badische Anilin und Soda Fabrik,
of Ludwigshafen and Stuttgart; Wm. Pickhardt & Kuttroff, New York,
Boston, and Philadelphia, viz.):

    Alizarine orange W, for brown orange,
    Alizarine red WR, for yellow touch ponceau or scarlet,
    Alizarine red WB, for blue touch yellow or scarlet,
    Alizarine blue WX and SW, for bright blue,
    Alizarine blue WR SRW, for dark reddish blue,
    Coeruleine W and SW, for green, and
    Galleine W, for dahlia,

are dyed after the same method, which offers the great advantage that all
these colors can be dyed upon one bath, and that by their mixture
numerous fast colors can be produced. On the ground of numerous careful
experiments, the writer recommends the following method, which gives well
developed and well fixed colors, viz.:

For 100 kil.--The scoured and washed wool is mordanted by boiling for 11/2
hours in a bath containing 3 kil. chromate of potash and 21/2 kil. tartar,
and lightly rinsed; when it can immediately be dyed. For 1,000 lit.
water, 1 lit. acetic acid of about 7 deg. Be. is added to the bath. If the
water is very hard, double the quantity of acetic acid, which is
indispensable, is added. Then the required quantity of dyestuff is added,
well stirred, the wool entered, and the temperature raised to boiling,
which is continued for 21/2 to 3 hours, that is, until a sample taken does
no longer surrender any color to a hot solution of soap. Loose wool and
worsted slubbing can be entered at 60 deg. C. (140 deg. F.). In dyeing yarn and
piece-goods, however, it is advisable to enter the bath cold, work for
about 1/4 hour in the cold, and then slowly to raise the temperature in
about one hour to the boiling point. With this precaution, level and
thoroughly dyed goods are always obtained. If the wool is entered in a
hot bath, or if it is rapidly brought to a boil, the dyestuff is too
rapidly fixed by the mordant and is liable to run up unevenly, and, with
piece-goods, more superficially. For the same reason the goods must
always be well wetted out before entering the bath.

We add some special recipes for the various colors, the mordant for all
of them being of 3 per cent. chromate of potash and 21/2 per cent. tartar
for 100 by weight of dry wool.

1. _Orange, Brown Touch_.
20 kil. wool, mordant with 600 grm. chromate of potash and 500 grm.
tartar, dye with 3 kil. alizarine orange W.

2. _Ponceau, Yellow Touch_.

20 kil. wool, mordant as for No. 1, dye with 2 kil. alizarine red WR 20
per cent.

3. _Ponceau, Blue Touch_.

20 kil. wool, mordant like No. 1, dye with 2 kil. alizarine red WB 20 per
cent.

4. _Dahlia_.

20 kil. wool, mordant like No. 1, dye with 5 kil. galleine W.

5. _Green_.

20 kil. wool, mordant like No. 1, dye with 6 kil. coeruleine W.

_For Piece-goods._

20 kil cloth, mordant the same, dye with 1 kil. 200 grm. coeruleine SW.

6. _Blue, Bright_.

20 kil. wool, mordant the same, dye with 6 kil. alizarine blue WX.

_For Piece-goods._

20 kil. cloth, mordant the same, dye with 1 kil. 200 grm. alizarine blue
SW.

7. _Blue, Dark and Red Touch_.

20 kil. wool, mordant like No. 1, dye with 6 kil. alizarine blue WR.

_For Piece-goods._

20 kil. cloth, mordant the same, dye with 1 kil. 200 grm. alizarine blue
SRW.

Particular stress is to be laid upon the great fastness of the alizarine
dyes against light and fulling. Besides, these dyestuffs contain nothing
whatever injurious to the wool fiber. Sanders, which very much tenders
the wool, as every dyer knows, can in all cases be replaced by alizarine
red and alizarine orange, making an end to the spinners' frequent
complaints about too much waste.

Alizarine blue in particular seems to be destined to replace indigo in
the majority of its applications, having at least the same power of
resisting light and acids, and relieving the dyer of the troublesome,
protracted rinsings required for indigo dyed goods. Every piece-dyer
knows that the medium and dark indigo blue goods still rub off, even
after eight hours' rinsing; but alizarine blue pieces are perfectly dyed
through and clean after one hour of rinsing. Another advantage of
alizarine blue and the other alizarine dyestuffs is that they unite with
all wood colors, as well as with indigo carmine and all aniline
dyestuffs. A fine and cheap dark blue, for instance, is obtained by
mordanting the wool as above stated and dyeing (20 kil.) in the second
bath with 6 kil. alizarine WX and 2 kil. logwood chips; the wood is added
to the bath together with the alizarine blue WX, and the best method is
to put it into a bag which is hung in the bath.--_D. Woll.-Gew.; Tex.
Colorist._

       *       *       *       *       *




Papier mache has come of late to be largely used in the manufacture of
theatrical properties, and nearly all the magnificent vases, the handsome
plaques, the graceful statues, and the superb gold and silver plate seen
to-day on the stage are made of that material.

       *       *       *       *       *




CEMENT PAVING.


The streets of "Old London" at the recent Inventions Exhibition at South
Kensington were paved with a material in imitation of old, worn bowlder
stones and red, herring-boned brickwork, all in one piece from one side
of the street to the other. The composition is made by Wilkes' Metallic
Flooring Company, out of a mixture consisting chiefly of iron slag and
Portland cement, a compound possessing properties which won the only gold
medal given for paving at that Exhibition. At the present time the
colonnade in Pall Mall, near Her Majesty's Theater, is being laid with
this paving, which is also being extensively used in London and the
provinces for roads, tramways, and flooring; the composition is likewise
sometimes cast into artistic forms for the ornamentation of buildings, or
into slabs for roofing, facing, and other purposes. The subway from the
Exhibition to the District Railway is laid with the same material.

The works of the Wilkes Metallic Flooring Company are in the goods yard
of the Midland Railway Company at West Kensington. The Portland cement,
before it is accepted at the works, is tested by means of an Aidie's
machine. The general strain the set cement is required to bear is 750 lb.
to the square inch. All samples which will not bear a strain of 500 lb.
are rejected. The various iron slags are carefully selected, and rejected
when too soft, and at the works a small percentage of black slag, rich in
iron, is mixed in with them. The lumps of slag are first crushed in a
Mason & Co.'s stone breaker, and then sifted through 1/8 in., 1/4 in.,
and 1/16 in. wire meshes into these three sizes for mixing. Next the
granulated substance is thoroughly well washed with water to remove
soluble matter and impalpable dust, and afterward placed where it is
protected from the access of dust and dirt. The washing waters carry off
some sulphides, as well as mechanical impurities. The Portland cement is
not used just as it, comes from the works, but is exposed to the air in a
drying room for about fourteen days, and turned over two or three times
during that period. The slag is also turned over three times dry and
three times wet, and mixed with the Portland cement by means of water
containing 5 per cent. of "Reekie" cement to make the whole mass set
quickly. The mixture is then turned over twice and put into moulds; each
mould is first half filled, and the mixture then hammered down with iron
beaters. The rest of the composition is then poured in, beaten down, and
the whole mould violently jolted by machinery to shake down the mixture
and to get rid of air holes. While it is still wet the casting is taken
out of the mould, its edges are cleaned, and after the lapse of one day
it is placed in a bath, of silicate of soda. Should the casting be
allowed to get dry before it is placed in this bath, no good results
would be obtained; it is left in the bath for seven days. When delicate
stone carvings have to be copied, the moulds are of a compound of
gelatine, from the flexible nature of which material designs much
undercut can be reproduced. For the foregoing particulars we are indebted
to Mr. William Millar, the working manager at West Kensington. Sometimes
the composition is cast in large, heavy slabs, moulded on the top to
resemble the surface of roads of granite blocks. A feature of the
invention is the rapidity with which the composition sets. For instance,
the manager states that a roadway was finished at the Inventions
Exhibition at seven o'clock one night, and at six o'clock next morning
four or five tons of paper in vans passed over it into the building,
without doing any harm to the new road. In laying down roads, much of the
preparation of the material is done on the spot, and the composition
after being put down unsilicated in a large layer has the required design
stamped upon its wet surface by means of wooden or gutta-percha moulds.
As regards the durability of the composition, Mr. T. Grover, one of the
directors, says that the company guarantees its paving work for ten
years, and that the paving, the whole of the ornamental tracings, and
some of the other work at Upton Church, Forest Gate, Essex, were executed
by means of Wilkes' metallic cement three years ago, and will now bear
examination as to its resistance to the action of weather. Some of this
paving has been down in Oxford Street, London, for more than six years.
Mr. A.R. Robinson, C.E., London agent of the company, states that the
North Metropolitan Tramway Company has about 25,000 yards of it in use at
the present time, and that the paving is largely used by the War Office
for cavalry stables. The latter is a good test, for paving for stables
must be non-slippery and have good power of resisting chemical action.

In the Wm. Millar and Christian Fair Nichols patent for "Improvements in
the means of accelerating the setting and hardening of cements," they
take advantage of the hydraulicity of certain of the salts of magnesia,
by which the cements set hard and quickly while wet. For accelerating the
setting of cements they use carbonate of soda, alum, and carbonate of
ammonia; for indurating or increasing the hardening properties of cements
they use chloride of calcium, oxide of magnesia, and chloride of magnesia
or bittern water; for obtaining an intense hardness they use oxychloride
of magnesia. The inventors do not bind themselves to any fixed
proportions, but give the following as the best within their knowledge.
For colored concretes for casts or other purposes they use Carbonate of
soda, 8.41; carbonate of ammonia, 1.12; chloride of magnesia, 0.28;
borax, 0.56; water, 89.63; total, 100.00. For gray concrete for any
purpose they use: Alum, 8.46; caustic soda, 0.28; whitening or chalk,
0.56; borax, 0.56; water, 90.14; total, 100.00. For floors or slabs _in
situ_ they add to cement, well mixed and incorporated with any required
proportion of agglomerate for a base, liquid composition of the following
proportions: Oxide of magnesia, 0.29; chloride of magnesia, 0.29;
carbonate of soda or alum, 4.74; water, 94.68; total, 100.00. Articles
manufactured by the invention are afterward wetted with chloride of
calcium and placed in a bath containing a solution of silicate of soda or
chloride of calcium. The strength of the chloride of calcium is equal to
about 20 deg. specific gravity.

C.A. Wilkes and William Millar's improved "metallic compound for
flooring, paving, and other purposes," has for its object to provide a
paving compound which is not slippery or liable to soften in hot weather,
which sets rapidly, and is durable. To three parts of blast furnace slag
are added one part of hydraulic cement and enough water to give the
proper consistency. To each gallon of water used is added one part of
bittern water--the dregs from the manufacture of sea salt--or one part
of brine, or about 5 per cent. of carbonate of soda, and 21/2 per cent. of
carbonate of ammonia. In the compound they sometimes use potash in the
proportion of about 5 per cent. of the carbonate of ammonia and carbonate
of soda, and when potash is used with bittern water or brine, the
proportion of the latter is correspondingly reduced. The compound is of a
blue gray color; but when a more striking color is desired, red or yellow
oxide of iron may be added. When more speedy induration is necessary,
they add about 1 oz. of copperas to every gallon of compound used. The
claim is the admixture of bittern water, carbonate of soda, and carbonate
of ammonia with the washed slag and cement.

Another improvement, by C.A. Wilkes, relates, in laying _in situ_ any
metallic or other materials for street roadways, to completing the
convenience thereof by roughening or grooving the surfaces. The concrete
is laid in a plastic condition upon a bed of hard core, broken stone, or
preferably rough concrete. For footpaths the material may be laid in
convenient sections, say 4 ft. to 8 ft. square and 2 in. to 4 in. thick;
and in order to allow for the expansion of the material during the
setting of the sections or subsequent variations in temperature, he packs
the joints between the sections with a layer of felting cloth or other
compressible material, thus forming expansion joints. Sometimes he
slightly roughens the surface of the material, to give better foothold to
pedestrians. Sometimes the grooving is made in imitation of ordinary
granite paving sets. In tramway pavement there are grooves to give a grip
to the horses' feet, and a slight camber between the rails. He states
that a great advantage in laying a pavement by the method is that, when
any repairs are necessary, a piece of the exact size can be manufactured
at the works, and stamped to the same pattern as the adjoining pavement,
then placed at once in position on the removal of the worn portion, thus
saving the time necessary for the setting of the concrete on the
spot.--_The Engineer_.

       *       *       *       *       *




A NEW BLEACHING PROCESS.


In the spring of 1883 a Mr. J.B. Thompson, of New Cross, London, patented
a new process of bleaching, the main feature of which consisted in the
use of carbonic acid gas in a closed vessel to decompose the chloride of
lime. The "chemicking" and "souring" operations he performed at one and
the same time. The reactions which took place in his bleaching keir were
stated by the inventor as follows:

      Cl.\
1.  Ca    ) + CO_{2} = CaCO_{3} + Cl_{2}.
     OCl./

2. OH_{2} + Cl_{2} = (ClH)_{2} + O.

3. CaCO_{3} + (ClH)_{2} = CaCl_{2} + CO_{2} + H_{2}O.

That is, in 1 chloride of lime and carbonic acid react upon each other,
producing chalk and nascent chlorine; in 2 the nascent chlorine reacts
upon the water of the solution and decomposes it, producing hydrochloric
acid and nascent oxygen, which bleaches; in 3 the hydrochloric acid just
formed reacts upon chalk formed in 1, and produces calcium chloride and
one equivalent of water, and at the same time frees the carbonic acid to
be used again in the process of decomposing the chloride of lime.

When the process was first brought to the notice of the Lancashire
bleachers, it met with an amount of opposition. Some bleaching chemists
declared the process was not patentable, as fully half a century ago
carbonic acid was known to decompose chloride of lime. The patentee's
answer was emphatic, that carbonic acid gas had never been applied in
bleaching before. After some delay one of the largest English cotton
bleachers, Messrs. Ainsworth, Son & Co., Halliwell, Bolton, threw open
their works for a fair test of the Thompson process on a commercial
scale.

The result of trial was so satisfactory that a company was formed to work
the patent. Soon after this the well-known authorities on the oxidation
of cellulose, Messrs. Cross & Bevan and Mr. Mather, the principal partner
in the engineering firm of Mather & Platt, of Salford, Lancashire, joined
the company. For the last twelve months these gentlemen have devoted
considerable attention to improving the original contrivance of Thompson,
and a few weeks since they handed over to Messrs. Ainsworth the machinery
and instructions for what they considered the most complete and best
process of bleaching that has ever been introduced.

Recently a "demonstration" of the "Mather-Thompson" process of bleaching
took place at Halliwell, and to which were invited numerous chemists and
practical bleachers. Having been favored with an invitation, I propose to
lay before your readers a concise report of the proceedings.

It is usual in this country to give a short preliminary boil to the cloth
before it is brought in contact with the alkali, the object being to well
scour the cloth from the loose impurities present in the raw fiber and
also the added sizing materials. In the new process the waste or spent
alkaline liquors of the succeeding process are employed, with the result
that the bleaching proper is much facilitated. The economy effected by
this change is considerable, but in the next operation, that of
saponification, the new process differs even more widely from those
generally in use. In England, "market" or "white" bleaching requires a
number of operations. There is first the alkaline treatment divided into
the two stages or processes of lime stewing and bowking in soda-ash,
which only imperfectly breaks down the motes. There is consequently a
second round given to the goods, consisting of a bowk in soda-ash,
followed by the second and usually final chemicking. There is, therefore,
much handling of the cloth, with the consequent increase of time and
therefore expense.

Now, in the saponification process, the Mather-Thompson Company claim to
have achieved a complete triumph. They use a "steamer keir," the
invention of Mr. Mather. This keir is so constructed that it will allow
of two wire wagons being run in and the door securely fastened. At the
top of the keir is fixed a mechanical appliance for steaming the cloth.
The steamer keir process consists essentially in:

1. The application of the alkali in solution and in its most effective
form, viz., as caustic alkali, to each portion of fiber in such quantity
as to produce the complete result upon that portion.

2. The immediate and sustained action of heat in the most effective form
of steam.

Before the cloth is run into the steamer keir on the wire wagons, it is
saturated with about twice its weight of a dilute solution of caustic
soda (2 deg. to 4 deg. Twaddell = 0.5 to 1% Na_{2}O) at a boiling-temperature,
when in the steamer keir it is exposed to an atmosphere of steam at four
pounds pressure for five hours. This part of the process is entirely new.
The advantage of using caustic soda alone in the one operation, such as I
describe, has been long recognized, but hitherto no one has been able to
effect this improvement. It will be observed that the Mather-Thompson
process does away entirely with the use of lime and soda-ash in at least
two boilings and the accessory souring operation. In the space of the
five hours necessary for the steamer keir process the goods are
thoroughly bottomed and all the motes removed, no matter what be the
texture or weight of the cloth. After the cloth is washed in hot water it
is removed from the steamer keir, then follows a rinse in cold water, and
the goods are ready for the bleaching process.

In passing to the bleaching and whitening process, it may be necessary to
say that thus far the original Thompson process has been entirely
altered. Now we come to that part of the bleaching operation where the
essential feature in Thompson's patent is utilized. The patentee has
apparently thoroughly grasped the fact that carbonic acid has great
affinity for lime and that it liberates, in its gaseous condition, the
hypochlorous acid, which bleaches. The most perfect contact is realized
between the _nascent_ hypochlorous acid resulting from its action and the
fiber constituent in the exposure of the cloth treated with the bleaching
solution to the action of the gas. The order of treatment is as follows:

    (1) Saturation with weak chemic (1 deg. Tw.), squeeze,
        and passage to gas chamber.
    (2) Wash (running).
    (3) Soda scald.
    (4) Wash.
    (5) Repetition of 1, but with weaker chemic (1/2 deg. Tw.).
    (6) Wash.
    (7) Scouring.

The whole of the above operations are carried out on a continuous plan,
the machinery being the invention of Mr. Mather. The cloth travels along
at the rate of sixty or eighty yards a minute, and comes out a splendid
white bleach. The company consider, however, that it is necessary in the
case of some cloth to give a second treatment with chemic and gas, each
of thirty seconds duration, with an intermediate scald in a boiling very
dilute alkaline solution. Mr. Thompson originally claimed that the use of
carbonic acid gas rendered the employment of a mineral acid for souring
unnecessary. It is considered now to be advisable to employ it, and the
souring is included, as will be observed, in the continuous operation.

The new process for treating cloth differs materially from that
originally proposed by Mr. Thompson. His plan was to use an air-tight
keir in conjunction with a gas-holder. It is obvious that the
"continuous" process would not answer for yarns; Thompson's keir is,
therefore, employed for these and all heavy piece-goods.

Thus far I have given a concise outline of the Mather-Thompson process of
bleaching, which, it cannot be denied, differs materially from any system
hitherto recommended to the trade. Beyond doubt the goods are as
perfectly bleached by this process as by any now in use. The question
arises, What pecuniary advantage does it offer? Mr. Manby, the manager of
Messrs. Ainsworth, has informed me that he has bleached as much as ten
miles of cloth by the new process, and is, therefore, entitled to be
heard on the subject of cost. In regard to the consumption of chemicals,
he estimates the saving to amount to (in money value) one-fourth; steam
(coal), one-half; labor, one-half; water, four-fifths; time, two-thirds.

It might be well to contrast the process formerly employed by Messrs.
Ainsworth with that they have recently adopted:

                 "MATHER-THOMPSON" SYSTEM.

Alkali.                  Bleach                Acid Machine
                        (chemic).                 Washes.
       / Saturate.
  (1) <
       \ Steam.
                  / (2) Continuous
                 |       (chemic)
                 |       machine
                 |       (or keir if
             (2) <       for yarns,
                 |       etc.).
                 |        (2a) Machine or
                  \            pit sour.
                                           (3) Wash up for
                                                finishing.

                      ORDINARY SYSTEM.

Alkali.                  Bleach.               Acid Machine
                                                  Washes.

(1) Lime stew.                                    (1) Wash.
                          (2) Sour.               (2)  "
(3) Gray bowk                                     (3)  "
     (soda ash).
       (4)I Chemic.                               (4)  "
                          (5) Sour.               (5)  "
(6) White bowk.                                   (6)  "
     (7)II Chemic.                                (7)  "
                          (8) Sour.               (8)  "

It will be understood that 2 and 2a are merged into a single process by
