[Illustration: FIG. 14--PRESSURE = 0.001 MM. = 1.3 M.]

On passing the current with the concave pole negative, the small veins
rotate in such a manner as to prove that at this high exhaustion a
stream of molecules issues from the lower hole in the diaphragm, while
at the same time a stream of freshly charged molecules is forced by
the negative pole through the upper hole. The experiment speaks for
itself, showing as forcibly as an experiment can show that so far the
theory is right.

This view of the ultra-gaseous state of matter is advanced merely as a
working hypothesis, which, in the present state of our knowledge, may
be regarded as a necessary help to be retained only so long as it
proves useful. In experimental research early hypotheses have
necessarily to be modified, or adjusted, or perhaps entirely
abandoned, in deference to more accurate observations. Dumas said,
truly, that hypotheses were like crutches, which we throw away when we
are able to walk without them.


RADIANT MATTER AND "RADIANT ELECTRODE MATTER."

In recording my investigations on the subject of radiant matter and
the state of gaseous residues in high vacua under electrical strain, I
must refer to certain attacks on the views I have propounded. The most
important of these questionings are contained in a volume of "Physical
Memoirs," selected and translated from foreign sources under the
direction of the Physical Society (vol. i., part 2). This volume
contains two memoirs, one by Hittorff on the "Conduction of
Electricity in Gases," and the other by Puluj on "Radiant Electrode
Matter and the So-called Fourth State." Dr. Puluj's paper concerns me
most, as the author has set himself vigorously to the task of opposing
my conclusions. Apart from my desire to keep controversial matter out
of an address of this sort, time would not permit me to discuss the
points raised by my critic; I will, therefore, only observe in passing
that Dr. Puluj has no authority for linking my theory of a fourth
state of matter with the highly transcendental doctrine of four
dimensional space.

Reference has already been made to the mistaken supposition that I
have pronounced the thickness of the dark space in a highly exhausted
tube through which an induction spark is passed to be identical with
the natural mean free path of the molecules of gas at that exhaustion.
I could quote numerous passages from my writings to show that what I
meant and said was the mean free path as amplified and modified by the
electrification.[2] In this view I am supported by Prof. Schuster,[3]
who, in a passage quoted below, distinctly admits that the mean free
path of an electrified molecule may differ from that of one in its
ordinary state.

[Footnote 2: "The thickness of the dark space surrounding the negative
pole is the measure of the mean length of the path of the gaseous
molecules between successive collisions. The electrified molecules are
projected from the negative pole with enormous velocity, varying,
however, with the degree of exhaustion and intensity of the induction
current."--_Phil. Trans._, part i., 1879, par. 530.

"The extra velocity with which the molecules rebound from the excited
negative pole keeps back the more slowly moving molecules which are
advancing toward the pole. The conflict occurs at the boundary of the
dark space, where the luminous margin bears witness to the energy of
the discharge."--_Phil. Trans._, part i., 1879, par. 507.

"Here, then, we see the induction spark actually illuminating the
lines of molecular pressure caused by the excitement of the negative
pole."--_R.I. Lecture_, Friday, April 4, 1879.

"The electrically excited negative pole supplies the _force majeure_,
which entirely, or partially, changes into a rectilinear action the
irregular vibration in all directions."--_Proc. Roy. Soc._, 1880. page
472.

"It is also probable that the absolute velocity of the molecules
is increased so as to make the mean velocity with which they
leave the negative pole greater than that of ordinary gaseous
molecules."--_Phil. Trans._, part ii., 1881, par. 719.]

[Footnote 3: "It has been suggested that the extent of the dark space
represents the mean free path of the molecules.... It has been pointed
out by others that the extent of the dark space is really considerably
greater than the mean free path of the molecules, calculated according
to the ordinary way. My measurements make it nearly twenty times as
great. This, however, is not in itself a fatal objection; for, as we
have seen, the mean free path of an ion may be different from that of
a molecule moving among others."--Schuster, _Proc. Roy. Soc_., xlvii.,
pp. 556-7.]

The great difference between Puluj and me lies in his statement
that[4] "the matter which fills the dark space consists of mechanical
detached particles of the electrodes which are charged with statically
negative electricity, and move progressively in a straight direction."

[Footnote 4: "Physical Memoirs," part ii., vol. i., p. 244. The
paragraph is italicized in the original.]

To these mechanically detached particles of the electrodes, "of
different sizes, often large lumps,"[5] Puluj attributes all the
phenomena of heat, force and phosphorescence that I from time to time
have described in my several papers.

[Footnote 5: _Loc. cit._, p. 242.]

Puluj objects energetically to my definition "Radiant Matter," and
then proposes in its stead the misleading term "Radiant Electrode
Matter." I say "misleading," for while both his and my definitions
equally admit the existence of "Radiant Matter," he drags in the
hypothesis that the radiant matter is actually the disintegrated
material of the poles.

Puluj declares that the phenomena I have described in high vacua are
produced by his irregularly shaped lumps of radiant electrode matter.
My contention is that they are produced by radiant matter of the
residual molecules of gas.

Were it not that in this case we can turn to experimental evidence, I
would not mention the subject to you. On such an occasion as this
controversial matter must have no place; therefore I content myself at
present by showing a few novel experiments which demonstratively prove
my case.

Let me first deal with the radiant electrode hypothesis. Some metals,
it is well known, such as silver, gold or platinum, when used for the
negative electrode in a vacuum tube, volatilize more or less rapidly,
coating any object in their neighborhood with a very even film. On
this depends the well known method of electrically preparing small
mirrors, etc. Aluminum, however, seems exempt from this volatility.
Hence, and for other reasons, it is generally used for electrodes.

If, then, the phenomena in a high vacuum are due to the "electrode
matter," the more volatile the metal used, the greater should be the
effect.[6]

[Footnote 6: In a valuable paper read before the Royal Society,
November 20, 1890, by Professors Liveing and Dewar, on finely divided
metallic dust thrown off the surface of various electrodes, in vacuum
tubes, they find not only that dust, however fine, suspended in a gas
will not act like gaseous matter in becoming luminous with its
characteristic spectrum in an electric discharge, but that it is
driven with extraordinary rapidity out of the course of the
discharge.]

Here is a tube (Fig. 15, P=0.00068 millimeter, or 0.9 M), with two
negative electrodes, AA', so placed as to protect two luminous spots
on the phosphorescent glass of the tube. One electrode, A', is of pure
silver, a volatile metal; the other, A, is of aluminum, practically
non-volatile. A quantity of "electrode matter" will be shot off from
the silver pole, and practically none from the aluminum pole; but you
see that in each case the phosphorescence, CC', is identical. Had the
radiant electrode matter been the active agent, the more intense
phosphorescence would proceed from the more volatile pole.

A drawing of another experimental piece of apparatus is shown in Fig.
16. A pear-shaped bulb of German glass has near the small end an inner
concave negative pole, A, of pure silver, so mounted that its
inverted image is thrown upon the opposite end of the tube. In front
of this pole is a screen of mica, C, having a small hole in the
center, so that only a narrow pencil of rays from the silver pole can
pass through, forming a bright spot, D, at the far end of the bulb.
The exhaustion is about the same as in the previous tube, and the
current has been allowed to pass continuously for many hours so as to
drive off a certain portion of the silver electrode; and upon
examination it is found that the silver has all been deposited in the
immediate neighborhood of the pole; while the spot, D, at the far end
of the tube, that has been continuously glowing with phosphorescent
light, is practically free from silver.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.--PRESSURE = 0.00068 MM. = 0.9 M.]

The experiment is too lengthy for me to repeat it here, so I shall not
attempt it; but I have on the table the results for examination.

The identity of action of silver and aluminum in the first case, and
the non-projection of silver in this second instance, are in
themselves sufficient to condemn Dr. Puluj's hypotheses, since they
prove that phosphorescence is independent of the material of the
negative electrode. In front of me is a set of tubes that to my mind
puts the matter wholly beyond doubt. The tubes contain no inside
electrodes with the residual gaseous molecules; and with them I will
proceed to give some of the most striking radiant-matter experiments
without any inner metallic poles at all.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.--PRESSURE = 0.00068 MM. = 0.9 M.]

In all these tubes the electrodes, which are of silver, are on the
outside, the current acting through the body of the glass. The first
tube contains gas only slightly rarefied and at the stratification
stage. It is simply a closed glass cylinder, with a coat of silver
deposited outside at each end, and exhausted to a pressure of 2
millimeters. The outline of the tube is shown in Fig. 17. I pass a
current, and, as you see, the stratifications, though faint, are
perfectly formed.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.--PRESSURE = 2 MM.]

The next tube, seen in outline in Fig. 18, shows the dark space. Like
the first it is a closed cylinder of glass, with a central indentation
forming a kind of hanging pocket and almost dividing the tube into two
compartments. This pocket, silvered on the air side, forms a hollow
glass diaphragm that can be connected electrically from the outside,
forming the negative pole, A; the two ends of the tube, also outwardly
silvered, form the positive poles, B B. I pass the current, and you
will see the dark space distinctly visible. The pressure here is 0.076
millimeter, or 100 M. The next stage, dealing with more rarefied
matter, is that of phosphorescence. Here is an egg-shaped bulb, shown
in Fig 19, containing some pure yttria and a few rough rubies. The
positive electrode, B, is on the bottom of the tube under the
phosphorescent material; the negative, A, is on the upper part of the
tube. See how well the rubies and yttria phosphorescence shows under
molecular bombardment, at an internal pressure of 0.00068 millimeter,
or 0.9 M.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.--PRESSURE = 0.076 MM. = 100 M.]

A shadow of an object inside a bulb can also be projected on to the
opposite wall of the bulb by means of an outside pole. A mica cross is
supported in the middle of the bulb (Fig. 20), and on connecting a
small silvered patch, A, on one side of the bulb with the negative
pole of the induction coil, and putting the positive pole to another
patch of silver, B, at the top, the opposite side of the bulb glows
with a phosphorescent light, on which the black shadow of the cross
seems sharply cut out. Here the internal pressure is 0.00068
millimeter, or 0.9 M.

[Illustration: FIG. 19.--PRESSURE = 0.00068 MM. = 0.9 M.]

[Illustration: FIG. 20.--PRESSURE = 0.00068 MM. = 0.9 M.]

[Illustration: FIG. 21.--PRESSURE = 0.001 MM. = 1.3 M.]

Passing to the next phenomenon, I proceed to show the production of
mechanical energy in a tube without internal poles. It is shown in
Fig. 21 (P = 0.001 millimeter, or 1.3 M). It contains a light wheel of
aluminum, carrying vanes of transparent mica, the poles, A B, being in
such a position outside that the molecular focus falls upon the vanes
on one side only. The bulb is placed in the lantern and the image is
projected on the screen; if I now pass the current, you see the wheels
rotate rapidly, reversing in direction as I reverse the current.

Here is an apparatus (Fig. 22) which shows that the residual gaseous
molecules when brought to a focus produce heat. It consists of a glass
tube with a bulb blown at one end and a small bundle of carbon wool,
C, fixed in the center, and exhausted to a pressure of 0.000076
millimeter, or 0.1 M. The negative electrode, A, is formed by coating
part of the outside of the bulb with silver, and it is in such a
position that the focus of rays falls upon the carbon wool. The
positive electrode, B, is an outer coating at the other end of the
tube. I pass the current, and those who are close may see the bright
sparks of carbon raised to incandescence by the impact of the
molecular stream.

You thus have seen that all the old "radiant matter" effects can be
produced in tubes containing no metallic electrodes to volatilize. It
may be suggested that the sides of the tube in contact with the
outside poles become electrodes in this case, and that particles of
the glass itself may be torn off and projected across, and so produce
the effects. This is a strong argument, which fortunately can be
tested by experiment. In the case of this tube (Fig. 23, P = 0.00068
millimeter, or 0.9 M), the bulb is made of lead glass phosphorescing
blue under molecular bombardment. Inside the bulb, completely covering
the part that would form the negative pole, A, I have placed a
substantial coat of yttria, so as to interpose a layer of this earth
between the glass and the inside of the tube. The negative and
positive poles are silver disks on the outside of the bulb, A being
the negative and B the positive poles. If, therefore, particles are
torn off and projected across the tube to cause phosphorescence, these
particles will not be particles of glass, but of yttria; and the spot
of phosphorescent light, C, on the opposite side of the bulb will not
be the dull blue of lead glass, but the golden yellow of yttria. You
see there is no such indication; the glass phosphoresces with its
usual blue glow, and there is no evidence that a single particle of
yttria is striking it.

[Illustration: Fig. 22.--Pressure = 0.000076 MM. = 0.1 M.]

[Illustration: Fig. 23.--Pressure = 0.00068 MM. = 0.9 M.]

Witnessing these effects I think you will agree I am justified in
adhering to my original theory, that the phenomena are caused by the
radiant matter of the residual gaseous molecules, and certainly not by
the torn-off particles of the negative electrode.


PHOSPHORESCENCE IN HIGH VACUA.

I have already pointed out that the molecular motions rendered visible
in a vacuum tube are not the motions of molecules under ordinary
conditions, but are compounded of these ordinary or kinetic motions
and the extra motion due to the electrical impetus.

Experiments show that in such tubes a few molecules may traverse more
than a hundred times the _mean_ free path, with a correspondingly
increased velocity, until they are arrested by collisions. Indeed, the
molecular free path may vary in one and the same tube, and at one and
the same degree of exhaustion.

Very many bodies, such as ruby, diamond, emerald, alumina, yttria,
samaria, and a large class of earthy oxides and sulphides,
phosphoresce in vacuum tubes when placed in the path of the stream of
electrified molecules proceeding from the negative pole. The
composition of the gaseous residue present does not affect
phosphorescence; thus, the earth yttria phosphoresces well in the
residual vacua of atmospherical air, of oxygen, nitrogen, carbonic
anhydride, hydrogen, iodine, sulphur and mercury.

With yttria in a vacuum tube, the point of maximum phosphorescence, as
I have already pointed out, lies on the margin of the dark space. The
diagram (Fig. 24) shows approximately the degree of phosphorescence in
different parts of a tube at an internal pressure of 0.25 millimeter,
or 330 M. On the top you see the positive and negative poles, A and B,
the latter having the outline of the dark space shown by a dotted
line, C. The curve, D E F, shows the relative intensities of the
phosphorescence at different distances from the negative pole, and the
position inside the dark space at which phosphorescence does not
occur. The height of the curve represents the degree of
phosphorescence. The most decisive effects of phosphorescence are
reached by making the tube so large that the walls are outside the
dark space, while the material submitted to experiment is placed just
at the edge of the dark space.

Hitherto I have spoken only of the phosphorescence of substances
placed under the negative pole. But from numerous experiments I find
that bodies will phosphoresce in actual contact with the negative
pole.

[Illustration: FIG. 24--PRESSURE = 0.25 MM. = 330 M.]

This is only a temporary phenomenon, and ceases entirely when the
exhaustion is pushed to a very high point. The experiment is one
scarcely possible to exhibit to an audience, so I must content myself
with describing it. A U-tube, shown in Fig. 25, has a flat aluminum
pole, in the form of a disk, at each end, both coated with a paint of
phosphorescent yttria. As the rarefaction approaches about 0.5
millimeter the surface of the negative pole, A, becomes faintly
phosphorescent. On continuing the exhaustion this luminosity rapidly
diminishes, not only in intensity but in extent, contracting more and
more from the edge of the disk, until ultimately it is visible only as
a bright spot in the center. This fact does not prop a recent theory,
that as the exhaustion gets higher the discharge leaves the center of
the pole and takes place only between the edge and the walls of the
tube.

[Illustration: FIG. 25.]

If the exhaustion is further pushed, then, at the point where the
surface of the negative pole ceases to be luminous, the material on
the positive pole, B, commences to phosphoresce, increasing in
intensity until the tube refuses to conduct, its greatest brilliancy
being just short of this degree of exhaustion. The probable
explanation is that the vagrant molecules I introduce in the next
experiment, happening to come within the sphere of influence of the
positive pole, rush violently to it, and excite phosphorescence in the
yttria, while losing their negative charge.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 794, page 12690.]




GASEOUS ILLUMINANTS.[1]

[Footnote 1: Lectures recently delivered before the Society of Arts,
London. From the _Journal_ of the Society.]

By Prof. VIVIAN B. LEWES.


V.

Having now brought before you the various methods by which ordinary
coal gas can be enriched, so as to give an increased luminosity to the
flame, I wish now to discuss the methods by which the gas can be
burnt, in order to yield the greatest amount of light, and also the
compounds which are produced during combustion.

In the first lecture, while discussing the theory of luminous flames,
I pointed out that, in an atmospheric burner, it was not the oxygen of
the air introduced combining with and burning up the hydrocarbons, and
so preventing the separation of incandescent carbon, which gave the
non-luminous flame, but the diluting action of the nitrogen, which
acted by increasing the temperature at which the hydrocarbons are
broken up, and carbon liberated, a fact which was proved by
observation that heating the mixture of gas and air again restored the
luminosity of the flame. This experiment clearly shows that
temperature is a most important factor in the illuminating value of a
flame, and this is still further shown by a study of the action of the
diluents present in coal gas, the non-combustible ones being far more
deleterious than the combustible, as they not only dilute, but
withdraw heat.

Anything which will increase the temperature of the flame will also
increase the illuminating power, provided, of course, that the
increase in temperature is not obtained at the expense of the too
rapid combustion of the hydrocarbons.

As has been shown in the experiments relating to the action of
diluents on flame, already quoted, oxygen, when added to coal gas,
increases its illuminating value to a marked and increasing degree,
until a certain percentage has been added, after which the
illuminating power is rapidly decreased, until the point is reached
when the mixture becomes explosive. This is due to the fact that the
added oxygen increases the temperature of the flame by doing the work
of the air, but without the cooling and diluting action of the
nitrogen; when, however, a certain proportion is added, it begins to
burn up the heavy hydrocarbons, and although the temperature goes on
increasing, the light-giving power is rapidly diminished by the
diminution of the amount of free carbon in the flame.

It has been proposed to carburet and enrich poor coal gas by
admixture with it of an oxy-oil gas made under Tatham's patents, in
which crude oils are cracked at a comparatively low temperature, and
are there mixed with from 12 to 24 per cent. of oxygen gas. Oil gas
made at low temperatures, _per se_, is of little use as an illuminant,
as it burns with a smoky flame, and does not travel well, but when
mixed with a certain amount of oxygen, it gives a very brilliant white
light, and no smoke, while as far as experiments have at present gone,
its traveling powers are much improved.

At first sight it seems a dangerous experiment to mix a heavy
hydrocarbon gas with oxygen, but it must be remembered that although
hydrogen and carbon monoxide only need to be mixed with half their own
volume of oxygen to give a most explosive mixture, yet as the number
of carbon and hydrogen atoms in the combustible gas increase, so does
the amount of oxygen needed to give explosion. Thus coal gas needs
rather more than its own volume, and ethylene three times its volume,
to give the maximum explosive results, while these mixtures begin to
be explosive when 10 per cent. of oxygen is mixed with hydrogen or
water gas, 30 per cent. with coal gas, and over 50 per cent. of oil
gas of the character used. It is claimed that if this gas was used as
an enricher of coal gas, 5 per cent. of it would increase the
luminosity of 16-candle gas by about 40 per cent.

Oxygen has been obtained for some time past from the air on a
commercial scale by the Brin process, and at the present time there
seems every prospect of our being able to obtain oxygen at a rate of
about 3s. 6d. per 1,000 cubic feet. Another process by which this
important result can also be obtained was first introduced by Tessie
du Mothay, and has now just been revived. It consists of passing
alternate currents of steam and air over sodic manganate heated to
dull redness in an iron tube; the process has never been commercially
successful, for the reason that the contents of the tube fused, and
flowing over the surface of the iron rapidly destroyed the tubes or
retorts, and also as soon as fusion took place, the mass became so
dense that it had little or no action on the air passing over it. Now,
however, this difficulty has been partly overcome by so preparing the
manganate as to prevent fusion, and to keep it in a spongy state,
