within him flamed.

Feeling some presence, he turned back to face the plain.  Something was
moving toward him.  Distance defied close description; but the shape of
the body and the nature of its movements did not at first imply
intelligence.  But he knew better than to form such judgments.  It
moved openly, tactlessly toward him. He felt no fear.

But as it drew steadily on, he felt the sudden shock of recognition.
This was no slow, cumbersome oddity.  It was an insect, nearly five
feet long.  Like but unlike a huge ant---it was flatter, more heavily
armored, with creased edges and corners, not unlike the rock.  Crisp,
tight-folded wings.  He turned back toward the ship, but there was
stayed by the will of whatever it was that came forward.  He felt a
sudden shame at his desire to run, and whirled angrily to face it, the
long knife (the only weapon he carried) in his hand.  With this action
the creature seemed pleased:  it wholly released its grip on his mind.
It continued to come on.

Stopping finally some eight meters in front of him, it raised its upper
body and addressed him.  He saw then the bright orange-yellow ring,
darkly filled, on the underside of its thorax.  He heard words in his
mind, somehow in his native tongue.

"I am Simin.  We must fight, you and I.  I cannot let you live.  For
this is our world, and it is not our way.  But your death need not be
without honor.  And if you fight well, it may be of greater worth than
you know."

For a moment the man stood disbelieving, incongruous.  Then,
 
"You will have to take me first!" he cried, feeling yet again the fire
that was in him.

The drone gave way before him, moving to the more level ground a short
distance to one side.  Shannon wondered at this, since clearly it moved
among the pebble-stones effortlessly, then realized also that his knife
had grown, or at least appeared to grow.  Its curved blade gleamed, two
feet long.  The creature was trying to even the odds.  But it fully
meant to kill him.  That he knew with equal certainty.

The two circled, then the mai advanced.  The man aimed a blow at the
head, but Simin rolled away beneath it.  Then rose and came closer.

*

The man had fought well.  SO UNLIKE THE OTHERS.  That he possessed the
heart of a soldier Simin had known from the first brief mind scan.  But
never would have guessed the size of it.  For it was easy to feel the
vast deserts the man had already crossed, and the final defeat showed
clearly in his eyes.  But still he fought on, for no other reason than
that his fierce spirit refused to be broken.  Paused before moving onto
the fallen body.

Came forward, touched antennae to his temples, and drank deeply from
the streams of Shannon's life.  Then engulfed the top of the skull with
massive, bowed jaws and cracked, lifted away the cranium.  Slowly ate
the man's brain, taking with it the remainder of his memory.

Almost at once the change began to come over him.  Tingling, he backed
away slowly on his hind legs.  At last the miracle had come.  He lifted
his head to the sky, and felt the transformation taking place.  The
hard shell of his face softened, yielding gradually to a new shape:
hawk nose, burning eyes.  White hair streamed back from the auburn
face, hard-edged once more.  The huge protruding jaws remained.  His
forward body was now nearly upright, like a mantis, but with stronger,
more flexible arms.  His mind was keen and sharp.

He turned back to face the mountains, felt the same fierce elation.
And for a time he could not move or think for the wonder of it.  How
had he not felt it before.  For a time he could not move or think.....

At long length he turned and headed back to the place of his spawning
---the Gorge.  The brothers, now forty, saw him reappear atop the high
precipice that loomed at the far side of the canyon.  They detected
some subtle change in him, though from that distance they could only
descry a somewhat more elevated form.  He did not come to them at once,
but stood looking down upon the stepped vastness, alone, as if seeing
it for the first time.

When at last he did spread his wings and fly closer they looked up at
him amazed, not understanding.  He landed on the ledge but remained at
his distance, regarding them quietly.  He addressed them, no longer
needing to touch.  His strange eyes shone and he did not move, as if
overwhelmed from within.  He spoke to their minds.

"My time has come.  Summon the others."

They could not understand, but obeyed, dispersing to summon their
queen, and all others that lived within the span of their own.

*


The sun tipped the horizon and dust was gathering and still the long
files of mai continued to stream down.  Already the central basin was
nearly filled, and pushing back toward the statued spires of the west
wall.  The moving shapes were dark in the lengthening shadows, and all
looked up at him, perched silently atop the Carrier Stone.  The first
circle of seven queens, not touching, seemed to understand, as did the
drones behind them.  All others knew only that another Outsider had
been killed.  Waited patiently for the joining.

As the darkness deepened and the last movement ceased, all joined and
were silent.  The queens approached the Stone, the giver of life, and
touched it.

From out of its crumpled iron surface arose a faint hum, the remainder
of its strength.  All lives were now fused, and the queens sent out
their messages.  Joined forelegs and antennae, bent all their thought
toward Simin, so that now he probed the memory not with one mind but
with many.  And stimulated by the Carrier, its greatness began to come
forth.

Slowly the streams of Shannon's life broke free and flowed in a gentle
murmur through all, paced and given substance by the queens and drones.
 And slowly they took shape into music, a long, rhythmic chant.  Then
with gathering strength as a river fed by many tributaries, rose into
song that filled all the valley, and echoed in the hearts of ten
thousand mai.  From birth to death, the long struggles of his life were
played out, rising and falling like the seasons of the wind.  Again and
yet again he did battle, with hope or without it.  The song grew within
Simin, overpowering, so stark and beautiful that he thought he must
die, but knew he could not yet.

Then all again was hushed, and stiffly the drone-that-was raised
himself up.  A voice rose out of his soul, but it was no longer his:  a
pulsing, soft white glow hovered in the air above him.

"They have called me a mercenary, but it is not so.  I am a warrior.
For be it my virtue or be it my curse, it has never been within me to
yield to aggression, or to stand aside and let violence pass.
Something has always risen inside me when persecution, in any form, is
at hand.  In this I claim no virtue, no heroism.  This only will I say:
 that I have ever given my strength to those unable to defend
themselves, the downtrodden, the weak, oppressed by the strong.  But
most bitter in my malice have always been those who kill in the name of
God, some higher purpose.  They are to me blindness and murder
personified.  Thus, I do not claim it.

"In twelve wars have I fought---in half as many victories.  For in time
my soldiering became no longer a conscious action, but an instinctive
response.

"Well do I know my folly in choosing this bitter course.  But if I am
to live, then it will be as a man.  And if by the loneliness that is my
soul I can turn aside the sword of injustice, even for a short time,
then so help me God I will do it."

The words ended and the glow receded.  It lived no more.  Again
himself, alone, Simin lowered his head, so deeply moved that the water
flowed freely from his eyes.  The ruling queen approached him.

"Simin-that-was.  Do you take this Quest?"

"I will take it, though I fear to falter."

"You will not."

The queen stepped back, and all proclaimed him.

"Si-mai, ungol, misch-naik!"  AGAINST THE EVIL THAT WAS AND IS, WE SEND
YOU.  The joining was ended, and the gathering dispersed.




II


He had flown for many days into the growing cold.  The sun was gone and
the wind was rising as he searched the ground below him for a place to
pass the night.  It must be sheltered, not so much from the elements
(though this too was important) as from the marauding bands of ground
wasps that lived in these northern regions.  There was still far to go
and much danger ahead.  He had no strength for useless battles.

At last as all light faded he came upon a towering pillar of stone in
the midst of a vast wasteland, split at the top as if cloven by a giant
axe.  Reaching its heights, he descended slowly into its broad
embrasure.  Detecting some deeper shadow in the blackness of the
eastern wall, he flew toward a narrow fissure in the rock.  Landing
silently on the lip of it, he tested the air for vibrations.  All was
still.  He moved inside and huddled close together.  He was empty and
cold and weary to the point of exhaustion.  He remained in quiet
thought for many hours.

When he had taken the quest, he knew only that he must somehow continue
the labors of Shannon's life---find some way to avenge the death of it.
 He had wandered alone for a period of days, remembering, until one
morning, at the rising dust of a fiery dawn, he had felt the North
calling to him.  He felt it still, though less strongly, and he deemed
that this was right.  What he hoped to find there he could not say.  He
only knew that he must find it.

The most difficult aspect of his journey thus far had not been the long
flight on short provisions.  To the mai such things meant nothing.
They lived to work and serve the greater need, that was all.  No, it
was more the feelings and emotions that the long pilgrimage evoked in
him, seeming almost to rise from the vast loneliness of his world.  For
though the man's spirit had died or moved on, his sensations and
experience had not.  They lived on within Simin, and sometimes puzzled
or even frightened him.  He understood, and knew this was necessary;
but the knowledge did not make it easier.

WHAT A TORTURED RACE THEY MUST BE, he thought. SO TORN BETWEEN DESIRE
AND FEAR.  THEY ARE GIVEN NO ROLE, NO CLEAR PLACE.  THEY MUST FIND IT,
AS WE MUST FIND MOISTURE IN AN ARID LAND.

It was this fear of frustration and fruitless searching that he felt
most deeply, because it had for so long been a part of his own
existence.  Through all his twenty months he had sought after some
intangible, some elusive quality of being, with no more guide than a
restless and smoldering hunger inside him.  TO NOT KNOW, really not
know who he was or where he was going.

This, he decided, must be the doom of humanity:  to be born a burning
question of itself, a paradox of beauty and destruction, love and loss.
 To take personally and introspectively the irresolvable conflict of
life and desire over stillness and the void.  Again, he felt it so
deeply.  That the struggle could also be beautiful he knew.  But still,
such a hard and lonely fate.....

When dawn came he crawled out of the niche and looked about him.  The
great crack was shadowed and still.  He felt the presence of many
creatures, but they were not yet near him.  The rockface offered little
resistance as he climbed, and soon he stood atop a hooked spire that
sprang from the pillar's crumbling eastern shoulder, high above the
plain.  Two long lines of wingless wasps were mounting towards him.
The first of their number touched the spire.  He took one last taste of
the dawn, then flew out beyond their reach.

He flew staunchly and steadily northward, now that he had some plan.
For the clarity of first-sun had told him what he must do.  Stopping to
rest along the top of a shallow ridge, he ate part of a darkening
bush-bulb, nearly as large as himself.  Its taste was bitter, but it
gave him strength.  Then he set out again.

His mind had determined to search the farthest North.  Shannon's memory
told him what he might find there:  great frozen wastes of ice and
earth, underground hollows left from times when the water had been
greater.  Sometimes as he pondered these, at the edge of thought he
would feel a sound, a sensation: deep throbbings in empty places
beneath the ground, a golden light that drew him onward.  But then it
would vanish and leave him, wondering.  He must find its source, if it
were real.

Three days more he journeyed toward it, till on the fading edge of the
third the wind forced him to land.  It had been gathering strength
since the morning of the spire, and now carried with it a bitter and
biting cold that would not rest.  His strength beginning at last to
fail him, he determined to go on on foot, until he found some shelter,
or a reason to stop.  He felt the presence of no other creature, yet
still he was uneasy.  He had reached the edge of the mighty tundra that
formed the cap of Newman's world.

Now more and more he reached into Shannon's past, trying to find the
thing that had kept him going.  Genuine physical weakness, other than
simple hunger, thirst and fatigue, was something he had never known,
and dealing with it frustrated all the lessons he had learned as a mai.
 Being alien to his experience, he had assumed that it did not
exist---that there was only weakness of will, and that so long as his
desire held, no barrier of the flesh would ever stop him.  This lesson
in perspective he accepted, though grudgingly.  It seemed that
everything he had known in three seasons of life must be relearned,
altered to fit this new reality.  But his will remained undaunted.

He traveled many hours into the darkness of night, until he found a
small hollow of earth and root of stone at the base of a pummeled and
wind torn boulder.  A thin lacing of ground-snow, carried by the wind,
swirled around him and whistled in its cracks, making a melancholy
sound that he felt still deeper for the lassitude of his body.  Here he
rested, and tried not to think, until the coming of morning.

The morning was much the same as the night, with only a patchy gray
light to tell him when the day had come.  He moved out of the shelter
and walked, across shallow hills, rising in monotonous rhythm through a
bleak and barren landscape.  The earth was a dull and frozen brown,
broken now and again by rock, or gnarled scrub, or nothing.  The thin
snow blew over all, trailing and whirling about in long wisps like the
twisting hands of witches.  He continued on for many hours, until the
wind relented just long enough for him to exhaust himself in flight.
He landed again, and found the earth covered intermittently with thin
patches of ice, sometimes deepening and joining together into shrunken,
unmoving streams, or withered oak leaves of many fingers.

He continued and night came again but he did not stop.  He had eaten
what hard and knotted brush he could find, and there was now no lack of
moisture; and though it was his mind he feared, denying it had not yet
become unbearable.  He rested a short time, went on the next day. And
the next, walking because he could not fly, into the growing cold, and
thicker snow, and ice that began to dominate the ground.  Until he was
alone.

Time passed.

*


He had reached the farthest North.  The world was ice, layered with
snow.  The wind blew the white softness above into dunes, sometimes
foaming against islands of rock, huddled together in groups or
branching straight like disjointed coral reefs, while its gusting
blasts wrapped veils over all, swirling and howling in relentless
defiance.  The day lasted but four short hours, then all was swathed in
darkness, so that the swirling sheets were blind and crashed over him
like spray of drowning surf on the deck of a floundering ship.  He was
utterly alone.

Simin's strength was gone; he did not know what kept him going.
Perhaps because he had never known defeat.....  But surely it was more.
 Through the numb slowness of his near-frozen body a heart beat that
carried no blood.  He was dangerously crippled by the cold.

He had passed wide cracks in the ice, chasms and fissures that he knew
must lead down:  sometimes he could almost see, or sense, uncovered
earth or the edges of rock far below.  And this was what he sought.
But always the feel of them was cold.  He sought an entrance, which led
to a passage.  He must find it soon or perish.

On the seventh day since entering the tundra, an hour after the
disappearing of light, a vast abyss opened before him, wider and
emptier and deeper than any he had yet come across.  Like a crushed
cylinder of otherworldly proportions, it yawned directly in front of
him, dropping deep into the earth.  His forelegs hovered trembling
above the void.

This must be the passage, or he would die.  He no longer trusted his
judgment; it had fallen in the snow many miles behind him.  It could
well be madness, but he felt a presence far below, some wild hope.....
No.  He must find shelter.  Perhaps it was there.  A shelter.  If he
could find it.  MUST CONTINUE ON.  NO, HERE.  IT MUST BE HERE, OR I AM
DYING.  SO. . .EASY TO SURRENDER.  LIKE FALLING ASLEEP.  LETTING GO.
NO!

He turned his sinking body around, and forced it to descend:  hooking
and digging, scraping into ice, forelegs stretched to the limit, trying
not to slip.  To slip was death.  Down.  Down farther.  A little
farther.  THE WIND IS LESS HERE.  Here.  KEEP MOVING.  MUST KEEP
MOVING.  NO STRENGTH. . .BUT WARMTH COMING BACK.  YES, WARMTH.  MOVE.
FARTHER.

DON'T SLIP!  DON'T SLIP.  An overhang.  CAREFUL.  MUST STRUGGLE PAST
SOMEHOW.  SOME WAY.  PAST.  WARMTH.  IT MUST BE WARMER.  KEEP MOVING.
IT WILL BE WARMER, OR I AM DYING.  I AM DYING.  IT IS WARMER.

After the long and grueling climb, stopping many times to marshal
strength, he found himself at the bottom.  The cylinder had narrowed,
so that now it was scarcely thirty meters broad, a sharp cleft of
stone, rising  sheer into ice that overtook it for perhaps a thousand
meters more.  He rested there, his body pulsing, spent.  The cold was
not as intense, and the wind was less, and the movement had warmed his
limbs.

But he was weak and near dead from hunger and exhaustion.  He needed
sustenance badly, soon.  Or it was over.  He moved to a tiny pool of
snow that had formed from a trickle of the torrent above, and with his
trembling foreclaw worked small bits of it into his mouth.  All done in
pitch darkness, and very little feeling left.  Then moved to examine
the corners of the cleft.

The first was blocked, solid stone.  He turned about.  He did not know
he had reached the opposite wall until he passed through it, was
inside.  A cave had opened blindly and taken him in, narrow and not
high, but a cave nonetheless.  A passage.  After a time he knew
instinctively that he was underground, but was far too weary for the
knowledge to have much effect.  He continued forward.  He must find
some kind of sustenance.  Sustenance.  He thought of his foreclaw, but
remembering the man.....  No.  Not yet.

He wandered on, stumbling, raising himself up to go on.  Plodded
forward, sinking ever deeper, and onward, until the air around him
suddenly grew larger.  A loosened rock rolled off another, and the echo
did not return for some time.  He moved to his right, sensing
something, and stroked the tip of his claw against the slanting surface
which met it.  The surface was sometimes soft and not smooth; it was
not part of the stone.  He tried to break off a small piece.  The layer
was thin, and it crumbled.  He tried again, brought the wretched
substance---some kind of dried blood, or excrement---to his mouth.  Its
taste was bile and bitter and acid.  Then swallowed.  Throat burning,
he repeated the motion perhaps a dozen times, then collapsed, half
holding, to the floor.  And lay unmoving.


*


Simin woke from his delirium many hours later, somewhat stronger, but
still dizzy and confused.  The little nourishment he had taken lifted
his mind back to awareness, strong, if subtly altered by the thick aura
of the place, and by the strange and pressing reality of his quest.  He
rose slowly, careful not to spend the wavering hope he had found, and
looked around him.

Looked around him.  There was a dim light in that place, that region of
vastness.  And whatever the source, though all before had been
darkness, it was undeniable.  The light was dim and surreal, softly
yellow and fallow gold, but nonetheless afforded him a glimpse of this
