of the fact that deep pits had been dug in one of the experimental fields
for the purpose of obtaining samples of the soil and subsoil. Small
quantities of soil were taken from freshly-cut surfaces on the sides of
these pits at depths varying from 2 inches to 8 feet. The soil removed was
at once transferred to a sterilized solution of diluted urine, which was
afterward examined from time to time to ascertain if nitrification took
place. These experiments are hardly yet completed; the two earlier series
of solutions have, however, been examined for eight and seven months
respectively. In both these series the soil taken from 2 inches, 9 inches,
and 18 inches from the surface has been proved to contain the nitrifying
organism by the fact that it has produced nitrification in the solutions
to which it was added; while in twelve distinct experiments made with soil
from greater depths no nitrification has yet occurred, and we must
therefore conclude that the nitrifying organism was not present in the
samples of soil taken. The third series of experiments has continued as
yet but three months and a half; at present no nitrification has occurred
with soil taken below 9 inches from the surface. It would appear,
therefore, that in a clay soil the nitrifying organism is confined to
about 18 inches from the surface; it is most abundant in the first 6
inches. It is quite possible, however, that in the channels caused by
worms, or by the roots of plants, the organism may occur at greater
depths. In a sandy soil we should expect to find the organism at a lower
level than in clay, but of this we have as yet no evidence. The facts here
mentioned are in accordance with the microscopical observations made by
Koch, who states that the micro-organisms in the soils he has investigated
diminish rapidly in number with an increasing depth; and that at a depth
of scarcely 1 meter the soil is almost entirely free from bacteria.

Some very practical conclusions may be drawn from the facts now stated. It
appears that the oxidation of nitrogenous matter in soil will be confined
to matter near the surface. The nitrates found in the subsoil and in
subsoil drainage waters have really been produced in the upper layer of
the soil, and have been carried down by diffusion, or by a descending
column of water. Again, in arranging a filter bed for the oxidation of
sewage, it is obvious that, with a heavy soil lying in its natural state
of consolidation, very little will be gained by making the filter bed of
considerable depth; while, if an artificial bed is to be constructed, it
is clearly the top soil, rich in oxidizing organisms, which should be
exclusively employed.

_The Substances Susceptible of Nitrification._--The analyses of soils and
drainage waters have taught us that the nitrogenous humic matter resulting
from the decay of plants is nitrifiable; also that the various nitrogenous
manures applied to land, as farmyard manure, bones, fish, blood, rape
cake, and ammonium salts, undergo nitrification in the soil. Illustrations
of many of these facts from the results obtained in the experimental
fields at Rothamsted have been published by Sir J.B. Lawes, Dr. J.H.
Gilbert, and myself, in a recent volume of the _Journal_ of the Royal
Agricultural Society of England. In the Rothamsted Laboratory, experiments
have also been made on the nitrification of solutions of various
substances. Besides solutions containing ammonium salts and urea, I have
succeeded in nitrifying solutions of asparagine, milk, and rape cake.
Thus, besides ammonia, two amides, and two forms of albuminoids have been
found susceptible of nitrification. In all cases in which amides or
albuminoids were employed, the formation of ammonia preceded the
production of nitric acid. Mr. C.F.A. Tuxen has already published in the
present year two series of experiments on the formation of ammonia and
nitric acids in soils to which bone-meal, fish-guano, or stable manure had
been applied; in all cases he found the formation of ammonia preceded the
formation of nitric acid.

As ammonia is so readily nitrifiable, we may safely assert that every
nitrogenous substance which yields ammonia when acted upon by the
organisms present in soil is also nitriflable.

_Certain Conditions having Great Influence in the Process of
Nitrification._--If we suppose that a solution containing a nitrifiable
substance is supplied with the nitrifying organism, and with the various
food constituents necessary for its growth and activity, the rapidity of
nitrification will depend on a variety of circumstances:

1. The degree of concentration of the solution is important. Nitrification
always commences first in the weakest solution, and there is probably in
the case of every solution a limit of concentration beyond which
nitrification is impossible.

2. The temperature has great influence. Nitrification proceeds far more
rapidly in summer than winter.

3. The presence or absence of light is important. Nitrification is most
rapid in darkness; and in the case of solutions, exposure to strong light
may cause nitrification to cease altogether.

4. The presence of oxygen is of course essential. A thin layer of solution
will nitrify sooner than a deep layer, owing to the larger proportion of
oxygen available. The influence of depth of fluid is most conspicuous in
the case of strong solutions.

5. The quantity of nitrifying organism present has also a marked effect. A
solution seeded with a very small amount of organism will for a long time
exhibit no nitrification, the organism being (unlike some other bacteria)
of very slow growth. A solution receiving an abundant supply of the
ferment will exhibit speedy nitrification, and strong solutions may by
this means be successfully nitrified, which with small seedings would
prove very refractory. The speedy nitrification which occurs in soil (far
more speedy than in experiments in solutions under any conditions yet
tried) is probably owing to the great mass of nitrifying organisms which
soil contains, and to the thinness of the liquid layer which covers the
soil particles.

6. The rapidity of nitrification also depends on the degree of alkalinity
of the solution. Nitrification will not take place in an acid solution; it
is essential that some base should be present with which the nitric acid
may combine; when all available base is used up, nitrification ceases.

It appeared of interest to ascertain to what extent nitrification would
proceed in a dilute solution of urine without the addition of any
substance save the nitrifying ferment. As urea is converted into ammonium
carbonate in the first stage of the action of the ferment, a supply of
salifiable base would at first be present, but would gradually be
consumed. The result of the experiment showed that only one-half the
quantity of nitric acid was formed in the simple urine solution as in
similar solutions containing calcium and sodium carbonate. The
nitrification of the urine had evidently proceeded until the whole of the
ammonium had been changed into ammonium nitrate, and the action had then
ceased. This fact is of practical importance. Sewage will be thoroughly
nitrified only when a sufficient supply of calcium carbonate, or some
other base, is available. If, instead of calcium carbonate, a soluble
alkaline salt is present, the quantity must be small, or nitrification
will be seriously hindered.

Sodium carbonate begins to have a retarding influence on the commencement
of nitrification when its amount exceeds 300 milligrammes per liter, and
up to the present time I have been unable to produce an effective
nitrification in solutions containing 1.000 gramme per liter.

Sodium hydrogen carbonate hinders far less the commencement of
nitrification.

Ammonium carbonate, when above a certain amount, also prevents the
commencement of nitrification. The strongest solution in which
nitrification has at present commenced contained ammonium carbonate
equivalent to 368 milligrammes of nitrogen per liter. This hinderance of
nitrification by the presence of an excess of ammonium carbonate
effectually prevents the nitrification of strong solutions of urine, in
which, as already mentioned, ammonium carbonate is the first product of
fermentation.

Far stronger solutions of ammonium chloride can be nitrified than of
ammonium carbonate, if the solution of the former salt is supplied with
calcium carbonate. Nitrification has in fact commenced in chloride of
ammonium solutions containing more than two grammes of nitrogen per liter.

The details of the recent experiments, some of the results of which we
have now described, will, it is hoped, shortly appear in the _Journal_ of
the Chemical Society of London.

Harpenden, July 21.

       *       *       *       *       *




ANILINE DYES IN DRESS MATERIALS.

By Professor CHARLES O'NEILL.


Twenty-eight years ago Mr. Perkin discovered the first of the aniline
dyes. It was the shade of purple called mauve, and the chief agent in its
production was bichromate of potash. This salt is not actively poisonous,
and no one thought of attributing injurious properties to materials dyed
with the aniline mauve. Next in chronological order came magenta red. It
was first made from aniline by the agency of mercurial salts, and
afterward by that form of arsenic known to chemists as arsenic acid. The
fact that this at one time fashionable color was prepared by means of an
arsenical compound was spread through the country in a very impressive
manner by the great trial as to whether the patent was valid or not, all
turning upon the expression in the specification of "dry arsenic acid,"
and the disputes of scientists whether this expression meant arsenic acid
with or without water. The public mind had been for some time previously
exercised and alarmed by accounts of sickness and debility caused by
arsenical paper-hangings; it was, therefore, easy for pseudo scientists to
create an opinion that the magenta dye must be also poisonous, and that
persons wearing materials dyed with this color were liable to absorb
arsenic and suffer from its action. Ever since there have been, at
intervals, statements more or less circumstantial, that individuals have
suffered from wearing materials dyed with some of the artificial dyes. At
the present time these statements are emphasized by the exhibition at the
Healtheries of models of skin diseases said to be actually produced by the
wearing of dyed garments. Whether it be true or not that any form of skin
disease has been produced by the wearing of dyed articles of clothing is
simply a question of evidence, and there is evidence enough to show that
individuals have experienced ill effects who have worn clothing dyed with
artificial colors. But, as far as we know, there is an entire want of any
evidence that will satisfactorily show that the inconvenience suffered by
wearers of these dyed goods has been owing to the dyeing material. Years
must elapse before chemists or physicians can hope to become thoroughly
informed of the physiological action produced by the cutaneous absorption
of the thousands of new products which the ingenuity and industry of
technological chemists have made available for the manufacture of colors;
they are also new to science, most of them very complex in their
constitution, and so dissimilar to previously studied compounds used by
the dyer, that it may be said we have nearly everything to learn
concerning their action upon the human economy. With respect to dyed
woolen and silk goods it is almost entirely a question as to the innocence
or otherwise of the coloring matter itself, which in nine cases out of ten
is an organic body containing no mineral matter of any sort, and not
requiring the assistance of any mordant to enable it to dye.
Considerations of arsenic, or antimony, or mercury existing in the dyed
stuffs are absolutely excluded. In a few cases the dyestuff is a zinc
compound, and zinc in small traces may possibly be fixed by the material,
but this metal is not known to be actively noxious. Textiles made from
fibers of animal origin do not require, and as a rule do not tolerate, the
addition of any metal in dyeing with the artificial colors, and if the
manufacture of the color require the use of a metal, such as arsenic,
which by unskillfulness or carelessness is left in it when delivered to
the dyer, the tendency of the animal fiber is to reject it.

But the case with regard to textiles made from vegetables fibers is quite
different; upon materials made from cotton, flax, jute, or other fiber of
the vegetable kingdom, the new aniline colors cannot be fixed without the
assistance of other bodies acting the part of mordants. Some of these
bodies are actively poisonous in their nature, and introduce a possible
element of danger to the wearer of the dyed article. For many years,
almost the only method of dyeing cotton goods with the aniline colors
consisted in a preliminary steeping in sumac or tannic acid, followed by a
passage in some suitable compound of tin, and subsequent dyeing in the
coloring matter. Sumac and tin have been used for two hundred years or
more as the dyer's basis for a considerable number of shades of color from
old dye-stuffs; there never has been the least suspicion that there was
anything hurtful in colors so dyed. Sumac or tannic acid, in combination
with alumina, may be held to be equally inoffensive; now it is a fact that
the great bulk of cotton goods are dyed with the aniline colors by the
agency of these harmless chemicals. But of late years the dyers of certain
goods, and the calico printers generally, have found an advantage in the
use of tartar emetic, and other compounds of antimony, to fix aniline
colors; besides this, some colors are fixed in calico printing by means of
an arsenical alumina mordant; it need not be mentioned that antimony, as
well as arsenic, is, when administered internally, an active poison in
even small quantities, and that externally both are injurious under
certain conditions. An alarmist would require nothing further than this
statement to feel himself justified in attributing everything bad to
fabrics so colored; but the practical dyer or calico printer knows that
though he employs these poisonous bodies in his business, and that some
portion of them does actually accompany the dyed material in its finished
state, not only is the quantity excessively small, but that it is in such
a state of combination as to be completely inert and innoxious. In the
case of tartar emetic, it is the tannate of antimony which remains upon
the cloth, a compound of considerable stability, and almost perfectly
insoluble in water; in the case of a few colors fixed by the arsenical
alumina mordant, the arsenic is in an insoluble state of combination with
the alumina, in fact, the poisons are in the presence of their antidotes,
and not even the most scrupulous manufacturer has any fear that he is
turning out goods which can be hurtful to the wearer. Persons quite
unacquainted with the process of dyeing are apt to think that goods are
dyed by simply immersing them in a colored liquid and then drying them
with all the color on them and all that the color contains; they do not
know that in all usual cases of dyeing a careful washing in a plentiful
supply of water is the final process in the dye-house, and that nothing
remains upon the cloth which can be washed out by water, the color being
retained by a sort of attraction or affinity between it and the fiber, or
mordant on the fiber. Dyeing is not like painting or even the printing or
staining of paper for hangings, where the vehicle and color in its
entirety is applied and remains. It follows, therefore, that many
chemicals used in dyeing have only a transitory use, and are washed away
completely--such as oil of vitriol, much used in woolen dyeing--and that
of others only a very minute quantity is finally left on the cloth, as is
the case in antimony and arsenic in cotton dyeing and printing.

There is evidently among working dyers, as among all other classes, an
unknown amount of carelessness, ignorance, and stupidity, from which
employers are constantly suffering in the shape of spoiled colors and
rotted cloth. It is not for us to say that the public may not at times
have to suffer also from neglect of the most common treatments which
should remove injurious matters from dyed goods; what can be said is, that
if the dyeing processes for aniline colors be followed out with ordinary
care and intelligence, it is extremely improbable that anything left in
the material should be injurious to human health.--_Manchester Textile
Recorder._

       *       *       *       *       *




CASE OF RESUSCITATION AND RECOVERY AFTER APPARENT DEATH BY HANGING.

By ERNEST W. WHITE, M.B. Lond., M.R.C.P., Senior Assistant Medical Officer
to the Kent Lunatic Asylum; Associate, Late Scholar, of King's College,
London.


The following case, from its hopelessness at the outset, yet ultimate
recovery under the duly recognized forms of treatment, is of such interest
as to demand publicity, and will afford encouragement to others in moments
of doubt.

M.A. S----, aged fifty-three, was admitted into the Kent Lunatic Asylum at
Chartham on Oct. 3, 1882, suffering from melancholia, the duration of
which was stated to have been three months. She had several times
attempted suicide by drowning and strangulation. She was on admission
ordered a mixture containing morphia and ether thrice daily, to allay her
distress. On Oct. 10 she attempted suicide by tying a stocking, which she
had secreted about her person, round her neck. Shortly afterward, with
similar intent, she threw herself downstairs. On Jan. 4, 1883, she
attempted to strangle herself with her apron. On the 30th of November
following, at 4 P.M. she evaded the attendants, and made her way to the
bath-room of of No. 1 ward, the door of which had been left unfastened by
an attendant. She then suspended herself from a ladder there by means of
portions of her dress and underclothing tied together. A patient of No. 1
ward discovered her suspended from the ladder eight minutes after she had
last seen her in the adjoining watercloset, and gave the alarm.

The woman was quickly cut down, and the medical officers summoned. In the
interval cold affusion was resorted to by the attendant in charge, but the
patient was to all appearances dead. The junior assistant medical officer,
Mr. J. Reynolds Salter, M.B. Lond., arrived after about three minutes, and
at once resorted to artificial respiration by the Silvester method. A
minute or so later the medical superintendent and myself joined him. At
this time the condition of the patient was as follows: The face presented
the appearance known as facies hippocratica: the eyeballs were prominent,
the corneae glassy, the pupils widely dilated, not acting to light, and
there was no reflex action of the conjunctivae; the lips were livid, the
tongue tumefied, but pallid, the skin ashy pale, the cutaneous tissues
apparently devoid of elasticity. There was an oblique depressed mark on
the neck, more evident on the left side; the small veins and capillaries
of the surface of the body were turgid with coagulating blood the surface
temperature was extremely low. She was pulseless at the wrists and
temples. There was no definite beat of the heart recognizable by the
stethoscope.

There was absolute cessation of all natural respiratory efforts, complete
unconsciousness, total abolition of reflex action and motion, and
galvanism with the ordinary magneto-electric machine failed to induce
muscular contractions. The urine and faeces had been passed involuntarily
during or immediately subsequent to the act of suspension. As the
stethoscope revealed that but a small amount of air entered the lungs with
each artificial inspiration, the tongue was at once drawn well forward,
and retained in that position by an assistant, with the result that air
then penetrated to the smaller bronchi. Inspiration and expiration were
artificially imitated about ten times to the minute. In performing
expiration the chest was thoroughly compressed. The lower extremities were
raised, and manual centripetal frictions freely applied. In the intervals
of these applications warmth to the extremities was resorted to.

About ten minutes from the commencement of artificial respiration we
noticed a single weak spasmodic contraction of the diaphragm, the feeblest
possible effort at natural respiration. Simultaneously, very distant weak
reduplicated cardiac pulsations, numbering about 150 to the minute, became
evident to the stethoscope. The reduplication implied that the two sides
of the heart were not acting synchronously, owing to obstruction to the
pulmonary circulation induced by the asphyxiated state. Artificial
respiration was steadily maintained, and during the next half hour
spasmodic contractions of the diaphragm occurred at gradually diminishing
intervals, from once in three minutes to three or four times a minute.

These natural efforts were artificially aided as far as possible. At 5:45
P.M. natural respiration was fairly though insufficiently established, the
skin began to lose its deadly hue, and titillation of the fauces caused
weak reflex contractions. Flagellation with wet towels was now freely
resorted to, and immediately the natural efforts at respiration were
increased to twice their previous number. The administration of a little
brandy and water by the mouth failed, as the liquid entered the larynx.
Ammonia was applied to the nostrils, and the surface temperature was
increased by warm applications and clothing. At 6 P.M. artificial
respiration was no longer necessary. The heart sounds then numbered 140 to
the minute, the right and left heart still acting separately. A very small
radial pulse could also be felt. At 6:45 P.M. the woman was put to bed,
warmth of surface maintained, and hot coffee and beef-tea given in small
quantities.

Great restlessness and jactitation set in with the renewal of the
circulation in the extremities. An enema of two ounces of strong beef-tea
was administered at 10 P.M. The amount of organic effluvium thrown off by
the lungs on the re-establishment of respiration was very great and
tainted the atmosphere of the room and adjoining ward. The pupils,
previously widely dilated, began to contract to light at 11 P.M. Imperfect
consciousness returned at 5 P.M. the following day (Dec. 1), and about an
hour later she vomited the contents of the stomach (bread, etc., taken on
Nov. 30). Small quantities of beef-tea were given by the mouth during the
night. At 9 A.M. air entered the lungs freely, and there were no symptoms
of pulmonary engorgement beyond slight basic hypostasis; the pulse
remained at 140, and the heart sounds reduplicated; she was semiconscious,
very drowsy, in a state of mental torpor, with confused ideas when roused,
and she complained of rheumatic-like pains all over her.

The temperature was 100.2 deg.; the facial expression more natural; the tongue
remained somewhat swollen and sore; she was no longer restless; she took
tea, beef-tea, milk, etc., well; the functions of the secreting organs
were being restored; she perspired freely; had micturated; the mucous
membrane of the mouth was moist, and there was a tendency to tears without
corresponding mental depression. The patient was ordered a mixture of
ether and digitalis every four hours. On December 2 the pulse was 136, and
the heart sounds reduplicated. The following day she was given bromide of
potassium in place of the ether in the digitalis mixture. On the 4th the
pulse was 126; reduplication gone. On the 6th the pulse was 82, and the
temperature fell with the pulse rate. She was well enough to get into the
ward for a few hours. Her memory, especially for recent events, was at
that time greatly impaired. On the 12th she still complained of muscular
pains like those of rheumatism. Apart from that, she was enjoying good
bodily health.

A curious fact in connection with this case is that since this attempt at
suicide she has steadily improved mentally, has lost her delusions, is
cheerful, and employs herself usefully with her needle. She converses
rationally, and tells me she recollects the impulse by which she was led
