at an ascertained distance. Put two pins in a stick half an inch
apart (Fig. 26). Hold it up two feet from the eye, and let the
upper pin fall in line with your eye and the top of a distant church
steeple, and the lower pin in line with the bottom of the church and
your eye. If the church is three-fourths of a mile away, it must
be eighty-two feet high; if a mile away, it must be one hundred
and ten feet high. For if two lines spread [Page 68] one-half an
inch going two feet, in going four feet they will spread an inch,
and in going a mile, or five thousand two hundred and eighty feet,
they will spread out one-fourth as many inches, viz., thirteen
hundred and twenty--that is, one hundred and ten feet. Of course
these are not exact methods of measurement, and would not be correct
to a hair at one hundred and twenty-five feet, but they perfectly
illustrate the true methods of measurement.

Imagine a base line ten inches long. At each end erect a perpendicular
line. If they are carried to infinity they will never meet: will
be forever ten inches apart. But at the distance of a foot from
the base line incline one line toward the other 63/10000000 of
an inch, and the lines will come together at a distance of three
hundred miles. That new angle differs from the former right angle
almost infinitesimally, but it may be measured. Its value is about
three-tenths of a second. If we lengthen the base line from ten
inches to all the miles we can command, of course the point of
meeting will be proportionally more distant. The angle made by
the lines where they come together will be obviously the same as
the angle of divergence from a right angle at this end. That angle
is called the parallax of any body, and is the angle that would
be made by two lines coming from that body to the two ends of any
conventional base, as the semi-diameter of the earth. That that
angle would vary according to the various distances is easily seen
by Fig. 27.

[Illustration: Fig. 27.]

Let O P be the base. This would subtend a greater angle seen from
star A than from star B. Let B be far enough away, and O P would
become invisible, and B [Page 69] would have no parallax for that
base. Thus the moon has a parallax of 57" with the semi-equatorial
diameter of the earth for a base. And the sun has a parallax 8".85
on the same base. It is not necessary to confine ourselves to right
angles in these measurements, for the same principles hold true in
any angles. Now, suppose two observers on the equator should look at
the moon at the same instant. One is on the top of Cotopaxi, on the
west coast of South America, and one on the west coast of Africa.
They are 90 deg. apart--half the earth's diameter between them. The one
on Cotopaxi sees it exactly overhead, at an angle of 90 deg. with the
earth's diameter. The one on the coast of Africa sees its angle with
the same line to be 89 deg. 59' 3"--that is, its parallax is 57". Try
the same experiment on the sun farther away, as is seen in Fig. 27,
and its smaller parallax is found to be only 8".85.

It is not necessary for two observers to actually station themselves
at two distant parts of the earth in order to determine a parallax.
If an observer could go from one end of the base-line to the other,
he could determine both angles. Every observer is actually carried
along through space by two motions: one is that of the earth's
revolution of one thousand miles an hour around the axis; and the
other is the movement of the earth around the sun of one thousand
miles in a minute. Hence we can have the diameter not only of [Page
70] the earth (eight thousand miles) for a base-line, but the
diameter of the earth's orbit (184,000,000 miles), or any part of
it, for such a base. Two observers at the ends of the earth's
diameter, looking at a star at the same instant, would find that it
made the same angle at both ends; it has no parallax on so short a
base. We must seek a longer one. Observe a certain star on the 21st
of March; then let us traverse the realms of space for six months,
at one thousand miles a minute. We come round in our orbit to a
point opposite where we were six months ago, with 184,000,000 of
miles between the points. Now, with this for a base-line, measure
the angles of the same stars: it is the same angle. Sitting in my
study here, I glance out of the window and discern separate bricks,
in houses five hundred feet away, with my unaided eye; they subtend
a discernible angle. But one thousand feet away I cannot distinguish
individual bricks; their width, being only two inches, does not
subtend an angle apprehensible to my vision. So at these distant
stars the earth's enormous orbit, if lying like a blazing ring in
space, with the world set on its edge like a pearl, and the sun
blazing like a diamond in the centre, would all shrink to a mere
point. Not quite to a point from the nearest stars, or we should
never be able to measure the distance of any of them. Professor Airy
says that our orbit, seen from the nearest star, would be the same
as a circle six-tenths of an inch in diameter seen at the distance
of a mile: it would all be hidden by a thread one-twenty-fifth of an
inch in diameter, held six hundred and fifty feet from the eye. If a
straight line could be drawn from a star, Sirius in the east to the
star Vega in the west, touching our [Page 71] earth's orbit on one
side, as T R A (Fig. 28), and a line were to be drawn six months
later from the same stars, touching our earth's orbit on the other
side, as R B T, such a line would not diverge sufficiently from a
straight line for us to detect its divergence. Numerous vain
attempts had been made, up to the year 1835, to detect and measure
the angle of parallax by which we could rescue some one or more of
the stars from the inconceivable depths of space, and ascertain
their distance from us. We are ever impelled to triumph over what is
declared to be unconquerable. There are peaks in the Alps no man has
ever climbed. They are assaulted every year by men zealous of more
worlds to conquer. So these greater heights of the heavens have been
assaulted, till some ambitious spirits have outsoared even
imagination by the certainties of mathematics.

[Illustration: Fig. 28.]

It is obvious that if one star were three times as far from us as
another, the nearer one would seem to be displaced by our movement
in our orbit three times as much as the other; so, by comparing one
star with another, we reach a ground of judgment. The ascertainment
of longitude at sea by means of the moon affords a good illustration.
Along the track where the moon sails, nine bright stars, four planets,
and the sun have been selected. The nautical almanacs give the
distance of the moon from these successive stars every hour in
the night for three years in advance. The sailor can measure the
distance at any time by his sextant. Looking from the world at
D (Fig. 29), the distance of the moon and [Page 72] star is A E,
which is given in the almanac. Looking from C, the distance is only
B E, which enables even the uneducated sailor to find the distance,
C D, on the earth, or his distance from Greenwich.

[Illustration: Fig. 29.--Mode of Ascertaining Longitude.]

So, by comparisons of the near and far stars, the approximate distance
of a few of them has been determined. The nearest one is the brightest
star in the Centaur, never visible in our northern latitudes, which
has a parallax of about one second. The next nearest is No. 61 in
the Swan, or 61 Cygni, having a parallax of 0".34. Approximate
measurements have been made on Sirius, Capella, the Pole Star,
etc., about eighteen in all. The distances are immense: only the
swiftest agents can traverse them. If our earth were suddenly to
dissolve its allegiance to the king of day, and attempt a flight
to the North Star, and should maintain its flight of one thousand
miles a minute, it would flyaway toward Polaris for thousands upon
thousands of years, till a million years had passed away, before
it reached that northern dome of the distant sky, and gave its
new allegiance to another sun. The sun it had left behind it would
gradually diminish till it was small as Arcturus, then small as
could be discerned by the naked eye, until at last it would finally
fade out in utter darkness long before the new sun was reached.
Light can traverse the distance around our earth eight times in
one second. It comes in eight minutes from the sun, but it takes
three and a quarter years to come from Alpha [Page 73] Centauri,
seven and a quarter years from 61 Cygni, and forty-five years from
the Polar Star.

Sometimes it happens that men steer along a lee shore, dependent
for direction on Polaris, that light-house in the sky. Sometimes it
has happened that men have traversed great swamps by night when that
star was the light-housse of freedom. In either case the exigency
of life and liberty was provided for forty-five years before by a
Providence that is divine.

We do not attempt to name in miles these enormous distances; we
must seek another yard-stick. Our astronomical unit and standard of
measurement is the distance of the earth from the sun--92,500,000
miles. This is the golden reed with which we measure the celestial
city. Thus, by laying down our astronomical unit 226,000 times, we
measure to Alpha Centauri, more than twenty millions of millions
of miles. Doubtless other suns are as far from Alpha Centauri and
each other as that is from ours.

Stars are not near or far according to their brightness. 61 Cygni is
a telescopic star, while Sirius, the brightest star in the heavens,
is twice as far away from us. One star differs from another star
in intrinsic glory.

The highest testimonies to the accuracy of these celestial observations
are found in the perfect predictions of eclipses, transits of planets
over the sun, occultation of stars by the moon, and those statements
of the Nautical Almanac that enable the sailor to know exactly
where he is on the pathless ocean by the telling of the stars:
"On the trackless ocean this book is the mariner's trusted friend
and counsellor; daily and nightly its revelations bring safety
to ships in all parts of the [Page 74] world. It is something more
than a mere book; it is an ever-present manifestation of the order
and harmony of the universe."

Another example of this wonderful accuracy is found in tracing
the asteroids. Within 200,000,000 or 300,000,000 miles from the
sun, the one hundred and ninety-two minute bodies that have been
already discovered move in paths very nearly the same--indeed two of
them traverse the same orbit, being one hundred and eighty degrees
apart;--they look alike, yet the eye of man in a few observations
so determines the curve of each orbit, that one is never mistaken
for another. But astronomy has higher uses than fixing time,
establishing landmarks, and guiding the sailor. It greatly quickens
and enlarges thought, excites a desire to know, leads to the utmost
exactness, and ministers to adoration and love of the Maker of
the innumerable suns.




[Page 75]
V.

THE SUN.

"And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and
the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also."--_Gen._
i. 16.

[Page 76]
"It is perceived that the sun of the world, with all its essence,
which is heat and light, flows into every tree, and into every
shrub and flower, and into every stone, mean as well as precious;
and that every object takes its portion from this common influx,
and that the sun does not divide its light and heat, and dispense
a part to this and a part to that. It is similar with the sun of
heaven, from which the Divine love proceeds as heat, and the Divine
wisdom as light; these two flow into human minds, as the heat and
light of the sun of the world into bodies, and vivify them according
to the quality of the minds, each of which takes from the common
influx as much as is necessary."--SWEDENBORG.




[Page 77]
V.

_THE SUN._

Suppose we had stood on the dome of Boston Statehouse November 9th,
1872, on the night of the great conflagration, and seen the fire
break out; seen the engines dash through the streets, tracking their
path by their sparks; seen the fire encompass a whole block, leap
the streets on every side, surge like the billows of a storm-swept
sea; seen great masses of inflammable gas rise like dark clouds
from an explosion, then take fire in the air, and, cut off from
the fire below, float like argosies of flame in space. Suppose we
had felt the wind that came surging from all points of the compass
to fan that conflagration till it was light enough a mile away to
see to read the finest print, hot enough to decompose the torrents
of water that were dashed on it, making new fuel to feed the flame.
Suppose we had seen this spreading fire seize on the whole city,
extend to its environs, and, feeding itself on the very soil, lick
up Worcester with its tongues of flame--Albany, New York, Chicago,
St. Louis, Cincinnati--and crossing the plains swifter than a prairie
fire, making each peak of the Rocky Mountains hold up aloft a separate
torch of flame, and the Sierras whiter with heat than they ever were
with snow, the waters of the Pacific resolve into their constituent
elements of oxygen and hydrogen, and [Page 78] burn with
unquenchable fire! We withdraw into the air, and see below a world
on fire. All the prisoned powers have burst into intensest activity.
Quiet breezes have become furious tempests. Look around this flaming
globe--on fire above, below, around--there is nothing but fire. Let
it roll beneath us till Boston comes round again. No ember has yet
cooled, no spire of flame has shortened, no surging cloud has been
quieted. Not only are the mountains still in flame, but other ranges
burst up out of the seething sea. There is no place of rest, no
place not tossing with raging flame! Yet all this is only a feeble
figure of the great burning sun. It is but the merest hint, a
million times too insignificant.

The sun appears small and quiet to us because we are so far away.
Seen from the various planets, the relative size of the sun appears
as in Fig. 30. Looked for from some of the stars about us, the
sun could not be seen at all. Indeed, seen from the earth, it is
not always the same size, because the distance is not always the
same. If we represent the size of the sun by one thousand on the
23d of September or 21st of March, it would be represented by nine
hundred and sixty-seven on the 1st of July, and by one thousand
and thirty-four on the 1st of January.

[Illustration: Fig. 30.--Relative Size of Sun as seen from Different
Planets.]

We sometimes speak of the sun as having a diameter of 860,000 miles.
We mean that that is the extent of the body as soon by the eye.
But that is a small part of its real diameter. So we say the earth
has an equatorial diameter of 7925-1/2 miles, and a polar one of
7899. But the air is as much a part of the earth as the rocks are.
The electric currents are as much a part of the [Page 79] earth as
the ores and mountains they traverse. What the diameter of the earth
is, including these, no man can tell. We used to say the air
extended forty-five miles, but we now know that it reaches vastly
farther. So of the sun, we might almost say that its diameter is
infinite, for its light and heat reach beyond our measurement. Its
living, throbbing heart sends out pulsations, keeping all space full
of its tides of living light.

[Page 80]
[Illustration: Fig. 31.--Zodiacal Light.]

We might say with evident truth that the far-off planets are a
part of the sun, since the space they traverse is filled with the
power of that controlling king; not only with light, but also with
gravitating power.

But come to more ponderable matters. If we look [Page 81] into our
western sky soon after sunset, on a clear, moonless night in March
or April, we shall see a dim, soft light, somewhat like the
milky-way, often reaching, well defined, to the Pleiades. It is
wedge-shaped, inclined to the south, and the smallest star can
easily be seen through it. Mairan and Cassini affirm that they have
seen sudden sparkles and movements of light in it. All our best
tests show the spectrum of this light to be continuous, and
therefore reflected; which indicates that it is a ring of small
masses of meteoric matter surrounding the sun, revolving with it and
reflecting its light. One bit of stone as large as the end of one's
thumb, in a cubic mile, would be enough to reflect what light we see
looking through millions of miles of it. Perhaps an eye sufficiently
keen and far away would see the sun surrounded by a luminous disk,
as Saturn is with his rings. As it extends beyond the earth's orbit,
if this be measured as a part of the sun, its diameter would be
about 200,000,000 miles.

Come closer. When the sun is covered by the disk of the moon at
the instant of total eclipse, observers are startled by strange
swaying luminous banners, ghostly and weird, shooting in changeful
play about the central darkness (Fig. 32). These form the corona.
Men have usually been too much moved to describe them, and have
always been incapable of drawing them in the short minute or two
of their continuance. But in 1878 men travelled eight thousand
miles, coming and returning, in order that they might note the
three minutes of total eclipse in Colorado. Each man had his work
assigned to him, and he was drilled to attend to that and nothing
else. Improved instruments were put into his [Page 82] hands, so
that the sun was made to do his own drawing and give his own picture
at consecutive instants. Fig. 33 is a copy of a photograph of the
corona of 1878, by Mr. Henry Draper. It showed much less
changeability that year than common, it being very near the time of
least sun-spot. The previous picture was taken near the time of
maximum sun-spot.

[Illustration: Fig. 32.--The Corona in 1858, Brazil.]

It was then settled that the corona consists of reflected light,
sent to us from dust particles or meteoroids swirling in the vast
seas, giving new densities and [Page 83] rarities, and hence this
changeful light. Whether they are there by constant projection, and
fall again to the sun, or are held by electric influence, or by
force of orbital revolution, we do not know. That the corona cannot
be in any sense an atmosphere of any continuous gas, is seen from
the fact that the comet of 1843, passing within 93,000 miles of the
body of the sun, was not burned out of existence as a comet, nor in
any perceptible degree retarded in its motion. If the sun's diameter
is to include the corona, it will be from 1,260,000 to 1,460,000
miles.

[Illustration: Fig. 33.--The Corolla in 1878, Colorado.]
 [Page 84] Come closer still. At the instant of the totality of the
 eclipse red flames of most fantastic shape play along the edge of
 the moon's disk. They can be seen at any time by the use of a
 proper telescope with a spectroscope attached. I have seen them
 with great distinctness and brilliancy with the excellent
 eleven-inch telescope of the Wesleyan University. A description of
 their appearance is best given in the language of Professor Young,
 of Princeton College, who has made these flames the object of most
 successful study. On September 7th, 1871, he was observing a large
 hydrogen cloud by the sun's edge. This cloud was about 100,000
 miles long, and its upper side was some 50,000 miles above the
 sun's surface, the lower side some 15,000 miles. The whole had the
 appearance of being supported on pillars of fire, these seeming
 pillars being in reality hydrogen jets brighter and more active
 than the substance of the cloud. At half-past twelve, when
 Professor Young chanced to be called away from his observatory,
 there were no indications of any approaching change, except that
 one of the connecting stems of the southern extremity of the cloud
 had grown considerably brighter and more curiously bent to one
 side; and near the base of another, at the northern end, a little
 brilliant lump had developed itself, shaped much like a summer
 thunderhead.

[Illustration: Fig. 34.--Solar Prominences of Flaming Hydrogen.]

But when Professor Young returned, about half an hour later, he
found that a very wonderful change had taken place, and that a
very remarkable process was actually in progress. "The whole thing
had been literally blown to shreds," he says, "by some inconceivable
uprush from beneath. In place of the quiet cloud I had [Page 87]
left, the air--if I may use the expression--was filled with the
flying _debris_, a mass of detached vertical fusi-form fragments,
each from ten to thirty seconds (_i. e._, from four thousand five
hundred to thirteen thousand five hundred miles) long, by two or
three seconds (nine hundred to thirteen hundred and fifty miles)
wide--brighter, and closer together where the pillars had formerly
stood, and rapidly ascending. When I looked, some of them had
already reached a height of nearly four minutes (100,000 miles); and
while I watched them they arose with a motion almost perceptible to
the eye, until, in ten minutes, the uppermost were more than 200,000
miles above the solar surface. This was ascertained by careful
measurements, the mean of three closely accordant determinations
giving 210,000 miles as the extreme altitude attained. I am
particular in the statement, because, so far as I know,
chromatospheric matter (red hydrogen in this case) has never before
been observed at any altitude exceeding five minutes, or 135,000
miles. The velocity of ascent, also--one hundred and sixty-seven
miles per second--is considerably greater than anything hitherto
recorded. * * * As the filaments arose, they gradually faded away
like a dissolving cloud, and at a quarter past one only a few filmy
wisps, with some brighter streamers low down near the
chromatosphere, remained to mark the place. But in the mean while
the little 'thunder-head' before alluded to had grown and developed
