transfer the odor of flowers to alcohol.

Where oil is used it is the very finest olive, produced by the trees
in the neighborhood. This is put into copper vats holding about 50
gallons; 1 cwt. of flowers is added. After some hours the flowers are
strained out by means of a large tin sieve. The oil is treated with
another cwt. of flowers and still another, until sufficiently
impregnated. It is then filtered through paper until it becomes quite
bright; lastly it is put into tins, and is ready for exportation or
for use in the production of extracts.

Where fat is employed as the macerating agent, the fat used is a
properly adjusted mixture of lard and suet, both of which have been
purified and refined during the winter months, and kept stored away in
well closed tins.

One cwt. of the fat is melted in a steam-jacketed pan, and poured into
a tinned copper vat capable of holding from 5 to 6 cwt. About 1 cwt.
of orange flowers being added, these are well stirred in with a wooden
spatula. After standing for a few hours, which time is not sufficient
for solidification to take place, the contents are poured into shallow
pans and heated to 60 deg. C. The mixture thus rendered more fluid is
poured on to a tin sieve; the fat passes through, the flowers remain
behind. These naturally retain a large amount of macerating liquor. To
save this they are packed into strong canvas bags and subjected to
pressure between the plates of a powerful hydraulic press. The fat
squeezed out is accompanied by the moisture of the flowers, from which
it is separated by skimming. Being returned to the original vat, our
macerating medium receives another complement of flowers to rob of
their scent, and yet others, until the strength of the pomade desired
is reached. The fat is then remelted, decanted, and poured into tins
or glass jars.

To make the extrait, the pomade is beaten up with alcohol in a special
air tight mixing machine holding some 12 gallons, stirrers moved by
steam power agitating the pomade in opposite directions. After some
hours' agitation a creamy liquid is produced, which, after resting,
separates, the alcohol now containing the perfume. By passing the
alcohol through tubes surrounded by iced water, the greater part of
the dissolved fat is removed.

These are the processes applied to the flowers. The leaves are
distilled only for the oil of petit grain. This name was given to the
oil because it was formerly obtained from miniature orange fruits.
From 1,000 kilos. of leaves 2 kilos. of oil are obtained.

The oil obtained from the fruit of the orange, like that of the lemon,
is extracted at Grasse by rolling the orange over the pricks of an
_ecueille_, an instrument with a hollow handle, into which the oil
flows. The oil is sometimes taken up by a sponge. Where the oil is
produced in larger quantities, as at Messina, more elaborate apparatus
is employed. A less fragrant oil is obtained by distilling the
raspings of the rind.


THE EUCALYPTUS, MYRTLE, ETC.

Of later introduction than the trees of the orange family is the
Eucalyptus globulus, which, not being able to compete with the former
in the variety of nasal titillations it gives rise to, probably
consoles itself with coming off the distinct victor in the department
of power and penetration. The leaves and twigs of this tree are
distilled for oil. This oil is in large demand on the Continent, the
fact of there being no other species than the globulus in the
neighborhood being a guarantee of the uniformity of the product.

Whereas the eucalyptus is but a newcomer in these regions, another
member of the same family, the common myrtle, can date its
introduction many centuries back. An oil is distilled from its leaves,
and also a water.

Associated with the myrtle we find the leaves of the bay laurel,
forming the victorious wreaths of the ancients. The oil produced is
the oil of bay laurel, oil of sweet bay. This must not be confounded
with the oil of bays of the West Indies, the produce of the _Myrcia
acris_; nor yet with the cherry laurel, a member of yet another
family, the leaves of which are sometimes substituted for those of the
sweet bay. The leaves of this plant yield the cherry laurel water of
the B.P. It can hardly be said to be an article of perfumery. It also
yields an oil.

Another water known to the British Pharmacopoeia is that produced from
the flowers of the elder, which flourishes round about Grasse.

The rue also grows wild in these parts, and is distilled.


THE LABIATES.

The family which overshadows all others in the quantity of essential
oils which it puts at the disposal of the Grassois and their neighbors
is that of the Labiatae. Foremost among these we have the lavender,
spike, thyme, and rosemary. These are all of a vigorous and hardy
nature and require no cultivation. The tops of these plants are
generally distilled _in situ_, under contract with the Grasse
manufacturer, by the villagers in the immediate vicinity. The higher
the altitude at which these grow, the more esteemed the oil. The
finest oil of lavender is produced by distilling the flowers only.
About 100 tons of lavender, 25 of spike, 40 of thyme, and 20 of
rosemary are sent out from Grasse every year.

Among the less abundant labiates of these parts is the melissa, which
yields, however, a very fragrant oil.

In the same family we have the sage and the sweet or common basil,
also giving up their essential oils on distillation.


THE UMBELLIFERS.

Whereas the flowers of the labiate family are treated by the
distillers as favorites are by the gods, and are cut off in their
youth, those of the Umbelliferae are allowed to mature and develop into
the oil-yielding fruits. Its representatives, the fennel and parsley,
grow wild round about the town, and are laid under contribution by the
manufacturers.

The Composites are represented by the wormwood and tarragon
(_Estragon_).


THE GERANIUM.

Oil of geranium is produced from the rose or oak-leaved geranium,
cuttings of which are planted in well sheltered beds in October.
During the winter they are covered over with straw matting. In April
they are taken up, and planted in rows in fields or upon easily
irrigated terraces. Of water they require _quantum sufficit_; of
nature's other gift, which cheers and not inebriates--the glorious
sunshine--they cannot have too much. They soon grow into bushes three
or four feet high. At Nice they generally flower at the end of August.
At Grasse and cooler places they flower about the end of October. The
whole flowering plant is put into the still.


THE ROSE.

Allied to the oil of geranium in odor are the products of the rose.
The Rose de Provence is the variety cultivated. It is grown on gentle
slopes facing the southeast. Young shoots are taken from a
five-year-old tree, and are planted in ground which has been well
broken up to a depth of three or four feet, in rows like vines. When
the young plant begins to branch out, the top of it is cut off about a
foot from the ground. During the first year the farmer picks off the
buds that appear, in order that the whole attention of the plant may
be taken up in developing its system. In the fourth or fifth year the
tree is in its full yielding condition. The flowering begins about
mid-April, and lasts through May to early June. On some days as many
as 150 tons of roses are gathered in the province of the Alpes
Maritimes.

The buds on the point of opening are picked in the early morning.
Scott says they are "sweetest washed with morning dew." The purchaser
may think otherwise where the dew has to be paid for.

The flowering season over, the trees are allowed to run wild. In
January they are pruned, and the branches left are entwined from tree
to tree all along the line, and form impenetrable fences.

A rose tree will live to a good age, but does not yield much after its
seventh year. At that period it is dug up and burned, and corn,
potatoes, or some other crop is grown on the land for twelve months or
more.

In the factory the petals are separated from the calyx, and are
distilled with water for the production of rose water and the otto.
For the production of the huile and pomade they are treated by
maceration. They are finished off, however, by the process of
enfleurage, in which the frames before alluded to are made use of. The
fat, or pomade, is spread on to the glass on both sides. The blossoms
are then lightly strewn on to the upper surface. A number of trays so
filled are placed one on the top of the other to a convenient height,
forming a tolerably air tight box. The next day the old flowers are
removed, and fresh ones are substituted for them. This is repeated
until the fat is sufficiently impregnated. From time to time the
surface of the absorbent is renewed by serrating it with a comb-like
instrument. This, of course, is necessary in order to give the hungry,
non-saturated lower layers a chance of doing their duty.

Where oil is the absorbent, the wired frames are used in connection
with cloths. The cloth acts as the holder of the oil, and the flowers
are spread upon it, and the process is conducted in the same way as
with the frames with glass.

From the pomade the extrait de rose is made in the same way as the
orange extrait.


CASSIE.

The stronger, though less delicate, cassie is grown from seeds, which
are contained in pods which betray the connection of this plant with
the leguminous family. After being steeped in water they are sown in a
warm and well sheltered spot. When two feet high the young plant is
grafted and transplanted to the open ground--ground well exposed to
the sun and sheltered from the cold winds. It flourishes best in the
neighborhood of Grasse and Cannes. The season of flowering is from
October to January or February, according to the presence or absence
of frost. The flowers are gathered twice a week in the daytime, and
are brought to the factories in the evening. They are here subjected
to maceration.


JONQUIL.

A plant of humbler growth is the jonquil. The bulbs of this are set
out in rows. The flowers put in an appearance about the end of March,
four or five on each stem. Each flower as it blooms is picked off at
the calyx. They are treated by maceration and enfleurage, chiefly the
latter. The harvesting period of the jonquil is of very short
duration, and it often takes two seasons for the perfumer to finish
off his pomades of extra strength. The crop is also very uncertain.


JASMIN.

A more reliable crop is that of the jasmin. This plant is reared from
cuttings of the wild jasmin, which are put in the earth in rows with
trenches between. Level ground is chosen; if hillside only is
available, this is formed into a series of terraces. When strong
enough, the young stem is grafted with shoots of the _Jasminum
grandiflorum_. The first year it is allowed to run wild, the second it
is trained by means of rods, canes and other appliances. At the
approach of winter the plants are banked up with earth to half their
height. The exposed parts then die off. When the last frost of winter
is gone the earth is removed, and what remains of the shrub is trimmed
and tidied up for the coming season. It grows to four or five feet.
Support is given by means of horizontal and upright poles, which join
the plants of one row into a hedge-like structure. Water is provided
by means of the ditches already mentioned. When not used for this
purpose, the trenches allow of the passage of women and children to
gather the flowers. These begin to appear in sufficient quantity to
repay collecting about the middle of July. The jasmin is collected as
soon as possible after it blooms. This occurs in the evening, and up
to about August 15, early enough for the blossoms to be gathered the
same day. They are delivered at the factories at once, where they are
put on to the chassis immediately; the work on them continuing very
often till long after midnight. Later on in the year they are gathered
in the early morning directly the dew is off. The farmer is up
betimes, and as soon as he sees the blossoms are dry he sounds a bugle
(made from a sea shell) to announce the fact to those engaged to pick
for him.


TUBEROSE.

The tuberose is planted in rows in a similar way to the jasmin. The
stems thrown up by the bulbs bear ten or twelve flowers. Each flower
as it blooms is picked off. The harvesting for the factories takes
place from about the first week in July to the middle of October.
There is an abundant yield, indeed, after this, but it is only of
service to the florist, the valued scent not being present in
sufficient quantity. The flowers are worked up at the factory directly
they arrive by the enfleurage process.


MIGNONETTE.

The _reseda_, or mignonette, is planted from seed, as here in England.
The flowering tops are used to produce the huile or pomade.


VIOLETS.

Last in order and least in size comes the violet. For "the flower of
sweetest smell is shy and lowly," and has taken a modest place in the
paper.

Violets are planted out in October or April. October is preferred, as
it is the rainy season; nor are the young plants then exposed to the
heat of the sun or to the drought, as they would be if starting life
in April.

The best place for them is in olive or orange groves, where they are
protected from the too powerful rays of the sun in summer and from the
extreme cold in winter. Specks of violets appear during November. By
December the green is quite overshadowed, and the whole plantation
appears of one glorious hue. For the leaves, having developed
sufficiently for the maintenance of the plant, rest on their oars, and
seem to take a silent pleasure in seeing the young buds they have
protected shoot past them and blossom in the open.

The flowers are picked twice a week; they lose both color and flavor
if they are allowed to remain too long upon the plant. They are
gathered in the morning, and delivered at the factories by the
commissionnaires or agents in the afternoon, when they are taken in
hand at once.

The products yielded by this flower are prized before all others in
the realms of perfumery, and cannot be improved; for, as one great
authority on all matters has said: "To throw a perfume on the violet
... were wasteful and ridiculous excess."

       *       *       *       *       *




HOW TO MAKE PHOTO. PRINTING PLATES.


The drawing intended for reproduction is pinned on a board and placed
squarely before a copying camera in a good, even light. The lens used
for this purpose must be capable of giving a perfectly sharp picture
right up to the edges, and must be of the class called rectilinear,
i.e., giving straight lines. The picture is then accurately focused
and brought to the required size. A plate is prepared in the dark room
by the collodion process, which is then exposed in the camera for the
proper time and developed in the ordinary way. After development, the
plate is fixed and strongly intensified, in order to render the white
portions of the drawings as opaque as possible. On looking through a
properly treated negative of this kind, it will be seen that the parts
representing the lines and black portions of the drawing are clear
glass, and the whites representing the paper a dense black.

The negative, after drying, is ready for the next operation, i.e.,
printing upon zinc. This is done in several ways. One method will,
however, be sufficient for the purpose here. I obtain a piece of the
bichromatized gelatine paper previously mentioned, and place it on the
face of the negative in a printing frame. This is exposed to sunlight
(if there is any) or daylight for a period varying from five to thirty
minutes, according to the strength of the light. This exposed piece of
paper is then covered all over with a thin coating of printing ink,
and wetted in a bath of cold water. In a few minutes the ink leaves
the white or protected parts of the paper, remaining only on the lines
where the light has passed through the negative and affected the
gelatine. We now have a transcript of the drawing in printing ink, on
a paper which, as soon as dry, is ready for laying down on a piece of
perfectly clean zinc, and passing through a press. The effect and
purpose of passing this cleaned sheet of zinc through the press in
contact with the picture on the gelatine paper is this: Owing to the
stronger attraction of the greasy ink for the clean metal than for the
gelatine, it leaves its original support, and attaches itself strongly
to the zinc, giving a beautifully sharp and clean impression of our
original drawing in greasy ink on the surface of the zinc. The zinc
plate is next damped and carefully rolled up with a roller charged
with more printing ink, and the image is thus made strong enough to
resist the first etching. This etching is done in a shallow bath,
which is so arranged that it can be rocked to and fro. For the first
etching, very weak solution of nitric acid and water is used. The
plate is placed with this acid solution in the bath, and steadily
rocked for five or ten minutes. The plate is then taken out, washed,
and again inked; then it is dusted over with powdered resin, which
sticks to the ink on the plate. After this the plate is heated until
the ink and resin on the lines melt together and form a strong
acid-resisting varnish over all the work. The plate is again put into
the acid etching bath and further etched. These operations are
repeated five or six times, until the zinc of the unprotected or white
part of the picture is etched deep enough to allow the lines to be
printed clean in a press, like ordinary type or an engraved wood
block. I ought perhaps to explain that between each etching the plate
is thoroughly inked, and that this ink is melted down the sides of the
line, so as to protect the sides as well as the top from the action of
the acid; were this neglected, the acid would soon eat out the lines
from below. The greatest skill and care is, therefore, necessary in
this work, especially so in the case of some of the exquisitely fine
blocks which are etched for some art publications.

There are many details which are necessary to successful etching, but
those now given will be sufficient to convey to you generally the
method of making the zinc plate for the typographic block. After
etching there only remains the trimming of the zinc, a little touching
up, and mounting it on a block of mahogany or cherry of exact
thickness to render it type high, and it is now ready for insertion
with type in the printer's form. From a properly etched plate hundreds
of thousands of prints may be obtained, or it may be electrotyped or
stereotyped and multiplied indefinitely.--_G.S. Waterlow, Brit. Jour.
Photo._

       *       *       *       *       *




ANALYSIS OF A HAND FIRE GRENADE.

By CHAS. CATLETT and R.C. PRICE.


The analyses of several of these "fire extinguishers" have been
published, showing that they are composed essentially of an aqueous
solution of one or more of the following bodies; sodium, potassium,
ammonium, and calcium chlorides and sulphates, and in small amount
borax and sodium acetate; while their power of extinguishing fire is
but three or fourfold that of water.

One of these grenades of a popular brand of which I have not found an
analysis was examined by Mr. Catlett with the following results: The
blue corked flask was so open as to show that it contained no gas
under pressure, and upon warming its contents, but 4 or 5 cubic inches
of a gas were given off. The grenade contained about 600 c.c. of a
neutral solution, which gave on analysis:


                                In 1000 c.c.  In the Flask.
                                  Grammes.        Grains.
  Calcium chloride¹                92.50           850.8
  Magnesium  "                     18.71           173.2
  Sodium     "                     22.20           206.9
  Potassium  "                      1.14            10.6
                                  ------          ------
                                  134.55          1241.5
        ¹Trace of bromide.


As this mixture of substances naturally suggested the composition of
the "mother liquors" from salt brines, Mr. Price made an analysis of
such a sample of "bittern" from the Snow Hill furnace, Kanawha Co.,
W.Va., obtaining the following composition:


                                In 1000 c.c.   In 200 c.c.
                                  Grammes.       Grains.
  Calcium chloride¹                299.70         925.8
  Magnesium  "                      56.93         175.7
  Strontium  "                       1.47           4.5
  Sodium     "                      20.16          62.2
  Potassium  "                       5.13          15.8
                                   ------        ------
                                   383.39        1184.0
        ¹Trace of bromide.


There is of course some variation in the bittern obtained from
different brines, but it appears of interest to call attention to this
correspondence in composition, as indicating that the liquid for
filling such grenades is obtained by adding two volumes of water to
one of the "bittern." The latter statement is fairly proved by the
presence of the bromine, and certainly from an economical standpoint
such should be its method of manufacture.--_Amer. Chem. Jour._

       *       *       *       *       *




MOLECULAR WEIGHTS.


A new and most valuable method of determining the molecular weights of
non-volatile as well as volatile substances has just been brought into
prominence by Prof. Victor Meyer (_Berichte_, 1888, No. 3). The method
itself was discovered by M. Raoult, and finally perfected by him in
1886, but up to the present has been but little utilized by chemists.
It will be remembered that Prof. Meyer has recently discovered two
isomeric series of derivatives of benzil, differing only in the
