only a slightly stupefied and contracted position of the head,
accompanied with a slight tremor. The current must be shut off as soon
as the horse's foot is well in one's hand, and be at once renewed if
he endeavors to defend himself again, as is rarely the case. It is a
mare of this nature that is represented in the annexed figures.

We know that this same system has been applied for bringing to an
abrupt standstill runaway horses, harnessed to vehicles; but knowing
the effect of a sudden stoppage under such circumstances, we believe
that the remedy would prove worse than the disease, since the coachman
and vehicle, in obedience to the laws of inertia, would continue their
motion and pass over the animals, much to their detriment.--_Science
et Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




ESTEVE'S AUTOMATIC PILE.


Mr. Esteve has recently devised a generator of electricity which he
claims to be energetic, constant, and always ready to operate. The
apparatus is designed for the production of light and for actuating
electric motors, large induction bobbins, etc.

We give a description of it herewith from data communicated by its
inventor.

The accompanying cut represents a battery of 6 elements, with a
reservoir, R, for the liquid, provided at its lower part with a cock
for allowing the liquid to enter the pile. The vessels of the
different elements are of rectangular form. At the upper part, and in
the wider surfaces of each, there are two tubes. The first tube of the
first vessel receives the extremity of a safety-tube, A, whose other
extremity enters the upper part of the reservoir, R. This tube is
designed for regulating the flow of the liquid into the pile. When the
cock, r, is too widely open, the liquid might have a tendency to
flow over the edges of the vessel; but this would close the orifice of
the tube, A, and, as the air would then no longer enter the reservoir,
R, the flow would be stopped automatically. The second tube of the
first vessel is connected with a lead tube, 1, one of the extremities
of which enters the second vessel. The other tubes are arranged in the
same way in the other vessels. The renewal of the liquids is effected
by displacement, in flowing upward from one element over into another;
and the liquids make their exit from the pile at D, after having
served six times. The electrodes of the two first elements are
represented as renewed in the cut, in order to show the arrangement of
the tubes.

[Illustration: ESTEVE'S AUTOMATIC PILE.]

_Dimensions._--The zinc, 2, has a superficies of 15x20 centimeters,
and is cut out of the ordinary commercial sheet metal. It may be
turned upside down when one end has become worn away, thus permitting
of its being entirely utilized. The negative electrode is formed of
four carbons, which have, each of them, a superficies of 8x21
centimeters. These four carbons are less fragile and are more easily
handled than two having the same surface. Their arrangement is shown
at the left of the figure. They are fixed to a strip of copper, a,
to which is soldered another strip, L, bent at right angles. There are
thus two pairs of carbon per element, and these are simply suspended
from a piece of wood, as shown in the figure. Upon this wooden holder
will be seen the two strips, LL, that are designed to be put in
contact with the zinc of the succeeding element by means of pinchers
that connect the electrodes with one another. This arrangement permits
the pile to be taken apart very quickly.

_Charging, Work, and Duration of the Pile._--The inventor has made a
large number of experiments with solutions of bichromate of potash of
various degrees of saturation, and has found the following to give the
best results:


     Bichromate of potash.           1 kilogramme.
     Sulphuric acid                  2 liters.
     Water                           8    "


When a larger quantity of the salt is used, crystallization occurs in
the pile.

                          Constants and work    Constants and work
                          of an element         of a round Bunsen
                          having a zinc of      element, 20x30 cm.
                          16x20 cm.

  Volts.                       1.9                   1.8
  Resistance.                  0.05                  0.24
  Work disposable in the
  external circuit.           1.839 k.              0.344 k.


The work disposable in the external circuit is deduced from the
formula:

                 T = E squared/(4R x 9.81)

It will be seen that an element thus charged gives as much energy as
5.3 large Bunsen elements.

The battery is charged with 10 liters of solution, and is capable of
furnishing for 5 hours a current of 7 amperes with a difference of
potential of 9 volts at the pile terminals. The work, according to the
formula (EI)/g, equals 6.422 kilogram-meters; with a feebler
resistance in the external circuit it is capable of producing a
current of 19 amperes for an hour and an half. In this case the
resistance of the external circuit equals the interior resistance of
the pile. Upon immersing the electrodes in new liquid, and with no
resistance in the external circuit, the current may reach 100 amperes.
On renewing the liquids during the operation of the pile, a current of
7 amperes is kept up if about a liter of saturation per hour be
allowed to pass into the battery. For five hours, then, only 5 liters
are used instead of the 10 that are necessary when the liquid is not
renewed while the pile is in action.--_La Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




WOODWARD'S DIFFUSION MOTOR.


The energy produced by the phenomena of diffusion is exhibited in
lecture courses by placing a bell glass filled with hydrogen over a
porous vessel at whose base is fixed a glass tube that dips into
water. The hydrogen, in diffusing, enters the porous vessel, increases
the internal pressure, and a number of bubbles escapes from the tube.
On withdrawing the bell glass of hydrogen, the latter becomes diffused
externally, a lower pressure occurs in the porous vessel, and the
level of the water rises.

The arrangement devised by Mr. C.J. Woodward, and recently presented
to the Physical Society of London, is an adaptation of this experiment
to the production of an oscillating motion by alternations in the
internal and external diffusion of the hydrogen.

The apparatus, represented herewith, consists of a scale beam about
three feet in length that supports at one end a scale pan and weights,
and, at the other, a corked porous vessel that carries a glass tube,
c, which dips into a vessel containing either water or methylic
alcohol. Three or four gas jets, one of which is shown at E, are
arranged around the porous vessel, as close as possible, but in such a
way as not to touch it during the oscillation of the beam. These gas
jets communicate with a gasometer tilled with hydrogen, the bell of
which is so charged as to furnish a jet of sufficient strength.
Experience will indicate the best place to give the gas jets, but, in
general, it is well to locate them at near the center of the porous
vessel when the beam is horizontal.

[Illustration]

It is now easy to see how the device operates. When the hydrogen comes
in presence of the porous vessel it becomes diffused therein, and the
pressure exerted in the interior then produces an ascent. When the
bottom of the porous vessel gets above the jets, the internal
diffusion ceases and the hydrogen becomes diffused externally, the
internal pressure diminishes, and the vessel descends. The vessel then
comes opposite the jets of hydrogen and the same motion occurs again,
and soon indefinitely. The work produced by this motor, which has
purely a scientific interest, is very feeble, and much below that
assigned to it by theory. In order to obtain a maximum, it would be
necessary to completely surround the porous vessel each time with
hydrogen, and afterward remove the jets to facilitate the access of
air. All the mechanical arrangements employed for obtaining such a
result have failed, because the friction introduced by the maneuvering
parts also introduces a resistance greater than the motor can
overcome. There is therefore a waste of energy due to the continuous
flow of hydrogen; but the apparatus, for all that, constitutes none
the less an original and interesting device.--_La Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *




SOME RELATIONS OF HEAT TO VOLTAIC AND THERMO-ELECTRIC ACTION OF METALS
IN ELECTROLYTES.[1]

   [Footnote 1: Read before the Royal Society, Nov., 1883.]

By G. GORE, F.R.S., LL.D.


The experiments described in this paper throw considerable light upon
the real cause of the voltaic current. The results of them are
contained in twenty tables; and by comparing them with each other, and
also by means of additional experiments, the following general
conclusions and chief facts were obtained.

When metals in liquids are heated, they are more frequently rendered
positive than negative in the proportion of about 2.8 to 1.0; and
while the proportion in weak solutions was about 2.29 to 1.0, in
strong ones it was about 3.27 to 1.0, and this accords with their
thermo-electric behavior as metals alone. The thermo-electric order of
metals in liquids was, with nearly every solution, whether strong or
weak, widely different from the thermo-electric order of the same
metals alone. A conclusion previously arrived at was also confirmed,
viz., that the liquids in which the hot metal was thermo-electro-positive
in the largest proportion of cases were those containing highly
electro-positive bases, such as the alkali metals. The thermo-electric
effect of _gradually_ heating a metal in a liquid was sometimes
different from that of _suddenly_ heating it, and was occasionally
attended by a reversal of the current.

Degree of strength of liquid greatly affected the thermo-electric
order of metals. Increase of strength usually and considerably
increased the potential of metals thermo-electro-negative in liquids,
and somewhat increased that of those positive in liquids.

The electric potential of metals, thermo-electro-positive in weak
liquids, was usually about 3.87 times, and in strong ones 1.87 times,
as great as of those which were negative. The potential of the
strongest thermo-electric couple, viz., that of aluminum in weak
solution of sodic phosphate, was 0.66 volt for 100 deg. F. difference of
temperature, or about 100 times that of a bismuth and antimony couple.

Heating one of the metals, either the positive or negative, of a
voltaic couple, usually increased their electric difference, making
most metals more positive, and some more negative; while heating the
second one also usually neutralized to a large extent the effect of
heating the first one. The electrical effect of heating a voltaic
couple is nearly wholly composed of the united effects of heating each
of the two metals separately, but is not however exactly the same,
because while in the former case the metals are dissimilar, and are
heated to the same temperature, in the latter they are similar, but
heated to different temperatures. Also, when heating a voltaic pair,
the heat is applied to two metals, both of which are previously
electro-polar by contact with each other as well as by contact with
the liquid; but when heating one junction of a metal and liquid
couple, the metal has not been previously rendered electro-polar by
contact with a different one, and is therefore in a somewhat different
state. When a voltaic combination, in which the positive metal is
thermo-negative, and the negative one is thermo-positive, is heated,
the electric potential of the couple diminishes, notwithstanding that
the internal resistance is decreased.

Magnesium in particular, also zinc and cadmium, were greatly depressed
in electromotive force in electrolytes by elevation of temperature.
Reversals of position of two metals of a voltaic couple in the tension
series by rise of temperature were chiefly due to one of the two
metals increasing in electromotive force faster than the other, and in
many cases to one metal increasing and the other decreasing in
electromotive force, but only in a few cases was it a result of
simultaneous but unequal diminution of potential of the two metals.
With eighteen different voltaic couples, by rise of temperature from
60 deg. to 160 deg. F., the electromotive force in twelve cases was increased,
and in six decreased, and the average proportions of increase for the
eighteen instances was 0.10 volt for the 100 deg. F. of elevation.

A great difference in chemical composition of the liquid was attended
by a considerable change in the order of the volta-tension series, and
the differences of such order in two similar liquids, such as
solutions of hydric chloride and potassic chloride, were much greater
than those produced in either of those liquids by a difference of 100 deg.
F. of temperature. Difference of strength of solution, like difference
of composition or of temperature, altered the order of such series
with nearly every liquid; and the amount of such alteration by an
increase of four or five times in the strength of the liquid was
rather less than that caused by a difference of 100 deg. F. of
temperature. While also a variation of strength of liquid caused only
a moderate amount of change of order in the volta-tension series, it
produced more than three times that amount of change in the
thermo-electric tension series. The usual effect of increasing the
strength of the liquid upon the volta-electromotive force was to
considerably increase it, but its effect upon the thermo-electro-motive
force was to largely decrease it. The degree of potential of a metal
and liquid thermo-couple was not always exactly the same at the same
temperature during a rise as during a fall of temperature; this is
analogous to the variations of melting and solidifying points of
bodies under such conditions, and also to that of supersaturation of a
liquid by a salt, and is probably due to some hinderance to change of
molecular movement.

The rate of ordinary chemical corrosion of each metal varied in every
different liquid; in each solution also it differed with every
different metal. The most chemically positive metals were usually the
most quickly corroded, and the corrosion of each metal was usually the
fastest with the most acid solutions. The rate of corrosion at any
given temperature was dependent both upon the nature of the metal and
upon that of the liquid, and was limited by the most feebly active of
the two, usually the electrolyte. The order of rate of corrosion of
metals also differed in every different liquid. The more dissimilar
the chemical characters of two liquids, the more diverse usually was
the order of rapidity of corrosion of a series of metals in them. The
order of rate of simple corrosion in any of the liquids examined
differed from that of chemico-electric and still more from that of
thermo-electric tension. Corrosion is not the cause of thermo-electric
action of metals in liquids.

Out of fifty-eight cases of rise of temperature the rate of ordinary
corrosion was increased in every instance except one, and that was
only a feeble exception--the increase of corrosion from 60 deg. to 160 deg. F.
with different metals was extremely variable, and was from 1.5 to 321.6
times. Whether a metal increased or decreased in thermo-electromotive
force by being heated, it increased in rapidity of corrosion. The
proportions in which the most corroded metal was also the most
thermo-electro-positive one was 65.57 per cent. in liquids at 60 deg. F.,
and 69.12 in the same liquids at 160 deg. F.; and the proportion in which
it was the most chemico-electro-positive at 60 F. was 84.44 per cent,
and at 160 deg. F. 80.77 per cent. The proportion of cases therefore in
which the most chemico-electro-negative metal was the most corroded
one increased from 15.56 to 19.23 per cent, by a rise of temperature
of 100 deg. F. Comparison of these proportions shows that corrosion
usually influenced in a greater degree chemico-electric rather than
thermo-electric actions of metals in liquids. Not only was the
relative number of cases in which the volta-negative metal was the
most corroded increased by rise of temperature, but also the average
relative loss by corrosion of the negative to that of the positive one
was increased from 3.11 to 6.32.

The explanation most consistent with all the various results and
conclusions is a kinetic one: That metals and electrolytes are
throughout their masses in a state of molecular vibration. That the
molecules of those substances, being frictionless bodies in a
frictionless medium, and their motion not being dissipated by
conduction or radiation, continue incessantly in motion until some
cause arises to prevent them. That each metal (or electrolyte), when
unequally heated, has to a certain extent an unlike class of motions
in its differently heated parts, and behaves in those parts somewhat
like two metals (or electrolytes), and those unlike motions are
enabled, through the intermediate conducting portion of the substance,
to render those parts electro-polar. That every different metal and
electrolyte has a different class of motions, and in consequence of
this, they also, by contact alone with each other at the same
temperature, become electro-polar. The molecular motion of each
different substance also increases at a different rate by rise of
temperature.

This theory is equally in agreement with the chemico-electric results.
In accordance with it, when in the case of a metal and an electrolyte,
the two classes of motions are sufficiently unlike, chemical corrosion
of the metal by the liquid takes place, and the voltaic current
originated by inherent molecular motion, under the condition of
contact, is maintained by the portions of motion lost by the metal and
liquid during the act of uniting together. Corrosion therefore is an
effect of molecular motion, and is one of the modes by which that
motion is converted into and produces electric current.

In accordance with this theory, if we take a thermo-electric pair
consisting of a non-corrodible metal and an electrolyte (the two being
already electro-polar by mutual contact), and heat one of their points
of contact, the molecular motions of the heated end of each substance
at the junction are altered; and as thermo-electric energy in such
combinations usually increases by rise of temperature, the metal and
liquid, each singly, usually becomes more electro polar. In such a
case the unequally heated metal behaves to some extent like two
metals, and the unequally heated liquid like two liquids, and so the
thermo-electric pair is like a feeble chemico-electric one of two
metals in two liquids, but without corrosion of either metal. If the
metal and liquid are each, when alone, thermo-electro-positive, and if,
when in contact, the metal increases in positive condition faster than
the liquid by being heated, the latter appears thermo-electro-negative,
but if less rapidly than the liquid, the metal appears
thermo-electro-negative.

As also the proportion of cases is small in which metals that are
