
I will now refer to the valuable experiments of Messrs. Brooks and
Steward, which were most carefully made. Everything was measured--the
gas by a 60 light, and the air by a 300 light meter; the indicated
horse power, by a steam-engine indicator; the useful work, by a Prony
brake; the temperature of the water, by a standard thermometer; and
that of the escaping gases, by a pyrometer. The gas itself was
analyzed; and its heating power calculated, from its composition, as
617.5[theta]. Its specific gravity was .464; and the volume of air was
about seven times that of the gas used (or one-eighth of the mixture),
and was only 111/2 per cent. by weight more than was needed for perfect
combustion. The results arrived at were as follows:

                                          Per cent.
  Converted into indicated horse power,
      including friction, etc.              17.0
  Escaped with the exhaust gas.             15.5
  Escaped in radiation.                     15.5
  Communicated to water in the jacket.      52.0


It will thus be seen that more than half of the heat is communicated
to the water in the jacket. Now, this is the opposite of the
steam-engine, where the jacket is used to transmit heat _to_ the
cylinder, and not _from_ it. This cooling is rendered necessary,
because without it the oil would be carbonized, and lubrication of the
cylinder rendered impossible. Indeed, a similar difficulty has
occurred with all hot-air engines, and is, I think, the reason they
have not been more generally adopted. I felt this so strongly that,
for some time after the introduction of the gas-engine, I was very
cautious in recommending those who consulted me to adopt it. I was
afraid that the wear and tear would be excessive. I have, however, for
some time past been thoroughly satisfied that this fear was needless;
as I am satisfied that a well-made gas-engine is as durable as a
steam-engine, and the parts subject to wear can be replaced at
moderate cost. We have no boiler, no feed pump, no stuffing-boxes to
attend to--no water-gauges, pressure-gauges, safety-valve, or
throttle-valve to be looked after; the governor is of a very simple
construction; and the slide-valves may be removed and replaced in a
few minutes. An occasional cleaning out of the cylinder at
considerable intervals is all the supervision that the engine
requires.

The very large percentage of heat absorbed by the water-jacket should
point out to the ingenuity of inventors the first problem to be
attacked, viz., how to save this heat without wasting the lubricant or
making it inoperative; and in the solution of this problem, I look for
the most important improvement to be expected in the engine. The most
obvious contrivance would be some sort of intercepting shield, which
would save the walls of the cylinder and the rings of the piston from
the heat of the ignited gases. I have just learned that something of
the kind is under trial. Another solution may possibly be found in the
employment of a fluid piston; but here we are placed in a dilemma
between the liquids that are decomposed and the metals that are
oxidized at high temperatures. Next, the loss by radiation--15 per
cent.--seems large; but this is to be attributed to the fact that the
inside surface of the cylinder is at each inward stroke exposed to the
atmosphere--an influence which contributes to the cooling necessary
for lubrication. The remaining 15 per cent., which is carried away by
the exhaust, is small compared with the proportion passing away with
the exhaust steam of a high-pressure or the water of a condensing
engine. As the water in the jacket can be safely raised to 212 deg. Fahr.,
the whole of the jacket heat can be utilized where hot water is
required for other purposes; and this, with the exhaust gases, has
been used for drying and heating purposes.

With such advantages, it may be asked: Why does not the gas-engine
everywhere supersede the steam-engine? My answer is a simple one: The
gas we manufacture is a dear fuel compared with coal. Ordinary coal
gas measures 30 cubic feet to the pound; and 1,000 cubic feet,
therefore, weigh 33 lb. Taking the price at 2s. 9d. per 1,000 cubic
feet, it costs 1d. per lb. The 30 cubic feet at 630[theta] give
19,000[theta] all available heat. Although good coal may yield 14,000
units by its combustion, only about 11,000 of these reach the boiler;
so that the ratio of the useful heat is 11/19. The thermal efficiency
of the best non-condensing engine to that of the gas-engine is in the
ratio 4/22. Multiplying together these two ratios, we get

        11     4        44
        -- x ------- = ----
        19   22_{1/2}  4.28

That is, speaking roughly, 1 lb. of gas gives about ten times as much
power as 1 lb. of coal does in a good non-condensing engine. But at
18s. 8d. a ton we get 10 lb. of coal for 1d.; so that with these
figures the cheapness of the coal would just compensate for the
efficiency of the gas. As to the waste heat passing away from the
engine being utilized, here the gas-engine has no advantage; and, so
far as this is concerned, the gas is about eight times dearer than
coal. The prices of gas and coal vary so much in different places that
it is hard to determine in what cases gas or coal will be the dearer
fuel, considering this point alone.

But there are other kinds of non-illuminating gases--such as Wilson's,
Strong's, and Dowson's--which are now coming into use; and at Messrs.
Crossley's works you will have an opportunity of seeing a large
engineering factory employing several hundred mechanics, and without a
chimney, in which every shaft and tool is driven by gas-engines
supplied by Dowson's gas, and in which the consumption of coal is only
1.2 lb. per indicated horse power. The greatest economy ever claimed
for the steam-engine was a consumption of 1.6 lb.; and this with steam
of very high pressure, expanded in three cylinders successively. Thus
in a quarter of a century the gas-engine has beaten in the race the
steam-engine; although from Watt's first idea of improvement, nearly a
century and a quarter have elapsed.

As regards the steam-engine, it is the opinion of competent
authorities that the limits of temperature between which it works are
so restricted, and so much of the heat is expended in producing a
change of state from liquid to vapor, that little further improvement
can be made. With respect to gas-engines, the limits of temperature
are much further apart. A change of state is not required, and so very
great improvement may still be looked for. It is not impossible even
that some of the younger members of our body may live to see that
period foretold by one of the greatest of our civil engineers--that
happy time when boiler explosions will only be matters of history;
that period, not a millennium removed by a thousand years, but an era
deferred perhaps by only half a dozen decades, when the use of the
gas-engine will be universal, and "a steam-engine can be found only in
a cabinet of antiquities."


_Discussion._

The President said this was a very delightful paper; and nothing could
be finer than Mr. Lane's description of the conversion of heat into
power, and the gradual growth of theory into practical work.

Mr. W. Foulis (Glasgow) agreed that it was admirable; but it required
to be read to be thoroughly appreciated. When members were able to
read it, they would find Mr. Lane had given a very clear description
of the elementary principles of thermo-dynamics in their relation to
the gas-engine and the steam-engine. There was very little in the
paper to raise discussion; but Mr. Lane had made exceedingly clear how
the present loss in a gas-engine was occasioned, and had also shown
how, in the future development of the engine, the loss might be saved,
and the engine rendered more efficient.

Mr. H.P. Holt (of Messrs. Crossley Bros., Limited) said he could
indorse everything Mr. Lane had said. He had found the paper most
interesting and instructive even to himself, though he had some little
practical experience of gas-engines, and was supposed to know a little
about them. He did not pretend to be able to teach other people; but
if he could say anything as to indicator cards, or answer any
questions, he should be happy to do so. (He then described the
indicator diagram of the atmospheric gas-engine.) In this engine the
proportion of the charging stroke to the whole sweep of the piston was
about 10 per cent.; and as the charge drawn in consisted of about 10
per cent. of gas, about 1-100 of the total sweep of the piston was
composed of the gas.

Mr. Foulis asked what proportion the power indicated on the diagram
bore to the power indicated on the brake in the atmospheric engine.

Mr. Holt said unfortunately he had not any figures with him which
would give this information; and it was so long since he had anything
practically to do with this form of engine, that he should not like to
speak from memory. He might add that the largest size of gas-engine
made (of about 100 horse power indicated) was at work at Messrs. Edwin
Butterworth and Co.'s, of Manchester. It was now driven by ordinary
coal gas; but Dowson plant was to be put up very shortly in order to
reduce the cost of working, which, though not excessive, would be
still more economical with the Dowson gas--probably only about 30s.
per week. The present cost was about L4 per week, though it was not
working always at full power.

Mr. T. Holgate (Batley) said he thought it was generally understood,
by those who had studied the subject, that the adoption of compression
of the gaseous mixture before ignition had, so far, more than anything
else, contributed to the improved working of gas-engines. This fact
had not been sufficiently brought out in the paper, although Mr. Lane
had clearly indicated some of the directions in which further
improvements were likely to obtain. Gas engineers were largely
indebted to Mr. Dugald Clerk for the statement he had made of the
theory of the gas-engine.[4] Mr. Lane had given some figures, arrived
at by Messrs. Brooks and Steward, from experiments made in America;
but, prior to these Mr. Clerk had given others which were in the main
in accordance with them. Professor Kennedy had also made experiments,
the results of which agreed with them.[5] The extent of the loss by
the cooling water was thus well ascertained; and it was no doubt by a
reduction of this loss that further improvement in the working of
gas-engines would eventually be obtained.

   [Footnote 4: See Journal, vol. xxxix., p. 648.]

   [Footnote 5: Ibid., vol. xl., p. 955.]

Mr. J. Paterson (Warrington) expressed his appreciation of the paper,
as one of exceptional interest and value. He said he did not rise with
a view to make any observations thereon. The analysis of first
principles required more matured consideration and thought than could
be given to it here. The opinion, however, he had formed of the paper
placed it beyond the reach of criticism. It was now many years since
his attention had been drawn to the name of Denny Lane; and everything
that had come from his facile pen conveyed sound scientific
conclusions. The paper to which they had just listened was no
exception. It was invested with great interest, and would be regarded
as a valuable contribution to the Transactions of the Institute.

Mr. Lane, in reply, thanked the members for the kind expressions used
with respect to his paper. His object in writing it was that any one
who had not paid any attention to the subject before should be able to
understand thoroughly the principles on which gas and hot-air engines
operated; and he believed any one who read it with moderate care would
perfectly understand all the essential conditions of the gas-engine.
He might mention that not long after the thermo-dynamic theory was so
far developed as to determine the amount of heat converted into power,
a very eminent French Engineer--M. Hirn--conducted some experiments on
steam-engines at a large factory, and thought he could account for the
whole heat of combustion in the condensed water and the heat which
passed away; so much so that he actually doubted altogether the theory
of thermo-dynamics. However, being open to conviction, he made further
experiments, and discovered that he had been in error, and ultimately
became one of the most energetic supporters of the theory. This showed
how necessary it was to be careful before arriving at a conclusion on
such a subject. He had endeavored, as far as the nature of the case
allowed, to avoid any scientific abstractions, because he knew that
when practical men came to theory--_x's_ and _y's_, differentials,
integrals, and other mathematical formulae--they were apt to be
terrified.

The President said it was like coming down to every day life to say
that it was important that gas managers should be familiar with the
appliances used in the consumption of gas, and should be able, when
called upon, to give an intelligent description of their method of
working. A study of Mr. Lane's paper would reveal many matters of
interest with regard to this wonderful motor, which was coming daily
more and more into use, not only to the advantage of gas
manufacturers, but of those who employed them.

       *       *       *       *       *




M. MEIZEL'S RECIPROCATING EXHAUSTER.


At the recent Congress of the Societe Technique de l'Industrie du Gaz
en France, M. Meizel, Chief Engineer of the St. Etienne Gas Works,
described a new exhauster devised by him on the reciprocating
principle, and for which he claims certain advantages over the
appliances now in general use. Exhausters constructed on the
above-named principle have hitherto, M. Meizel says, been costly to
fit up, owing to the necessity for providing machinery and special
mechanism for the transmission of motion. This has prevented the
employment of cylinders of large dimensions; and, consequently, when
the quantity of gas to be dealt with has been considerable, the number
of exhausters has had to be increased. The result of this has been
inconvenience, which has led to a preference being shown for other
kinds of exhausters, notwithstanding the manifest advantages which, in
M. Meizel's opinion, those of the reciprocating type possess. The
improvement which he has effected in these appliances consists in the
application to them of cylinders working automatically; and the
general features of the arrangement are shown in the accompanying
illustrations.

[Illustration: IMPROVED RECIPROCATING GAS EXHAUSTER.]

The principal advantages to be gained by the use of this exhauster are
stated by M. Meizel to be the following: Considerably less motive
force is necessary than is the case with other exhausters, which
require steam engines and all the auxiliary mechanism for the
transmission of power. By its quiet and regular action, it prevents
oscillation and unsteadiness in the flow of gas in the hydraulic main,
as well as in the pipes leading therefrom--a defect which has been
found to exist with other exhausters. The bells, being of large area,
serve the purpose of a condenser; and as, owing to its density, the
tar falls to the bottom of the lower vessels, which are filled with
water, contact between the gas and tar is avoided. Although the
appliance is of substantial construction, its action is so sensitive
that it readily adapts itself to the requirements of production. It
may be placed in the open air; and therefore its establishment is
attended with less outlay than is the case with other exhausters,
which have to be placed under cover, and provided with driving
machinery and, of course, a supply of steam.

The total superficial area of the exhauster above described, including
the governor, is 150 square feet; and its capacity per 24 hours is
230,000 cubic feet. It works silently, with an almost entire absence
of friction; and consequently there are few parts which require
lubrication. Exhausters of this type (which, M. Meizel says, could be
made available for ventilation purposes, in case of necessity) may be
constructed of all sizes, from 500 cubic feet per hour upward.

       *       *       *       *       *




AUTOMATIC SIPHON FOR IRRIGATION.


When, at an elevated point in a meadow, there exists a spring or vein
of water that cannot be utilized at a distance, either because the
supply is not sufficient, or because of the permeability of the soil,
it becomes very advantageous to accumulate the water in a reservoir,
which may be emptied from time to time through an aperture large
enough to allow the water to flow in abundance over all parts of the
field.

[Illustration: GIRAL'S AUTOMATIC SIPHON.]

The storing up of the water permits of irrigating a much greater area
of land, and has the advantage of allowing the watering to be effected
intermittingly, this being better than if it were done continuously.
But this mode of irrigating requires assiduous attention. It is
necessary, in fact, when the reservoir is full, to go and raise the
plug, wait till the water has flowed out, and then put in the plug
again as accurately as possible--a thing that it is not always easy to
do. The work is a continuous piece of drudgery, and takes just as much
the longer to do in proportion as the reservoir is more distant from
one's dwelling. In order to do away with this inconvenience, Mr.
Giral, of Langogne (Lozere), has invented a sort of movable siphon
that primes itself automatically, however small be the spring that
feeds the reservoir in which it is placed. The apparatus (see figure)
consists of an elbowed pipe, C A B D E, of galvanized iron, whose
extremity, C, communicates with the outlet, R, where it is fixed by
means of a piece of rubber of peculiar form that allows the other
extremity, B D E, to revolve around the axis, K, while at the same
time keeping the outlet pipe hermetically closed. This rubber, whose
lower extremity is bent back like the bell of a trumpet, forms a
washer against which there is applied a galvanized iron ring that is
fixed to the mouth of the outlet pipe by means of six small screws.
This ring is provided with two studs which engage with two flexible
thimbles, K and L, that are affixed to the siphon by four rivets.
These studs and thimbles, as well as the screws, are likewise
galvanized. Between the branches, A B D E, of the pipe there is
soldered a sheet of galvanized iron, which forms isolatedly a
receptacle or air-chamber, F, that contains at its upper part a small
aperture, _b_, that remains always open, and, at its lower part, a
copper screw-plug, _d_, and a galvanized hook, H.

In the interior of this chamber there is arranged a small leaden
siphon, _a b c_, whose longer leg, _a_, passes through the bottom,
where it is soldered, and whose shorter one, _c_, ends in close
proximity to the bottom. Finally, a galvanized iron chain, G H, fixed
at G to the bottom of the reservoir, and provided with a weight, P, of
galvanized iron, is hooked at H to the siphon and allows it to rise
more or less, according as it is given a greater or less length.

From what precedes, it will be seen that the outlet is entirely
closed, so that, in order that the water may escape, it must pass into
the pipe in the direction, E D B A C.

This granted, let us see how the apparatus works: In measure as the
water rises in the reservoir, the siphon gradually loses weight, and
its extremity, B D H, is finally lifted by the thrust, so that the
entire affair revolves upon the studs, K, until the chain becomes
taut. The apparatus then ceases to rise; but the water, ever
continuing to rise, finally reaches the apex, _b_, of the smaller
siphon, and, through it, enters the air chamber and fills it. The
equilibrium being thus broken, the siphon descends to the bottom,
becomes primed, and empties the reservoir. When the level of the
water, in descending, is at the height of the small siphon, _a b c_,
this latter, which is also primed, empties the chamber, F, in turn, so
that, at the moment the large siphon loses its priming, the entire
apparatus is in the same state that it was at first.

In short, when the water enters the reservoir, the siphon, movable
upon its base, rises to the height at which it is desired that the
flow shall take place. Being arrested at this point by the chain, it
becomes primed, and sinks, and the water escapes. When the water is
exhausted, the siphon rises anew in order to again sink; and this goes
on as long as the period of irrigation lasts.

This apparatus, which is simple in its operation, and not very costly,
is being employed with success for irrigating several meadows in the
upper basin of the Allier.--_Le Genie Civil._

       *       *       *       *       *




ASSAY OF EARTHENWARE GLAZE.


Lead oxide melted or incompletely vitrified is still in common use in
the manufacture of inferior earthenware, and sometimes leads to
serious results. To detect lead in a glaze, M. Herbelin moistens a
slip of white linen or cotton, free from starch, with nitric acid at
10 per cent. and rubs it for ten to fifteen seconds on the side of the
utensil under examination, and then deposits a drop of a solution of
potassium iodide, at 5 per cent. on the part which has been in
contact. A lead glaze simply fused gives a very highly colored yellow
spot of potassium iodide; a lead glaze incompletely vitrified gives
spots the more decided, the less perfect the vitrification; and a
glaze of good quality gives no sensible color at all.--_M. Herbelin._

       *       *       *       *       *




ON THE ELECTRICAL FURNACE AND THE REDUCTION OF THE OXIDES OF BORON,
SILICON, ALUMINUM, AND OTHER METALS BY CARBON.[1]

   [Footnote 1: Read at the recent meeting of the American
   Association, Ann Arbor, Mich.]

By EUGENE H. COWLES, ALFRED H. COWLES, AND CHARLES F. MABERY.


The application of electricity to metallurgical processes has hitherto
been confined to the reduction of metals from solutions, and few
attempts have been made to effect dry reductions by means of an
electric current. Sir W. Siemens attempted to utilize the intense heat
of an electric arc for this purpose, but accomplished little beyond
fusing several pounds of steel. A short time since, Eugene H. Cowles
and Alfred H. Cowles of Cleveland conceived the idea of obtaining a
continuous high temperature on an extended scale by introducing into
the path of an electric current some material that would afford the
requisite resistance, thereby producing a corresponding increase in
the temperature. After numerous experiments that need not be described
in detail, coarsely pulverized carbon was selected as the best means
for maintaining a variable resistance and at the same time as the most
available substance for the reduction of oxides. When this material,
mixed with the oxide to be reduced, was made a part of the electric
circuit in a fire clay retort, and submitted to the action of a
current from a powerful dynamo machine, not only was the oxide
reduced, but the temperature increased to such an extent that the
whole interior of the retort fused completely. In other experiments
lumps of lime, sand, and corundum were fused, with indications of a
reduction of the corresponding metal; on cooling, the lime formed
large, well-defined crystals, the corundum beautiful red, green, and
blue hexagonal crystals.

Following up these results with the assistance of Charles F. Mabery,
professor of chemistry in the Case School of Applied Science, who
became interested at this stage of the experiments, it was soon found
that the intense heat thus produced could be utilized for the
reduction of oxides in large quantities, and experiments were next
tried on a large scale with a current from two dynamos driven by an
equivalent of fifty horse power. For the protection of the walls of
the furnace, which were made of fire brick, a mixture of the ore and
coarsely pulverized gas carbon was made a central core, and it was
surrounded on the sides and bottom by fine charcoal, the current
following the lesser resistance of the central core from carbon
electrodes which were inserted at the ends of the furnace in contact
with the core. In order to protect the machines from the variable
resistance within the furnace, a resistance box consisting of a coil
of German silver wire placed in a large tank of water was introduced
into the main circuit, and a Brush ammeter was also attached by means
of a shunt circuit, to indicate the quantity of current that was being
absorbed in the furnace. The latter was charged by first filling it
with charcoal, making a trough in the center, and filling this central
space with the ore mixture, which was covered with a layer of coarse
charcoal. The furnace was closed at the top with fire brick slabs
containing two or three holes for the escape of the gaseous products
