into the top of 1, and the circulation is precisely similar to that
already described, 2 having taken the place of 1, 3 of 2, and so on.

When 2 is emptied, 3 takes the first place in the series and so on. When
12 has been filled, it takes the l3th place. (The juice pipe returns
from the termination of the series, and connects with 1, making the
circuit complete.) The process is continuous, and the best and most
economical results are obtained if there is no intermission.

One cell should be filled and another emptied every eight minutes, so
that in twenty-four hours the number of cells diffused should be one
hundred and eighty.


WHAT HAS TAKEN PLACE IN THE DIFFUSION CELLS.

For the purpose of illustration, let us assume that when it has been
filled with chips just as much water is passed into the cell as there
was juice in the chips. The process of osmosis or diffusion sets in, and
in a few minutes there is as much sugar in the liquid outside of the
cane cells as in the juice in these cane cells; i.e., the water and
the juice have divided the sugar between them, each taking half.

Again, assume that as much liquid can be drawn from 1 as there was water
added. It is plain that if the osmotic action is complete, the liquid
drawn off will be half as sweet as cane juice. It has now reached fresh
chips in 2, and again equalization takes place. Half of the sugar from 1
was brought into 2, so that it now contains one and a half portions of
sugar, dissolved in two portions of liquid, or the liquid has risen to
three quarters of the strength of cane juice. This liquid having three
fourths strength passes to 3, and we have in 3 one and three fourths
portions of liquid, or after the action has taken place the liquid in 3
is seven eighths strength. One portion of this liquid passes to 4, and
we have one and seven eighths portions of sugar in two portions of
liquid, or the liquid becomes 15/16 strength. One portion of this liquid
passes to 5, and we have in 5 one and fifteen sixteenths portions of
sugar in two portions of liquid, or the liquid is 31/32 strength. It is
now called _juice_. From this time forward a cell is emptied for every
one filled.

Throughout the operation, the temperature is kept as near the boiling
point as can be done conveniently without danger of filling some of the
cells with steam. Diffusion takes place more rapidly at high than at low
temperatures, and the danger of fermentation, with the consequent loss
of sugar, is avoided.


WHAT HAS HAPPENED TO THE CHIPS.

By the first action of water in 1, 1/2 of the sugar was left in cell 1; by
the second 1/4 was left, by the third 1/8 was left, by the fourth 1/16 was
left, by the fifth 1/32 was left, by the sixth 1/64 was left, by the
seventh 1/128 was left, by the eighth 1/256 was left, by the ninth 1/512
was left. The fractions representing the strength of the juice on the
one hand and the sugar left in each cell on the other hand, after the
battery is fully in operation, are not so readily deduced. The theory is
easily understood, however, although the computation is somewhat
intricate. Those who desire to follow the process by mathematical
formula are referred to pages 9 and 10, Bulletin No. 2, Chemical
Division U.S. Department of Agriculture, where will be found the formula
furnished by Professor Harkness, of the U.S. Naval Observatory.

For the sake of simplifying the explanation, it was assumed that the
water added is equal in volume to the juice in a cellful of cane chips.
In practice more water is added, to secure more perfect exhaustion of
the chips, and with the result of yielding about thirteen volumes of
juice for every nine volumes as it exists in the cane, and of extracting
92.04 per cent. of all the sugars from the cane, as shown by the report
of Dr. C.A. Crampton, Assistant Chemist of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture.


INVERSION OF SUGAR IN THE DIFFUSION CELLS.

In the experiments at Fort Scott in 1886, much difficulty was
experienced on account of inversion of the sugar in the diffusion
battery. The report shows that this resulted from the use of soured cane
and from delays in the operation of the battery on account of the
imperfect working of the cutting and elevating machinery, much of which
was there experimental. Under the circumstances, however, it became a
matter of the gravest importance to find a method of preventing this
inversion without in any manner interfering with the other processes. On
the suggestion of Prof. Swenson, a portion of freshly precipitated
carbonate of lime was placed with the chips in each cell.[1] In the
case of soured cane, this took up the acid which otherwise produced
inversion. In case no harmful acids were present, this chalk was
entirely inactive. Soured canes are not desirable to work under any
circumstances, and should be rejected by the chemist, and not allowed to
enter the factory. So, also, delays on account of imperfect machinery
are disastrous to profitable manufacturing, and must be avoided. But for
those who desired to experiment with deteriorated canes and untried
cutting machines, the addition of the calcium carbonate provides against
disastrous results which would otherwise be inevitable.

   [Footnote 1: For this improvement Prof. Swenson obtained a patent
   Oct. 11, 1887, the grant of which was recently made the subject
   of congressional inquiry.]

Immediately after it is drawn from the diffusion battery the juice is
taken from the measuring tanks into the defecating tanks or pans. These
are large, deep vessels, provided with copper steam coils in the bottom
for the purpose of heating the juice. Sufficient milk of lime is added
here to nearly or quite neutralize the acids in the juice, the test
being made with litmus paper. The juice is brought to the boiling point,
and as much of the scum is removed as can be taken quickly. The scum is
returned to the diffusion cells, and the juice is sent by a pump to the
top of the building, where it is boiled and thoroughly skimmed. These
skimmings are also returned to the diffusion cells.

This method of disposing of the skimmings was suggested by Mr.
Parkinson. It is better than the old plan of throwing them away to
decompose and create a stench about the factory. Probably a better
method would be to pass these skimmings through some sort of filter, or,
perhaps better still, to filter the juice and avoid all skimming. After
this last skimming the juice is ready to be boiled down to a thin sirup
in


THE DOUBLE EFFECT EVAPORATORS.

These consist of two large closed pans provided within with steam pipes
of copper, whereby the liquid is heated. They are also connected with
each other and with pumps in such a way as to reduce the pressure in the
first to about three fifths and in the second to about one fifth the
normal atmospheric pressure.

The juice boils rapidly in the first at somewhat below the temperature
of boiling water, and in the second at a still lower temperature. The
exhaust steam from the engines is used for heating the first pan, and
the vapor from the boiling juice in the first pan is hot enough to do
all the boiling in the second, and is taken into the copper pipes of the
second for this purpose. In this way the evaporation is effected without
so great expenditure of fuel as is necessary in open pans, or in single
effect vacuum pans, and the deleterious influences of long continued
high temperature on the crystallizing powers of the sugar are avoided.

From the double effects the sirup is stored in tanks ready to be taken
into the strike pan, where the sugar is crystallized.


THE FIRST CHANCE TO PAUSE.

At this point the juice has just reached a condition in which it will
keep. From the moment the cane is cut in the fields until now, every
delay is liable to entail loss of sugar by inversion. After the water is
put into the cells of the battery with the chips, the temperature is
carefully kept above that at which fermentation takes place most
readily, and the danger of inversion is thereby reduced. But with all
the precautions known to science up to this point the utmost celerity is
necessary to secure the best results. There is here, however, a natural
division in the process of sugar making, which will be further
considered under the heading of "Auxiliary Factories." Any part of the
process heretofore described may be learned in a few days by workmen of
intelligence and observation who will give careful attention to their
respective duties.


BOILING THE SIRUP TO GRAIN THE SUGAR.

This operation is the next in course, and is performed in what is known
at the sugar factory as the strike pan, a large air tight iron vessel
from which the air and vapor are almost exhausted by means of a suitable
pump and condensing apparatus. As is the case with the saccharine juices
of other plants, the sugar from sorghum crystallizes best at medium
temperature.

The process of boiling to grain may be described as follows: A portion
of the sirup is taken into the pan, and boiled rapidly _in vacuo_ to the
crystallizing density. If in a sirup the molecules of sugar are brought
sufficiently near to each other through concentration--the removal of
the dissolving liquid--these molecules attract each other so strongly as
to overcome the separating power of the solvent, and they unite to form
crystals. Sugar is much more soluble at high than at low temperatures,
the heat acting in this as in almost all cases as a repulsive force
among the molecules. It is therefore necessary to maintain a high vacuum
in order to boil at a low temperature, in boiling to grain. When the
proper density is reached the crystals sometimes fail to appear, and a
fresh portion of cold sirup is allowed to enter the pan. This must not
be sufficient in amount to reduce the density of the contents of the pan
below that at which crystallization may take place. This cold sirup
causes a sudden though slight reduction in temperature, which may so
reduce the repulsive forces as to allow the attraction among the
molecules to prevail, resulting in the inception of crystallization. To
discover this requires the keenest observation. When beginning to form,
the crystals are too minute to show either form or size, even when
viewed through a strong magnifying glass. There is to be seen simply a
very delicate cloud. The inexperienced observer would entirely overlook
this cloud, his attention probably being directed to some curious
globular and annular objects, which I have nowhere seen explained. Very
soon after the sample from the pan is placed upon glass for observation,
the surface becomes cooled and somewhat hardened. As the cooling
proceeds below the surface, contraction ensues, and consequently a
wrinkling of the surface, causing a shimmer of the light in a very
attractive manner. This, too, is likely to attract more attention than
the delicate, thin cloud of crystals, and may be even confounded with
the reflection and refraction of light, by which alone the minute
crystals are determined. The practical operator learns to disregard all
other attractions, and to look for the cloud and its peculiarities. When
the contents of the pan have again reached the proper density, another
portion of sirup is added. The sugar which this contains is attracted to
the crystals already formed, and goes to enlarge these rather than to
form new crystals, provided the first are sufficiently numerous to
receive the sugar as rapidly as it can crystallize.

The contents of the pan are repeatedly brought to the proper density,
and fresh sirup added as above described until the desired size of grain
is obtained, or until the pan is full. Good management should bring
about these two conditions at the same time. If a sufficient number of
crystals has not been started at the beginning of the operation to
receive the sugar from the sirup added, a fresh crop of crystals will be
started at such time as the crystallization becomes too rapid to be
accommodated on the surfaces of the grain already formed. The older and
larger crystals grow more rapidly, by reason of their greater attractive
force, than the newer and smaller ones on succeeding additions of sirup,
so that the disparity in size will increase as the work proceeds. This
condition is by all means to be avoided, since it entails serious
difficulties on the process of separating the sugar from the molasses.
In case this second crop of crystals, called "false grain" or "mush
sugar" has appeared, the sugar boiler must act upon his judgment, guided
by his experience as to what is to be done. He may take enough thin
sirup into the pan to dissolve all of the crystals and begin again, or,
if very skillful, he may so force the growth of the false grain as to
bring it up to a size that can be worked.

The completion of the work in the strike pan leaves the sugar mixed with
molasses. This mixture is called _malada_ or _masscuite_. It may be
drawn off into iron sugar wagons and set in the hot room above
mentioned, in which case still more of the sugar which remains in the
uncrystallized state generally joins the crystals, somewhat increasing
the yield of "first sugars." At the proper time these sugar wagons are
emptied into a mixing machine, where the mass is brought to a uniform
consistency. If the sugar wagons are not used, the strike pan is emptied
directly into the mixer.


THE CENTRIFUGAL MACHINES.

From the mixer the melada is drawn into the centrifugal machines. These
consist, first, of an iron case resembling in form the husk of mill
stones. A spout at the bottom of the husk connects with a molasses tank.
Within this husk is placed a metallic vessel with perforated sides. This
vessel is either mounted or hung on a vertical axis, and is lined with
wire cloth. Having taken a proper portion of the melada into the
centrifugal, the operator starts it to revolving, and by means of a
friction clutch makes such connection with the engine as gives it about
1,500 revolutions per minute. The centrifugal force developed drives the
liquid molasses through the meshes of the wire cloth, and out against
the husk, from which it flows off into a tank. The sugar, being solid,
is retained by the wire cloth. If there is in the melada the "false
grain" already mentioned, it passes into the meshes of the wire cloth,
and prevents the passage of the molasses. After the molasses has been
nearly all thrown out, a small quantity of water is sprayed over the
sugar while the centrifugal is in motion. This is forced through the
sugar, and carries with it much of the molasses which would otherwise
adhere to the sugar, and discolor it. If the sugar is to be refined,
this washing with water is omitted. When the sugar has been sufficiently
dried, the machine is stopped, the sugar taken out, and put into barrels
for market.

Simple as the operation of the centrifugals is, the direction of the
sugar boiler as to the special treatment of each strike is necessary,
since he, better than any one else, knows what difficulties are to be
expected on account of the condition in which the melada left the strike
pan.


CAPACITY OF THE SUGAR FACTORY.

A plant having a battery like that at Fort Scott, in which the cells are
each capable of containing a ton of cane chips, should have a capacity
of 180 tons of cleaned cane, or 200 tons of cane with leaves, or 240
tons of cane as it grows in the field, per day of twenty-four hours.
Those who have given most attention to the subject think that a battery
composed of one and a half ton cells may be operated quite as
successfully as a battery of one ton cells. Such a battery would have a
capacity of 360 tons of field cane per day.


THE CUTTING AND CLEANING APPARATUS.

This consists of modifications of appliances which have long been used.
Simple as it is, and presenting only mechanical problems, the cutting,
cleaning, and evaporating apparatus is likely to be the source of more
delays and perplexities in the operation of the sugar factory than any
other part.

The diffusion battery in good hands works perfectly; the clarification
of the juice causes no delays; the concentration to the condition of
semi-sirup may be readily, rapidly, and surely effected in apparatus
which has been brought to great perfection by long experience, and in
many forms; the work at the strike pan requires only to be placed in the
hands of an expert; the mixer never fails to do its duty; there are
various forms of centrifugal machines on the market, some of which are
nearly perfect. If, then, the mechanical work of delivering, cutting,
cleaning, and elevating the cane can be accomplished with regularity and
rapidity, the operation of a well adjusted sugar factory should proceed
without interruption or delay from Monday morning to Saturday night.


THE FUTURE OF THE SORGHUM SUGAR INDUSTRY.

An acre of land cultivated in sorghum yields a greater tonnage of
valuable products than in any other crop, with the possible exception of
hay. Under ordinary methods of cultivation, ten tons of cleaned cane per
acre is somewhat above the average, but under the best cultivation the
larger varieties often exceed twelve, while the small early amber
sometimes goes below eight tons per acre. Let seven and a half tons of
cleaned cane per acre be assumed for the illustration. This corresponds
to a gross yield of ten tons for the farmer, and at two dollars per ton
gives him twenty dollars per acre for his crop. These seven and a half
tons of clean cane will yield:

  750 pounds of sugar.
  1,000 pounds of molasses.
  900 pounds of seed.
  1,500 pounds of fodder (green leaves).
  1,500 pounds of exhausted chips (dried). A total of 5,650 pounds.

The first three items, which are as likely to be transported as wheat or
corn, aggregate 2,650 pounds per acre.

Sorghum will yield seven and a half tons of cleaned cane per acre more
surely than corn will yield thirty bushels or wheat fifteen bushels per
acre.

In the comparison, then, of products which bear transportation, these
crops stand as follows:

  Sorghum, at 71/2 tons, 2,650 pounds per acre.
  Corn, at 30 bushels, 1,680 pounds per acre.
  Wheat, at 15 bushels, 900 pounds per acre.

The sugar from the sorghum is worth say 5 cents per pound; the molasses,
13/4 cents per pound; the seed, 1/2 cent per pound.

The sorghum products give market values as follows:

  750 pounds sugar at say 5 cents,[2] $37.50.
  1,000 pounds molasses at say 13/4 cents,[2] $17.50.
  900 pounds seed at say 1/2 cent,[2] $4.50.
  Total value of sorghum, less fodder, $59.50.
  The corn crop gives 1,680 pounds, at 1/2 cent $8.40.
  The wheat crop gives 900 pounds, at 1 cent, $9.

   [Footnote 2: The sugar sold this year at 53/4 cents per pound, the
   molasses at 20 cents per gallon, and the seed at ---- per bushel
   of 56 pounds. The seed is of about equal value with corn for
   feeding stock.]

Thus it will be seen that the sorghum yields to the farmer more than
twice as much per acre as either of the leading cereals, and as a gross
product of agriculture and manufacture on our own soil more than six
times as much per acre as is usually realized from either of these
standard crops.

       *       *       *       *       *


A new process for producing iron and steel direct from the ore has been
brought out in Russia. Under the new process iron ore, after being
submitted to the smelting processes, is taken direct from the furnace to
the rolling mill and turned into thin sheets of the finest charcoal
iron. At present the process has only been commercially applied with
charcoal fuel, but experiments are stated to have shown that equal
success can be obtained with coke. The secret of the process lies in the
construction of the furnace, which is said to be simple and inexpensive.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MENGES THERMO-MAGNETIC GENERATOR AND MOTOR.


We have received from M. Menges (of the Hague) a most interesting
description of an apparatus on which he has been at work for some time
past, with the object of generating electricity by the direct conversion
of heat, or, as it might be more accurately described, by a more direct
conversion than that of an ordinary dynamo. M. Menges' apparatus
depends, like that of Edison, upon the fact that the magnetic metals
lose their magnetic permeability at a certain temperature.

It differs greatly, however, from its predecessor in important points,
especially in the fact that it does not require the aid of any external
source of motive power.

In Edison's pyromagnetic dynamo it will be remembered that it is
necessary to provide some small amount of motive power from an
extraneous source in order to revolve the shield by which the heat is
alternately directed on one half or the other of the armature cores. M.
Menges' apparatus is, on the contrary, wholly automatic.

We proceed to give a free translation of the description furnished us by
the inventor.

In attempting to employ the thermo-magnetic properties of iron or nickel
in the construction of machines for the generation of electricity upon
an industrial scale, we are met with the difficulty that the heating and
cooling of large masses of metal not only involves great loss of heat,
but also requires much time. Hence, to obtain a useful effect of any
importance, it would appear necessary to employ machines of dimensions
altogether impracticable. By the device and method of construction now
to be explained this difficulty has, however, been completely overcome.

The action of a magnetic pole diminishes so rapidly with the increase of
distance that it may suffice to remove the armature to a distance
relatively small compared with its own dimensions, or with those of the
magnet, in order to reduce the action to a negligible value. But if the
magnet, N S, and the armature, A, being at a certain distance, we bring
between them a piece of iron or nickel, d, then the magnetic force
upon A is immediately and very considerably increased. In modern
language, the resistance of the magnetic circuit has been reduced by the
introduction of a better magnetic conductor, and the number of lines of
force passing through A is proportionately increased. The mass of the
piece, d, may, moreover, be relatively small compared with that of N S
and A. If d be again withdrawn, the magnetic resistance is increased,
and the lines through A are again a minimum.

Now, it is evident that we can also obtain the same effect by
sufficiently heating and cooling the intermediate piece, d; and again,
with a broad field we can alter the distribution of the lines at will by
heating or cooling one side of this piece or the other. For this reason
we will call the piece d the _thermo-magnetic distributor_, or, briefly,
the distributor.

We will now describe the manner in which this principle has been
realized in the practical construction of both a thermo-magnetic
generator and motor.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

Fig. 1 shows an elevation and part section of one of the arrangements
employed. Fig. 2 is a plan of the same machine (in the latter the ring,
_a a_, appearing on a higher plane than it actually occupies).

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

N S is an electro-magnet, _a a_ the armature, wound as a Gramme ring,
and fixed to a frame with four arms, which can turn freely upon a pivot
midway between the poles. The cross arms of the frame are attached at 1,
2, 3, 4, Fig. 2. Between the magnets and the armature is placed the
distributor, _d d_, where it occupies an annular space open above and
below. Both the magnets and the armature are coated on the sides facing
