from you if its screen picks us up."

That sounded good to Rip. "We'll be ready when you are, sir."

The chief analyst took less than the estimated ten minutes for his next
set of figures. Commander O'Brine called personally while Rip was still
searching for the right landing-boat ports. The voice horn bellowed, "Get
it, Lieutenant Foster! The mass measurements are correct. This is your
asteroid. Estimated twelve minutes before we reach it. Your data will be
ready by the time you get back here. Show an exhaust!"

Rip found Koa and the men and asked the sergeant major for a report.

"We're ready, sir," Koa told him. "We can get out in three minutes. It
will take us that long to get into space gear. Your stuff is laid out,
sir."

"Get me the books and charts from the supplies," Rip directed. "Have
Santos take them to the chief analyst. I'm going back and figure our
course. No use doing it the hard way on the asteroid, when I can do it in
a few minutes here with the ship's computer."

He turned and hurried back, hauling himself along by handholds. The ship
had stopped acceleration and was at no-weight again. As he neared the
analysis section, it went into deceleration, but the pressure was not too
bad. He made his way against it easily.

The chief analyst was waiting for him. "We have everything you need,
Lieutenant, except the orbital stuff. We'll do the best we can on that
and have an estimate in a few minutes. Meanwhile you can mark up your
figures. Incidentally, what power are you going to use to move the
asteroid?"

"Nuclear explosions," Rip said, and saw the chief's eyes pop. He added,
"With conventional chemical fuel for corrections."

He felt rising excitement. The whole ship seemed to have come to life.
There was excited tension in the computer room when he went in with the
chief. Spacemen, all mathematicians, were waiting for him. As the chief
led him to a table, they gathered around him.

Rip took command. "Here's what we're after. I need to plot an orbit that
will get us out of the asteroid belt without collisions, take us as close
to the sun as possible without having it capture us, and land us in space
about ten thousand miles from Earth. From then on I'll throw the asteroid
into a braking ellipse around the earth, and I'll be able to make any
small corrections necessary."

He spread out a solar system chart and marked in the positions of the
planets as of that moment, using the daily almanac. Then he put down the
position of the asteroid, taking it from the paper the chief analyst
handed him.

"Will you make assignments, Chief?"

The chief shook his head. "Make them yourself, Lieutenant. We're at your
service."

Rip felt a little ashamed of some of the unkind things he had said about
spacemen. "Thank you." He pointed to a spaceman. "Will you calculate the
inertia of the asteroid, please?" The spaceman hurried off. "First thing
to do is plot the orbit as though there were no other bodies in the
system," Rip said. "Where's Santos?"

"Here, sir." The corporal had come in unnoticed with Rip's reference
books.

Rip had plotted orbits before, but never one for actual use. His palms
were wet as he laid it out, using prepared tables. When he had finished
he pointed to a spaceman. "That's it. Will you translate it into analogue
figures for the computer, please?" He assigned to others the task of
figuring out the effect Mercury, the sun, and Earth would have on the
orbit, using an assumed speed for the asteroid.

To the chief analyst he gave the job of putting all the data together in
proper form for feeding to the electronic brain.

It would have taken all spacemen present about ten days to complete the
job by regular methods, but the electronic computer produced the answer
in three minutes.

"Thanks a million, Chief," Rip said. "I'll be calling on you again before
this is over." He tucked the sheets into his pocket.

"Anytime, Lieutenant. We'll keep rechecking the figures as we go along.
If there are any corrections, we'll send them to you. That will give
you a check on your own figures."

"Don't worry," Rip assured him, "we're going to have plenty of
corrections before we're through."

Deceleration had been dropping steadily. It ceased altogether, leaving
them weightless. O'Brine's voice came over the speaker. "Get it! Valve
crews take stations at landing boats five and six. The Planeteers will
depart in five minutes. Lieutenant Foster will report to central control
if he cannot be ready in that time."

Santos grinned at Rip. "Here we go, Lieutenant."

Rip's heart would have dropped into his shoes if there had been any
gravity. Only a little excitement showed on his face, though. He waved
his thanks at the analysts and grinned back at Santos.

"Show an exhaust, Corporal. High vack is waiting!"




CHAPTER SIX

Rip's Planet


Rip rechecked his space suit before putting on his helmet. The air seal
was intact, and his heating and ventilating units worked. He slapped his
knee pouches to make sure the space knife was handy to his left hand, the
pistol to his right.

Koa was already fully dressed. He handed Rip the shoulder case that
contained the plotting board. Santos had taken charge of Rip's
astrogation instruments.

A spaceman was waiting with Rip's bubble. At a nod, the spaceman slipped
it on his head. Rip reached up and gave it a quarter turn. The locking
mechanism clamped into place. He turned his belt ventilator control on
full, and the space suit puffed out. When it was fully inflated, he
watched the pressure gauge. It was steady. No leaks in suit or helmet.
He let the pressure go down to normal.

Koa's voice buzzed in his ears. "Hear me, sir?"

Rip adjusted the volume of his communicator and replied, "I hear you. Am
I clear?"

"Yessir. All men dressed and ready."

Rip made a final check. He counted his men, then personally inspected
their suits. The boats were next. They were typical landing craft,
shaped like rectangular boxes. There was no need for streamlining in the
vacuum of space. They were not pressurized. Only men in space suits rode
in the ungainly boxes.

He checked all blast tubes to make sure they were clear. There were small
single tubes on each side of the craft. A clogged one could explode and
blow the boat up.

Koa, he knew, had checked everything, but the final responsibility was
his. In space, no officer took anyone's word for anything that might mean
lives. Each checked every detail personally.

Rip looked around and saw the Planeteers watching him. There was approval
on the faces behind the clear helmets, and he knew they were satisfied
with his thoroughness.

At last, certain that everything was in good order, he said quietly,
"Pilots, man your boats."

Dowst got into one and a spaceman into the other. Dowst's boat would stay
with them on the asteroid. The spaceman would bring the other back to the
ship.

Commander O'Brine stepped through the valve into the boat lock. A
spaceman handed him a hand communicator. He spoke into it. Rip couldn't
have heard him through the helmet otherwise. "All set, Foster?"

"Ready, sir."

"Good. The long-range screen picked up a blip a few minutes ago. It's
probably that Connie cruiser."

Rip swallowed. The Planeteers froze, waiting for the commander's next
words.

"Our screens are a little better than theirs, so there's a slim chance
they haven't picked us up yet. We'll drop you and get out of here. But
don't worry. We have your orbit fixed, and we'll find you when the
screens are clear."

"Suppose they find us while you're gone?" Rip said.

"It's a chance," O'Brine admitted. "You'll have to take spaceman's
luck on that one. But we won't be far away. We'll duck behind Vesta,
or another of the big asteroids, and hide so their screens won't pick
up our motion. Every now and then we'll sneak out for a look, if the
screen seems clear. If those high-vack vermin do find you, get on the
landing-boat radio and yell for help. We'll come blasting."

He waved a hand, thumb and forefinger held together in the ancient symbol
for "everything right," then ordered, "Get flaming." He stepped through
the valve.

"Clear the lock," Rip ordered. "Open outer valve when ready."

He took a quick, final look around. The pilots were in the boats. His
Planeteers were standing by, safety lines already attached to the boats
and their belts. He moved into position and snapped his own line to a
ring on Dowst's boat. The spacemen vanished through the valve, and the
massive door slid closed. The overhead lights flicked out. Rip now
snapped on his belt light, and the others followed suit.

In front of the boxlike landing boats a great door slid open, and air
from the lock rushed out. Rip knew it was only imagination, but he felt
as though all the heat from his suit was radiating into space, chilling
him to near absolute zero. Beyond the lights from their belts, he saw
stars and recognized the constellation for which the space cruiser was
named. A superstitious spaceman would have taken that as a good sign.
Rip admitted that it was nice to see.

"Float 'em," he ordered.

The Planeteers gripped handholds at the entrance with one hand and
launching rails on the boats with the other, then heaved. The boats
slid into space. As the safety lines tightened, the Planeteers were
pulled after the boat.

Rip left his feet with a little spring and shot through the door.
Directly below him, the asteroid gleamed darkly in the light of the tiny
sun. His first reaction was "Great Cosmos! What a little chunk of rock!"
But that was because he was used to looking from the space platform at
the great curve of Terra or at the big ball of the moon. Actually the
asteroid was fair-sized, when compared with most of its kind.

The Planeteers hauled themselves into the boats by their safety lines.
Rip waited until all were in, then pulled himself along his own line
to the black square of the door. Koa was waiting to give him a hand into
the craft.

The Planeteers were standing, except for Dowst. Rip had never seen an
old-type railroad, or he might have likened the landing boat to a
railroad boxcar. It was about the same size and shape, but had huge
"windows" on both sides and in front of the pilot--windows that were
not enclosed. The space-suited men needed no protection.

"Blast," Rip ordered.

A pulse of fire spurted from the top of each boat, driving them bottom
first toward the asteroid.

"Land at will," Rip said.

The asteroid loomed large as he looked through an opening. It was rocky,
but there were plenty of smooth places.

Dowst picked one. He was an expert pilot, and Rip watched him with
pleasure. The exhaust from the top lessened, and fire spurted soundlessly
from the bottom. Dowst balanced the opposite thrusts of the top and
bottom blasts with the delicacy of a woman threading a needle. In a few
moments the boat was hovering a foot above the asteroid. Dowst cut the
exhausts, and Rip stepped out onto the tiny planet.

The Planeteers knew what to do. Corporal Pederson produced hardened steel
spikes with ring tops. Private Trudeau had a sledge. Driving the first
spike would be the hardest, because the action of swinging the hammer
would propel the Planeteer like a rocket exhaust. In space, the law that
every action has an equal and opposite reaction had to be remembered
every moment.

Rip watched, interested in how his man would tackle the problem. He
didn't know the answer himself, because he had never driven a spike
on an airless world with almost no gravity, and no one had ever mentioned
it to him.

Pederson searched the gray metal with his torch and found a slender spur
of thorium, perhaps two feet high, a short distance from the boat.
"Here's a hold," he said. "Come on, Frenchy. You too, Bradshaw."

Trudeau, carrying the sledge, walked up to the spur of rock and stood
with his heels against it. Pederson sat down on the ground with his legs
on either side of the spur. He stretched, hooking his heels around
Trudeau's ankles, anchoring him. With his gloves, he grabbed the seat of
the Frenchman's space suit.

Bradshaw took a spike and held it against the gray metal ground. The
Frenchman swung, his hammer noiseless as it drove the tough spike. A
few inches into the metal was enough. Bradshaw took a wrench from his
belt, put it on the head of the spike, and turned it. Below the surface,
teeth on the spike bit into the metal. It would hold.

The rest was easy. The spike was used to anchor Trudeau while he drove
another, at his longest reach. Then the second spike became his anchor,
and so on, until enough spikes had been set to lace the boat down against
any sudden shock.

The boat piloted by the spaceman was tied to the one that would remain,
and the Planeteers floated its supplies through a window. It took only a
few moments, with Planeteers forming a chain from inside the boat to a
spot a little distance away. The crates weighed almost nothing, but still
retained their mass. Once their inertia was overcome, they moved from one
man to the next like ungainly balloons.

"All clear, sir," Koa called.

Rip stepped inside and made a quick inspection. The box was empty except
for the spaceman pilot. He put a hand on the pilot's shoulder. "On your
way, Rocky. Thanks."

"You're welcome, sir." The pilot added, "Watch out for high vack."

Rip and Koa stepped out and walked a little distance away. Santos and
Pederson cast the landing boat adrift and shoved it away from the
anchored boat. In a moment fire spurted from the bottom tube, spreading
over the dull metal and licking at the feet of the Planeteers.

Rip watched the boat rise upward to the great, sleek, dark bulk of the
_Scorpius_. The landing boat maneuvered into the air lock with brief
flares from its exhausts. In a few moments the sparkling blast of
auxiliary rocket tubes moved the spaceship away. O'Brine was putting a
little distance between his ship and the asteroid before turning on the
nuclear drive. The ship decreased in size until Rip saw it only as a
dark, oval silhouette against the Milky Way. Then the exhaust of the
nuclear drive grew into a mighty column of glowing blue, and the ship
flamed into space.

For a moment Rip had a wild impulse to yell for the ship to come back.
He had been in vacuum before, but only as a cadet, with an officer in
charge. Now, suddenly, he was the one responsible. The job was his. He
stiffened. Planeteer officers didn't worry about things like that.
He forced his mind to the job at hand.

The next step was to establish a base. The base would have to be on the
dark side of the asteroid, once it was in its new orbit. That meant a
temporary base now and a better one later, when they had blasted the
little planet into its new course. He estimated roughly the approximate
positions where he would place his charges, using the sun and the star
Canopus as visual guides.

"This will do for a temporary base," he announced. "Rig the boat
compartment. While two of you are doing that, you others break out the
rocket launcher and rocket racks and assemble the cutting torch. Koa will
make assignments."

While the sergeant major translated Rip's general instructions into
specific orders for each man, the young lieutenant walked to the edge
of the sun belt. There was no atmosphere, so the edge was a sharp line
between dark and light. There wasn't much light, either. They were too
far from the sun for that. But as they neared the sun, the darkness would
be their protection. They would get so close to Sol that the metal on the
sun side would get soft as butter.

He bent close to the uneven surface. It was clean metal, not oxidized
at all. The thorium had never been exposed to oxygen. Here and there,
pyramids of metal thrust up from the asteroid, sometimes singly,
