she could no longer bear.

Varnis, lost in her dream-world, and Dorita, hard-faced and haggard,
were the only ones left, beside Kalvar Dard, of the original eight. But
the band had grown, meanwhile, to more than fifteen. In the rear, in
Seldar Glav's old place, the son of Kalvar Dard and Analea walked. Like
his father, he wore a pistol, for which he had six rounds, and a dagger,
and in his hand he carried a stone-headed killing-maul with a three-foot
handle which he had made for himself. The woman who walked beside him
and carried his spears was the daughter of Glav and Olva; in a net-bag
on her back she carried their infant child. The first Tareeshan born of
Tareeshan parents; Kalvar Dard often looked at his little grandchild
during nights in camp and days on the trail, seeing, in that tiny
fur-swaddled morsel of humanity, the meaning and purpose of all that he
did. Of the older girls, one or two were already pregnant, now; this
tiny threatened beachhead of humanity was expanding, gaining strength.
Long after man had died out on Doorsha and the dying planet itself had
become an arid waste, the progeny of this little band would continue to
grow and to dominate the younger planet, nearer the sun. Some day, an
even mightier civilization than the one he had left would rise here....

       *       *       *       *       *

All day the trail had wound upward into the mountains. Great cliffs
loomed above them, and little streams spumed and dashed in rocky gorges
below. All day, the Hairy People had followed, fearful to approach too
close, unwilling to allow their enemies to escape. It had started when
they had rushed the camp, at daybreak; they had been beaten off, at cost
of almost all the ammunition, and the death of one child. No sooner had
the tribe of Kalvar Dard taken the trail, however, than they had been
pressing after them. Dard had determined to cross the mountains, and had
led his people up a game-trail, leading toward the notch of a pass high
against the skyline.

The shaggy ape-things seemed to have divined his purpose. Once or
twice, he had seen hairy brown shapes dodging among the rocks and
stunted trees to the left. They were trying to reach the pass ahead of
him. Well, if they did.... He made a quick mental survey of his
resources. His pistol, and his son's, and Dorita's, with eight, and six,
and seven rounds. One grenade, and the big demolition bomb, too powerful
to be thrown by hand, but which could be set for delayed explosion and
dropped over a cliff or left behind to explode among pursuers. Five
steel daggers, and plenty of spears and slings and axes. Himself, his
son and his son's woman, Dorita, and four or five of the older boys and
girls, who would make effective front-line fighters. And Varnis, who
might come out of her private dream-world long enough to give account
for herself, and even the tiniest of the walking children could throw
stones or light spears. Yes, they could force the pass, if the Hairy
People reached it ahead of them, and then seal it shut with the heavy
bomb. What lay on the other side, he did not know; he wondered how much
game there would be, and if there were Hairy People on that side, too.

Two shots slammed quickly behind him. He dropped his axe and took a
two-hand grip on his stabbing-spear as he turned. His son was hurrying
forward, his pistol drawn, glancing behind as he came.

"Hairy People. Four," he reported. "I shot two; she threw a spear and
killed another. The other ran."

The daughter of Seldar Glav and Olva nodded in agreement.

"I had no time to throw again," she said, "and Bo-Bo would not shoot the
one that ran."

Kalvar Dard's son, who had no other name than the one his mother had
called him as a child, defended himself. "He was running away. It is the
rule: _use bullets only to save life, where a spear will not serve_."

Kalvar Dard nodded. "You did right, son," he said, taking out his own
pistol and removing the magazine, from which he extracted two
cartridges. "Load these into your pistol; four rounds aren't enough. Now
we each have six. Go back to the rear, keep the little ones moving, and
don't let Varnis get behind."

"That is right. _We must all look out for Varnis, and take care of
her_," the boy recited obediently. "That is the rule."

He dropped to the rear. Kalvar Dard holstered his pistol and picked up
his axe, and the column moved forward again. They were following a
ledge, now; on the left, there was a sheer drop of several hundred feet,
and on the right a cliff rose above them, growing higher and steeper as
the trail slanted upward. Dard was worried about the ledge; if it came
to an end, they would all be trapped. No one would escape. He suddenly
felt old and unutterably weary. It was a frightful weight that he
bore--responsibility for an entire race.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly, behind him, Dorita fired her pistol upward. Dard sprang
forward--there was no room for him to jump aside--and drew his pistol.
The boy, Bo-Bo, was trying to find a target from his position in the
rear. Then Dard saw the two Hairy People; the boy fired, and the stone
fell, all at once.

It was a heavy stone, half as big as a man's torso, and it almost missed
Kalvar Dard. If it had hit him directly, it would have killed him
instantly, mashing him to a bloody pulp; as it was, he was knocked flat,
the stone pinning his legs.

At Bo-Bo's shot, a hairy body plummeted down, to hit the ledge. Bo-Bo's
woman instantly ran it through with one of her spears. The other
ape-thing, the one Dorita had shot, was still clinging to a rock above.
Two of the children scampered up to it and speared it repeatedly,
screaming like little furies. Dorita and one of the older girls got the
rock off Kalvar Dard's legs and tried to help him to his feet, but he
collapsed, unable to stand. Both his legs were broken.

This was it, he thought, sinking back. "Dorita, I want you to run ahead
and see what the trail's like," he said. "See if the ledge is passable.
And find a place, not too far ahead, where we can block the trail by
exploding that demolition-bomb. It has to be close enough for a couple
of you to carry or drag me and get me there in one piece."

"What are you going to do?"

"What do you think?" he retorted. "I have both legs broken. You can't
carry me with you; if you try it, they'll catch us and kill us all. I'll
have to stay behind; I'll block the trail behind you, and get as many of
them as I can, while I'm at it. Now, run along and do as I said."

She nodded. "I'll be back as soon as I can," she agreed.

The others were crowding around Dard. Bo-Bo bent over him, perplexed and
worried. "What are you going to do, father?" he asked. "You are hurt.
Are you going to go away and leave us, as mother did when she was hurt?"

"Yes, son; I'll have to. You carry me on ahead a little, when Dorita
gets back, and leave me where she shows you to. I'm going to stay behind
and block the trail, and kill a few Hairy People. I'll use the big
bomb."

"The _big_ bomb? The one nobody dares throw?" The boy looked at his
father in wonder.

"That's right. Now, when you leave me, take the others and get away as
fast as you can. Don't stop till you're up to the pass. Take my pistol
and dagger, and the axe and the big spear, and take the little bomb,
too. Take everything I have, only leave the big bomb with me. I'll need
that."

Dorita rejoined them. "There's a waterfall ahead. We can get around it,
