"Of course, there were no detectors set up in advance around Auburn," he
said. "We didn't really begin to find anything out for half an hour. By
that time, the cosmic radiation was over and we weren't getting anything
but gamma."

"What--What has Auburn to do--?" The Russian stopped short. "You think
this was the same thing?" He gave it a moment's consideration. "Lee,
you're crazy! There wasn't an atom of artificial negamatter in the world
in 1969. Nobody had made any before us. We gave each other some
scientific surprises, then, but nobody surprised both of us. You and I,
between us, knew everything that was going on in nuclear physics in the
world. And you know as well as I do--"

A voice came out of the public-address speaker. "Some of the radio
equipment around the target area, that wasn't knocked out by blast, is
beginning to function again. There is an increasingly heavy gamma
radiation, but no more cosmic rays. They were all prompt radiation from
the annihilation; the gamma is secondary effect. Wait a moment; Captain
Urquiola, of the Air Force, says that the first drone plane is about to
take off."

It had been two hours after the blast that the first drones had gone
over what had been Auburn, New York. He was trying to remember, as
exactly as possible, what had been learned from them. Gamma radiation; a
great deal of gamma. But it didn't last long. It had been almost down to
a safe level by the time the investigation had been called off, and, two
months after there had been no more missiles, and no way of producing
more, and no targets to send them against if they'd had them, rather--he
had been back at Auburn on his hopeless quest, and there had been almost
no trace of radiation. Nothing but a wide, shallow crater, almost two
hundred feet in diameter and only fifteen at its deepest, already full
of water, and a circle of flattened and scattered rubble for a mile and
a half all around it. He was willing to bet anything that that was what
they'd find where the chunk of nega-iron had landed, fifty miles away on
the pampas.

Well, the first drone ought to be over the target area before long, and
at least one of the balloons that had been sent up was reporting its
course by radio. The radios in the others were silent, and the recording
counters had probably jammed in all of them. There'd be something of
interest when the first drone came back. He dragged his mind back to the
present, and went to work with Alexis Pitov.

They were at it all night, checking, evaluating, making sure that the
masses of data that were coming in were being promptly processed for
programming the computers. At each of the increasingly frequent
coffee-breaks, he noticed Pitov looking curiously. He said nothing,
however, until, long after dawn, they stood outside the bunker, waiting
for the jeep that would take them back to their bungalow and watching
the line of trucks--Argentine army engineers, locally hired laborers,
load after load of prefab-huts and equipment--going down toward the
target-area, where they would be working for the next week.

"Lee, were you serious?" Pitov asked. "I mean, about this being like the
one at Auburn?"

"It was exactly like Auburn; even that blazing light that came rushing
down out of the sky. I wondered about that at the time--what kind of a
missile would produce an effect like that. Now I know. We just launched
one like it."

"But that's impossible! I told you, between us we know everything that
was happening in nuclear physics then. Nobody in the world knew how to
assemble atoms of negamatter and build them into masses."

"Nobody, and nothing, on this planet built that mass of negamatter. I
doubt if it even came from this Galaxy. But we didn't know that, then.
When that negamatter meteor fell, the only thing anybody could think of
was that it had been a Soviet missile. If it had hit around Leningrad or
Moscow or Kharkov, who would you have blamed it on?"


THE END.




       *       *       *       *       *

TYPOGRAPHICAL ERRORS CORRECTED

The following typographical errors in the text were corrected as
detailed here.

In the text: "Could they have built an ICBM with a thermonuclear
warhead ..." the word "termonuclear" was corrected to "thermonuclear."

In the text: "If it had hit around Leningrad or Moscow ..." the word
"Lenigrad" was corrected to "Leningrad."

In the text: "... from all over South America, from South Africa
and Australia ..." the word "Austrailia" was corrected to "Australia."

