in an essential enzyme system. Knowing this, Tiger quickly found a drug
which could be substituted for the damaged enzyme, and the problem was
solved. They left the planet, assuring the planetary government that
laboratories on Hospital Earth would begin working at once to find a way
actually to rebuild the damaged genes in the embryonic cells, and thus
put a permanent end to the disease.

These were routine calls, the kind of ordinary general medical work that
the patrol ships were expected to handle. But the visits to the various
planets were welcome breaks in the pattern of patrol ship life. The
_Lancet_ was fully equipped, but her crew's quarters and living space
were cramped. Under the best conditions, the crewmen on patrol ships got
on each other's nerves; on the _Lancet_ there was an additional focus of
tension that grew worse with every passing hour.

From the first Jack Alvarez had made no pretense of pleasure at Dal's
company, but now it seemed that he deliberately sought opportunities to
annoy him. The thin Blue Doctor's face set into an angry mold whenever
Dal was around. He would get up and leave when Dal entered the control
room, and complained loudly and bitterly at minor flaws in Dal's
shipboard work. Nothing Dal did seemed to please him.

But Tiger had a worse time controlling himself at the Blue Doctor's digs
and slights than Dal did. "It's like living in an armed camp," he
complained one night when Jack had stalked angrily out of the bunk
room. "Can't even open your mouth without having him jump down your
throat."

"I know," Dal said.

"And he's doing it on purpose."

"Maybe so. But it won't help to lose your temper."

Tiger clenched a huge fist and slammed it into his palm. "He's just
deliberately picking at you and picking at you," he said. "You can't
take that forever. Something's got to break."

"It's all right," Dal assured him. "I just ignore it."

But when Jack began to shift his attack to Fuzzy, Dal could ignore it no
longer.

One night in the control room Jack threw down the report he was writing
and turned angrily on Dal. "Tell your friend there to turn the other way
before I lose my temper and splatter him all over the wall," he said,
pointing to Fuzzy. "All he does is sit there and stare at me and I'm
getting fed up with it."

Fuzzy drew himself up tightly, shivering on Dal's shoulder. Dal reached
up and stroked the tiny creature, and Fuzzy's shoe-button eyes
disappeared completely. "There," Dal said. "Is that better?"

Jack stared at the place the eyes had been, and his face darkened
suspiciously. "Well, what happened to them?" he demanded.

"What happened to what?"

"To his eyes, you idiot!"

Dal looked down at Fuzzy. "I don't see any eyes."

Jack jumped up from the stool. He scowled at Fuzzy as if commanding the
eyes to come back again. All he saw was a small ball of pink fur. "Look,
he's been blinking them at me for a week," he snarled. "I thought all
along there was something funny about him. Sometimes he's got legs and
sometimes he hasn't. Sometimes he looks fuzzy, and other times he hasn't
got any hair at all."

"He's a pleomorph," Dal said. "No cellular structure at all, just a
protein-colloid matrix."

Jack glowered at the inert little pink lump. "Don't be silly," he said,
curious in spite of himself. "What holds him together?"

"Who knows? I don't. Some kind of electro-chemical cohesive force. The
only reason he has 'eyes' is because he thinks I want him to have eyes.
If you don't like it, he won't have them any more."

"Well, that's very obliging," Jack said. "But why do you keep him
around? What good does he do you, anyhow? All he does is eat and drink
and sleep."

"Does he have to do something?" Dal said evasively. "He isn't bothering
you. Why pick on him?"

"He just seems to worry you an awful lot," Jack said unpleasantly.
"Let's see him a minute." He reached out for Fuzzy, then jerked his
finger back with a yelp. Blood dripped from the finger tip.

Jack's face slowly went white. "Why, he--he _bit_ me!"

"Yes, and you're lucky he didn't take a finger off," Dal said, trembling
with anger. "He doesn't like you any more than I do, and you'll get bit
every time you come near him, so you'd better keep your hands to
yourself."

"Don't worry," Jack Alvarez said, "he won't get another chance. You can
just get rid of him."

"Not a chance," Dal said. "You leave him alone and he won't bother you,
that's all. And the same thing goes for me."

"If he isn't out of here in twelve hours, I'll get a warrant," Jack said
tightly. "There are laws against keeping dangerous pets on patrol
ships."

Somewhere in the main corridor an alarm bell began buzzing. For a
moment Dal and Jack stood frozen, glaring at each other. Then the door
burst open and Tiger Martin's head appeared. "Hey, you two, let's get
moving! We've got a call coming in, and it looks like a tough one. Come
on back here!"

They headed back toward the radio room. The signal was coming through
frantically as Tiger reached for the pile of punched tape running out on
the floor. But as they crowded into the radio room, Dal felt Jack's hand
on his arm. "If you think I was fooling, you're wrong," the Blue Doctor
said through his teeth. "You've got twelve hours to get rid of him."




CHAPTER 5

CRISIS ON MORUA VIII


The three doctors huddled around the teletype, watching as the decoded
message was punched out on the tape. "It started coming in just now,"
Tiger said. "And they've been beaming the signal in a spherical pattern,
apparently trying to pick up the nearest ship they could get. There's
certainly some sort of trouble going on."

The message was brief, repeated over and over: REQUIRE MEDICAL AID
URGENT REPLY AT ONCE. This was followed by the code letters that
designated the planet, its location, and the number of its medical
service contract.

Jack glanced at the code. "Morua VIII," he said. "I think that's a grade
I contract." He began punching buttons on the reference panel, and
several screening cards came down the slot from the information bank.
"Yes. The eighth planet of a large Sol-type star, the only inhabited
planet in the system with a single intelligent race, ursine evolutionary
pattern." He handed the cards to Tiger. "Teddy-bears, yet!"

"Mammals?" Tiger said.

"Looks like it. And they even hibernate."

"What about the contract?" Dal asked.

"Grade I," said Tiger. "And they've had a thorough survey. Moderately
advanced in their own medical care, but they have full medical coverage
any time they think they need it. We'd better get an acknowledgment back
to them. Jack, get the ship ready to star-jump while Dal starts digging
information out of the bank. If this race has its own doctors, they'd
only be hollering for help if they're up against a tough one."

Tiger settled down with earphones and transmitter to try to make contact
with the Moruan planet, while Jack went forward to control and Dal
started to work with the tape reader. There was no argument now, and no
dissension. The procedure to be followed was a well-established routine:
acknowledge the call, estimate arrival time, relay the call and response
to the programmers on Hospital Earth, prepare for star-drive, and start
gathering data fast. With no hint of the nature of the trouble, their
job was to get there, equipped with as much information about the planet
and its people as time allowed.

The Moruan system was not distant from the _Lancet_'s present location.
Tiger calculated that two hours in Koenig drive would put the ship in
the vicinity of the planet, with another hour required for landing
procedures. He passed the word on to the others, and Dal began digging
through the mass of information in the tape library on Morua VIII and
its people.

There was a wealth of data. Morua VIII had signed one of the first
medical service contracts with Hospital Earth, and a thorough medical,
biochemical, social and psychological survey had been made on the people
of that world. Since the original survey, much additional information
had been amassed, based on patrol ship reports and dozens of specialty
studies that had been done there.

And out of this data, a picture of Morua VIII and its inhabitants began
to emerge.

The Moruans were moderately intelligent creatures, warm-blooded air
breathers with an oxygen-based metabolism. Their planet was cold, with
17 per cent oxygen and much water vapor in its atmosphere. With its vast
snow-fields and great mountain ranges, the planet was a popular resort
area for oxygen-breathing creatures; most of the natives were engaged in
some work related to winter sports. They were well fitted anatomically
for their climate, with thick black fur, broad flat hind feet and a
four-inch layer of fat between their skin and their vital organs.

Swiftly Dal reviewed the emergency file, checking for common drugs and
chemicals that were poisonous to Moruans, accidents that were common to
the race, and special problems that had been met by previous patrol
ships. The deeper he dug into the mass of data, the more worried he
became. Where should he begin? Searching in the dark, there was no way
to guess what information would be necessary and what part totally
useless.

He buzzed Tiger. "Any word on the nature of the trouble?" he asked.

"Just got through to them," Tiger said. "Not too much to go on, but
they're really in an uproar. Sounds like they've started some kind of
organ-transplant surgery and their native surgeon got cold feet halfway
through and wants us to bail him out." Tiger paused. "I think this is
going to be your show, Dal. Better check up on Moruan anatomy."

It was better than no information, but not much better. Fuzzy huddled on
Dal's shoulder as if he could sense his master's excitement. Very few
races under contract with Hospital Earth ever attempted their own major
surgery. If a Moruan surgeon had walked into a tight spot in the
operating room, it could be a real test of skill to get him--and his
patient--out of it, even on a relatively simple procedure. But
organ-transplantation, with the delicate vascular surgery and
micro-surgery that it entailed, was never simple. In incompetent hands,
it could turn into a nightmare.

Dal took a deep breath and began running the anatomical atlas tapes
through the reader, checking the critical points of Moruan anatomy.
Oxygen-transfer system, circulatory system, renal filtration system--at
first glance, there was little resemblance to any of the "typical"
oxygen-breathing mammals Dal had studied in medical school. But then
something struck a familiar note, and he remembered studying the
peculiar Moruan renal system, in which the creature's chemical waste
products were filtered from the bloodstream in a series of tubules
passing across the peritoneum, and re-absorbed into the intestine for
excretion. Bit by bit other points of the anatomy came clear, and in
half an hour of intense study Dal began to see how the inhabitants of
Morua VIII were put together.

Satisfied for the moment, he then pulled the tapes that described the
Moruans' own medical advancement. What were they doing attempting
organ-transplantation, anyway? That was the kind of surgery that even
experienced Star Surgeons preferred to take aboard the hospital ships,
or back to Hospital Earth, where the finest equipment and the most
skilled assistants were available.

There was a signal buzzer, the two-minute warning before the Koenig
drive took over. Dal tossed the tape spools back into the bin for
refiling, and went forward to the control room.

Just short of two hours later, the _Lancet_ shifted back to normal
space drive, and the cold yellow sun of the Moruan system swam into
sight in the viewscreen. Far below, the tiny eighth planet glistened
like a snowball in the reflection of the sun, with only occasional rents
in the cloud blanket revealing the ragged surface below. The doctors
watched as the ship went into descending orbit, skimming the outer
atmosphere and settling into a landing pattern.

Beneath the cloud blanket, the frigid surface of the planet spread out
before them. Great snow-covered mountain ranges rose up on either side.
A forty-mile gale howled across the landing field, sweeping clouds of
powdery snow before it.

A huge gawky vehicle seemed to be waiting for the ship to land; it shot
out from the huddle of gray buildings almost the moment they touched
down. Jack slipped into the furs that he had pulled from stores, and
went out through the entrance lock and down the ladder to meet the dark
furry creatures that were bundling out of the vehicle below. The
electronic language translator was strapped to his chest.

Five minutes later he reappeared, frost forming on his blue collar, his
face white as he looked at Dal. "You'd better get down there right
away," he said, "and take your micro-surgical instruments. Tiger, give
me a hand with the anaesthesia tanks. They're keeping a patient alive
with a heart-lung machine right now, and they can't finish the job. It
looks like it might be bad."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Moruan who escorted them across the city to the hospital was a huge
shaggy creature who left no question of the evolutionary line of his
people. Except for the flattened nose, the high forehead and the
fur-less hand with opposing thumb, he looked for all the world like a
mammoth edition of the Kodiak bears Dal had seen displayed at the
natural history museum in Hospital Philadelphia. Like all creatures with
oxygen-and-water based metabolisms, the Moruans could trace their
evolutionary line to minute one-celled salt-water creatures; but with
the bitter cold of the planet, the first land-creatures to emerge from
the primeval swamp of Morua VIII had developed the heavy furs and the
hibernation characteristics of bear-like mammals. They towered over Dal,
and even Tiger seemed dwarfed by their immense chest girth and powerful
shoulders.

As the surface car hurried toward the hospital, Dal probed for more
information. The Moruan's voice was a hoarse growl which nearly deafened
the Earthmen in the confined quarters of the car but Dal with the aid of
the translator could piece together what had happened.

More sophisticated in medical knowledge than most races in the galaxy,
the Moruans had learned a great deal from their contact with Hospital
Earth physicians. They actually did have a remarkable grasp of
physiology and biochemistry, and constantly sought to learn more. They
had already found ways to grow replacement organs from embryonic grafts,
the Moruan said, and by copying the techniques used by the surgeons of
Hospital Earth, their own surgeons had attempted the delicate job of
replacing a diseased organ with a new, healthy one in a young male
afflicted with cancer.

Dal looked up at the Moruan doctor. "What organ were you replacing?" he
asked suspiciously.

"Oh, not the entire organ, just a segment," the Moruan said. "The tumor
had caused an obstructive pneumonia--"

"Are you talking about a segment of _lung_?" Dal said, almost choking.

"Of course. That's where the tumor was."

Dal swallowed hard. "So you just decided to replace a segment."
