inside the hangar had to pass a simple but telling test of
identification. On a table at each entrance to the hangar was a small
box with a hole in the top. Each worker, guard, and person that entered
the hangar had to insert a key into the hole and it made contact with a
highly sensitive electronic device inside. The keys were issued only by
Major Connel or Captain Strong, and should anyone attempt to enter the
hangar without it, or should the key not make the proper contact,
lighting up a small bulb on the top of the box, Tom, Roger, and Astro
had simple instructions: Shoot to kill.

This form of identification had been employed for some time now, even
before the wire fence had been installed, but the really spectacular
change was in the heat blasters each guard carried. This, more than
anything else, impressed on everyone connected with the project, that to
move the wrong way, to say the wrong thing, or to act in any suspicious
manner might result in instant death.

It was a mark of trust that Tom, Roger, and Astro had been placed in
such a highly sensitive position. They could kill a man and simply
explain, "The light didn't go on!" and that would be the end of it.
Neither of them knew that Connel had specifically requested that they be
assigned to the day shift, when the hangar would be crowded with
workers, who, intent on their assigned jobs, might be careless and leave
themselves open to instant action on the part of the guards. Connel
reasoned that Tom, Roger, and Astro, aside from their occasional antics
in the Academy, would be more responsible than rough enlisted spacemen.
The orders were specific: shoot to kill, but there was almost always one
poor human being who would forget. In spite of the necessity for tight
security, Connel felt he had to allow for that one percent of human
failure. Secretly he was very happy that he had a crack unit like the
_Polaris_ to place in such a job. And the _Capella_ unit had been
entrusted with the same responsibility.

It was under such tight conditions that Astro, watching the least busy
of the three entrances and exits, saw Dave Barret walk to a nearby
public teleceiver booth, and, with the door ajar, place a transspace
call to Venusport.

The booth was used often by the workers and Astro did not think much of
it, until he accidentally overheard Barret's conversation.

"... Yeah, I know, but things are so tight, I can't even begin to get at
it." Barret had his mouth close to the transmitter and his voice was
low, but Astro could still hear him. "Yeah, I know how important it is
to you, but I can be burned to a cinder if I make one false move. You'll
just have to wait until I find an opening somewhere. Good-by!"

Barret switched off the teleceiver set and stepped out of the booth to
face the muzzle of Astro's blaster. "Stand where you are!" growled the
big cadet.

"What, why you--" Barret clamped his mouth shut. There was a difference
between being frozen and being blasted into a crisp.

Astro reached over and touched the button that would alert a squad of
guards, Major Connel, and Tim Rush. In a flash the alarm sounded
throughout the hangar and troopers stormed in brandishing their guns.
Firehouse Tim and Connel arrived seconds later. They skidded to a stop
when they saw Barret with his hands in the air and Astro's finger on the
trigger of the blaster.

"By the blessed rings of Saturn!" roared Connel. "Not again."

"Put down that gun," demanded Rush, stepping forward quickly. Astro
lowered the gun and Barret dropped his hands.

"What's the meaning of this?" demanded Connel, his face reddening with
rage.

Astro turned and looked the major right in the eye. "Major," he said
calmly, "this man just made a teleceiver call--a transspace call to
Venusport."

"Well, what about it?" cried Barret.

"Sir," said Astro, unruffled by Barret's screaming protest, "this man
spoke of getting at something, and that he was unable to do so, because
he might be burned to a cinder. And the other party would have to wait
until he found an opening."

"What!" exclaimed Connel, turning to look at Barret. "What is the
meaning of this, Barret?"

"Why, that knuckle-headed baboon!" yelled Barret. "Sure, I made a
transspace call to Venusport--to the Venusian Atomic By-Products
Corporation."

"What was the call about?" demanded Connel.

The guards had not moved and the workers in the hangar were now
gathering around the small knot of men by the teleceiver booth.

"Why--I--"

"Come on, man!" shouted Connel. "Out with it."

"I called about getting a new timer for the projectile fuel-injection
system," snapped Barret. "The timer is too slow for our needs. I wanted
to adjust it myself, but the projectile is so compact, I can't get at it
without taking a chance of getting doused by the fuel."

"What about that remark about finding an opening?" growled Connel.

"What's going on here?" called Professor Hemmingwell as he bustled up to
the group. "Why aren't these men working? Dave, why aren't you up
there--?"

"Just a minute, Professor!" Connel barked, and turned back to Barret.
"Go ahead, Barret."

"They can't make a new timer until I find a way of installing it without
taking apart the whole projectile," said Barret, adding sarcastically,
"in other words, Major--finding an opening."

"All right," barked Connel. "That's enough." He turned to the assembled
workers. "Get back to work, all of you." The men moved away and
Firehouse Tim led the guards back to their quarters. Professor
Hemmingwell, Barret, and Astro remained where they were.

Connel turned to Astro. "Good work, you dumb Venusian," he snorted.
"But so help me, if you had burned this man, I, personally, would've
buried you on a prison rock." The major then turned to Barret. "As for
you--" he snarled.

"Yes?" asked Barret coolly.

"You make one more call like that over a public teleceiver," Connel
roared, "especially a transspace call that's monitored by the idiots in
the teleceiver company, and I'll send _you_ to a prison asteroid!"

"Now, Major," said Hemmingwell testily, "I don't think you should speak
to Dave that way. After all, he's a very valuable man in this project."

"How valuable would he be if this cadet had gone ahead and blasted him?"
snarled Connel.

"It's just another example of how these stupid boys have obstructed my
work here," replied Hemmingwell angrily. "I can't see why they have to
interfere this way. And they always pick on poor Dave."

"Yes," snarled Barret. "I'm getting pretty tired of being a clay pigeon
for a bunch of brats." He turned to Astro. "You'll have a head full of
socket wrench if you mess with me again."

"You'll get a receipt, Barret," growled Astro. "Paid in full."

"All right, break it up," growled Connel. "Back to your post, Astro. And
you get back to work, Barret, and remember what I said about using that
public teleceiver."

Barret and Hemmingwell walked off, with the little professor talking
rapidly to the younger scientist, trying to calm his anger.

Astro, Tom, and Roger were extraordinarily strict about the exit of the
workers that night and there was angry muttering in the ranks of the men
who wanted to get home. But the three cadets refused to be hurried and
made each man perform the ritual of getting out to the letter. Still
later, after they had been relieved by the _Capella_ unit and had told
them of the incident between Astro and Barret, they headed back to the
Academy dormitory more tired than they had ever been before in their
lives. Thirty seconds after reaching their room, they were asleep in
their bunks, without undressing or washing. Like whipped dogs, they
sprawled on their bunks, dead to the world.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 6


Sabotage!

Major Connel, Commander Walters, Captain Strong, Professor Hemmingwell,
and Dave Barret stared unbelievingly at the tangle of wires and smashed
tubes on the main deck of the sleek spaceship.

"Get every man that has been in this hangar during the last twenty-four
hours and have him brought under guard to the laboratory for
psychographs." Commander Walters' face was grim as he snapped out the
order.

Professor Hemmingwell and Barret got down on their hands and knees and
examined the wrecked firing device carefully. After a long period of
silence, while Strong, Walters, and Connel watched them pawing through
the tangle of wires and broken connections, Hemmingwell stood up.

"It can be replaced in twelve hours," he announced. "I believe that
whoever did this either didn't know what he was doing, or it was an
accident."

"Explain that, will you, Professor?" asked Strong. "I don't
understand."

"This is an important unit," Hemmingwell replied, indicating the
wreckage, "but not the most important part of the whole unit. Anyone who
really knew what he was doing and wanted to delay the project could have
done so much more easily by simply destroying this." Hemmingwell held
out a small metallic-looking cylinder.

"What is that, Professor?" asked Barret.

"Don't you know?" asked Connel.

"No, he doesn't," snapped Professor Hemmingwell. "This is something I
developed that only the commander and myself know about."

[Illustration]

"So, if you and Commander Walters are the only ones that know about it,"
said Steve Strong slowly, "then a saboteur would have thought it
unimportant and concentrated on the rest of the mechanism."

"Looks that way," mused Connel. "But there is still the possibility that
it was an accident, as the professor said."

Strong looked at Connel questioningly and then back to the wreckage. The
unit had been hurled from the upper deck of the spaceship, down to the
main deck, and it looked as if someone had trampled on its delicate
works.

[Illustration]

"I'll have a crew put right to work on this," said Hemmingwell.

"Commander," Connel suddenly announced, "I'm going ahead with my trip to
Mars to inspect the testing receivers. I don't think this incident is
serious enough for me to delay leaving, and if Professor Hemmingwell and
his men can get this unit back in operation in twelve hours, then
there's very little time lost and we can go ahead with the tests on
schedule."

"All right, Lou," said Walters. "Do whatever you think best. I'll have a
ship made ready for you at the Academy spaceport any time you want to
leave."

Connel nodded his thanks. "I think I'll take the _Polaris_, with Cadet
Corbett along as second pilot," he said. "I'm getting too old to make a
solo hop in a scout all the way to Mars. I need my rest." He grinned
slyly at Walters.

"Rest," Walters snorted. "If I know you, Lou Connel, you'll be up all
night working out standard operational procedures for the space
projectiles." He turned to Strong. "He's so sure this will work that
he's already writing a preliminary handbook for the enlisted personnel."

Strong turned and looked at the major, amazed. Every day he learned more
and more about the space-hardened veteran.

Connel turned to Strong. "Will you give Corbett the order to be ready at
0600 hours tomorrow morning, Steve?" he asked.

"Certainly, Lou," replied Strong.

As the major turned away, Walters called after him, "Take it easy."

Leaving Hemmingwell and Barret to take care of clearing away the
wreckage, Strong and Walters climbed out of the ship, left the hangar,
and headed for the Academy.

"Do you think it was sabotage, sir?" asked Strong, as they rode on the
slidewalk.

"I don't know, Steve," said the commander. "If that special unit of
Hemmingwell's had been damaged, I would say it might have been an
accident. But the things that were damaged would have put the whole
works out of commission if we didn't have that unit."

"Yes, sir," said Strong grimly. "So the man who did it thought he was
doing a complete job."

"Right," said Walters. "Assuming that it was sabotage."

"Anyone you suspect?"

"Not a living soul," replied Walters. "Every man in that hangar has been
carefully screened by our Security Section. Background, history,
everything. No, I think it really was an accident."

"Yes, sir," replied Strong, but not with the conviction he would like to
have felt.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pat Troy had been Professor Hemmingwell's foreman for nearly two years.
It was his job to read the complicated blueprints and keep the
construction and installation work proceeding on schedule. Troy lacked a
formal education, but nevertheless he could read and interpret the
complicated plans which the professor and his assistants drew up, and
transform their ideas into actual mechanical devices. Professor
Hemmingwell considered himself fortunate to have a man of Troy's ability
not only as a co-worker, but as a close friend.

But Dave Barret did not like Troy, and he made this dislike obvious by
giving Troy as much work as possible, mainly tasks that were beneath his
ability, claiming he only trusted the trained scientists. Barret put the
professor in the position of having to defend one to the other. He
needed both men, both being excellent in their respective fields, and
found it more and more difficult to maintain any kind of peaceful
relationship between them. Barret, as Hemmingwell's chief assistant and
supervisor of the project, was naturally superior in rank to Troy, and
made the most of it. A placid, easy-going man, Troy took Barret's gibes
and caustic comments in silence, doing his work and getting it finished
on time. But occasionally he had difficulty in controlling his
resentment.

The day after the accident, or sabotage attempt on the firing unit, the
hangar was quiet, most of the workers still being psychographed. Troy,
one of the first to be graphed, had been detained by the technicians
longer than usual, but was now back at his bench, working on the unit.
This incident gave Barret the opportunity he was looking for, and as he
and Professor Hemmingwell strode through the hangar, he commented
casually, "I hate to say this, sir, but I don't like the way Troy has
been acting lately."

"What do you mean, Dave?" asked Hemmingwell.

"I depend a great deal on instinct," replied Barret. "And as good as
Troy's work has been, I feel the man is hiding something."

"Come now, Dave," snorted the professor. "I've known him a long time. I
think you're being a little harsh."

As Barret shrugged and didn't reply, a troubled expression crossed
Hemmingwell's face. "But at the same time," he said slowly, "if you have
any reservations, I don't suppose it would hurt to keep an eye on him."

"Yes!" agreed Barret eagerly. "That's just what I was thinking."

They reached the workbench where Troy, a small man with powerful arms
and shoulders, was working on a complicated array of wires and vacuum
tubes. He looked up, nodded casually at the two men, and indicated the
instrument.

"Here it is, Professor," he said. "All ready to go. But I had a little
trouble fitting that coil where the blueprints called for it."

"Why?" Barret demanded. "I designed that coil myself. Isn't it a little
odd that a coil I designed, and the professor O.K.'d, should not fit?"

