Team, or toward Free Scientists as a class, or toward the
research-contract system. Nor do I need to point out that if he pressed
these charges against us, some of us could easily suffer death or
imprisonment."

"So he had to have a victim in a hurry, and pulled my name out of the
hat," Lowiewski sneered.

"I appreciate the gravity of the situation," Sir Neville Lawton said.
"And if the Sugihara Effect was among the data betrayed, I can
understand that nobody but one of us could have betrayed it. But why,
necessarily, should it be Adam? We all have unlimited access to all
records and theoretical data."

"Exactly. But collecting information is the smallest and easiest part of
espionage. Almost anybody can collect information. Where the spy really
earns his pay is in transmitting of information. Now, think of the
almost fantastic security measures in force here, and consider how you
would get such information, including masses of mathematical data beyond
any human power of memorization, out of this reservation."

"Ha, nobody can take anything out," Suzanne Maillard said. "Not even
one's breakfast. Is Adam accused of sorcery, too?"

"The only material things that are allowed to leave this reservation are
sealed cases of models and data shipped to the different development
plants. And the Sugihara Effect never was reported, and wouldn't go out
that way," Heym ben-Hillel objected.

"But the data on the Sugihara Effect reached Smolensk," MacLeod replied.
"And don't talk about Darwin and Wallace: it wasn't a coincidence. This
stuff was taken out of the Tonto Basin Reservation by the only person
who could have done so, in the only way that anything could leave the
reservation without search. So I had that person shadowed, and at the
same time I had our telephone lines tapped, and eavesdropped on all
calls entering or leaving this center. And the person who had to be the
spy-courier called Adam Lowiewski, and Lowiewski made an appointment to
meet him at the Oppenheimer Village Recreation House to play chess."

"Very suspicious, very suspicious," Lowiewski derided. "I receive a call
from a friend at the same time that some anonymous suspect is using the
phone. There are only five hundred telephone conversations a minute on
this reservation."

"Immediately, Dr. Lowiewski attempted to leave this building," MacLeod
went on. "When I intercepted him, he tried to draw a pistol. This one."
He exhibited the Beretta. "I am now going to have Dr. Lowiewski
searched, in the presence of all of you." He nodded to Alex and the
Englishman.

       *       *       *       *       *

They did their work thoroughly. A pile of Lowiewski's pocket effects was
made on the table; as each item was added to it, the Pole made some
sarcastic comment.

"And that pack of cigarettes: unopened," he jeered. "I suppose I
communicated the data to the manufacturers by telepathy, and they
printed it on the cigarette papers in invisible ink."

"Maybe not. Maybe you opened the pack, and then resealed it," Kato
suggested. "A heated spatula under the cellophane; like this."

He used the point of his knife to illustrate. The cellophane came
unsealed with surprising ease: so did the revenue stamp. He dumped out
the contents of the pack: sixteen cigarettes, four cigarette tip-ends,
four bits snapped from the other ends--and a small aluminum microfilm
capsule.

Lowiewski's face twitched. For an instant, he tried vainly to break
loose from the men who held him. Then he slumped into a chair. Heym
ben-Hillel gasped in shocked surprise. Suzanne Maillard gave a short,
felinelike cry. Sir Neville Lawton looked at the capsule curiously and
said: "Well, my sainted Aunt Agatha!"

"That's the capsule I gave him, at noon," Farida Khouroglu exclaimed,
picking it up. She opened it and pulled out a roll of colloidex
projection film. There was also a bit of cigarette paper in the capsule,
upon which a notation had been made in Kyrilic characters.

Rudolf von Heldenfeld could read Russian. "'Data on new development of
photon-neutrino-electron interchange. 22 July, '65. Vladmir.' Vladmir, I
suppose, is this _schweinhund's_ code name," he added.

The film and the paper passed from hand to hand. The other members of
the Team sat down; there was a tendency to move away from the chair
occupied by Adam Lowiewski. He noticed this and sneered.

"Afraid of contamination from the moral leper?" he asked. "You were glad
enough to have me correct your stupid mathematical errors."

Kato Sugihara picked up the capsule, took a final glance at the
cigarette pack, and said to MacLeod: "I'll be back as soon as this is
done." With that, he left the room, followed by Bertie Wooster and the
Greek.

       *       *       *       *       *

Heym ben-Hillel turned to the others: his eyes had the hurt and puzzled
look of a dog that has been kicked for no reason. "But why did he do
this?" he asked.

"He just told you," MacLeod replied. "He's the great Adam Lowiewski.
Checking math for a physics-research team is beneath his dignity. I
suppose the Komintern offered him a professorship at Stalin University."
He was watching Lowiewski's face keenly. "No," he continued. "It was
probably the mathematics chair of the Soviet Academy of Sciences."

"But who was this person who could smuggle microfilm out of the
reservation?" Suzanne Maillard wanted to know. "Somebody has invented
teleportation, then?"

MacLeod shook his head. "It was General Nayland's chauffeur. It had to
be. General Nayland's car is the only thing that gets out of here
without being searched. The car itself is serviced at Army vehicles
pool; nobody could hide anything in it for a confederate to pick up
outside. Nayland is a stuffed shirt of the first stuffing, and a tinpot
Hitler to boot, but he is fanatically and incorruptibly patriotic. That
leaves the chauffeur. When Nayland's in the car, nobody even sees him;
he might as well be a robot steering-device. Old case of Father Brown's
Invisible Man. So, since he had to be the courier, all I did was have
Ahmed Abd-el-Rahman shadow him, and at the same time tap our phones.
When he contacted Lowiewski, I knew Lowiewski was our traitor."

Sir Neville Lawton gave a strangling laugh. "Oh, my dear Aunt Fanny! And
Nayland goes positively crackers on security. He gets goose pimples
every time he hears somebody saying 'E = mc^{2}', for fear a Komintern
spy might hear him. It's a wonder he hasn't put the value of Planck's
Constant on the classified list. He sets up all these fantastic search
rooms and barriers, and then he drives through the gate, honking his
bloody horn, with his chauffeur's pockets full of top secrets. Now I've
seen everything!"

"Not quite everything," MacLeod said. "Kato's going to put that capsule
in another cigarette pack, and he'll send one of his lab girls to
Oppenheimer Village with it, with a message from Lowiewski to the effect
that he couldn't get away. And when this chauffeur takes it out, he'll
run into a Counter Espionage road-block on the way to town. They'll
shoot him, of course, and they'll probably transfer Nayland to the
Mississippi Valley Flood Control Project, where he can't do any more
damage. At least, we'll have him out of our hair."

"If we have any hair left," Heym ben-Hillel gloomed. "You've got Nayland
into trouble, but you haven't got us out of it."
