about the enterprise of our manufacturers and the skill of our
workmen; but if what I have shown to you is to be taken as a specimen,
it is time we set our house in order. Since commencing the paper I
have read the discussion between Messrs. Chubb and Hill, and am at a
loss to know why Messrs. Chubb entered into the arena. If all the
English makers tried to reach Chubb's standard we should keep our
markets, at least so far as high quality is concerned; and to see
Messrs. Chubb acting as champions of the English lockmakers is
something like seeing Messrs. Horrocks taking up the cudgels for those
people who manufacture china clay and call it calico, the proportion
of fiber in the material being just a little greater than that found
in hair mortar.

In conclusion, I wish it to be understood that I bring these facts
before you in no exultant spirit. I am an Englishman, and the future
welfare of myself and my children depends very much upon the future of
English manufactures; but we cannot be blind to the fact that the
apathy and conservatism of our manufacturers, the greed of our
Merchants, and the ignorance and drunkenness of our workmen, are
weighing us so heavily in the race for trade that a member of our own
family, whose leading business should be to produce food for us, is
outstripping us with the greatest ease. Our boasted supremacy as a
manufacturing people is leaving us, and leaving us under such
humiliating circumstances--and if the men of Birmingham and the
district are content to dwell in their present "fools' paradise," it
is the duty of every lover of his country to speak as plainly as
possible to them.

Of course I am prepared to be told that as I am not a lockmaker my
opinion is worthless; but I have been about 28 years as man and boy,
employer and workman, in the building trade, and if I have not got to
know something about builders' hardware during that period, I have
made but a poor use of my time. I do not know if I have added to your
stock of knowledge, but deeming the subject an important one, I have
done the best I could in the time at my disposal.

In the discussion which followed the opinion of the members present
was unanimously in favor of the American articles shown to them.

       *       *       *       *       *


A high Indian official reports that the people of Cashmere are dying
of famine like flies, and at the present rate of mortality the
province will be nearly depopulated by the end of the year.

       *       *       *       *       *




TO INVENTORS.


An experience of more than thirty years, and the preparation of not
less than one hundred thousand applications for patents at home and
abroad, enable us to understand the laws and practice on both
continents, and to possess unequaled facilities for procuring patents
everywhere. In addition to our facilities for preparing drawings and
specifications quickly, the applicant can rest assured that his case
will be filed in the Patent Office without delay. Every application,
in which the fees have been paid, is sent complete--including the
model--to the Patent Office the same day the papers are signed at our
office, or received by mail, so there is no delay in filing the case,
a complaint we often hear from other sources. Another advantage to the
inventor in securing his patent through the Scientific American Patent
Agency, it insures a special notice of the invention in the SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN, which publication often opens negotiations for the sale of
the patent or manufacture of the article. A synopsis of the patent
laws in foreign countries may be found on another page, and persons
contemplating the securing of patents abroad are invited to write to
this office for prices, which have been reduced in accordance with the
times, and our perfected facilities for conducting the business.
Address MUNN & CO., office SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.

       *       *       *       *       *




BUSINESS AND PERSONAL.


_The Charge for Insertion under this head is One Dollar a line for
each insertion; about eight words to a line. Advertisements must be
received at publication office as early as Thursday morning to appear
in next issue._

Valves and Hydrants, warranted to give perfect satisfaction. Chapman
Valve Manuf. Co., Boston, Mass.

Brown & Sharpe, Prov., R. I. Best Gear Teeth Cutters and Index Plates
at low prices. Send for catalogue.

Wanted--Galvanic Battery, Induction Coil, Electro-Magnet. Address,
with description and price, Box 1700, Boston, Mass.

New Steam Governor.--Entire right for $3,000. For circulars address E.
Towns, Cisne, Ill.

Gutta Percha, pure and sheeted, for sale in quantities to suit.
Anderson & Reynolds, Salem, Mass.

The new fragrant Vanity Fair Cigarettes. New combinations of rare Old
Perique and Virginia.

Wanted--Second-hand Corliss Engine, 100 to 125 H. P. Address P. O. Box
1208, New Haven, Conn.

17 and 20 in. Gibed Rest Screw Lathes. Geo. S. Lincoln, Hartford,
Conn.

"Downer's Anti-Incrustation Liquid" for Removal and Prevention of
Scales in Steam Boilers, is spoken of in highest terms by those who
have given it a thorough trial. Circulars and price lists furnished on
application. A. H. Downer, 17 Peck Slip, New York.

Mr. W. B. Adams, one of the most extensive contractors and decorators
in this city, says he has used nearly fifty thousand gallons of H. W.
Johns' Asbestos Liquid Paints, and after an experience of twenty years
with white lead and other paints, he considers them not only superior
in richness of color and durability, but owing to their wonderful
covering properties, they are fully 20 per cent more economical than
any others.

New Pamphlet of "Burnham's Standard Turbine Wheel" sent free by N. F.
Burnham, York, Pa.

Gaume's Electric Engine. 171 Pearl St., B'klyn, N. Y.

Engines, 1/2 to 5 H. P. G. F. Shedd, Waltham, Mass.

Clipper Injector. J. D. Lynde, Philadelphia, Pa.

Diamond Drills, J. Dickinson, 64 Nassau St., N. Y.

Eagle Anvils, 9 cents per pound. Fully warranted.

Case Hardening Preparation. Box 73, Willimantic, Ct.

Vertical Burr Mill. C. K. Bullock, Phila., Pa.

Sheet Metal Presses, Ferracute Co., Bridgeton, N. J.

Mundy's Pat. Friction Hoist. Eng., of any power, double and single.
Said by all to be the best. J. S. Mundy, Newark, N. J.

Auction Sale.--The Machinery and Property of the well known Hardie's
Machine Works, 62 and 64 Church St., Albany, N. Y., will be sold March
26, at noon. No postponement.

To Manufacturers or Capitalists.--A rare chance to control a valuable
agricultural patented implement. Address S. A. Fisher, Maplewood,
Mass.

Reflecting Telescope, 61/2 inches aperture, well mounted, price
only $70. J. Ramsden, Philadelphia, Pa.

See Hogins' Laundry Table, illustrated on page 194. State, Canada, and
entire right for sale.

Emery.--Best Turkey Emery in bbls., kegs, and cases in quantities to
suit. Greene, Tweed & Co., 18 Park Place, N. Y.

The SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN Export Edition is published monthly, about the
15th of each month. Every number comprises most of the plates of the
four preceding weekly numbers of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, with other
appropriate contents, business announcements, etc. It forms a large
and splendid periodical of nearly one hundred quarto pages, each
number illustrated with about one hundred engravings. It is a complete
record of American progress in the arts.

Gold, Silver, and Nickel Plater wants situation. Address Plater,
Oakville, Conn.

Amateur Photo. Apparatus, including instructions; outfits complete. E.
Sackmann & Co., 278 Pearl St., N. Y.

Outfits for Nickel and Silver Plating, $5 to $200. Union Silver
Plating Company, Princeton, Ill.

Send for Circulars of Indestructible Boot and Shoe Soles to H. C.
Goodrich, 40 Hoyne Ave., Chicago, Ill.

For Sale.--Brown & Sharp Universal Milling Machine; Bement Profiling
Machine; first-class 2d hand Machine Tools. E. P. Bullard, 14 Dey St.,
New York.

For Sale.--7 foot bed Putnam Planer, $350. A. A. Pool & Co., Newark,
N. J.

Bevins & Co.'s Hydraulic Elevator. Great power, simplicity, safety,
economy, durability. 94 Liberty St. N. Y.

A Cupola works best with forced blast from a Baker Blower. Wilbraham
Bros., 2,318 Frankford Ave., Phila.

Shaw's Noise Quieting Nozzles and Mercury Pressure Gauges. T. Shaw,
915 Ridge Ave., Philadelphia, Pa.

For Solid Wrought Iron Beams, etc., see advertisement. Address Union
Iron Mills, Pittsburgh, Pa., for lithograph, etc.

H. Prentiss & Company, 14 Dey St., N. Y., Manufs. Taps, Dies, Screw
Plates, Reamers, etc. Send for list.

Presses, Dies, and Tools for working Sheet Metal, etc. Fruit & other
can tools. Bliss & Williams, B'klyn, N. Y.

Nickel Plating.--A white deposit guaranteed by using our material.
Condit, Hanson & Van Winkle, Newark, N. J.

Hydraulic Elevators for private houses, hotels, and public buildings.
Burdon Iron Works, Brooklyn, N. Y.

The Lathes, Planers, Drills, and other Tools, new and second-hand, of
the Wood & Light Machine Company, Worcester, are to be sold out very
low by the George Place Machinery Agency, 121 Chambers St., New York.

Hydraulic Presses and Jacks, new and second hand. Lathes and Machinery
for Polishing and Buffing Metals E. Lyon & Co., 470 Grand St., N. Y.

Solid Emery Vulcanite Wheels--The Solid Original Emery Wheel--other
kinds imitations and inferior. Caution.--Our name is stamped in full
on all our best Standard Belting, Packing, and Hose. Buy that only.
The best is the cheapest. New York Belting and Packing Company, 37 and
38 Park Row, N. Y.

Pulverizing Mills for all hard substances and grinding purposes.
Walker Bros. & Co., 23d & Wood St., Phila., Pa.

Portland Cement--Roman & Keene's, for walks, cisterns, foundations,
stables, cellars, bridges, reservoirs, breweries, etc. Remit 25 cents
postage stamps for Practical Treatise on Cements. S. L. Merchant &
Co., 53 Broadway, New York.

Needle Pointed Iron, Brass, and Steel Wire for all purposes. W. Crabb,
Newark, N. J.

Manufacturers of Improved Goods who desire to build up a lucrative
foreign trade, will do well to insert a well displayed advertisement
in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN Export Edition. This paper has a very large
foreign circulation.

Band Saws, $100; Scroll Saws, $75; Planers, $150; Universal Wood
Workers and Hand Planers, $150, and upwards. Bentel, Margedant & Co.,
Hamilton, Ohio.

The best Friction Clutch Pulley and Friction Hoisting Machinery in the
world, to be seen with power applied, 95 and 97 Liberty St., New York.
D. Frisbie & Co., New Haven, Conn.

C. M. Flint, Fitchburg, Mass., Mfr. of Saw Mills and Dogs, Shingle and
Clapboard Machines. Circulars.

Blake's Belt Studs; strongest, cheapest, and best fastening for
Leather or Rubber Belts. Greene, Tweed & Co., New York.

No gum! No grit! No acid! Anti-Corrosive Cylinder Oil is the best in
the world, and the first and only oil that perfectly lubricates a
railroad locomotive cylinder, doing it with half the quantity required
of best lard or tallow, giving increased power and less wear to
machinery, with entire freedom from gum, stain, or corrosion of any
sort, and it is equally superior for all steam cylinders or heavy work
where body or cooling qualities are indispensable. A fair trial
insures its continued use. Address E. H. Kellogg, sole manufacturer,
17 Cedar St., New York.

The unprecedented demand for Kinney Bros.' New Cigarette, Sweet
Caporal, is a good recommendation as to their merit.

Wheels and Pinions, heavy and light, remarkably strong and durable.
Especially suited for sugar mills and similar work. Pittsburgh Steel
Casting Company, Pittsburgh, Pa.

Deoxidized Bronze. Patent for machine and engine journals.
Philadelphia Smelting Co., Phila., Pa.

For Sale.--4 H. P. Vertical Engine and Boiler (New York Safety Steam
Power Co.'s make), as good, and in some respects better, than new.
Address H. M. Quackenbush, Herkimer, N. Y.

Wood-working Machinery, Waymouth Lathes. Specialty, Wardwell Patent
Saw Bench; it has no equal. Improved Patent Planers; Elevators; Dowel
Machines. Rollstone Machine Company, Fitchburg, Mass.

Galland & Co.'s improved Hydraulic Elevators. Office 206 Broadway, N.
Y., (Evening Post Building, room 22.)

The only economical and practical Gas Engine in the market is the new
"Otto" Silent, built by Schleicher. Schumm & Co., Philadelphia, Pa.
Send for circular.

Dead Pulleys that stop the running of loose pulleys and their belts,
controlled from any point. Send for catalogue. Taper Sleeve Pulley
Works, Erie, Pa.

_Vick's Illustrated Monthly Magazine_ is one of the most beautiful
magazines in the world. Each number contains a chromo of some group of
flowers, and many fine engravings. Published monthly at $1.25 per
year. Address James Vick, Rochester, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: Notes and Queries]

NOTES & QUERIES


HINTS TO CORRESPONDENTS.

No attention will be paid to communications unless accompanied with
the full name and address of the writer.

Names and addresses of correspondents will not be given to inquirers.

We renew our request that correspondents, in referring to former
answers or articles, will be kind enough to name the date of the paper
and the page, or the number of the question.

Correspondents whose inquiries do not appear after a reasonable time
should repeat them.

Persons desiring special information which is purely of a personal
character, and not of general interest, should remit from $1 to $5,
according to the subject, as we cannot be expected to spend time and
labor to obtain such information without remuneration.

       *       *       *       *       *

(1) S. Q.--The speed of a circular saw at the periphery should be from
6,000 to 7,000 feet per minute. The number of revolutions per minute
will of course vary with the diameter of the saw.

(2) T. J. F. asks (1) for the best way to fasten emery on a wooden
wheel, to be used in place of a solid emery wheel. A. Cover the wheel
with leather devoid of grease, and coat the leather surface, a portion
at a time, with good glue; immediately roll the glued surface in emery
spread out on a board. 2. How can I fasten small pieces of looking
glass on iron? A. Use equal parts of pitch and gutta percha together.

(3) W. C. asks: 1. What is the power of the simple electric light
described in SUPPLEMENT NO. 149? A. When supplied with a strong
current it is equal to 5 or 6 5-foot gas burners. It is designed for
temporary use only. 2. What is the cost of manufacturing the
dynamo-electric machine in SUPPLEMENT NO. 161? A. The one shown in the
article referred to cost about $35.

(4) L. D. asks: 1. Which is the better conductor, silver or copper? A.
Silver. 2. And the comparative resistance offered to the electric
current by water and the above? A. Taking pure silver as 100,000,000,
the conductivity of distilled water would be 0.01.

(5) H. J. F. writes: In SUPPLEMENT 162 a simple electric light is
described. I wish to light a room 20x20x10 feet. 1. How large is the
bell glass? A. 21/2 inches. 2. Can I use battery carbon? A. Use a
carbon pencil made for electric lamps. 3. How can I make tray water
tight after putting wire through? A. With gutta percha. 4. I have one
large cell Bunsen and one Smee. How many more and of what kind shall I
get? A. One of the batteries described in SUPPLEMENTS 157, 158, 159,
will do, probably 8 or 10 Bunsen elements would be the best.

(6) W. B. F. writes: I tried to make an electric pen, like the one
described in your SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, of February 22d, 1879, using a
Smee's battery, a circuit breaker, and an induction coil, but it did
not work. Is there anything wrong, or is a condenser different from an
induction coil? A. A condenser consists of a number of sheets of tin
foil separated from each other by larger sheets of paper. One half of
the tin foil sheets are connected with one terminal of the primary
coil, the other half with the other terminal; the tin foil sheets
connected with one terminal alternate with those of the other
terminal. The condenser is essential to the working of the coil. For
complete directions for making induction coils, see SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT NO. 160.

(7) J. De F. asks: 1. Knowing the resistance of a wire of given
conductivity, length, and diameter, will the resistance of any other
wire be in proportion inversely? A. Yes. 2. Is there heat enough
developed in the secondary coil of an induction coil to prevent the
use of paraffine as an insulating material? A. With proper battery
power, no. 3. How high in the list of non-conductors does paraffine
stand? A. It is one of the best. 4. Will a cotton insulator soaked in
paraffine answer as well as silk? A. No, because it renders the
covering of the wire too thick. 5. Can you recommend any insulating
material for making induction coils which will dry rapidly? A.
Alcoholic shellac varnish. Rosin to which a little beeswax has been
added is an excellent insulator; it must be applied in a melted state.
6. What is the composition of the black material covering the
Leclanche porous cell? A. Gutta percha. 7. Is the magneto-electric
machine described in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT patented? A.
To which do you refer? Most, if not all of them are patented.

(8) B. V. F. writes: With reference to item 8, on page 139, of
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, March 1, 1879, I think there is some mistake
about the coal you think required to heat 1,000 cubic feet space. I
burn some 8 tons coal to heat, in the whole year, such part of my
house as must exceed 25x20x18=9,000 cubic feet. We keep up a moderate
heat at night. Ventilate more than most families do; take part only of
the cool air, and only in part of the coldest weather, from the
cellar, which at such times is opened into the main entries. House
wood, back plastered, and stands alone. If 100 lbs. coal would heat
1,000 feet one day, I ought to burn 900 lbs. a day, or nearly 14 tons
in December and 14 more in January. A. We are glad to receive these
data, which correspond quite closely with some obtained by recent
accurate experiments. The estimate given in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN
also agrees well with experiments on the use of hot air heaters for
very small buildings or rooms. Of course, the larger the space to be
heated, the more economically it can generally be done.

(9) W. M. S. asks: Will the coil described in SUPPLEMENT NO. 160 do
for the electric pen described in a recent number of the SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN? If not how must it be changed? A. It is too large; make it
one half the size given.

[Illustration]

(10) B. G.--In reply to your inquiry as to Mr. Stroh's telephone
experiment, we give the following, which we clip from the _English
Mechanic_: A singular experimental effect, of special interest just
now from its possible bearing on the theory of the source of sound in
the Bell telephone, has just been observed by Mr. Stroh, the well
known mechanician. If a telephone, T, with the circuit of its coil
left open, be held to the ear, and a powerful magnet, M, be moved
gently up and down along the length of the magnet, as shown by the
arrow, and at a distance of an inch or two from it, a faint breathing
sound will be heard, the recurring pulses of sound keeping time with
the up and down motion of the magnet. The sound may be aptly compared
to the steady breathing of a child, and there is a striking
resemblance between it and the microphonic sounds of gases diffusing
through a porous septum as heard by Mr. Chandler Roberts. We
understand that Professor Hughes is investigating the cause of this
curious sound by help of the microphone.

(11) "Enterprise" asks: What part of its volume will iron expand in
passing from a temperature of 60 deg. to melting temperature? A. The
cubical expansion of iron for each degree (C.) between 0 deg. and 100 deg. is
0.00003546 of its volume, its volume being 1. This ratio however,
increases somewhat at higher temperatures, since the mean coefficient
of expansion for each degree between 0 deg. C. and 300 deg. C. is 0.00004405.
The question you ask has probably never been settled. You may form an
approximation by the use of the above ratios, knowing the melting
point of the iron.

(12) P. L. O. asks for a good chemistry for a beginner to study
without a teacher. A. Fownes' "Chemistry;" Gorup-Besanez, "Inorganic,
Organic and Physiological Chemistry."

(13) L. E. M. asks: What is the best method of keeping fine guns from
rusting, and what oil should be used? A. For the outside, clear gum
copal 1 part, oil of rosemary 1 part, absolute alcohol 3 parts. Clean
and heat the metal and apply a flowing coat of the liquid by means of
a camel's hair brush. Do not handle until the coat becomes dry and
hard. For the inside of the barrel a trace of refined sperm oil is as
good as anything, but an excess should be avoided.

(14) A. H. B. asks how much weight, falling 10 feet, will be required
to produce one horse power for five hours? A. One horse power for 5
hours = 33,000 x 300 = 9,900,000 foot pounds--so that the weight
required is 9,900,000 / 10 = 990,000 lbs.

(15) A. D. R. asks: 1. In renewing a Leclanche battery, do the zincs
have to be amalgamated? A. They are usually amalgamated. 2. Will two
cells large size Leclanche battery give any light, using the simple
lamp described in SUPPLEMENT NO. 162? A. No.

(16) H. L. J. writes: In a recent issue of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN you
state that the floating of solid iron on melted iron is on the same
principle as the floating of ice in water. I do not quite understand
how it can be. Please explain. A. Solid iron, at an elevated
temperature, floats upon molten iron for the same reason that ice
floats upon molten ice-water--because it is specifically lighter. You
will find the subject discussed at length in Tyndall's "Heat as a Mode
of Motion."

(17) J. W. will find full directions for canning corn, etc., on p. 394
(4), vol. 39, SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.

(18) "Amateur" writes: I wish to make some small bells that have a
clear ring. What metal or metals can I use that I can melt easily? A.
Use an alloy of tin and antimony. See SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT
NO. 17.

(19) H.--A nutritious mixed diet is unquestionably the best, care
being taken to avoid an excess of meat.

(20) W. F. writes: I have made an engine, and would like to find out
what size of boiler it will require. The cylinder has 21/4 inch bore and
3 inches stroke. A. It depends upon pressure and speed to be
maintained; probably a vertical tubular boiler, 15 inches diameter,
and 32 to 36 inches high, would suit you.

(21) R. G. (Salt Lake).--Please send full name.

(22) J. M. G. asks: If two persons each pull one hundred pounds on
opposite ends of a rope, what will be the strain on the rope? A. The
strain on the rope will be 100 lbs.

(23) W. M. M. asks: In laying off a mill stone in furrows, what
draught is given? What amount of the space of a stone is given to
furrows and what to grinding surface? A. There is considerable
difference in the practice of various millers, and we would be glad to
receive communications from those experienced in the art of dressing
millstones.

MINERALS, ETC.--Specimens have been received from the following
correspondents, and examined, with the results stated:

S. (New Orleans.)--The powder consists of a mixture of zinc oxide and
finely powdered resin. A quantitative analysis would be necessary to
determine the proportions.

Any numbers of the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT referred to in these
columns may be had at this office. Price 10 cents each.

       *       *       *       *       *


COMMUNICATIONS RECEIVED.

  Life Preserving Stone. By J. D. W.
  On Ventilation. By D. W.
  What is Mental Action? By N. K.
  Panama Railroad or Canal. By G. R. P.
  A Problem. By K.
  On the Gary Motor. By G. F. M.
  Magnetic Motor. By G. W. W., W. A. A., G. H. F.
  House Warming. By H. B. F.
  The Injector. By M. A. B.
  Columbus' Problem; Cure for Diphtheria; The Mullein
  Cure for Consumption. By R. W. L.
  A Visit to Tula. By L. R.
  On Vacuum in Pumps and the Atwood Machine. By P. J. D.
  On the Patent Bill. By R.

       *       *       *       *       *

[OFFICIAL.]




INDEX OF INVENTIONS

FOR WHICH

LETTERS PATENT OF THE UNITED STATES WERE GRANTED IN THE WEEK ENDING

February 18, 1879,

AND EACH BEARING THAT DATE.

[Those marked (r) are reissued patents.]

A complete copy of any patent in the annexed list, including both the
specifications and drawings, will be furnished from this office for
one dollar. In ordering, please state the number and date of the
patent desired, and remit to Munn & Co., 37 Park Row, New York city.


  Air heater, W. Pickhardt                                        212,499
  Anchor, A. F. White                                             212,340
  Animal trap, S. J. Bennett                                      212,430
  Axle box, vehicle, P. K. Hughes                                 212,382
  Axle, carriage, C. H. Kendall                                   212,387
  Axle for wagons, trussed, J. Herby                              212,378
  Axle, vehicle, C. H. Kendall                                    212,386
  Barrel cover, C. Brinton                                        212,350
  Bed bottom, J. Flinn                                            212,451
  Bed bottom, spring, W. B. Crich                                 212,443
  Bedstead, sofa, A. N. Hornung                                   212,312
  Bedstead, wardrobe, H. P. Blackman                              212,348
  Belt hook templet, E. Card                                      212,353
  Boot and shoe laster, L. Graf                                   212,460
  Boot and shoe sole polisher, etc., O. Gilmore                   212,372
  Boot and shoe sole edge trimmer, C. H. Helms                    212,311
  Boot fronts, cutting in, C. H. Colburn                          212,357
  Boot, India-rubber, G. Watkinson (r)                              8,587
  Bottle filler, W. S. Paddock                                    212,494
  Bread board, H. Van Doren                                       212,334
  Brick, shed for drying, C. H. Roselius                          212,511
  Bridge gate, A. Stempel                                         212,329
  Broom corn tabler, G. W. Foulger                                212,454
  Button F. E. Williams                                           212,418
  Calculator, tax, P. F. Pettibone                                212,498
  Car coupling, G. R. Hamilton                                    212,462
  Car coupling, S. A. Haydock                                     212,464
  Car coupling, J. Worrall                                        212,529
  Car heaters, coupling for pipes of railway, J. W. Graydon       212,376
  Car heater, railway, J. W. Graydon                              212,375
  Car heating pipe coupling, railway, J. W. Graydon               212,374
  Car ventilation, J. Knipscheer                                  212,475
  Cars, heating, J. & J. W. Russell                               212,403
  Cars, supplying water to wash stands on, D. H. Jones            212,385
