fare, but the sure touch of Mrs. Hill's cooking and the free use of
delicate Venusian jungle spices added exotic flavor, new but immensely
satisfying to the three hungry boys, a satisfaction they demonstrated by
cleaning their plates quickly and coming back for second helpings.
Astro, of course, was not happy until he had polished off his fourth
round. Mrs. Hill beamed with pleasure at their unspoken compliment to
her cooking.

After the meal, Mrs. Hill stacked the dishes and put them into a small
carrier concealed in the wall. Pressing a button, near the opening, she
explained, "That dingus takes them to the sink, washes them, dries them,
and puts everything in its right place. That's the kind of modern living
I like!"

As the sun dropped behind the wall of the jungle and the sky darkened,
they all relaxed. Sinclair and George smoked contentedly, Mrs. Hill
brought out some needle point, and the three cadets rested in
comfortable contour chairs. They chatted idly, stopping only to listen
to the wild calls of birds and animals out in the jungle as George, or
Sinclair, identified them all. George told of his experiences on
tyrannosaurus hunts, and Astro described his method of hunting as a boy.

"I was a big kid," he explained. "And since the only way of earning a
living was by working, I found I could combine business with pleasure. I
used to hitch rides over the belt and parachute in to hunt for baby
tyrannos." He grinned and added, "When I think back, I wonder how I ever
stayed in one piece."

"Land sakes!" exclaimed Mrs. Hill. "It's a wonder you weren't eaten
alive! Those tyrannos are horrible things."

"I was almost a meal once," confessed Astro sheepishly, and at the
urging of the others he described the incident that had cured him of
hunting alone in the jungles of Venus with only a low-powered shock
blaster.

"If I didn't get it at the base of the brain where the nerve centers
aren't so well protected with the first shot, I was in trouble," he
said. "I took a lot of chances, but was careful not to tangle with a
mama or papa tyrannosaurus. I'd stalk the young ones. I'd wait for him
to feed and then let him have it. If I was lucky, I'd get him with one
shot, but most of the time I'd just stun him and have to finish him off
with a second blast. Then I'd skin him, take the hams and shoulders, and
get out of there fast before the wild dogs got wind of the blood. I'd
usually hunt pretty close to a settlement where I could get the meat
frozen. After that, I'd just have to call a couple of the big
restaurants in Venusport and get the best price. I used to make as much
as fifty credits on one kill."

"How would you get the meat to Venusport?" asked Roger, who, for all his
braggadocio, was awed by his unit mate's calm bravery and skill as a
hunter.

"The restaurant that bought it would send a jet boat out for it and I'd
ride back with it. After a while the restaurant owners got to know me
and would give me regular orders. I was trying to fill a special order
on that last hunt."

"What happened?" asked Tom, equally impressed with Astro's life as a boy
hunter.

"I had just about finished hunting in a section near a little settlement
on the other side of Venus," began the big cadet, "but I thought there
might be one more five-hundred-pound baby around, so I dropped in."
Astro paused and grinned. "I didn't find a baby, I found his mother! She
must have weighed twenty-five or thirty tons. Biggest tyranno I've ever
seen. She spotted me the same time I saw her and I didn't even stop to
fire. I never could have dented her hide. I started running and she came
after me. I made it to a cave and went as far back inside as I could.
She stuck her head in after me, and by the craters of Luna, she was only
about three feet away, with me backed up against a wall. She tried to
get farther in, opened her mouth, and snapped and roared like twenty
rocket cruisers going off at once."

[Illustration: "_She tried to get farther into the cave._"]

Tom gulped and Roger's eyes widened.

"I figured there was only one thing to do," continued Astro. "Use the
blaster, even though it couldn't do much damage. I let her have one
right in the eye!" Astro shook his head and laughed. "You should have
seen her pull her head out of that cave! I couldn't sleep for months
after that. I used to dream that she was sticking her head in my window,
always getting closer."

"Did the blaster do any damage at all?" asked Sinclair.

"Oh, yes, sir," said Astro. "I was close enough for the heat charge from
the muzzle to get her on the side of the head. Nothing fatal, but she's
probably still out there in the jungle more ugly than ever with half a
face."

The group fell silent, each thinking of how he would have reacted under
similar conditions; each silently thankful that it hadn't happened to
him. Finally Mrs. Hill rose and said good night, and George excused
himself to take a last look at the stock. Remembering their early call
for the next morning, the cadets said good night to Sinclair and retired
to their comfortable rooms. In bed at last, each boy stretched full
length on his bed and in no time was sound asleep.

It was still dark, an hour and a half before the sun would burst over
the top of the jungle, when Sinclair went to the cadets' room to rouse
them. He found them already up and dressed in their jungle garb. Each
boy was wearing skin-tight trousers and jerseys made of double strength
space-suit cloth and colored a dark moldy green. A hunter dressed in
this manner and standing still could not be seen at twenty paces. The
snug fit of the suit was protection against thorns and snags that could
find no hold on the hard, smooth-surfaced material.

After a hearty breakfast the three cadets collected their gear, the
paralo-ray pistols, the shock rifles, and the small shoulder packs of
synthetic food and camping equipment. Each boy also carried a two-foot
jungle knife with a compass inlaid in the handle. A helmet of clear
plastic with a small mesh-covered opening in the face covered each boy's
head. Dressed as they were, they could walk through the worst part of
the jungles and not get so much as a scratch.

"Well," commented Sinclair, looking them over, "I guess you boys have
everything. I'd hate to be the tyranno that crosses your path!"

The boys grinned. "Thanks for everything, sir," said Tom. "You've been a
lot of help."

"Think nothing of it, Tom. Just bring back a pair of tyranno scalps!"

"Where are Mr. and Mrs. Hill?" asked Astro. "We'd like to say good-by to
them."

"They left before you got up," replied Sinclair. "They're taking a few
days off for a visit to Venusport."

The boys pulled on their jungle boots. Knee-length and paper-thin, they
were nonetheless unpenetrable even if the boys should step on one of the
needle-sharp ground thorns.

They waved a last good-by to their host, standing on the steps of the
big house, and moved across the clearing to the edge of the jungle wall.

As the cadets approached the thick tangle of vines, the calls and
rustling noises from the many crawling things hidden in the forbidding
thicket slowly died down. They walked along the edge of the tangle of
jungle creepers until they found an opening and stepped through.

[Illustration: _They were completely surrounded by the jungle_]

After walking only ten feet they were completely surrounded by the
jungle and could not even see the clearing they had just left. It was
dark, the network of vines, the thick tree trunks and rank growing
vegetation shutting out the sun, leaving the interior of the jungle
strangely plunged in gloom. Astro moved ahead, followed by Roger, with
Tom bringing up the rear. They followed the path they had entered, as
far as it went, and then began cutting their way through the underbrush,
stopping only to cut notches in the trees to mark their passage.

Their long-bladed knives slicing through vines and brush easily, Tom,
Roger, and Astro hacked their way deeper and deeper into the mysterious
and suffocating green world.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER 6


"I guess that's the Sharkey place over there," mumbled Major Connel to
himself, banking his jet launch over the green jungles and pointing the
speedy little craft's nose toward the clearing in the distance. The
Solar Guard officer wrenched the scout around violently in his approach.
He was still boiling over the Venusian Delegate's indifference toward
his mission.

The launch skimmed the jungle treetops and glided to a perfect stop near
the largest of a group of farm buildings. Cutting the motors, Connel sat
and waited for someone to appear. He sat there for ten minutes but no
one came out to greet him. Finally he climbed out of the launch and
stood by the hatch, peering intently at the buildings around him, his
eyes squinting against the glare of the fiery sun overhead. The
plantation seemed deserted. Reaching back into the launch and pulling
out a paralo-ray gun, he strapped its reassuring bulk to his side and
stepped toward the building that was obviously the main house. Nothing
else moved in the hot noon sun.

As he strode purposefully toward the house, eyes alert for any sign of
life, he thought for a moment everyone might be taking a midday nap.
Many of the Venusian colonists adapted the age-old custom of the tropics
to escape the intense heat of midday. But he dismissed the thought
immediately, realizing that his approach in the jet would have awakened
the deepest of sleepers.

Entering the house, he stopped in the spacious front hall and called:

"Hello! Anybody home? Halloo!"

The only answer was the echo of his own voice, vibrating through the
large rooms.

"Funny," muttered the spaceman. "Why is this place deserted?"

He walked slowly through the house, opening doors and looking into all
the rooms, searching the whole place thoroughly before returning to the
clearing. Going to the nearest of the outbuildings, he opened one of the
wide doors and stared into the gloomy interior. With his experienced eye
he saw immediately that the building had been used to house a large jet
craft. There was the slightly pungent odor of jet fuel, and on the floor
the tire marks of a dolly used to roll the craft out to the launching
strip. He followed the tracks outside and around to the side of the
building where he saw the dolly. It was empty.

Shaking his head grimly, Connel made a quick tour of the remaining
buildings. They were all deserted but the last one, which seemed to be
built a little more sturdily than the others. Unlike the others, it was
locked. He looked for a window and discovered that the walls were solid.
There were no openings except the locked door. He hesitated in front of
the door, looking down at the ground for a sign of what might have been
stored in the building. The surrounding area revealed no tracks. He
pulled out a thick-bladed pocketknife and stepped to the lock, then
suddenly stopped and grinned.

"Great," he said to himself. "A Solar Guard officer about to break into
private property without a warrant. Fine thing to have known back at the
Academy!"

He turned abruptly and strode back to the scout. Climbing into the
craft, he picked up the audioscriber microphone and recorded a brief
message. Removing the threadlike tape from the machine, he returned to
the house and left it on the spool of the audioscribe-replay machine
near the front door.

A few moments later the eerie silence of the Sharkey plantation was once
again shattered by the hissing roar of jets as the launch took off and
climbed rapidly over the jungle. Air-borne, Connel glanced briefly at a
chart, changed course, and sent the launch hurtling at full speed across
the jungle toward the Sinclair plantation.

       *       *       *       *       *

"How far do you think we've come?" asked Tom sleepily.

Astro yawned and stretched before answering. "I'd say about fifteen
miles, Tom."

"Seems more like a hundred and fifteen," moaned Roger who was sprawled
on the ground. "I ache all over. Start at the top of my head and work
down, and you won't find one square inch that isn't sore."

Tom grinned. He was tired himself, but the three-day march through the
jungle had been three of the most exciting days in his life. Coming from
a large city where he had to travel two hours by monorail to get to open
green country, the curly-haired cadet found this passage through the
wildest jungle in the solar system new and fascinating. He had seen
flowers of every color in the spectrum, some as large as himself; giant
shrubs with leaves so fine that they looked like spider webs; Venusian
teakwood trees fifty to a hundred feet thick at the base with some
twisted into strange spirals as their trunks, shaded by another larger
tree, sought a clear avenue to the sun. There were bushes that grew
thorns three inches long, hard as steel and thin as needles; jungle
creepers, vines two and three feet thick, twisting around tree trunks
and strangling them. He saw animals too, all double the size of anything
on Earth because of the lighter Venusian gravity; insects the size of
rats, rats the size of dogs, and wild dogs the size of ponies. Up in the
trees, small anthropoids, cousins to the monkeys of Earth, scampered
from limb to limb, screaming at the invaders of their jungle home.
Smooth-furred animals that looked like deer, their horns curling
overhead, scampered about the cadets like puppies, nuzzling them,
nipping at their heels playfully, and barking as though in laughter when
Astro roared at them for getting in the way.

But there were dangerous creatures in the jungle too; the beautiful but
deadly poisonous brush snakes that lurked unseen in the varicolored
foliage, striking out at anything that passed; animals resembling
chipmunks with enlarged razor-sharp fangs, whose craving for raw meat
was so great that they would attack an animal ten times its size;
lizards the size of elephants with scales like armor plate that rooted
in swampy ground for their food, but which would attack any intruder,
charging with amazing speed, their three horns poised; and, finally,
there were the monsters of Venus--giant beasts whose weights were
measured in tons, ruled over by the most horrible of them all--the
tyrannosaurus.

Fights to death between the jungle creatures were common sights for the
boys during their march. They saw a weird soundless fight between a
forty-foot snake and a giant vulture with talons nearly two feet across
and a beak resembling a mammoth nutcracker. The vulture won,
methodically cutting the reptile's body into sections, its beak slicing
through the snake as easily as a knife going through butter.

More than once Astro spotted a dangerous creature, and telling Roger and
Tom to stand back, he would level his shock rifle and blast it.

So far they had seen nothing of their prey--the tyrannosaurus. Tracks
around the steaming swamps were as close as they had come. Once, late in
the evening of the second day they caught a fleeting glimpse of a
plant-eating brontosaurus lumbering through the brush.

All three of the boys had found it difficult to sleep in the jungle. The
first two nights they had taken turns at staying on guard and tending
the campfire. Nothing had bothered them, and on the third night out,
they decided the fire would be enough to scare off the jungle animals.
It was risky, but the continual fight through the jungle underbrush had
tired the three boys to the bone and the few hours they stood guard were
sorely missed the next day, so they decided to chance it.

Roger was already asleep. Astro had just finished checking his rifle to
be ready for instant fire, when Tom threw the last log on the campfire
and crawled into his sleeping bag.

"Think it'll be all right, Astro?" asked Tom. "I'm not anxious to wake
up inside one of these critter's stomachs."

"Most of them have never seen fire, Tom," Astro said reassuringly. "It
scares them. Besides, we're getting close to the big stuff now. You
might see a tyranno or a big bronto any time. And if they come along,
you'll hear 'em, believe me. They're about as quiet as a squadron of
cruisers on battle emergency blasting off from the Academy in the middle
of the night!"

"O.K.," replied Tom. "You're the hunter in this crew." Suddenly he
laughed. "You know I really got a bang out of the way Roger jumped back
from that waddling ground bird yesterday."

Astro grinned. "Yeah, the one thing in this place that's as ferocious as
a kitten and he pulls his ray gun like an ancient cowboy!"

A very tired voice spoke up from the other sleeping bag. "Is that so!
Well, when you two brave men came face to face with that baby lizard on
a tree root, you were ready to finish your leave in Atom City!" Roger
unzipped the end of the bag, stuck his blond head out, and gave his unit
mates a sour look. "Sack in, will you? Your rocket wash is keeping me
awake!"

Laughing, Astro and Tom nodded good night to each other and closed their
sleeping bags. The jungle was still, the only movement being the leaping
tongues of flame from the campfire.

An hour later it began to rain, a light drizzle at first that increased
until it reached the steady pounding of a tropical downpour. Tom awoke
first, opening the flap of his sleeping bag only to get his face full of
slimy water that spilled in. Spluttering and coughing he sat up and saw
that the campfire was out and the campsite was already six inches deep
in water.

"Roger, Astro!" he called and slapped the nearest sleeping bag. Astro
opened the flap a little and peered out sleepily. Instantly he rolled
out of the bag and jumped to his feet.

"Wake Roger up!" he snapped. "We've got to get out of here!"

"What's the matter?" Roger mumbled through the bag, not opening it. "Why
the excitement over a little rain?"

"The fire's out, hotshot," said Astro. "It's as dark as the inside of a
cow's number-four belly. We've got to move!"

"Why?" asked Tom, not understanding the big cadet's sudden nervous
excitement. "What's the matter with staying right where we are? Why go
trooping around in the dark?"

"We can't light a fire anywhere," added Roger, finally sticking his head
out of his sleeping bag.

"We've got to get on high ground!" said Astro, hurriedly packing the
camping equipment. "We're in a hollow here. The rain really comes down
on Venus, and in another hour this place will be a pond!"

Sensing the urgency in Astro's voice, Roger began packing up his
equipment and in a few moments the three boys had their gear slung over
their shoulders and were slogging through water already knee-deep.

"I still don't see why we have to go tracking through the jungle in the
middle of the night," grumbled Roger. "We could climb up a tree and wait
