frequencies there are in that word, all crowding up behind each
other," Lillian said. "But it isn't sensitive or selective enough.
I'm going to see what Ayesha Keithley can do about building me
a better one."

Ayesha was signals and detection officer on the _Hubert Penrose_.
Dave Questell mentioned that she'd had a hard day, and was probably
making sack-time, and she wouldn't welcome being called at 0130.
Nobody seemed to have realized that it had gotten that late.

"Well, I'll call the ship and have a recording made for her for when
she gets up. But till we get something that'll sort this mess out
and make sense of it, I'm stopped."

"You're stopped, period, Lillian," Dorver told her. "What these
people gibber at us doesn't even make as much sense as the Shooting
of Dan McJabberwock. The real information is conveyed by telepathy."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lieutenant j.g. Ayesha Keithley was on the screen the next morning
while they were eating breakfast. She was a blonde, like Lillian.

"I got your message; you seem to have problems, don't you?"

"Speaking conservatively, yes. You see what we're up against?"

"You don't know what their vocal organs are like, do you?" the girl
in naval uniform in the screen asked.

Lillian shook her head. "Bennet Fayon's hoping for a war, or an
epidemic, or something to break out, so that he can get a few
cadavers to dissect."

"Well, he'll find that they're pretty complex," Ayesha Keithley
said. "I identified stick-and-slip sounds and percussion sounds,
and plucked-string sounds, along with the ordinary hiss-and-buzz
speech-sounds. Making a vocoder to reproduce that speech is going
to be fun. Just what are you using, in the way of equipment?"

Lillian was still talking about that when the two landing craft
from the ship were sighted, coming down. Charley Loughran and Willi
Schallenmacher, who were returning to the _Hubert Penrose_ to join
the other landing party, began assembling their luggage. The others
went outside, Howell among them.

Mom and Sonny were watching the two craft grow larger and closer
above, keeping close to a group of spacemen; Sonny was looking around
excitedly, while Mom clung to his arm, like a hen with an oversized
chick. The reasoning was clear--these people knew all about big things
that came down out of the sky and weren't afraid of them; stick close
to them, and it would be perfectly safe. Sonny saw the contact team
emerging from their hut and grabbed his mother's arm, pointing. They
both beamed happily; that expression didn't look sad, at all, now that
you knew what it meant. Sonny began ghroogh-ghrooghing hideously; Mom
hushed him with a hand over his mouth, and they both made eating
gestures, rubbed their abdomens comfortably, and pointed toward the
mess hut. Bennet Fayon was frightened. He turned and started on the
double toward the cook, who was standing in the doorway of the hut,
calling out to him.

The cook spoke inaudibly. Fayon stopped short. "Unholy Saint Beelzebub,
no!" he cried. The cook said something in reply, shrugging. Fayon came
back, talking to himself.

"Terran carniculture pork," he said, when he returned. "Zarathustra
pool-ball fruit. Potato-flour hotcakes, with Baldur honey and Odin
flameberry jam. And two big cups of coffee apiece. It's a miracle
they aren't dead now. If they're alive for lunch, we won't need to
worry about feeding them anything we eat, but I'm glad somebody else
has the moral responsibility for this."

Lillian Ransby came out of the headquarters hut. "Ayesha's coming
down this afternoon, with a lot of equipment," she said. "We're
not exactly going to count air molecules in the sound waves, but
we'll do everything short of that. We'll need more lab space,
soundproofed."

"Tell Dave Questell what you want," Meillard said. "Do you really
think you can get anything?"

She shrugged. "If there's anything there to get. How long it'll
take is another question."

       *       *       *       *       *

The two sixty-foot collapsium-armored turtles settled to the ground
and went off contragravity. The ports opened, and things began being
floated off on lifter-skids: framework for the water tower, and
curved titanium sheets for the tank. Anna de Jong said something
about hot showers, and not having to take any more sponge-baths.
Howell was watching the stuff come off the other landing craft. A
dozen pairs of four-foot wagon wheels, with axles. Hoes, in bundles.
Scythe blades. A hand forge, with a crank-driven fan blower, and a
hundred and fifty pound anvil, and sledges and cutters and swages
and tongs.

Everybody was busy, and Mom and Sonny were fidgeting, gesturing
toward the work with their own empty hands. _Hey, boss; whatta
we gonna do?_ He patted them on the shoulders.

"Take it easy." He hoped his tone would convey nonurgency.
"We'll find something for you to do."

He wasn't particularly happy about most of what was coming off.
Giving these Svants tools was fine, but it was more important to
give them technologies. The people on the ship hadn't thought of
that. These wheels, now; machined steel hubs, steel rims, tubular
steel spokes, drop-forged and machined axles. The Svants wouldn't
be able to copy them in a thousand years. Well, in a hundred, if
somebody showed them where and how to mine iron and how to smelt
and work it. And how to build a steam engine.

He went over and pulled a hoe out of one of the bundles. Blades
stamped out with a power press, welded to tubular steel handles.
Well, wood for hoe handles was hard to come by on a spaceship, even
a battle cruiser almost half a mile in diameter; he had to admit
that. And they were about two thousand per cent more efficient than
the bronze scrapers the Svants used. That wasn't the idea, though.
Even supposing that the first wave of colonists came out in a year
and a half, it would be close to twenty years before Terran-operated
factories would be in mass production for the native trade. The idea
was to teach these people to make better things for themselves; give
them a leg up, so that the next generation would be ready for
contragravity and nuclear and electric power.

Mom didn't know what to make of any of it. Sonny did, though; he
was excited, grabbing Howell's arm, pointing, saying, "_Ghroogh_!
_Ghroogh_!" He pointed at the wheels, and then made a stooping,
lifting and pushing gesture. _Like wheelbarrow?_

"That's right." He nodded, wondering if Sonny recognized that as
an affirmative sign. "Like big wheelbarrow."

One thing puzzled Sonny, though. Wheelbarrow wheels were small--his
hands indicated the size--and single. These were big, and double.

"Let me show you this, Sonny."

He squatted, took a pad and pencil from his pocket, and drew two
pairs of wheels, and then put a wagon on them, and drew a quadruped
hitched to it, and a Svant with a stick walking beside it. Sonny
looked at the picture--Svants seemed to have pictoral sense, for
which make us thankful!--and then caught his mother's sleeve and
showed it to her. Mom didn't get it. Sonny took the pencil and
drew another animal, with a pole travois. He made gestures. A
travois dragged; it went slow. A wagon had wheels that went
around; it went fast.

So Lillian and Anna thought he was the village half-wit. Village
genius, more likely; the other peasants didn't understand him, and
resented his superiority. They went over for a closer look at the
wheels, and pushed them. Sonny was almost beside himself. Mom was
puzzled, but she thought they were pretty wonderful.

Then they looked at blacksmith tools. Tongs; Sonny had never seen
anything like them. Howell wondered what the Svants used to handle
hot metal; probably big tweezers made by tying two green sticks
together. There was an old Arabian legend that Allah had made the
first tongs and given them to the first smith, because nobody could
make tongs without having a pair already.

Sonny didn't understand the fan-blower until it was taken apart.
Then he made a great discovery. The wheels, and the fan, and the
pivoted tongs, all embodied the same principle, one his people
had evidently never discovered. A whole new world seemed to open
before him; from then on, he was constantly finding things pierced
and rotating on pivots.

       *       *       *       *       *

By this time, Mom was fidgeting again. She ought to be doing
something to justify her presence in the camp. He was wondering
what sort of work he could invent for her when Karl Dorver called
to him from the door of the headquarters hut.

"Mark, can you spare Mom for a while?" he asked. "We want her to
look at pictures and show us which of the animals are meat-cattle,
and which of the crops are ripe."

"Think you can get anything out of her?"

"Sign-talk, yes. We may get a few words from her, too."

At first, Mom was unwilling to leave Sonny. She finally decided that
it would be safe, and trotted over to Dorver, entering the hut.

Dave Questell's construction crew began at once on the water tank,
using a power shovel to dig the foundation. They had to haul water
in a tank from the river a quarter-mile away to mix the concrete.
Sonny watched that interestedly. So did a number of the villagers,
who gathered safely out of bowshot. They noticed Sonny among the
Terrans and pointed at him. Sonny noticed that. He unobtrusively
picked up a double-bitted ax and kept it to hand.

He and Mom had lunch with the contact team. As they showed no ill
effects from breakfast, Fayon decided that it was safe to let them
have anything the Terrans ate or drank. They liked wine; they knew
what it was, all right, but this seemed to have a delightfully
different flavor. They each tried a cigarette, choked over the
first few puffs, and decided that they didn't like smoking.

"Mom gave us a lot of information, as far as she could, on the crops
and animals. The big things, the size of rhinoceroses, are draft
animals and nothing else; they're not eaten," Dorver said. "I don't
know whether the meat isn't good, or is taboo, or they are too
valuable to eat. They eat all the other three species, and milk two
of them. I have an idea they grind their grain in big stone mortars
as needed."

That was right; he'd seen things like that.

"Willi, when you're over in the mountains, see if you can find
something we can make millstones out of. We can shape them with
sono-cutters; after they get the idea, they can do it themselves
by hand. One of those big animals could be used to turn the mill.
Did you get any words from her?"

Paul Meillard shook his head gloomily. "Nothing we can be sure of.
It was the same thing as in the village, yesterday. She'd say
something, I'd repeat it, and she'd tell us it was wrong and say
the same thing over again. Lillian took recordings; she got the
same results as last night. Ask her about it later."

"She has the same effect on Mom as on the others?"

"Yes. Mom was very polite and tried not to show it, but--"

Lillian took him aside, out of earshot of the two Svants, after
lunch. She was almost distracted.

"Mark, I don't know what I'm going to do. She's like the others.
Every time I open my mouth in front of her, she's simply horrified.
It's as though my voice does something loathsome to her. And I'm the
one who's supposed to learn to talk to them."

"Well, those who can do, and those who can't teach," he told her.
"You can study recordings, and tell us what the words are and
teach us how to recognize and pronounce them. You're the only
linguist we have."

That seemed to comfort her a little. He hoped it would work out that
way. If they could communicate with these people and did leave a
party here to prepare for the first colonization, he'd stay on, to
teach the natives Terran technologies and study theirs. He'd been
expecting that Lillian would stay, too. She was the linguist; she'd
