
A sharp click interrupted him. "That's enough, Steward. Captain Everts
speaking. Dr. Feldman, you have my apologies. Until you reach your
destination, you are my passenger and entitled to every consideration of
any other passenger except freedom of movement through the ship. I am
always available for legitimate complaints."

Feldman shook his head. He'd heard of such men. But he'd thought the
species extinct.

The steward brought his food in a thoroughly chastened manner. He
managed to find space for it and came to attention. "Is that all--sir?"

For a moment, as the smell of real steak reached him, Doc regretted the
fact that his metabolism had been switched. Then he shrugged. A little
wouldn't hurt him, though there was no proper nourishment in it. He
squeezed some of the gravy and bits of meat into one of his bottles,
sticking to his purpose; then he fell to on the rest. But after a few
bites, it was queerly unsatisfactory. The seemingly unappealing
Mars-normal ragout suited his current tastes better, after all.

Once the steward had cleared away the dishes, Doc went to work. It was
better than wasting his time in dread. He might even be able to leave
some notes behind.

A gong sounded, and a red light warned him that acceleration was due. He
finished with his bottles, put them into the incubator, and piled into
his bunk, swallowing one of the tablets of morphetal the ship furnished.

Acceleration had ended, and a simple breakfast was waiting when he
awoke. There was also a red flashing light over the call board. He
flipped the switch while reaching for the coffee.

"Captain Everts," the speaker said. "May I join you in your cabin?"

"Come ahead," Feldman invited. He cut off the switch and glanced at the
clock on the wall. There were less than eleven hours left to him.

Everts was a trim man of forty, erect but not rigid. There was neither
friendliness nor hostility in his glance. His words were courteous as
Doc motioned toward the tray of breakfast. "I've already eaten, thank
you."

He accepted a chair. His voice was apologetic when he began. "This is a
personal matter which I perhaps have no right to bring up. But my wife
is greatly worried about this plague. I violate no confidence in telling
you there is considerable unease, even on Earth, according to messages I
have received. The ship physician believes Mrs. Everts may have the
plague, but isn't sure of the symptoms. I understand you are quite
expert."

Doc wondered about the physician. Apparently there was another man who
placed his patients above anything else, though he was probably
meticulous about obeying all actual rules. There was no law against
listening to a pariah, at least.

"When did she have Selznik's migraine?" he asked.

"About thirteen years ago. We went through it together, shortly after
having our metabolism switched during the food shortage of '88."

Doc felt carefully at the base of the Captain's skull; the swelling was
there. He asked a few questions, but there could be no doubt.

"Both of you must have it, Captain, though it won't mature for another
year. I'm sorry."

"There's no hope, then?"

Doc studied the man. But Everts wasn't the sort to dicker even for his
life. "Nothing that I've found, Captain. I have a clue, but I'm still
working on it. Perhaps if I could leave a few notes for your
physician--"

It was Everts' turn to shake his head. "I'm sorry, Dr. Feldman. I have
orders to burn out your cabin when you leave. But thank you." He got to
his feet and left as quietly and erectly as he had entered.

Doc tore up his notes bitterly. He paced his cabin slowly, reading out
the hours while his eyes lingered on the little bottle of cultures. At
times the fear grew in him, but he mastered it. There was half an hour
left when he began opening the little bottles and making his films.

He was still not finished when steps echoed down the hall, but he was
reasonably sure of his results. The bug could not grow in Earth-normal
tissue.

Three men entered the room. One of them, dressed in a spacesuit, held
out another suit to him. The other two began gathering up everything in
the cabin and stowing it neatly into a sack designed to protect freight
for a limited time in a vacuum.

Doc forced his hands to steadiness with foolish pride and began climbing
into the suit. He reached for the helmet, but the man shook his head,
pointing to the oxygen gauge. There would be exactly one hour's supply
of oxygen when he was thrown out and it still lacked five minutes of the
deadline.

They marched him down the hallway, to meet Everts coming toward them.
There were still three minutes left when they reached the airlock, with
its inner door already open. The spacesuited man climbed into it and
began strapping down so that the rush of air would not sweep him outward
when the other seal was released.

Doc had saved one bracky weed. Now he raised it to his lips, fumbling
for a light.

Everts stepped forward and flipped a lighter. Doc inhaled deeply. Fear
was thick in every muscle, and he needed the smoke desperately. Then he
caught himself.

"Better change your metabolism back to Earth-normal, Captain Everts," he
said, and his voice was so normal that he hardly recognized it.

Everts' eyes widened briefly. The man bowed faintly. "Thank you, Dr.
Feldman."

It was ridiculous, impossible, and yet there was a curious relief at the
formality of it. It was like something from a play, too unreal to affect
his life.

Everts nodded to the man holding the helmet. Doc dropped his bracky weed
and felt the helmet snap down. A hiss of oxygen reached him and the suit
ballooned out. There was no gravity; the two men handed him up easily to
the one in the airlock while the inner seal began to close.

There was still ten seconds to go, according to the big chronometer that
had been installed in the lock. The spaceman used it in tying the sack
of possessions firmly to Doc's suit.

A red light went on. The man caught Doc and held him against the outer
seal. The red light blinked. Four seconds ... three ... two....

There was a sudden heavy thudding sound, and the _Iroquois_ seemed to
jerk sideways slightly. The spaceman's face swung around in surprise.

The red light blinked and stayed on. Zero!

The outer seal snapped open and the spaceman heaved. Air exploded
outwards, and Doc went with it. He was alone in space, gliding away from
the ship, with oxygen hissing softly through the valve and ticking away
his life.




XI

Convert


Feldman fought for control of himself, forced himself to think, to hold
onto his sanity. It was sheer stupidity, since nothing could have been
more merciful than to lose this reality. But the will to be himself was
stronger than logic. And bit by bit, he forced the fear and horror away
from him until he could examine his situation.

He was spinning slowly, so that stars ahead of him seemed to crawl
across his view. The ship was retreating from him already hundreds of
yards away. Mars was a shrunken pill far away.

Then something blinked to one side. He turned his head to stare.

A little ship was less than three hundred yards away. He recognized it
as a life raft. Now his spin brought him around to face it, and he saw
it was parallelling his course. The ejection of the life raft must have
caused the thump he'd heard before he was cast adrift.

It meant someone was trying to save him. It meant _life_!

He flailed his arms and beat his legs together, senselessly trying to
force himself closer, while trying to guess who could have taken the
chance. No one he could think of could have booked passage on the
_Iroquois_. There wasn't that much free money in the villages.

Something flashed a hot blue, and the little ship leaped forward.
Whoever was handling it knew nothing about piloting. It picked up too
much speed at too great an angle.

Again blue spurts came, but this time matters were even worse. Then
there was a long wait before a third try was made. He estimated the
course. It would miss him by a good hundred feet, but it was probably
the best the amateur pilot could do. The ship drifted closer, but to one
side. It would soon pass him completely.

A spacesuited figure suddenly appeared in the tiny airlock, holding a
coil of rope. The rope shot out, well thrown. But it was too short. It
would pass within ten feet--and might as well have been ten miles for
all the good it would do him.

Every film he had seen on space seemed to form a mad jumble in his mind,
but he seized on the first idea he could remember. He inhaled deeply and
yanked the oxygen tank free. An automatic seal on the suit cut off the
connection. He aimed the hissing bottle, fumbling for the manual valve.

It almost worked. It kicked him toward the rope slightly, but most of
the energy was wasted in setting him into a wilder spin. He blinked,
trying to spot the rope. It was within five feet now.

Again he waited, until he seemed to be in position. This time he threw
the bottle away from it. It added spin to his vertical axis, but the
rope came into view within arm's reach.

He grasped it, just as his lungs seemed about to burst. He couldn't hold
on long enough to tie the rope....

His lungs gave up suddenly, collapsing and then sucking in greedily.
Clean air rushed in, letting his head clear. He'd forgotten that the
inflated suit held enough oxygen for several minutes.

His body struck the edge of the airlock and a hand jerked him inside.
The outer seal was slammed shut and locked, and there was a hiss of air
entering.

He threw back his helmet just as Chris Ryan jerked hers off.

Her voice shook almost hysterically. "Thank God. Dan, I almost gave up!"

"I liked the air out there better," he told her bitterly. "If you'll
open the lock again, I'll leave. Or am I supposed to believe this is
rescue and that you came along just to save me?"

"I came along to see you killed, as you know very well. Saving you
wasn't in my orders."

He grunted and reached for the handle that would release the outer lock.
"Better get back inside if you don't want to blow out with me."

"It's up to you, Dan," she told him, and there was all the sincerity in
the world in her blue eyes. "I'm on your side now."

He began counting on his fingers. "Let's see. The spare battery, the
delay in arresting me, the choice of Matthews--"

"It was all true." Anger began to grow in her eyes. "Dan Feldman, you
get inside this raft! If you don't care about me, you might consider the
people dying of the plague who need you!"

She'd played her trump, and it took the round. He followed her.

"All right," he said grudgingly. "Spill your story."

She held out a copy of a space radiogram, addressed to Mrs. D. E.
Everts, and signed by one of the best doctors on the Lobby Board of
Directors.

     Regret confirm diagnosis. Topsecret. Repeat topsecret.
     Martian fever incubates fourteen years, believed highly
     fatal. No cure, research beginning immediately. Penalty
     violation topsecret, death all concerned.

"Mrs. Everts rates a topsecret break?" Doc commented dryly. "Come off
it, Chris!"

"She's the daughter of Elmers of Space Lobby!" Chris answered. She
pointed to the message, underlining words with her finger. "_Fourteen
years._ You couldn't have caused it. _Highly fatal._ And people are
being told it's only a skin disease. _Research beginning._ But you've
already done most of the research. I can see that now. I can see a lot
of things."

"You've got me beat then," he said. "I can't see how such a reformed
young noblewoman calmly walked over and stole a life raft. I can't see
how your brilliant mind concocted this whole scheme in almost no time.
And to be honest, I can't even see why Medical Lobby decided to save me
at the last minute and sent you to do the job. You didn't have to spy
out knowledge from me. I've been trying all along to get it to your
Research division."

She sighed and dropped onto a little seat.

"I can't prove my motives. You'll just have to believe me. But it wasn't
hard to do what I've done. That shuttle pilot was found in a routine
check, stowed away on the life raft. I was with Captain Everts when he
was found, so I discovered how to get into the raft. And I heard his
whole confession. He wasn't the real pilot. He'd come from the villages
to save you. The whole scheme was his. I just used it, hoping I could
reach you."

As always her story had a convincing element she shouldn't have known.
The pilot's farewell, addressing him as Dr. Feldman, had been too low
for her to hear, but it was something that fitted her story. It was
probably a deliberate clue to give him hope, to assure him the villages
were still trying. It shook his confidence.

"And your motive--your real motive?" he insisted.

She swore at him, then began ripping off the spacesuit. She turned her
back, pulling a thin blouse down from her neck. He stared, then reached
out to touch the lump there.

"So you've had Selznik's migraine and know you're carrying plague. And
you've decided your precious Lobby won't save you?"

She dropped her eyes, then raised them to meet his defiantly. "I'm not
just scared and selfish. Dad caught it, too, and it must be close to the
time for him. He switched to Mars-normal when he was a liaison agent and
never changed back. Dan, are we all going to have to die? Can't you save
him?"

Feldman was out of his suit and at the control panel. There was a manual
lever, which Chris must have used before. It might work out here where
there was room to maneuver and nothing to hit. But trying to make a
landing was going to be different.

"Dan?" she repeated.

He shrugged. "I don't know. They've started research too late and
they'll be under so much pressure that the real brains won't have a
chance. The topsecret stuff looks bad for research. Maybe there's a
cure. It works in culture bottles, but it may fail in person. When I'm
convinced I'm safe with you, I may tell you about it."

"Oh." Her voice was low. Then she sighed. "I suppose I can understand
why you hate me, Dan."

"I don't hate you. I'm too mixed up. Tomorrow maybe, but not now. Shut
up and let me see if I can figure out how to land this thing."

He found that the fuel tanks were nearly full, but that still didn't
leave much margin. Mars must have been notified by Everts and be ready
to pick the raft up. He had to reach the wastelands away from any of the
shuttle ports. They had no aspirators, however, and they couldn't cover
much territory in the spacesuits they would have to use. It meant he'd
have to land close to a village where he was known.

He jockeyed the ship around by trial and error, studying the manual that
was lying prominently on the control panel. According to the booklet,
the ship was simple to operate. It was self-leveling in an atmosphere,
and automatic flare computers were supposed to make it possible for an
amateur to judge the rate of descent near the surface. It looked
reassuring--and was probably written with that in mind.

Finally he reached for the control, hoping he'd figured his landing
orbit reasonably well by simple logic. He smoothed it out in the
following hours as he watched the markings on Mars. When they were near
turnover point, he began cranking the little gyroscope to swing the
ship. It saved fuel to turn without power, and he wasn't sure he could
have turned accurately by blasting.

He was gaining some proficiency, however, he felt. But now he had to
waste fuel and ruin his orbit again. There was no way to practice
maneuvering without actually doing so.

In the end, he compromised, leaving a small margin for a bad landing
that would require a second attempt, but with less practice than he
wanted.

He had located Jake's village through the little telescope when he
finally reached for the main blast control. The thin haze of Mars'
atmosphere came rushing up, while the blast lashed out. Then they were
in the outer fringes of the sky and the blast was beginning to show a
corona that ruined visibility.

He turned to the flare computer and back to what he could see through
the quartz viewport. He was going to land about half a mile from the
village, as nearly as he could judge.

The computer seemed to work as it should. The speed was within
acceptable limits. He gave up trying to see the ground and was forced to
trust the machinery designed for amateur pilots. The flare bloomed, and
he yanked down on the little lever.

It could have been worse. They hit the ground, bounced twice, and turned
over. The ship was a mess when Feldman freed himself from the elastic
straps of the seat. Chris had shrieked as they hit, but she was
unbuckling herself now.

He threw her her spacesuit and one of the emergency bottles of oxygen
from the rack. "Hurry up with that. We've sprung a leak and the
pressure's dropping."

They were halfway to the village when a dozen tractors came racing up
and Jake piled out of the lead one to drag the two in with him.

"Heard about it from the broadcasts and figured you might land around
here. Good to see you, Doc." He started the tractor off at full speed,
back to the wastelands, while Doc stared at the armed men who were
riding the tractors.

Jake caught his look and nodded. "You're in enemy territory, Doc.
There's a war going on!"




XII

War


Sometimes it seemed to Doc that war was nothing but an endurance race to
see how many times they could run before they were bombed. He was just
beginning to drop off to sleep after a long trip for the sixth
consecutive day when the little alarm shrilled. He sighed and shook
Chris awake.

"Again?" she protested. But she got up and began helping him pack.

Jake came in, his eyes weary, pulling on the old jacket with the big
star on its sleeve. Doc hadn't been too surprised to learn that Jake was
the actual leader of the rebels. "Shuttles spotted taking off this way.
And I still can't find where the leak is. They haven't missed our
location once this week. Here, give me that."

He took the electron mike that had been among Doc's' possessions, but
Chris recaptured it. "I can manage," she told him, and headed out for
the tractor where Lou was waiting.

Doc scowled after her. He and Jake had been watching her. She was too
useful to Doc's research to be turned away, but they didn't trust her
yet. So far, however, they had found nothing wrong with her conduct.
Still....

He swung suddenly into Jake's tractor. "Just remembered something. How'd
they find me that time I stopped in the tractor to use the mike? I was
pretty well hidden, and no tracks last in the sand long enough for them
to have followed. But they were there when I came to. Somehow, they must
have put a radio tracer on me."

Jake waited while they lighted up, his eyes suddenly bright. "You mean
something you got from her house was bugged? It figures."

"And I've still got all the stuff. Now they find wherever we set up
headquarters, though they've always managed to miss my laboratory, even
when they've hit the troops around us. Jake, I think it's the
microscope." Doc managed to push enough junk off one of the seats to
make a cramped bed, and stretched out. "Sure, we figured they sent her
because they want to keep tabs on what I discover. They've finally
gotten scared of the plague, and she's the perfect Judas goat. But they
have to have some way to get in touch with her. I'll bet there's a
tracer in the mike and a switch so she can modulate it or key it to send
out Morse."

"Yeah," Jake nodded. "Well, she does her own dirty work. I might get to
like her if she was on our side. Okay, Doc. If they've put things into
the mike, I've got a boy who'll find and fix it so she won't guess it's
been touched."

Doc relaxed. For the moment, there would be no power in the instrument,
nor any excuse for her to use it. But she must have handled some secret
arrangement during the work periods. She used the mike more than he did.
The switch could be camouflaged easily enough. If anyone detected the
signal, they'd probably only think it was some leak in the electrical
circuit.

Far away, the shuttle rockets had appeared as tiny dots in the sky. They
were standing on their tails a second later, just off the ground,
letting the full force of their blasts bake the area where headquarters
had been.

Jake watched grimly, driving by something close to instinct. Then he
looked back. "Know anything about a Dr. Harkness?"

"Not much, except that he protested sealing off the villages. Why?"

"He and five other doctors were picked up, trying to get through to us.
Claimed they wanted to give us medical help. We can use them, God knows.
I guess I'll have to chance it."

They stopped at a halfway village and hid the tractors before looking
for a place to rest. Doc found Chris curled up asleep against the
microscope. He had a hard time getting her to leave it in the tractor,
but she was too genuinely tired to put up any real argument.

Jake reported in the morning before they set out again. "You were right,
Doc. It was a nice job of work. Must have taken the best guys in
Southport to hide the circuit so well. But it's safe now. It just makes
a kind of meaningless static nobody can trace. Maybe we can get you a
permanent lab now."

Doc debated again having Chris left behind and decided against it. The
Lobby was determined to let him find a cure for them if he could. That
meant Chris would work herself to exhaustion trying to help. Let her
think she was doing it for the Lobby! It was time she was on the
receiving end of a double cross.

"It's a stinking way to run a war," he decided.

Jake chuckled without much humor. "It's the war you wanted, remember?
They forced our hand, but it had to come sometime. Right now the Lobby's
fighting to get their hands on your work before we can use it; they're
just using holding tactics, which helps our side. And we're hoping you
get the cure so we can win. With that, maybe we'll whip them."

It was a crazy war, with each side killing more of its own men than of
the enemy. The runners were increasing, and Jake's army was learning to
shoot the poor devils mercifully and go on. They knew, at least, that
