
In a few minutes they reached the forward end of the _Porpoise_. Now
they were to solve the mystery of what had stopped the submarine. For a
few moments they could distinguish nothing.

Suddenly the boys felt the professor grasping their arms. They looked in
the direction he pointed. There in the diffused glare from the search
light and the illumination of their helmet lamps they saw, wrapped about
the forward shaft opening a gigantic squid or devil fish. Its soft,
jelly-like body completely covered the opening of the shaft preventing
any water from entering, and thus stopping any forward motion to the
ship.

This was what had caused all the trouble. The _Porpoise_ had run into
the monster, who feeling what it must have thought an enemy, had grasped
the submarine with its long sinuous arms.

The professor hesitated a moment. Then he slowly raised his electrical
gun, and took aim at the hideous mass. The boys followed his example. At
Mr. Henderson's signal they all fired together.

From the muzzles of the guns darted small barbs that carried with them a
strong shock of electricity, from storage batteries in the shoulder
pieces of the weapons. Three of them were enough to produce death in an
animal as large as a whale.

The devil fish quivered. Then the water about it suddenly grew black,
and the boys and the professor were in dense darkness, for the squid had
dyed the ocean with a dark liquid from the sack it carried for the
purpose.

The explorers groped their way to the left, having fortunately grasped
hands after firing their guns, to prevent being separated in case the
terrible fish began a death struggle.

Luckily Professor Henderson went in the right direction and managed to
locate the _Porpoise_. Then, feeling along her steel sides, he led the
boys through the inky blackness to the water chamber by which entrance
could be had to the interior.

In a few minutes all three were safely inside and had removed their
diving suits. The others crowded about, anxious to learn what had
happened. The inventor related it briefly.

Once more the engines were started. This time there was no hanging back
on the part of the _Porpoise_. The big screw revolved, the water came in
the shaft and was thrust out of the rear end, making a current that sent
the craft ahead swiftly. The gigantic fish had been killed, and its body
no longer obstructed progress.

"Now we'll rise to the surface and see how it feels to sail along that
way for a while," said the professor as he started the pumps that
emptied the tanks. In a little while the ship was floating on the
waves.

It was now night, and the clouds overhead made it so dark that it was
hard to see ten feet in advance. The professor did not want to use the
searchlight for he did not care to have his presence discovered by
curious persons. So he ran the ship at half speed.

"Where are we now?" asked Mark, who had entered the conning tower, where
the professor was steering.

"Somewhere's off the coast of South Carolina," replied the inventor.

The next instant there was a sudden shock and jar. The ship quivered
from stem to stern, and came to an abrupt stop.

"We've hit something!" exclaimed the professor, shutting down the
engines with a jerk of the lever.




CHAPTER IX

A PRICE ON THEIR HEADS


On board the _Porpoise_ there was great excitement. Washington, with
Andy, Tom, Bill and Jack came running from the engine room.

"What is it?" cried Jack.

"I don't know," answered the professor as calmly as he could. "We'll
soon see, however."

He switched on the searchlight and peered from the conning tower.

"Can you see anything?" asked Andy, anxiously.

"I can," announced the inventor.

"What?"

"Land," replied Mr. Henderson. "We've hit the coast."

"I hope we ain't done no damage," put in Washington.

"Do you mean to the coast or to us?" asked the professor, with a smile.
"I guess there isn't much danger in ramming the shore excepting to the
_Porpoise_. However, we do not seem to be in any immediate trouble."

He tested various wheels and levers, and announced that, aside from the
jar, which might have started some of the machinery, the _Porpoise_ was
unharmed.

The cover of the man-hole was loosened and, one after another, the
adventurers crawled out on the small deck or platform. It took them a
little while to become accustomed to the darkness, but soon they were
able to make out that they had run on the muddy bank of the ocean beach.
The tide was low and the _Porpoise_ had rammed her nose well into the
soft muck, which accounted for the lack of damage.

"Well, I guess there is nothing to do excepting to wait for morning,"
said Mr. Henderson. "It doesn't look like a very lively neighborhood
about here. I don't believe we'll be disturbed."

Save for the splash and lapping of the waves and the sound of the wind,
it was as quiet as the proverbial graveyard. Not a light showed on
shore, and the gleam from the search lamp of the _Porpoise_ cut the
darkness like a small moonbeam.

"If there's nothing to do I'm going to turn in," said Andy. "I'm tired."

The professor said this was a good suggestion, and, leaving instructions
that Washington and Bill were to divide the night's watch between them,
the inventor sought his bunk.

The boys remained on deck a few minutes longer.

"We certainly are getting our share of adventures," remarked Jack.

"I should say so," answered Mark.

"Gollyation yes!" exclaimed Washington. "You-uns done most been eat by
dat air koslostrous specimen ob a parralleledon! I'm glad I didn't go.
But I'se brave enough!"

"What's that?" asked Mark suddenly, pointing to an object floating on
the water.

Washington turned to behold something white drifting along.

"Oh my good land ob mercy! It's a ghost!" the colored man yelled. "It's
a ghost! Land a' massy! Hide me some where, quick!"

Washington fell on his knees and stretched up his clasped hands in
supplication. The boys gazed curiously at the white object that was
slowly floating toward the stranded ship.

It rose and fell on the waves, with an odd motion.

"I wonder what it is," said Mark.

"We'll soon see," spoke Jack. "It's coming this way."

"Don't go near it! Don't touch it, boys!" pleaded Washington. "It'll put
de evil eye on yo', suah! Turn yo' haids away!"

But the boys were not so easily frightened. The white thing did look
queer, but Jack reasoned correctly that the darkness of the night
magnified it, and made it appear stranger than it probably was.

"I'm going to try to get it," said Mark.

The white thing was now quite close. It resembled a bundle of rags,
floating on top of the water, and, as it came nearer, it seemed to take
on a curious form.

"It's a baby! It's de ghost ob a little dead baby!" cried the colored
man. "Let it alone, I tell you!"

Indeed, now that Washington had suggested it, the boys could see a
resemblance to a child in the white object. But this did not deter them.
Jack secured a boat hook from where it was fastened to the platform.
With it he gently poked at the white thing. The object seemed to
collapse and Jack was conscious of a strange feeling. Then, with slow
motions, he drew it close to the side of the ship.

Lying on his face he was able to get a good look at the thing. He
muttered an exclamation.

"What is it?" cried Mark.

"Nothing but a newspaper!" announced Jack with a laugh, as he threw it
on the deck. "All our trouble for nothing."

"I shore thought it were a ghost," cried Washington as he got up from
his knees.

The boys went to their bunks. They were the first ones awake the next
morning, and Jack followed Mark on deck.

"There's the paper you rescued from drowning," said Mark.

"So it is," came from Jack. "I wonder if there's any news in it."

The sheet had dried out and Jack spread it open. No sooner had he
scanned the first page than he uttered a whistle.

"Something startling?" asked Mark.

"Startling! I guess yes! Look here!"

Mark looked over Jack's shoulder. Staring at them, from amid a mass of
other news was the announcement in big black type:

          REWARD FOR BOY ANARCHISTS!

Then followed an account of the burning of the hotel at Easton, a vivid
description with pictures, of how it had been blown up in an attempt to
assassinate Lord Peckham, and how the two boys, sons of an English
anarchist, had escaped.

The rest of the story was given over to a description which Jack and
Mark could see was meant for them though it was incorrect in several
particulars. How the boys had escaped the detective, through the trolley
car mishap, was related, and then came the startling announcement that
the hotel authorities had offered a reward of $1,000 for the capture of
either or both of the boy anarchists. To this Lord Peckham had added an
equal sum.

"Well, it looks as if we were of some importance in the world," remarked
Jack.

"Rather," agreed Mark. "Think of having a price on our heads! Well, that
detective certainly is a hustler. When is that paper dated?"

Jack looked and saw that the sheet had been issued in Charleston the day
previous. It had probably been thrown overboard from some steamer, and
had drifted toward shore.

While the boys were speculating over the matter Professor Henderson came
on deck. He saw something was up, and soon had the whole story from the
boys.

"I shouldn't worry about it," said the inventor. "They've got to catch
you first, and it isn't like running away when you know you are guilty.
You boys had no more to do with the fire than the man in the moon. And
we'll soon be beyond the reach of rewards and newspapers."

Nevertheless, the boys brooded over the matter. It seemed that they
were still under a cloud, and they wished very much that it could be
cleared away.

However there were soon busy times. The rising tide floated the boat,
and soon it was riding safely at anchor. The professor needed some small
bits of machinery, and had decided to send the boys to the nearest town
for them. But the news in the paper changed his plans, and he sent Bill
and Washington, who soon returned with the needed articles.

"Now we'll make another start," said Mr. Henderson, as soon as all were
on board once more. "This time I hope we will keep on until we reach the
south pole!"

He started the engine, the _Porpoise_ sank beneath the waves, and with a
hum of the big screw that throbbed and vibrated, was away again.




CHAPTER X

ATTACKED BY A MONSTER


For several days the _Porpoise_ plowed her way beneath the surface of
the ocean. Obedient to the directing hand of Professor Henderson she
rose or sank as the tanks were emptied or filled. He put the craft
through several rather difficult movements to test her under all
conditions. In each one she was a success.

Dinner was sometimes eaten five hundred feet below the surface. Then
while Washington washed the dishes and cleaned up the galley, Jack and
Mark looked from the side windows at the strange life under water.

They were getting farther south now and the water was warmer as the
equator was approached. This produced a great variety of animal life,
and the ocean fairly swarmed with fishes, big and little, strange and
curious that could be seen from the glass bull's-eyes.

Great sharks swam up alongside of the _Porpoise_, keeping pace with her
in spite of her speed. Their cruel tigerish eyes and ugly mouths made
the boys shudder as they looked at the creatures. Then came odd
creatures that seemed neither of the land or sea, but which swam along
with their horrible bodies flapping up against the glass. One and all,
the inhabitants of the ocean seemed to resent the intrusion of the
submarine.

One day the boys turned the light out in the cabin and sat in the
darkness the better to observe the fishes. The sea, in the vicinity of
the ship, was illuminated with a sort of glow that diffused from the
searchlight.

Suddenly, as the boys were watching, there came a thud on the glass
window at the port side. They glanced in that direction to see some
horrible thing peering in at them through the window.

At first they were greatly frightened. Two big eyes of green, with rims
of what looked like red fire, stared at them, and, there was an ugly
mouth lined with three rows of teeth.

"It's only a fish," said Mark.

"Well, I wouldn't like to meet it outside," said Jack. "I'd rather be
here. My, but it's a nasty sight!"

"Let's give Washington a little scare," suggested Mark.

"How?"

"We'll go out and tell him some one in the cabin wants to see him. The
fish will stay there. See, it is fastened to the glass by some sort of
suction arrangement, like the octupus fish have on their arms. Then
we'll look in and see what Wash does."

Jack agreed to the plan. The boys left the cabin, and Mark called to the
colored man, who was in the engine room.

"I'll go right instanter this minute," said Washington. "Don't no grass
grow under dis chile's feet!"

"Now listen," said Mark as he and Jack tiptoed after the colored man.

Washington had no sooner entered the darkened cabin, and caught sight of
the horrible staring red and green eyes looking straight at him, than he
let out a yell that could be heard all over the ship. Then the colored
man dropped on his knees and began to implore:

"Good please Mr. Satan fish, doan take Washington White," he begged.
"It's all a mistake. I didn't do nuffin. Good please Mr. Satan fish,
take some one else. It's disproportionate to de circumulation ob de
interiorness ob dis subicecream ship, so kindly pass me by dis time!"

"What's the matter?" asked Amos Henderson, as he came hurrying into the
cabin, seeking the cause for Washington's loud cry.

Jack and Mark, who came in at that juncture, were a little bit ashamed
of the trick they had played.

"What is the trouble?" repeated Mr. Henderson.

"We's all goin' to be devoured alibe!" cried Washington pointing to the
fish, that still clung to the glass.

"Ah, a sucker fish!" remarked the inventor. "A large specimen, too.
Don't be afraid Washington, it can't hurt you."

"He looks like he could," said the colored man. "Look at dem teef!"

Indeed the creature's mouth was a horrible sight, as it opened and shut.

"I'll show you how to get rid of him," said the professor.

He turned on the electric lights in the cabin, flooding the room with a
bright glow. The big fish darted off, and, when the lights were turned
out again, the terrible eyes did not reappear, much to their
satisfaction.

"The lights scared it away," remarked the inventor. "But you mustn't get
frightened so easily, Washington. You'll see stranger sights than that
before you're through with this voyage."

"Oh I wasn't 'fraid," spoke up Washington. "I were jest 'stonished,
dat's all."

"What did you get down on your knees for?" asked Mark with a grin.

"I might hab been lookin' for my collar button, for all you knows,"
replied Washington, with an air of great dignity, and went back to the
