whole of the narrow path, so to speak, which constituted his Universe,
and no one could move to the right or left to make way for passers by,
it followed that no Linelander could ever pass another.  Once
neighbours, always neighbours.  Neighbourhood with them was like
marriage with us.  Neighbours remained neighbours till death did them
part.

Such a life, with all vision limited to a Point, and all motion to a
Straight Line, seemed to me inexpressibly dreary; and I was surprised
to note the vivacity and cheerfulness of the King.  Wondering whether
it was possible, amid circumstances so unfavourable to domestic
relations, to enjoy the pleasures of conjugal union, I hesitated for
some time to question his Royal Highness on so delicate a subject; but
at last I plunged into it by abruptly inquiring as to the health of his
family.  "My wives and children," he replied, "are well and happy."

Staggered at this answer--for in the immediate proximity of the Monarch
(as I had noted in my dream before I entered Lineland) there were none
but Men--I ventured to reply, "Pardon me, but I cannot imagine how your
Royal Highness can at any time either see or approach their Majesties,
when there are at least half a dozen intervening individuals, whom you
can neither see through, nor pass by?  Is it possible that in Lineland
proximity is not necessary for marriage and for the generation of
children?"

"How can you ask so absurd a question?" replied the Monarch.  "If it
were indeed as you suggest, the Universe would soon be depopulated.
No, no; neighbourhood is needless for the union of hearts; and the
birth of children is too important a matter to have been allowed to
depend upon such an accident as proximity.  You cannot be ignorant of
this.  Yet since you are pleased to affect ignorance, I will instruct
you as if you were the veriest baby in Lineland.  Know, then, that
marriages are consummated by means of the faculty of sound and the
sense of hearing.

"You are of course aware that every Man has two mouths or voices--as
well as two eyes--a bass at one and a tenor at the other of his
extremities.  I should not mention this, but that I have been unable to
distinguish your tenor in the course of our conversation." I replied
that I had but one voice, and that I had not been aware that his Royal
Highness had two.  "That confirms my impression," said the King, "that
you are not a Man, but a feminine Monstrosity with a bass voice, and an
utterly uneducated ear.  But to continue.

"Nature having herself ordained that every Man should wed two wives--"
"Why two?" asked I.  "You carry your affected simplicity too far", he
cried.  "How can there be a completely harmonious union without the
combination of the Four in One, viz. the Bass and Tenor of the Man and
the Soprano and Contralto of the two Women?" "But supposing," said I,
"that a man should prefer one wife or three?" "It is impossible," he
said; "it is as inconceivable as that two and one should make five, or
that the human eye should see a Straight Line."  I would have
interrupted him; but he proceeded as follows:

"Once in the middle of each week a Law of Nature compels us to move to
and fro with a rhythmic motion of more than usual violence, which
continues for the time you would take to count a hundred and one.  In
the midst of this choral dance, at the fifty-first pulsation, the
inhabitants of the Universe pause in full career, and each individual
sends forth his richest, fullest, sweetest strain.  It is in this
decisive moment that all our marriages are made.  So exquisite is the
adaptation of Bass to Treble, of Tenor to Contralto, that oftentimes
the Loved Ones, though twenty thousand leagues away, recognize at once
the responsive note of their destined Lover; and, penetrating the
paltry obstacles of distance, Love unites the three.  The marriage in
that instant consummated results in a threefold Male and Female
offspring which takes its place in Lineland."

"What!  Always threefold?" said I.  "Must one wife then always have
twins?"

"Bass-voiced Monstrosity! yes," replied the King.  "How else could the
balance of the Sexes be maintained, if two girls were not born for
every boy?  Would you ignore the very Alphabet of Nature?" He ceased,
speechless for fury; and some time elapsed before I could induce him to
resume his narrative.

"You will not, of course, suppose that every bachelor among us finds
his mates at the first wooing in this universal Marriage Chorus.  On
the contrary, the process is by most of us many times repeated.  Few
are the hearts whose happy lot it is at once to recognize in each
other's voices the partner intended for them by Providence, and to fly
into a reciprocal and perfectly harmonious embrace.  With most of us
the courtship is of long duration.  The Wooer's voices may perhaps
accord with one of the future wives, but not with both; or not, at
first, with either; or the Soprano and Contralto may not quite
harmonize.  In such cases Nature has provided that every weekly Chorus
shall bring the three Lovers into closer harmony.  Each trial of voice,
each fresh discovery of discord, almost imperceptibly induces the less
perfect to modify his or her vocal utterance so as to approximate to
the more perfect.  And after many trials and many approximations, the
result is at last achieved.  There comes a day at last, when, while the
wonted Marriage Chorus goes forth from universal Lineland, the three
far-off Lovers suddenly find themselves in exact harmony, and, before
they are awake, the wedded Triplet is rapt vocally into a duplicate
embrace; and Nature rejoices over one more marriage and over three more
births."




Section 14.  How I vainly tried to explain the nature of Flatland



Thinking that it was time to bring down the Monarch from his raptures
to the level of common sense, I determined to endeavour to open up to
him some glimpses of the truth, that is to say of the nature of things
in Flatland.  So I began thus: "How does your Royal Highness
distinguish the shapes and positions of his subjects?  I for my part
noticed by the sense of sight, before I entered your Kingdom, that some
of your people are Lines and others Points, and that some of the Lines
are larger--" "You speak of an impossibility," interrupted the King;
"you must have seen a vision; for to detect the difference between a
Line and a Point by the sense of sight is, as every one knows, in the
nature of things, impossible; but it can be detected by the sense of
hearing, and by the same means my shape can be exactly ascertained.
Behold me--I am a Line, the longest in Lineland, over six inches of
Space--"  "Of Length", I ventured to suggest.  "Fool," said he, "Space
is Length.  Interrupt me again, and I have done."

I apologized; but he continued scornfully, "Since you are impervious to
argument, you shall hear with your ears how by means of my two voices I
reveal my shape to my Wives, who are at this moment six thousand miles
seventy yards two feet eight inches away, the one to the North, the
other to the South.  Listen, I call to them."

He chirruped, and then complacently continued:  "My wives at this
moment receiving the sound of one of my voices, closely followed by the
other, and perceiving that the latter reaches them after an interval in
which sound can traverse 6.457 inches, infer that one of my mouths is
6.457 inches further from them than the other, and accordingly know my
shape to be 6.457 inches.  But you will of course understand that my
wives do not make this calculation every time they hear my two voices.
They made it, once for all, before we were married.  But they COULD
make it at any time.  And in the same way I can estimate the shape of
any of my Male subjects by the sense of sound."

"But how," said I, "if a Man feigns a Woman's voice with one of his two
voices, or so disguises his Southern voice that it cannot be recognized
as the echo of the Northern?  May not such deceptions cause great
inconvenience?  And have you no means of checking frauds of this kind
by commanding your neighbouring subjects to feel one another?"  This of
course was a very stupid question, for feeling could not have answered
the purpose; but I asked with the view of irritating the Monarch, and I
succeeded perfectly.

"What!" cried he in horror, "explain your meaning."  "Feel, touch, come
into contact," I replied.  "If you mean by FEELING," said the King,
"approaching so close as to leave no space between two individuals,
know, Stranger, that this offence is punishable in my dominions by
death.  And the reason is obvious.  The frail form of a Woman, being
liable to be shattered by such an approximation, must be preserved by
the State; but since Women cannot be distinguished by the sense of
sight from Men, the Law ordains universally that neither Man nor Woman
shall be approached so closely as to destroy the interval between the
approximator and the approximated.

"And indeed what possible purpose would be served by this illegal and
unnatural excess of approximation which you call TOUCHING, when all the
ends of so brutal and coarse a process are attained at once more easily
and more exactly by the sense of hearing?  As to your suggested danger
of deception, it is non-existent: for the Voice, being the essence of
one's Being, cannot be thus changed at will.  But come, suppose that I
had the power of passing through solid things, so that I could
penetrate my subjects, one after another, even to the number of a
billion, verifying the size and distance of each by the sense of
FEELING:  how much time and energy would be wasted in this clumsy and
inaccurate method!  Whereas now, in one moment of audition, I take as
it were the census and statistics, local, corporeal, mental and
spiritual, of every living being in Lineland.  Hark, only hark!"

So saying he paused and listened, as if in an ecstasy, to a sound which
seemed to me no better than a tiny chirping from an innumerable
multitude of lilliputian grasshoppers.

"Truly," replied I, "your sense of hearing serves you in good stead,
and fills up many of your deficiencies.  But permit me to point out
that your life in Lineland must be deplorably dull.  To see nothing but
a Point!  Not even to be able to contemplate a Straight Line!  Nay, not
even to know what a Straight Line is!  To see, yet be cut off from
those Linear prospects which are vouchsafed to us in Flatland!  Better
surely to have no sense of sight at all than to see so little!  I grant
you I have not your discriminative faculty of hearing; for the concert
of all Lineland which gives you such intense pleasure, is to me no
better than a multitudinous twittering or chirping.  But at least I can
discern, by sight, a Line from a Point.  And let me prove it.  Just
before I came into your kingdom, I saw you dancing from left to right,
and then from right to left, with Seven Men and a Woman in your
immediate proximity on the left, and eight Men and two Women on your
right.  Is not this correct?"

"It is correct," said the King, "so far as the numbers and sexes are
concerned, though I know not what you mean by 'right' and 'left'.  But
I deny that you saw these things.  For how could you see the Line, that
is to say the inside, of any Man?  But you must have heard these
things, and then dreamed that you saw them.  And let me ask what you
mean by those words 'left' and 'right'.  I suppose it is your way of
saying Northward and Southward."

"Not so," replied I; "besides your motion of Northward and Southward,
there is another motion which I call from right to left."

KING.  Exhibit to me, if you please, this motion from left to right.

I.  Nay, that I cannot do, unless you could step out of your Line
altogether.

KING.  Out of my Line?  Do you mean out of the world?  Out of Space?

I.  Well, yes.  Out of YOUR World.  Out of YOUR Space.  For your Space
is not the true Space.  True Space is a Plane; but your Space is only a
Line.

KING.  If you cannot indicate this motion from left to right by
yourself moving in it, then I beg you to describe it to me in words.

I.  If you cannot tell your right side from your left, I fear that no
words of mine can make my meaning clear to you.  But surely you cannot
be ignorant of so simple a distinction.

KING.  I do not in the least understand you.

I.  Alas!  How shall I make it clear?  When you move straight on, does
it not sometimes occur to you that you COULD move in some other way,
turning your eye round so as to look in the direction towards which
your side is now fronting?  In other words, instead of always moving in
the direction of one of your extremities, do you never feel a desire to
move in the direction, so to speak, of your side?

KING.  Never.  And what do you mean?  How can a man's inside "front" in
any direction?  Or how can a man move in the direction of his inside?

I.  Well then, since words cannot explain the matter, I will try deeds,
and will move gradually out of Lineland in the direction which I desire
to indicate to you.

At the word I began to move my body out of Lineland.  As long as any
part of me remained in his dominion and in his view, the King kept
exclaiming, "I see you, I see you still; you are not moving."  But when
I had at last moved myself out of his Line, he cried in his shrillest
voice, "She is vanished; she is dead."  "I am not dead," replied I; "I
am simply out of Lineland, that is to say, out of the Straight Line
which you call Space, and in the true Space, where I can see things as
they are.  And at this moment I can see your Line, or side--or inside
as you are pleased to call it; and I can see also the Men and Women on
the North and South of you, whom I will now enumerate, describing their
order, their size, and the interval between each."


[Illustration 7]

[ASCII approximation follows]


            My body just before I disappeared
                      +---------+
                      |\ \ \ \ \|
                      |\ \ \ \ \|
                      |\ \ \ \ \|
  Lineland ---->      |\ \ \ \ \|              The King
  --------------------+---------+--------------========


When I had done this at great length, I cried triumphantly, "Does that
at last convince you?"  And, with that, I once more entered Lineland,
taking up the same position as before.

But the Monarch replied, "If you were a Man of sense--though, as you
appear to have only one voice I have little doubt you are not a Man but
a Woman--but, if you had a particle of sense, you would listen to
reason.  You ask me to believe that there is another Line besides that
which my senses indicate, and another motion besides that of which I am
daily conscious.  I, in return, ask you to describe in words or
indicate by motion that other Line of which you speak.  Instead of
moving, you merely exercise some magic art of vanishing and returning
to sight; and instead of any lucid description of your new World, you
simply tell me the numbers and sizes of some forty of my retinue, facts
known to any child in my capital.  Can anything be more irrational or
audacious?  Acknowledge your folly or depart from my dominions."

Furious at his perversity, and especially indignant that he professed
to be ignorant of my sex, I retorted in no measured terms, "Besotted
Being!  You think yourself the perfection of existence, while you are
in reality the most imperfect and imbecile.  You profess to see,
whereas you can see nothing but a Point!  You plume yourself on
inferring the existence of a Straight Line; but I CAN SEE Straight
Lines, and infer the existence of Angles, Triangles, Squares,
Pentagons, Hexagons, and even Circles.  Why waste more words?  Suffice
it that I am the completion of your incomplete self.  You are a Line,
but I am a Line of Lines, called in my country a Square:  and even I,
infinitely superior though I am to you, am of little account among the
great nobles of Flatland, whence I have come to visit you, in the hope
of enlightening your ignorance."

Hearing these words the King advanced towards me with a menacing cry as
if to pierce me through the diagonal; and in that same moment there
arose from myriads of his subjects a multitudinous war-cry, increasing
in vehemence till at last methought it rivalled the roar of an army of
a hundred thousand Isosceles, and the artillery of a thousand
Pentagons.  Spell-bound and motionless, I could neither speak nor move
to avert the impending destruction; and still the noise grew louder,
and the King came closer, when I awoke to find the breakfast-bell
recalling me to the realities of Flatland.




Section 15.  Concerning a Stranger from Spaceland



From dreams I proceed to facts.

It was the last day of the 1999th year of our era.  The pattering of
the rain had long ago announced nightfall; and I was sitting in the
company of my wife, musing on the events of the past and the prospects
of the coming year, the coming century, the coming Millennium.

[Note:  When I say "sitting", of course I do not mean any change of
attitude such as you in Spaceland signify by that word; for as we have
no feet, we can no more "sit" nor "stand" (in your sense of the word)
than one of your soles or flounders.

Nevertheless, we perfectly well recognize the different mental states
of volition implied in "lying", "sitting", and "standing", which are to
some extent indicated to a beholder by a slight increase of lustre
corresponding to the increase of volition.

But on this, and a thousand other kindred subjects, time forbids me to
dwell.]

My four Sons and two orphan Grandchildren had retired to their several
apartments; and my wife alone remained with me to see the old
Millennium out and the new one in.

I was rapt in thought, pondering in my mind some words that had
casually issued from the mouth of my youngest Grandson, a most
promising young Hexagon of unusual brilliancy and perfect angularity.
His uncles and I had been giving him his usual practical lesson in
Sight Recognition, turning ourselves upon our centres, now rapidly, now
more slowly, and questioning him as to our positions; and his answers
had been so satisfactory that I had been induced to reward him by
giving him a few hints on Arithmetic, as applied to Geometry.

Taking nine Squares, each an inch every way, I had put them together so
as to make one large Square, with a side of three inches, and I had
hence proved to my little Grandson that--though it was impossible for
us to SEE the inside of the Square--yet we might ascertain the number
of square inches in a Square by simply squaring the number of inches in
the side:  "and thus," said I, "we know that 3^2, or 9, represents the
number of square inches in a Square whose side is 3 inches long."

The little Hexagon meditated on this a while and then said to me; "But
you have been teaching me to raise numbers to the third power: I
suppose 3^3 must mean something in Geometry; what does it mean?"
"Nothing at all," replied I, "not at least in Geometry; for Geometry
has only Two Dimensions."  And then I began to shew the boy how a Point
by moving through a length of three inches makes a Line of three
inches, which may be represented by 3; and how a Line of three inches,
moving parallel to itself through a length of three inches, makes a
Square of three inches every way, which may be represented by 3^2.

Upon this, my Grandson, again returning to his former suggestion, took
me up rather suddenly and exclaimed, "Well, then, if a Point by moving
three inches, makes a Line of three inches represented by 3; and if a
straight Line of three inches, moving parallel to itself, makes a
Square of three inches every way, represented by 3^2; it must be that a
Square of three inches every way, moving somehow parallel to itself
(but I don't see how) must make Something else (but I don't see what)
of three inches every way--and this must be represented by 3^3."

"Go to bed," said I, a little ruffled by this interruption: "if you
would talk less nonsense, you would remember more sense."

So my Grandson had disappeared in disgrace; and there I sat by my
Wife's side, endeavouring to form a retrospect of the year 1999 and of
the possibilities of the year 2000, but not quite able to shake off the
thoughts suggested by the prattle of my bright little Hexagon.  Only a
few sands now remained in the half-hour glass.  Rousing myself from my
reverie I turned the glass Northward for the last time in the old
Millennium; and in the act, I exclaimed aloud, "The boy is a fool."

Straightway I became conscious of a Presence in the room, and a
chilling breath thrilled through my very being.  "He is no such thing,"
cried my Wife, "and you are breaking the Commandments in thus
dishonouring your own Grandson." But I took no notice of her.  Looking
round in every direction I could see nothing; yet still I FELT a
Presence, and shivered as the cold whisper came again.  I started up.
"What is the matter?" said my Wife, "there is no draught; what are you
looking for?  There is nothing."  There was nothing; and I resumed my
seat, again exclaiming, "The boy is a fool, I say; 3^3 can have no
meaning in Geometry."  At once there came a distinctly audible reply,
"The boy is not a fool; and 3^3 has an obvious Geometrical meaning."

My Wife as well as myself heard the words, although she did not
understand their meaning, and both of us sprang forward in the
direction of the sound.  What was our horror when we saw before us a
Figure!  At the first glance it appeared to be a Woman, seen sideways;
but a moment's observation shewed me that the extremities passed into
dimness too rapidly to represent one of the Female Sex; and I should
have thought it a Circle, only that it seemed to change its size in a
manner impossible for a Circle or for any regular Figure of which I had
had experience.

But my Wife had not my experience, nor the coolness necessary to note
these characteristics.  With the usual hastiness and unreasoning
jealousy of her Sex, she flew at once to the conclusion that a Woman
had entered the house through some small aperture.  "How comes this
person here?" she exclaimed, "you promised me, my dear, that there
should be no ventilators in our new house." "Nor are there any," said
I; "but what makes you think that the stranger is a Woman?  I see by my
power of Sight Recognition----" "Oh, I have no patience with your Sight
Recognition," replied she, "'Feeling is believing' and 'A Straight Line
to the touch is worth a Circle to the sight'"--two Proverbs, very
common with the Frailer Sex in Flatland.

"Well," said I, for I was afraid of irritating her, "if it must be so,
demand an introduction."  Assuming her most gracious manner, my Wife
advanced towards the Stranger, "Permit me, Madam, to feel and be felt
by----" then, suddenly recoiling, "Oh!  it is not a Woman, and there
are no angles either, not a trace of one.  Can it be that I have so
misbehaved to a perfect Circle?"

