
=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Buds small, roundish, resinous, grouped on
the leading shoots. Leaves scattered, spirally arranged in rows, at
right angles to twig, or disposed in two ranks like the hemlock; 1/2-1
inch long, dark glossy green on the upper surface, beneath silvery
bluish-white, and traversed lengthwise by rows of minute dots, flat,
narrowly linear; apex blunt, in young trees and upon vigorous shoots,
often slightly but distinctly notched, or sometimes upon upper branches
with a sharp, rigid point; sessile; aromatic.

=Inflorescence.=--Early spring. Lateral or terminal on shoots of the
preceding season; sterile flowers oblong-cylindrical, 1/4 inch in
length; anthers yellow, red-tinged: fertile flowers on the upper side of
the twig, erect, cylindrical; cover-scales broad, much larger than the
purple ovuliferous scales, terminating in a long, recurved tip.

=Fruit.=--Cones along the upper side of the branchlets, erect or nearly
so in all stages of growth, purplish when young, 3-5 inches long, 1 inch
or more wide; puberulous; cover-scales at maturity much smaller than
ovuliferous scales, thin, obovate, serrulate, bristle-pointed;
ovuliferous scales thin, broad, rounded; edge minutely erose, serrulate
or entire; both kinds of scales falling from the axis at maturity; seeds
winged, purplish.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy in New England, but best adapted to the
northern sections; grows rapidly in open or shaded situations,
especially where there is cool, moist, rich soil; easily transplanted;
suitable for immediate effects in forest plantations, but not desirable
for a permanent ornamental tree, as it loses the lower branches at an
early period. Nurserymen and collectors offer it in quantity at a low
price. Propagated from seed.

[Illustration: PLATE X.--Abies balsamea.]

  1. Branch with flower-buds.
  2. Branch with sterile flowers.
  3. Branch with fertile flowers.
  4. Cover-scale and ovuliferous scale with ovules, inner side.
  5. Fruiting branch.
  6. Ovuliferous scales with ovules at maturity, inner side.
  7. Cone-scale and ovuliferous scale at maturity, outer side.
  8-9. Leaves.
  10-11. Cross-sections of leaves.


=Thuja occidentalis, L.=

ARBOR-VITAE. WHITE CEDAR. CEDAR.

=Habitat and Range.=--Low, swampy lands, rocky borders of rivers and
ponds.

     Southern Labrador to Nova Scotia; west to Manitoba.

Maine,--throughout the state; most abundant in the central and northern
portions, forming extensive areas known as "cedar swamps"; sometimes
bordering a growth of black spruce at a lower level; New
Hampshire,--mostly confined to the upper part of Coos county,
disappearing at the White river narrows near Hanover; seen only in
isolated localities south of the White mountains; Vermont,--common in
swamps at levels below 1000 feet; Massachusetts,--Berkshire county;
occasional in the northern sections of the Connecticut river valley;
Rhode Island,--not reported; Connecticut,--East Hartford (J. N. Bishop).

     South along the mountains to North Carolina and East Tennessee;
     west to Minnesota.

=Habit.=--Ordinarily 25-50 feet high, with a trunk diameter of 1-2 feet,
in northern Maine occasionally 60-70 feet in height, with a diameter of
3-5 feet; trunk stout, more or less buttressed in old trees, tapering
rapidly, often divided, inclined or twisted, ramifying for the most part
near the ground, forming a dense head, rather small for the size of the
trunk; branches irregularly disposed and nearly horizontal, the lower
often much declined; branchlets many, the flat spray disposed in
fan-shaped planes at different angles; foliage bright, often
interspersed here and there with yellow, faded leaves.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk in old trees a dead ash-gray, striate with broad
and flat ridges, often conspicuously spirally twisted, shreddy at the
edge; young stems and large branches reddish-brown, more or less striate
and shreddy; branchlets ultimately smooth, shining, reddish-brown,
marked by raised scars; season's twigs invested with leaves.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Leaf-buds naked, minute. Leaves in opposite
pairs, 4-ranked, closely adherent to the branchlet and completely
covering it, keeled in the side pairs and flat in the others,
scale-like, ovate (in seedlings needle-shaped), obtuse or pointed at the
apex, glandular upon the back, exhaling when bruised a strong aromatic
odor.

=Inflorescence.=--April to May. Flowers terminal, dark reddish-brown;
sterile and fertile, usually on the same plant, rarely on separate
plants; anthers opposite; filaments short; ovuliferous scales opposite,
with slight projections near the base, usually 2-ovuled.

=Fruit.=--Cones, terminal on short branchlets, spreading or recurved,
about 1/2 inch long, reddish-brown, loose-scaled, opening to the base at
maturity; persistent through the first winter; scales 6-12, dry, oblong,
not shield-shaped, not pointed; margin entire or nearly so; seeds winged
all round.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy in New England; adapts itself to all soils
and exposures, but prefers moist locations; grows slowly. Young trees
have a narrowly conical outline, which spreads out at the base with age;
retains its lower branches in open places, and is especially useful for
hedges or narrow evergreen screens; little affected by insects; often
disfigured, however, by dead branches and discolored leaves; is
transplanted readily, and can be obtained in any quantity from
nurserymen and collectors. The horticultural forms in cultivation range
from thick, low, spreading tufts, through very dwarf, round, oval or
conical forms, to tall, narrow, pyramidal varieties. Some have all the
foliage tinged bright yellow, cream, or white; others have variegated
foliage; another form has drooping branches. The bright summer foliage
turns to a brownish color in winter. It is propagated from the seed and
its horticultural forms from cuttings and layers.

[Illustration: PLATE XI.--Thuja occidentalis.]

  1. Flowering branch with the preceding year's fruit.
  2. Branch.
  3. Sterile flower.
  4. Stamen.
  5. Fertile flower.
  6. Scale with ovules.


=Cupressus thyoides, L.=

_Chamaecyparis sphaeroidea, Spach. Chamaecyparis thyoides, B. S. P._

WHITE CEDAR. CEDAR.

=Habitat and Range.=--In deep swamps and marshes, which it often fills
to the exclusion of other trees, mostly near the seacoast.

     Cape Breton island and near Halifax, Nova Scotia, perhaps
     introduced in both.

Maine,--reported from the southern part of York county; New
Hampshire,--limited to Rockingham county near the coast; Vermont,--no
station known; Massachusetts,--occasional in central and eastern
sections, very common in the southeast; Rhode Island,--common;
Connecticut,--occasional in peat swamps.

     Southward, coast region to Florida and west to Mississippi.

=Habit.=--20-50 feet high and 1-2 feet in diameter at the ground,
reaching in the southern states an altitude of 90 and a diameter of 4
feet; trunk straight, tapering slowly, throwing out nearly horizontal,
slender branches, forming a narrow, conical head often of great elegance
and lightness; foliage light brownish-green; strong-scented; spray flat
in planes disposed at different angles; wood permanently aromatic.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk thick, reddish, fibrous, shreddy, separating into
thin scales, becoming more or less furrowed in old trees; branches
reddish-brown; fine scaled; branches after fall of leaves, in the third
or fourth year, smooth, purplish-brown; season's shoots at first
greenish.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Leaf-buds naked, minute. Leaves mostly
opposite, 4-ranked, adherent to the branchlet and completely covering
it; keeled in the side pairs and slightly convex in the others, dull
green, pointed at apex or triangular awl-shaped, mostly with a minute
roundish gland upon the back.

=Inflorescence.=--April. Flowers terminal, sterile and fertile, usually
on the same plant, rarely on separate plants, fertile on short
branchlets: sterile, globular or oblong, anthers opposite, filaments
shield-shaped: fertile, oblong or globular; ovuliferous scales opposite,
slightly spreading at top, dark reddish-brown.

=Fruit.=--Cones, variously placed, 1/2 inch in diameter, roundish,
purplish-brown, opening towards the center, never to the base; scales
shield-shaped, woody; seeds several under each scale, winged.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England, growing best in
the southern sections. Young trees are graceful and attractive, but soon
become thin and lose their lower branches; valued chiefly in landscape
planting for covering low and boggy places where other trees do not
succeed as well. Seldom for sale in nurseries, but easily procured from
collectors. Several unimportant horticultural forms are grown.

[Illustration: PLATE XII.--Cupressus thyoides.]

  1. Branch with flowers.
  2. Sterile flower.
  3. Stamen, back view.
  4. Stamen, front view.
  5. Fertile flower.
  6. Ovuliferous scale with ovules.
  7. Fruiting-branch.
  8. Fruit.
  9. Branch.


=Juniperus Virginiana, L.=

RED CEDAR. CEDAR. SAVIN.

=Habitat and Range.=--Dry, rocky hills but not at great altitudes,
borders of lakes and streams, sterile plains, peaty swamps.

     Nova Scotia and New Brunswick to Ontario.

Maine,--rare, though it extends northward to the middle Kennebec valley,
reduced almost to a shrub; New Hampshire,--most frequent in the
southeast part of the state; sparingly in the Connecticut valley as far
north as Haverhill (Grafton county); found also in Hart's location in
the White mountain region; Vermont,--not abundant; occurs here and there
on hills at levels less than 1000 feet; frequent in the Champlain and
lower Connecticut valleys; Massachusetts,--west and center occasional,
eastward common; Rhode Island and Connecticut,--common.

     South to Florida; west to Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, and Indian
     Territory.

=Habit.=--A medium-sized tree, 25-40 feet high, with a trunk diameter of
8-20 inches, attaining much greater dimensions southward; extremely
variable in outline; the lower branches usually nearly horizontal, the
upper ascending; head when young very regular, narrow-based, close and
conical; in old trees frequently rather open, wide-spreading, ragged,
roundish or flattened. In very exposed situations, especially along the
seacoast, the trunk sometimes rises a foot or two and then develops
horizontally, forming a curiously contorted lateral head. Under such
conditions it occasionally becomes a dwarf tree 2-3 feet high, with
wide-spreading branches and a very dense dome; spray close, foliage a
sombre green, sometimes tinged with a rusty brownish-red; wood pale red,
aromatic.

=Bark.=--Bark of trunk light reddish-brown, fibrous, shredding off, now
and then, in long strips, exposing the smooth brown inner bark; season's
shoots green.

=Winter Buds and Leaves.=--Leaf-buds naked, minute. Leaves dull green or
brownish-red, of two kinds:

1. Scale-like, mostly opposite, each pair overlapping the pair above,
4-ranked, ovate, acute, sometimes bristle-tipped, more or less convex,
obscurely glandular.

2. Scattered, not overlapping, narrowly lanceolate or needle-shaped,
sharp-pointed, spreading. The second form is more common in young trees,
sometimes comprising all the foliage, but is often found on trees of all
ages, sometimes aggregated in dense masses.

=Inflorescence.=--Early May. Flowers terminating short branches, sterile
and fertile, more commonly on separate trees, often on the same tree;
anthers in opposite pairs; ovuliferous scales in opposite pairs,
slightly spreading, acute or obtuse; ovules 1-4.

=Fruit.=--Berry-like from the coalescence of the fleshy cone-scales, the
extremities of which are often visible, roundish, the size of a small
pea, dark blue beneath a whitish bloom, 1-4-seeded.

=Horticultural Value.=--Hardy throughout New England; prefers sunny
slopes and a loamy soil, but grows well in poor, thin soils and upon
wind-swept sites; young plants increase in height 1-2 feet yearly and
have a very formal, symmetrical outline; old trees often become
irregular and picturesque, and grow very slowly; a long-lived tree;
usually obtainable in nurseries and from collectors, but must frequently
be transplanted to be moved with safety. If a ball of earth can be
retained about the roots of wild plants, they can often be moved
successfully. There are horticultural forms distinguished by a slender
weeping or distorted habit, and by variegated bluish or yellowish
foliage, occasionally found in American nurseries. The type is usually
propagated from the seed, the horticultural forms from cuttings or by
grafting.

[Illustration: PLATE XIII.--Juniperus Virginiana.]

  1. Branch with sterile and fertile flowers.
  2. Sterile flower.
  3. Stamen with pollen-sacs.
  4. Fertile flower.
  5. Fruiting branch.
  6. Branch.
  7. Branch with needle-shaped leaves.




SALICACEAE. WILLOW FAMILY.


Trees or shrubs; leaves simple, alternate, undivided, with stipules
either minute and soon falling or leafy and persistent; inflorescence
from axillary buds of the preceding season, appearing with or before the
leaves, in nearly erect, spreading or drooping catkins, sterile and
fertile on separate trees; flowers one to each bract, without calyx
or corolla; stamens one to many; style short or none; stigmas 2, entire
or 2-4-lobed; fruit a 2-4-celled capsule.


POPULUS.

Inflorescence usually appearing before the leaves; flowers with lacerate
bracts, disk cup-shaped and oblique-edged, at least in sterile flowers;
stamens usually many, filaments distinct; stigmas mostly divided,
elongated or spreading.


SALIX.

Inflorescence appearing with or before the leaves; flowers with entire
bracts and one or two small glands; disks wanting; stamens few.


=Populus tremuloides, Michx.=

POPLAR. ASPEN.

=Habitat and Range.=--In all soils and situations except in deep swamps,
though more usual in dry uplands; sometimes springing up in great
abundance in clearings or upon burnt lands.
