for a comprehensible analogy, and thought of a native vegetable, layered
like an onion, with a hard kernel in the middle. "The Oomphel Secret is
like a fooshkoot. There are many lesser secrets around it, each of which
must be peeled off like the skins of a fooshkoot and eaten. Then you
will find the nut in the middle."

"But the nut of the fooshkoot is bitter," somebody said.

He nodded, slowly and solemnly. "The nut of the fooshkoot is bitter," he
agreed.

They looked at one another, disquieted by his words. Before anybody
could comment, he was continuing:

"Before this secret is given, there are things to be learned. You would
not understand it if I gave it to you now. You believe many not-real
things which must be chased out of your minds, otherwise they would
spoil your understanding."

That was verbatim what they told adolescents before giving them the
Manhood Secret. Some of them huffed a little; most of them laughed. Then
one called out: "Speak on, Grandfather of Grandfathers," and they all
laughed. That was fine, it had been about time for teacher to crack his
little joke. Now he became serious again.

"The first of these not-real things you must chase from your mind is
this which you believe about the home of the Terrans. It is not real
that they come from the Dark Place under the World. There is no Dark
Place under the World."

Bedlam for a few seconds; that was a pretty stiff jolt. No Dark Place;
who ever heard of such a thing? The eldest shoonoo rose, cradling his
graven image in his arms, and the noise quieted.

"Mailsh Heelbare, if there is no Dark Place where do the Sky Fire and
the Always-Same go when they are not in the sky?"

"They never leave the sky; the World is round, and there is sky
everywhere around it."

They knew that, or had at least heard it, since the Terrans had come.
They just couldn't believe it. It was against common sense. The oldest
shoonoo said as much, and more:

"These young ones who have gone to the Terran schools have come to the
villages with such tales, but who listens to them? They show disrespect
for the chiefs and the elders, and even for the shoonoon. They mock at
the Grandfather-stories. They say men should do women's work and women
do no work at all. They break taboos, and cause trouble. They are
fools."

"Am I a fool, Grandfather? Do I mock at the old stories, or show
disrespect to elders and shoonoon? Yet I, Mailsh Heelbare, tell you
this. The World is indeed round, and I will show you."

The shoonoo looked contemptuously at the globe. "I have seen those
things," he said. "That is not the World; that is only a make-like." He
held up his phallic wood-carving. "I could say that this is a make-like
of the World, but that would not make it so."

"I will show you for real. We will all go in a ship." He looked at his
watch. "The Sky Fire is about to set. We will follow it all around the
world to the west, and come back here from the east, and the Sky Fire
will still be setting when we return. If I show you that, will you
believe me?"

"If you show us for real, and it is not a trick, we will have to believe
you."


When they emerged from the escalators, Alpha was just touching the
western horizon, and Beta was a little past zenith. The ship was moored
on contragravity beside the landing stage, her gangplank run out. The
shoonoon, who had gone up ahead, had all stopped short and were staring
at her; then they began gabbling among themselves, overcome by the
wonder of being about to board such a monster and ride on her. She was
the biggest ship any of them had ever seen. Maybe a few of them had been
on small freighters; many of them had never been off the ground. They
didn't look or act like cynical charlatans or implacable enemies of
progress and enlightenment. They were more like a lot of schoolboys
whose teacher is taking them on a surprise outing.

"Bet this'll be the biggest day in their lives," Travis said.

"Oh, sure. This'll be a grandfather-story ten generations from now."

"I can't get over the way they made up their minds, down there," Edith
Shaw was saying. "Why, they just went and talked for a few minutes and
came back with a decision."

They hadn't any organization, or any place to maintain on an
organizational pecking-order. Nobody was obliged to attack anybody
else's proposition in order to keep up his own status. He thought of the
Colonial Government taking ten years not to build those storm-shelters.

Foxx Travis was commenting on the ship, now:

"I never saw that ship before; didn't know there was anything like that
on the planet. Why, you could lift a whole regiment, with supplies and
equipment--"

"She's been laid up for the last five years, since the heat and the
native troubles stopped the tourist business here. She's the old
_Hesperus_. Excursion craft. This sun-chasing trip we're going to make
used to be a must for tourists here."

"I thought she was something like that, with all the glassed
observation deck forward. Who's the owner?"

"Kwannon Air Transport, Ltd. I told them what I needed her for, and they
made her available and furnished officers and crew and provisions for
the trip. They were working to put her in commission while we were
fitting up the fourth and fifth floors, downstairs."

"You just asked for that ship, and they just let you have it?" Edith
Shaw was incredulous and shocked. They wouldn't have done that for the
Government.

"They want to see these native troubles stopped, too. Bad for business.
You know; selfish profit-move. That's another social force it's a good
idea to work with instead of against."

The shoonoon were getting aboard, now, shepherded by the K.N.I. officer
and a couple of his men and some of the ship's crew. A couple of sepoys
were lugging the big globe that had been brought up from below after
them. Everybody assembled on the forward top observation deck, and Miles
called for attention and, finally, got it. He pointed out the three
viewscreens mounted below the bridge, amidships. One on the left, was
tuned to a pickup on the top of the Air Terminal tower, where the Terran
city, the military reservation and the spaceport met. It showed the view
to the west, with Alpha on the horizon. The one on the right, from the
same point, gave a view in the opposite direction, to the east. The
middle screen presented a magnified view of the navigational globe on
the bridge.

Viewscreens were no novelty to the shoonoon. They were a very familiar
type of oomphel. He didn't even need to do more than tell them that the
little spot of light on the globe would show the position of the ship.
When he was sure that they understood that they could see what was
happening in Bluelake while they were away, he called the bridge and
ordered Up Ship, telling the officer on duty to hold her at five
thousand feet.

The ship rose slowly, turning toward the setting M-giant. Somebody
called attention that the views in the screens weren't changing.
Somebody else said:

"Of course not. What we see for real changes because the ship is moving.
What we see in the screens is what the oomphel on the big building sees,
and it does not move. That is for real as the oomphel sees it."

"Nice going," Edith said. "Your class has just discovered relativity."
Travis was looking at the eastward viewscreen. He stepped over beside
Miles and lowered his voice.

"Trouble over there to the east of town. Big swarm of combat
contragravity working on something on the ground. And something's on
fire, too."

"I see it."

"That's where those evacuees are camped. Why in blazes they had to bring
them here to Bluelake--"

That had been EETA, too. When the solar tides had gotten high enough to
flood the coastal area, the natives who had been evacuated from the
district had been brought here because the Native Education people
wanted them exposed to urban influences. About half of the shoonoon who
had been rounded up locally had come in from the tide-inundated area.

"Parked right in the middle of the Terran-type food production area,"
Travis was continuing.

That was worrying him. Maybe he wasn't used to planets where the
biochemistry wasn't Terra-type and a Terran would be poisoned or, at
best, starve to death, on the local food; maybe, as a soldier he knew
how fragile even the best logistics system can be. It was something to
worry about. Travis excused himself and went off in the direction of the
bridge. Going to call HQ and find out what was happening.


Excitement among the shoonoon; they had spotted the ship on which they
were riding in the westward screen. They watched it until it had
vanished from "sight of the seeing-oomphel," and by then were over the
upland forests from whence they had been brought to Bluelake. Now and
then one of them would identify his own village, and that would start
more excitement.

Three infantry troop-carriers and a squadron of air cavalry were rushing
past the eastward pickup in the right hand screen; another fire had
started in the trouble area.

The crowd that had gathered around the globe that had been brought
aboard began calling for Mailsh Heelbare to show them how they would go
around the world and what countries they would pass over. Edith
accompanied him and listened while he talked to them. She was bubbling
with happy excitement, now. It had just dawned on her that shoonoon were
fun.

None of them had ever seen the mountains along the western side of the
continent except from a great distance. Now they were passing over them;
the ship had to gain altitude and even then make a detour around one
snow-capped peak. The whole hundred and eighty-four rushed to the
starboard side to watch it as they passed. The ocean, half an hour
later, started a rush forward. The score or so of them from the
Tidewater knew what an ocean was, but none of them had known that there
was another one to the west. Miles' view of the education program of the
EETA, never bright at best, became even dimmer. _The young men who have
gone to the Terran schools ... who listens to them? They are fools._

There were a few islands off the coast; the shoonoon identified them on
the screen globe, and on the one on deck. Some of them wanted to know
why there wasn't a spot of light on this globe, too. It didn't have the
oomphel inside to do that; that was a satisfactory explanation. Edith
started to explain about the orbital beacon-stations off-planet and the
radio beams, and then stopped.

"I'm sorry; I'm not supposed to say anything to them," she apologized.

"Oh, that's all right. I wouldn't go into all that, though. We don't
want to overload them."

She asked permission, a little later, to explain why the triangle tip
of the arctic continent, which had begun to edge into sight on the
screen globe, couldn't be seen from the ship. When he told her to go
ahead, she got a platinum half-sol piece from her purse, held it on the
globe from the classroom and explained about the curvature and told them
they could see nothing farther away than the circle the coin covered. It
was beginning to look as though the psychological-warfare experiment
might show another, unexpected, success.

[Illustration]

There was nothing, after the islands passed, but a lot of empty water.
The shoonoon were getting hungry, but they refused to go below to eat.
They were afraid they might miss something. So their dinner was brought
up on deck for them. Miles and Travis and Edith went to the officers'
dining room back of the bridge. Edith, by now, was even more excited
than the shoonoon.

"They're so anxious to learn!" She was having trouble adjusting to that;
that was dead against EETA doctrine. "But why wouldn't they listen to
the teachers we sent to the villages?"
