today, with his freshly-opened eyes of science, take in the mighty
pyramid of knowledge that will be built up in those long, long years of
the future? It's too gigantic to grasp; we can't imagine the things that
the ever-expanding mind of man will discover."

Arcot's voice slowed, and a far-off look came in his eyes.

"You might say there can be no greater energy than that of matter
annihilation. I doubt that. I have seen hints of something new--an
energy so vast--so transcendently tremendous--that it frightens me. The
energies of all the mighty suns of all the galaxies--of the whole
cosmos--in the hand of man! The energy of a billion billion billion
suns! And every sun pouring out its energy at the rate of quintillions
of horsepower every instant!

"But it's too great for man to have--I am going to forget it, lest man
be destroyed by his own might."

Arcot's halting speech told of his intense thought--of a dream of such
awful energies as man had never before conceived. His eyes looked
unseeing at the black velvet of space with its few, scattered stars.

"But we're here to decide which way to go," he added with a sudden
briskness as he straightened his shoulders. "Every now and then, I get a
new idea and I--I sort of dream. That's when I'm most likely to see the
solution. I think I know the solution now, but unless the need arises,
I'm never going to use it. It's too dangerous a toy."

There was silence for a moment, then Morey said, quietly:

"I've got a course plotted for us. We'll leave this Galaxy at a steep
angle--about forty-five degrees from the Galactic plane--to give us a
good view of our own Galaxy. And we can head for one of the nebulae in
that general area. What do you say?"

"I say," remarked Fuller, "that some of the great void without seems to
have leaked into my own poor self. It's been thirty thousand years since
I am going to have a meal this morning--whatever it is I mean--and I
want another." He looked meaningfully at Wade, the official cook of the
expedition.

Arcot suddenly burst out laughing. "So that's what I've been wanting!"
It had been ten chronometer hours since they had eaten, but since they
had been outracing light, they were now thirty thousand years in Earth's
past.

The weightlessness of free fall makes it difficult to recognize normally
familiar sensations, and the feeling of hunger is one of them. There was
little enough work to be done, so there was no great need for
nourishment, but the ordinary sensation of hunger is not caused by lack
of nourishment, but an empty stomach.

Sleep was another problem. A restless body will not permit a tired brain
to sleep, and though they had done a great deal of hard mental work, the
lack of physical fatigue made sleep difficult. The usual "day" in space
was forty hours, with thirty-hour waking periods and ten hours of sleep.

"Let's eat, then," Arcot decided. "Afterwards, we'll take a few
photographs and then throw this ship into high and really make time."

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours later, they were again seated at the control board. Arcot
reached out and threw the red switch. "I'm going to give her half power
for ten seconds." The air about them seemed suddenly snapping with
unprecedented power--then it was gone as the coil became fully charged.

"Lucky we shielded those relays," Arcot muttered. The tremendous surge
of current set up a magnetic field that turned knives and forks and, as
Wade found to his intense disgust, stopped watches that were not
magnetically shielded.

Space was utterly black about them now; there wasn't the slightest hint
of light. The ten seconds that Arcot had allowed dragged slowly. Then at
last came the heavy crashing of the huge relays; the current flowed back
into the storage coils, and space became normal again. They were alone
in the blackness.

Morey dove swiftly for the observatory. Before them, there was little to
see; the dim glow of nebulae millions of light years away was scarcely
visible to the naked eye, despite the clarity of space.

Behind them, like a shining horizon, they saw the mass of the Galaxy for
the first time as free observers.

Morey began to make swift calculations of the distance they had come by
measuring the apparent change in diameter of the Galaxy.

Arcot floated into the room after him and watched as Morey made his
observations and began to work swiftly with pencil and paper. "What do
you make?" Arcot asked.

"Mmmmm. Let's see." Morey worked a moment with his slide rule. "We made
good time! Twenty-nine light years in ten seconds! You had it on at half
power--the velocity goes up as the cube of the power--doubling the
power, then, gives us eight times the velocity--Hmmmmmm." He readjusted
the slide rule and slid the hairline over a bit. "We can make ten
million light years in a little less than five days at full power.

"But I suggest we make another stop in six hours. That will put us about
five radii, or half a million light years from the Galaxy. We'll need to
take some more photographs to help us retrace our steps to Earth."

"All right, Morey," Arcot agreed. "It's up to you. Get your photos here
and we'll go on. By the way, I think you ought to watch the instruments
in the power room; this will be our first test at full power. We figured
we'd make twenty light years per second, and it looks as if it's going
to be closer to twenty-four."

A few minutes later, Arcot seated himself at the control board and
flipped on the intercom to the power room. "All ready, Morey? I just
happened to think--it might be a good idea to pick out our galaxy now
and start toward it."

"Let's wait," cautioned Morey. "We can't make a very careful choice at
this distance, anyway; we're beyond the enlarging power range of the
telectroscope here. In another half million light years, we'll have a
much better view, and that comparatively short distance won't take us
much out of our way."

"Wait a minute," said Fuller. "You say we're beyond the magnification
range of the telectroscope. Then why would half a million light years
out of ten million make that much difference?"

"Because of the limit of amplification in the tubes," Arcot replied.
"You can only have so many stages of amplification; after that, you're
amplifying noise. The whole principle of the vacuum tube depends on
electronic emission; if you get _too much_ amplification, you can hear
every single electron striking the plate of the first tube by the time
the thing reaches the last amplifying stage! In other words, if your
incoming signal is weaker than the minimum noise level on the first
amplifying stage, no amount of amplification will give you anything but
more noise.

"The same is true of the telectroscope image. At this distance, the
light signal from those galaxies is weaker than the noise level. We'd
only get a flickering, blurred image. But if we go on another half
million light years, the light signal from the nearer nebulae will be
_stronger_ than the base noise level, and full amplification will give
us a good image on the screen."

Fuller nodded. "Okay, then let's go that additional half million light
years. I want to take a look at another galaxy."

"Right." Arcot turned to the intercom. "Ready, Morey?"

"Anytime you are."

"Here goes!" said Arcot. He pushed over the little red control.

At full power, the air filled with the strain of flowing energy and
actually broke down in spots with the terrific electrical energy of the
charge. There were little snapping sparks in the air, which, though
harmless electrically, were hot enough to give slight burns, as Wade
found to his sorrow.

"Yike! Say, why didn't you tell us to bring lightning rods?" he asked
indignantly as a small spark snapped its way over his hand.

"Sorry," grinned Arcot, "but most people know enough to stay out of the
way of those things. Seriously, though, I didn't think the electrostatic
curvature would be so slow to adjust. You see, when we build up our
light-rate distortion field, other curvatures are affected. We get some
gravity, some magnetic, and some electrostatic field distortion, too.
You can see what happens when they don't leak their energy back into the
coil.

"But we're busy with the instruments; leave the motorman alone!"

Morey was calling loudly for tests. Although the ship seemed to be
behaving perfectly, he wanted check tests to make sure the relays were
not being burned, which would keep them from responding properly. By
rerouting the current around each relay, Arcot checked them one by one.

It was just as they had finished testing the last one that Fuller
yelled.

"Hey! _Look!_" He pointed out the broad viewport in the side of the
ship.

Far off to their left and far to their right, they saw two shining ships
paralleling their course. They were shining, sleek ships, their long,
longitudinal windows glowing with white light. They seemed to be moving
at exactly the same speed, holding grimly to the course of the _Ancient
Mariner_. They bracketed the ship like an official guard, despite the
terrific velocity of the Earthmen's ship.

Arcot stared in amazement, his face suddenly clouded in wonder. Morey,
who had come up from the power room, stared in equal wonder.

Quickly, Wade and Fuller slid into the ray control seats. Their long
practice with the rays had made them dead shots, and they had been
chosen long before as the ship's official ray operators.

"Lord," muttered Morey as he looked at the ships, "where can they have
come from?"




VII


Silently, the four men watched the two ships, waiting for any hostile
movement. There was a long, tense moment, then something happened for
which three of them were totally unprepared.

Arcot burst into sudden laughter.

"Don't--ho--hoh-ho--oh--don't shoot!" he cried, laughing so hard it was
almost impossible to understand him. "Ohoh--space--curved!" he managed
to gasp.

For a moment more, Morey looked puzzled--then he was laughing as hard as
Arcot. Helplessly, Wade and Fuller looked at them, then at each other.
Then, suddenly, Wade caught the meaning of Arcot's remark and joined the
other two in laughter.

"All right," said Fuller, still mystified, "when you half-witted
physicists recover, please let me in on the joke!" He knew it had
something to do with the mysterious ships, so he looked closely at them
in hopes that he would get the point, too. When he saw it, he blinked in
amazement. "Hey! What is this? Those ships are exact duplicates of the
_Ancient Mariner_!"

"That--that's what I was laughing at," Arcot explained, wiping his eyes.
"Four big, brave explorers, scared of their own shadows!"

"The light from our own ship has come back to us, due to the intense
curvature of the space which encloses us. In normal space, a light ray
would take hundreds of millions of years to travel all the way around
the Universe and return to its point of origin. Theoretically, it would
be possible to photograph our own Galaxy as it was thousands of
millennia ago by the light which left it then and has traveled all the
way around the curvature of space.

"But our space has such terrific curvature that it only takes a fraction
of a second for light to make the trip. It has gone all the way around
our little cosmos and come back again.

"If we'd shot at it, we would have really done ourselves in! The ray
beam would go around and hit us from behind!"

"Say, that is a nice proposition!" laughed Fuller. "Then we'll be
accompanied by those ghosts all the way? There goes the spirit 'nine
fathoms deep' which moves the ship--the ghosts that work the sails. This
will be a real _Ancient Mariner_ trip!"

It was like that famed voyage in another way, too. The men found little
to do as they passed on at high speed through the vast realm of space.
The chronometer pointed out the hours with exasperating slowness. The
six hours that were to elapse before the first stop seemed as many days.
They had thought of this trip as a wonderful adventure in itself, but
the soundless continued monotony was depressing. They wandered around,
aimlessly. Wade tried to sleep, but after lying strapped in his bunk for
half an hour, he gave up in despair.

Arcot saw that the strain of doing nothing was not going to be good for
his little crew and decided to see what could be done about it.

He went down to the laboratory and looked for inspiration. He found it.

"Hey! Morey! Wade! Fuller! Come on down here! I've got an idea!" he
called.

They came to find him looking meditatively at the power pack from one of
the flying suits he had designed. He had taken the lux metal case off
and was looking at the neat apparatus that lay within.

"These are equipped for use with the space suits, of course," Morey
pointed out, "and that gives us protection against gases. But I wonder
if we might install protection against mechanical injury--with intent to
damage aforethought! In other words, why not equip these suits with a
small invisibility apparatus? We have it on the ship, but we might need
personal protection, too."

"Great idea," said Wade, "provided you can find room in that case."

"I think we can. We won't need to add anything but a few tuning devices,
really, and they don't take a whale of a lot of power."

Arcot pointed out the places where they could be put; also, he replaced
some of the old induction coils with one of his new storage cells and
got far higher efficiency from the tubes.

But principally, it was something to do.

Indeed, it was so thoroughly something to do that the six hours had
almost elapsed before they realized it. In a very short time, they
returned again to the control room and strapped themselves in.

Arcot reached toward the little red switch that controlled the titanic
energies of the huge coil below and pulled it back a quarter of the way.

"There go the ghosts!" he said. The images had quickly disappeared,
seemingly leaping away from them at terrific speed as the space in which
the ship was enclosed opened out more and more and the curvature
decreased. They were further away from themselves!

Easing back a quarter at a time, to prevent sparks again flying about in
the atmosphere of the ship, Arcot cut the power to zero, and the ship
was standing still once more.

They hurriedly dived to the observatory and looked eagerly out the
window.

Far, far behind them, floating in the marvelous, soft, utter blackness
of space, was a shining disc made up of myriads of glowing points. And
it didn't seem to be a huge thing at a great distance, but simply a
small glowing object a few feet outside the window.

So perfectly clear was their view through the lux metal wall and the
black, empty space that all sense of distance was lost. It seemed more a
miniature model of their universe--a tiny thing that floated close
behind them, unwavering, shining with a faint light, a heatless
illumination that made everything in the darkened observatory glow very
faintly. It was the light of three hundred million suns seen at a
distance of three million million million miles! And it seemed small
because there was nothing with which to compare it.

It was an amazingly beautiful thing, that tiny floating disc of light.

Morey floated over to the cameras and began to take pictures.

"I'd like to take a color shot of that," he said a few minutes later,
"but that would require a direct shot through the reflector telescope
and a time exposure. And I can't do that; the ship is moving."

"Not enough to make any difference," Arcot contradicted. "We're moving
away from it in a straight line, and that thing is three quintillion
miles away. We're not moving fast enough to cause any measurable
contraction in a time exposure. As for having a steady platform, this
ship weighs a quarter of a million tons and is held by gyroscopes. We
won't shake it."

While Morey took the time exposure, Arcot looked at the enlarged image
in the telectroscope and tried to make angular measurements from the
individual stars. This he found impossible. Although he could spot
Betelgeuse and Antares because of their tremendous radiation, they were
too close together for measurements; the angle subtended was too small.

Finally, he decided to use the distance between Antares and S Doradus in
the Lesser Magellanic Cloud, one of the two clouds of stars which float
as satellites to the Galaxy itself.

To double-check, he used the radius of the Galaxy as base to calculate
the distance. The distances checked. The ship was five hundred thousand
light years from home!

After all the necessary observations were made, they swung the ship on
its axis and looked ahead for a landing place.

The nebulae ahead were still invisible to the naked eye except as
points, but the telectroscope finally revealed one as decidedly nearer
than the rest. It seemed to be a young Island Universe, for there was
still a vast cloud of gas and dust from which stars were yet to be born
in the central whorl--a single titanic gas cloud that stretched out
through a million billion miles of space.

"Shall we head for that?" asked Arcot at last, as Morey finished his
observations.

"I think it would be as good as any--there are more stars there than we
can hope to visit."

"Well, then, here we go!"

Arcot dived for the control room, while Morey shut off the telectroscope
and put the latest photographs in the file.

Suddenly space was snapping about him--they were off again. Another
shock of surging energy--another--the ship leaped forward at tremendous
speed--still greater--then they were rushing at top speed, and beside
them ran the ghost ships of the _Ancient Mariner_.

Morey pushed himself into the control room just as Arcot, Wade, and
Fuller were getting ready to start for the lab.

"We're off for quite a while, now," he said. "Our goal is about five
days away. I suggest we stop at the end of four days, make more
accurate measurements, then plan a closer stop.

"I think from now on we ought to sleep in relays, so that there will be
three of us awake at all times. I'll turn in now for ten hours, and then
someone else can sleep. Okay?"

It was agreed, and in the meantime the three on duty went down to the
lab to work.

Arcot had finished the installation of the invisibility apparatus in his
suit at the end of ten hours, much to his disappointment. He tested it,
then cast about for something to do while Wade and Morey added the
finishing touches to theirs.

Morey came down, and when Wade had finished his, which took another
quarter of an hour, he took the off duty shift.

Arcot had gone to the library, and Morey was at work down below. Fuller
had come up, looking for something to do, and had hit upon the excellent
idea of fixing a meal.

He had just begun his preparations in the kitchen when suddenly the
_Ancient Mariner_ gave a violent leap, and the men, not expecting any
weight, suddenly fell in different ways with terrific force!

