"The country before us, under the cloudless, starry sky, stretched
gray-blue and beautiful into the quivering obscurity of the distance. At
our feet lay the city, just awakening into life. Beyond, over the
rolling meadows and fields, wound the road that led out to the
battle-front, and coming back over it now, we could see an endless line
of vehicles. These, as they passed through the street beneath our
window, I found were loaded with soldiers, wounded and dying. I
shuddered at the sight of one cart in particular, and Lylda pressed
close to me, pleading with her eyes for my help for her stricken people.

"My exit from the castle was made quite a ceremony. A band of music and
a guard of several hundred soldiers ushered me forth, walking beside the
king, with Lylda a few paces behind. As we passed through the streets of
the city, heading for the open country beyond, we were cheered
continually by the people who thronged the streets and crowded upon the
housetops to watch us pass.

"Outside Arite I was taken perhaps a mile, where a wide stretch of
country gave me the necessary space for my growth. We were standing upon
a slight hill, below which, in a vast semicircle, fully a hundred
thousand people were watching.

"And now, for the first time, fear overcame me. I realized my
situation--saw myself in a detached sort of way--a stranger in this
extraordinary world, and only the power of my drug to raise me out of
it. This drug you must remember, I had not as yet taken. Suppose it were
not to act? Or were to act wrongly?

"I glanced around. The king stood before me, quietly waiting my
pleasure. Then I turned to Lylda. One glance at her proud, happy little
face, and my fear left me as suddenly as it had come. I took her in my
arms and kissed her, there before that multitude. Then I set her down,
and signified to the king I was ready.

"I took a minute quantity of one of the drugs, and as I had done before,
sat down with my eyes covered. My sensations were fairly similar to
those I have already described. When I looked up after a moment, I found
the landscape dwindling to tiny proportions in quite as astonishing a
way as it had grown before. The king and Lylda stood now hardly above my
ankle.

"A great cry arose from the people--a cry wherein horror, fear, and
applause seemed equally mixed. I looked down and saw thousands of them
running away in terror.

"Still smaller grew everything within my vision, and then, after a
moment, the landscape seemed at rest. I kneeled now upon the ground,
carefully, to avoid treading on any of the people around me. I located
Lylda and the king after a moment; tiny little creatures less than an
inch in height. I was then, I estimated, from their viewpoint, about
four hundred feet tall.

"I put my hand flat upon the ground near Lylda, and after a moment she
climbed into it, two soldiers lifting her up the side of my thumb as it
lay upon the ground. In the hollow of my palm, she lay quite securely,
and very carefully I raised her up towards my face. Then, seeing that
she was frightened, I set her down again.

"At my feet, hardly more than a few steps away, lay the tiny city of
Arite and the lake. I could see all around the latter now, and could
make out clearly a line of hills on the other side. Off to the left the
road wound up out of sight in the distance. As far as I could see, a
line of soldiers was passing out along this road--marching four abreast,
with carts at intervals, loaded evidently with supplies; only
occasionally, now, vehicles passed in the other direction. Can I make it
plain to you, gentlemen, my sensations in changing stature? I felt at
first as though I were tremendously high in the air, looking down as
from a balloon upon the familiar territory beneath me. That feeling
passed after a few moments, and I found that my point of view had
changed. I no longer felt that I was looking down from a balloon, but
felt as a normal person feels. And again I conceived myself but six feet
tall, standing above a dainty little toy world. It is all in the
viewpoint, of course, and never, during all my changes, was I for more
than a moment able to feel of a different stature than I am at this
present instant. It was always everything else that changed.

"According to the directions I had received from the king, I started now
to follow the course of the road. I found it difficult walking, for the
country was dotted with houses, trees, and cultivated fields, and each
footstep was a separate problem.

"I progressed in this manner perhaps two miles, covering what the day
before I would have called about a hundred and thirty or forty miles.
The country became wilder as I advanced, and now was in places crowded
with separate collections of troops.

"I have not mentioned the commotion I made in this walk over the
country. My coming must have been told widely by couriers the night
before, to soldiers and peasantry alike, or the sight of me would have
caused utter demoralization. As it was, I must have been terrifying to a
tremendous degree. I think the careful way in which I picked my course,
stepping in the open as much as possible, helped to reassure the people.
Behind me, whenever I turned, they seemed rather more curious than
fearful, and once or twice when I stopped for a few moments they
approached my feet closely. One athletic young soldier caught the loose
end of the string of one of my buskins, as it hung over my instep close
to the ground and pulled himself up hand over hand, amid the
enthusiastic cheers of his comrades.

"I had walked nearly another mile, when almost in front of me, and
perhaps a hundred yards away, I saw a remarkable sight that I did not at
first understand. The country here was crossed by a winding river
running in a general way at right angles to my line of progress. At the
right, near at hand, and on the nearer bank of the river, lay a little
city, perhaps half the size of Arite, with its back up against a hill.

"What first attracted my attention was that from a dark patch across the
river which seemed to be woods, pebbles appeared to pop up at intervals,
traversing a little arc perhaps as high as my knees, and falling into
the city. I watched for a moment and then I understood. There was a
siege in progress, and the catapults of the Malites were bombarding the
city with rocks.

"I went up a few steps closer, and the pebbles stopped coming. I stood
now beside the city, and as I bent over it, I could see by the battered
houses the havoc the bombardment had caused. Inert little figures lay in
the streets, and I bent lower and inserted my thumb and forefinger
between a row of houses and picked one up. It was the body of a woman,
partly mashed. I set it down again hastily.

"Then as I stood up, I felt a sting on my leg. A pebble had hit me on
the shin and dropped at my feet. I picked it up. It was the size of a
small walnut--a huge bowlder six feet or more in diameter it would have
been in Lylda's eyes. At the thought of her I was struck with a sudden
fit of anger. I flung the pebble violently down into the wooded patch
and leaped over the river in one bound, landing squarely on both feet in
the woods. It was like jumping into a patch of ferns.

"I stamped about me for a moment until a large part of the woods was
crushed down. Then I bent over and poked around with my finger.
Underneath the tangled wreckage of tiny-tree trunks, lay numbers of the
Malites. I must have trodden upon a thousand or more, as one would stamp
upon insects.

"The sight sickened me at first, for after all, I could not look upon
them as other than men, even though they were only the length of my
thumb-nail. I walked a few steps forward, and in all directions I could
see swarms of the little creatures running. Then the memory of my coming
departure from this world with Lylda, and my promise to the king to rid
his land once for all from these people, made me feel again that they,
like vermin, were to be destroyed.

"Without looking directly down, I spent the next two hours stamping over
this entire vicinity. Then I ran two or three miles directly toward the
country of the Malites, and returning I stamped along the course of the
river for a mile or so in both directions. Then I walked back to Arite,
again picking my way carefully among crowds of Oroids, who now feared me
so little that I had difficulty in moving without stepping upon them.

"When I had regained my former size, which needed two successive doses
of the drug, I found myself surrounded by a crowd of the Oroids, pushing
and shoving each other in an effort to get closer to me. The news of my
success over their enemy have been divined by them, evidently. Lord
knows it must have been obvious enough what I was going to do, when they
saw me stride away, a being four hundred feet tall.

"Their enthusiasm and thankfulness now were so mixed with awe and
reverent worship of me as a divine being, that when I advanced towards
Arite they opened a path immediately. The king, accompanied by Lylda,
met me at the edge of the city. The latter threw herself into my arms at
once, crying with relief to find me the proper size once more.

"I need not go into details of the ceremonies of rejoicing that took
place this afternoon. These people seemed little given to pomp and
public demonstration. The king made a speech from his balcony, telling
them all I had done, and the city was given over to festivities and
preparations to receive the returning soldiers."

The Chemist pushed his chair back from the table, and moistened his dry
lips with a swallow of water. "I tell you, gentlemen," he continued, "I
felt pretty happy that day. It's a wonderful feeling to find yourself
the savior of a nation."

At that the Doctor jumped to his feet, overturning his chair, and
striking the table a blow with his fist that made the glasses dance.

"By God!" he fairly shouted, "that's just what you can be here to us."

The Banker looked startled, while the Very Young Man pulled the Chemist
by the coat in his eagerness to be heard. "A few of those pills," he
said in a voice that quivered with excitement, "when you are standing in
France, and you can walk over to Berlin and kick the houses apart with
the toe of your boot."

"Why not?" said the Big Business Man, and silence fell on the group as
they stared at each other, awed by the possibilities that opened up
before them.




CHAPTER VIII

"I MUST GO BACK"


The tremendous plan for the salvation of their own suffering world
through the Chemist's discovery occupied the five friends for some time.
Then laying aside this subject, that now had become of the most vital
importance to them all, the Chemist resumed his narrative.

"My last evening in the world of the ring, I spent with Lylda,
discussing our future, and making plans for the journey. I must tell you
now, gentlemen, that never for a moment during my stay in Arite was I
once free from an awful dread of this return trip. I tried to conceive
what it would be like, and the more I thought about it, the more
hazardous it seemed.

"You must realize, when I was growing smaller, coming in, I was able to
climb down, or fall or slide down, into the spaces as they opened up.
Going back, I could only imagine the world as closing in upon me,
crushing me to death unless I could find a larger space immediately
above into which I could climb.

"And as I talked with Lylda about this and tried to make her understand
what I hardly understood myself, I gradually was brought to realize the
full gravity of the danger confronting us. If only I had made the trip
out once before, I could have ventured it with her. But as I looked at
her fragile little body, to expose it to the terrible possibilities of
such a journey was unthinkable.

"There was another question, too, that troubled me. I had been gone from
you nearly a week, and you were only to wait for me two days. I believed
firmly that I was living at a faster rate, and that probably my time
with you had not expired. But I did not know. And suppose, when I had
come out on to the surface of the ring, one of you had had it on his
finger walking along the street? No, I did not want Lylda with me in
that event.

"And so I told her--made her understand--that she must stay behind, and
that I would come back for her. She did not protest. She said
nothing--just looked up into my face with wide, staring eyes and a
little quiver of her lips. Then she clutched my hand and fell into a
low, sobbing cry.

"I held her in my arms for a few moments, so little, so delicate, so
human in her sorrow, and yet almost superhuman in her radiant beauty.
Soon she stopped crying and smiled up at me bravely.

"Next morning I left. Lylda took me through the tunnels and back into
the forest by the river's edge where I had first met her. There we
parted. I can see, now, her pathetic, drooping little figure as she
trudged back to the tunnel.

"When she had disappeared, I sat down to plan out my journey. I resolved
now to reverse as nearly as possible the steps I had taken coming in.
Acting on this decision, I started back to that portion of the forest
where I had trampled it down.

"I found the place without difficulty, stopping once on the way to eat a
few berries, and some of the food I carried with me. Then I took a small
amount of one of the drugs, and in a few moments the forest trees had
dwindled into tiny twigs beneath my feet.

"I started now to find the huge incline down which I had fallen, and
when I reached it, after some hours of wandering, I followed its bottom
edge to where a pile of rocks and dirt marked my former landing-place.
The rocks were much larger than I remembered them, and so I knew I was
not so large, now, as when I was here before.

"Remembering the amount of the drug I had taken coming down, I took now
twelve of the pills. Then, in a sudden panic, I hastily took two of the
others. The result made my head swim most horribly. I sat or lay down, I
forget which. When I looked up I saw the hills beyond the river and
forest coming towards me, yet dwindling away beneath my feet as they
approached. The incline seemed folding up upon itself, like a telescope.
As I watched, its upper edge came into view, a curved, luminous line
against the blackness above. Every instant it crawled down closer, more
sharply curved, and its inclined surface grew steeper.

"All this time, as I stood still, the ground beneath my feet seemed to
be moving. It was crawling towards me, and folding up underneath where I
was standing. Frequently I had to move to avoid rocks that came at me
and passed under my feet into nothingness.

"Then, all at once, I realized that I had been stepping constantly
backward, to avoid the inclined wall as it shoved itself towards me. I
turned to see what was behind, and horror made my flesh creep at what I
saw. A black, forbidding wall, much like the incline in front, entirely
encircled me. It was hardly more than half a mile away, and towered four
or five thousand feet overhead.

"And as I stared in terror, I could see it closing in, the line of its
upper edge coming steadily closer and lower. I looked wildly around with
an overpowering impulse to run. In every direction towered this rocky
wall, inexorably swaying in to crush me.

"I think I fainted. When I came to myself the scene had not greatly
changed. I was lying at the bottom and against one wall of a circular
pit, now about a thousand feet in diameter and nearly twice as deep. The
wall all around I could see was almost perpendicular, and it seemed
impossible to ascend its smooth, shining sides. The action of the drug
had evidently worn off, for everything was quite still.

"My fear had now left me, for I remembered this circular pit quite well.
I walked over to its center, and looking around and up to its top I
estimated distances carefully. Then I took two more of the pills.

"Immediately the familiar, sickening, crawling sensation began again. As
the walls closed in upon me, I kept carefully in the center of the pit.
Steadily they crept in. Now only a few hundred feet away! Now only a few
paces--and then I reached out and touched both sides at once with my
hands.

"I tell you, gentlemen, it was a terrifying sensation to stand in that
well (as it now seemed), and feel its walls closing up with irresistible
force. But now the upper edge was within reach of my fingers. I leaped
upward and hung for a moment, then pulled myself up and scrabbled out,
tumbling in a heap on the ground above. As I recovered myself, I looked
again at the hole out of which I had escaped; it was hardly big enough
to contain my fist.

"I knew, now, I was at the bottom of the scratch. But how different it
looked than before. It seemed this time a long, narrow canon, hardly
more than sixty feet across. I glanced up and saw the blue sky overhead,
flooded with light, that I knew was the space of this room above the
ring.

"The problem now was quite a different one than getting out of the pit,
for I saw that the scratch was so deep in proportion to its width that
if I let myself get too big, I would be crushed by its walls before I
could jump out. It would be necessary, therefore, to stay comparatively
small and climb up its side.

"I selected what appeared to be an especially rough section, and took a
portion of another of the pills. Then I started to climb. After an hour
the buskins on my feet were torn to fragments, and I was bruised and
battered as you saw me. I see, now, how I could have made both the
descent into the ring, and my journey back with comparatively little
effort, but I did the best I knew at the time.

"When the canon was about ten feet in width, and I had been climbing
arduously for several hours, I found myself hardly more than fifteen or
twenty feet above its bottom. And I was still almost that far from the
top. With the stature I had then attained, I could have climbed the
remaining distance easily, but for the fact that the wall above had
grown too smooth to afford a foothold. The effects of the drug had again
worn off, and I sat down and prepared to take another dose. I did
so--the smallest amount I could--and held ready in my hand a pill of the
other kind in case of emergency. Steadily the walls closed in.

"A terrible feeling of dizziness now came over me. I clutched the rock
beside which I was sitting, and it seemed to melt like ice beneath my
grasp. Then I remembered seeing the edge of the canon within reach above
my head, and with my last remaining strength, I pulled myself up, and
fell upon the surface of the ring. You know the rest. I took another
dose of the powder, and in a few minutes was back among you."

The Chemist stopped speaking, and looked at his friends. "Well," he
said, "you've heard it all. What do you think of it?"

"It is a terrible thing to me," sighed the Very Young Man, "that you did
not bring Llyda with you."

"It would have been a terrible thing if I had brought her. But I am
going back for her."

"When do you plan to go back?" asked the Doctor after a moment.

"As soon as I can--in a day or two," answered the Chemist.

"Before you do your work here? You must not," remonstrated the Big
Business Man. "Our war here needs you, our nation, the whole cause of
liberty and freedom needs you. You cannot go."

"Lylda needs me, too," returned the Chemist. "I have an obligation
towards her now, you know, quite apart from my own feelings. Understand
me, gentlemen," he continued earnestly, "I do not place myself and mine
before the great fight for democracy and justice being waged in this
world. That would be absurd. But it is not quite that way, actually; I
can go back for Lylda and return here in a week. That week will make
little difference to the war. On the other hand, if I go to France
first, it may take me a good many months to complete my task, and during
that time Lylda will be using up her life several times faster than I.
No, gentlemen, I am going to her first."

"That week you propose to take," said the Banker slowly, "will cost this
world thousands of lives that you could save. Have you thought of that?"

The Chemist flushed. "I can recognize the salvation of a nation or a
cause," he returned hotly, "but if I must choose between the lives of a
thousand men who are not dependent on me, and the life or welfare of one
woman who is, I shall choose the woman."

"He's right, you know," said the Doctor, and the Very Young Man agreed
with him fervently.

Two days later the company met again in the privacy of the clubroom.
When they had finished dinner, the Chemist began in his usual quiet way:

"I am going to ask you this time, gentlemen, to give me a full week.
There are four of you--six hours a day of watching for each. It need not
be too great a hardship. You see," he continued, as they nodded in
agreement, "I want to spend a longer period in the ring world this time.
I may never go back, and I want to learn, in the interest of science, as
much about it as I can. I was there such a short time before, and it was
all so strange and remarkable, I confess I learned practically nothing.

"I told you all I could of its history. But of its arts, its science,
and all its sociological and economic questions, I got hardly more than
a glimpse. It is a world and a people far less advanced than ours, yet
