industrious and intelligent student from four to six weeks, depending
upon his quickness of perception and his working qualities. While
progressing in his bookkeeping, he is pursuing the collateral studies, a
certain attainment in which is essential to promotion, especially
correcting any marked deficiency in spelling, arithmetic, and the use of
language.

Upon a satisfactory examination the student now passes to the second
department, where a wider scope of knowledge in accounts is opened to
him, with a large amount of practical detail familiarizing him with the
actual operations of business. The greatest care is taken to prevent
mere copying and to throw the student upon his own resources, by
obliging him to correct his own blunders, and to work out his own
results; accepting nothing as final that has not the characteristics of
real business. Much care is bestowed in this department upon the form
and essential matter of business paper, and especially of
correspondence. A great variety of letters is required to be written on
assigned topics and in connection with the business which is recorded,
and thorough instruction is given in the law of negotiable paper,
contracts, etc. During all this time the student devotes from half an
hour to an hour daily to penmanship, a plain, practical, legible hand
being aimed at, to the exclusion of superfluous lines and flourishes. It
is expected that the work in the first and second departments will
establish the student in the main principles of bookkeeping, in its
general theories, and their application to ordinary transactions.

In the third department the student takes an advanced position, and is
expected, during the two or three months he will remain in this
department, to perfect himself in the more subtle questions involved in
accounts, as well as to shake off the crude belongings of schoolboy
work. He will be required to use his mind in everything he does--to
depend as much as possible upon himself. The work which he presents for
approval here must have the characteristics of business. His letters,
statements, and papers of all kinds are critically examined, and
approved only when giving evidence of conscientious work, as well as
coming up to strict business requirements. Before he leaves this
department he should be versed in all the theories of accounts, should
write an acceptable business hand; should be able to execute a faultless
letter so far as relates to form, spelling, and grammatical
construction, should have a fair knowledge of commercial law, and have
completed his arithmetical course.

The next step is to reduce the student's theoretical knowledge to
practice, in a department devoted to actual business operations. This
business or finishing department is shown at the upper left corner of
our front page illustration. The work in this department is as exacting
and as real as the work in the best business houses and banks. At the
extreme end of the room is a bank in complete operation, as perfect in
its functions as any bank in this city or elsewhere. The records made in
its books come from the real transactions of dealers who are engaged in
different lines of business at their desks and in the offices. The small
office adjoining the bank, on the right, is a post office, the only one
in the country, perhaps, where true civil service rules are strictly
observed. In connection with it is a transportation office. From fifty
to a hundred letters daily are received and delivered by the post
office, written by or to the students of this department.

The correspondence thus indicated goes on not only between the students
of this college, but between members of this and other similar
institutions in different parts of the country. A perfected system of
intercommunication has for years been in practice between co-ordinate
schools in New York, Boston, Brooklyn, Philadelphia, Chicago, Baltimore,
and other cities, by which is carried on an elaborate scheme of
interchangeable business, little less real in its operations and results
than the more tangible and obtrusive activity which the world recognizes
as business.

The work of the transportation office corresponds with that of the post
office in its simulation of reality. The alleged articles handled are
represented by packages bearing all the characteristic marks of freight
and express packages. They are sent by mail to the transportation
company, and by this agency delivered to the proper parties, from whom
the charges are collected in due form, and the requisite vouchers
passed. Whatever is necessary in the way of manipulation to secure the
record on either hand is done, and, so far as the clerical duties are
concerned, there is no difference between handling pieces of paper which
represent merchandise and handling the real article.

In the bank is employed a regular working force, such as may be found in
any bank, consisting of a collector or runner, a discount clerk, a
deposit bookkeeper, a general bookkeeper, and a cashier. The books are
of the regular form, and the work is divided as in most banks of medium
size, and the business that is presented differs in no important
particular from that which comes to ordinary banks. After getting a fair
knowledge of theory, the student is placed in this bank. He begins in
the lowest place, and works up gradually to the highest, remaining long
enough in each position to acquaint himself with its duties. He is made
familiar with the form and purpose of all kinds of business paper, and
the rules which govern a bank's dealings with its customers. He gets a
practical knowledge of the law of indorsement and of negotiability
generally, and is called upon to decide important questions which arise
between the bank and its dealers. Wherever he finds himself at fault he
has access to a teacher whose duty it is to give the information for
which he asks, and who is competent to do it.

Throughout the whole of this course of study and practice the students
are treated like men and are expected to behave like men.

The college thus becomes a self-regulating community, in which the
students learn not only to govern themselves, but to direct and control
others. As one is advanced in position his responsibilities are
increased. He is first a merchant or agent, directing his own work;
next, a sub-manager, and finally manager in a general office or the
bank, with clerks subject to his direction and criticism, until he
arrives at the exalted position of "superintendent of offices," which
gives him virtual control of the department. This is, in fact, an
important part of his training, and the reasonable effect of the system
is that the student, being subject to orders from those above him, and
remembering that he will shortly require a like consideration from those
below him, concludes that he cannot do a better thing for his own future
comfort than to set a wholesome example of subordination.

This, however, is not the only element of personal discipline that the
college affords. At every step the student's conduct, character, and
progress are noted, recorded, and securely kept for the teacher's
inspection, as well as that of his parents and himself. Such records are
kept in the budget room, shown in the lower left corner of the front
page.

This budget system was suggested by the difficulties encountered in
explaining to parents the progress and standing of their sons. The
inconvenience of summoning teachers, and of taking students from their
work, made necessary some simpler and more effective plan. The first
thing required of a new student is that he should give some account of
himself, and to submit to such examinations and tests as will acquaint
his teachers with his status. This account and these tests constitute
the subject-matter of his first budget, which is placed at the bottom of
his box, and every four weeks thereafter, while he remains in the
school, he is required to present the results of his work, such as his
written examinations in the various studies, his test examples in
arithmetic, his French, German, and Spanish translations and exercises,
various letters and forms, with four weekly specimens of improvement in
writing, the whole to be formally submitted to the principal in an
accompanying letter; the letter itself to exhibit what can be thus shown
of improvement in writing, expression, and general knowledge. These
budgets, accumulating month by month, are made to cover as much as
possible of the student's school work, and to constitute the visible
steps of his progress.

Besides this is a character record, kept in a small book assigned to
each student, every student having free access to his own record, but
not to that of any fellow student. Each book contains the record of a
student's deportment from the first to the last day of his attendance,
with such comments and recommendations as his several teachers may think
likely to be of encouragement or caution to him.

In addition to the strictly technical training furnished by the
college, there is given also not a little collateral instruction
calculated to be of practical use to business men. For example, after
roll call every morning some little time is spent in exercises designed
to cultivate the art of intelligent expression of ideas. Each day a
number of students are appointed to report orally, in the assembly room,
upon such matters or events mentioned in the previous day's newspapers
as may strike the speaker as interesting or important. Or the student
may describe his personal observation of any event, invention,
manufacture, or what not; or report upon the condition, history, or
prospects of any art, trade, or business undertaking. This not to teach
elocution, but to train the student to think while standing, and to
express himself in a straightforward, manly way.

Instruction is also given in the languages likely to be required in
business intercourse or correspondence; in phonography, so far as it may
be required for business purposes; commercial law relative to contracts,
negotiable paper, agencies, partnerships, insurance, and other business
proceedings and relations; political economy, and incidentally any and
every topic a knowledge of which may be of practical use to business
men.

In all this the ultimate end and aim of the instruction offered are
practical workable results. Mr. Packard regards education as a tool. If
the tool has no edge, is not adapted to its purpose, is not practically
usable, it is worthless as a tool. This idea is kept prominent in all
the work of the college, and its general results justify the position
thus taken. The graduates are not turned out as finished business men,
but as young men well started on the road toward that end. As Mr.
Packard puts it: "Their diplomas do not recommend them as bank cashiers
or presidents, or as managers of large or small enterprises, but simply
as having a knowledge of the duties of accountantship. They rarely fail
to fulfill reasonable expectations; and they are not responsible for
unreasonable ones."

       *       *       *       *       *




AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF ARCHITECTS.


The fourteenth annual convention of the American Institute of Architects
began in Philadelphia, November 17. Mr. Thomas U. Walter, of
Philadelphia, presided, and fifty or more prominent architects were
present. In his annual address the president spoke of the tendency of
the architectural world as decidedly in the direction of originality.
But little attention is paid to the types of building drawn from the
works of by-gone ages or to the mannerisms of the more recent past.
Progress in the development of the elements of taste and beauty, and the
concretion of aesthetic principles with common sense in architectural
design, are now everywhere apparent. The responsibilities of architects
are greater than they have ever before been; the growing demand of the
times calls for intelligent studies in all that relates to architecture,
whether it be in the realm of aesthetics, in sciences that relate to
construction, in the nature and properties of the materials used, in the
atmosphere that surrounds us, or in the availability of the
thousand-and-one useful and ingenious inventions that tend to promote
the convenience and completeness of structures.

Papers were read by Mr. A. J. Blood, of New York, on "The Best Method of
Solving the Tenement House Problem;" Mr. George T. Mason, Jr., of
Newport, on "The Practice of American Architects during the Colonial
Period;" Mr. Robert Briggs, of Philadelphia, on "The Ventilation of
Audience Rooms;" Mr. T. M. Clark, of Boston, on "French Building Laws,
etc."

The following named officers were elected: President, T. U. Walter,
Philadelphia; Treasurer, O. P. Hatfield, New York; Secretary, A. J.
Blood. Trustees, R. M. Hunt, H. M. Congdon, J. Cady, Napoleon Le Brun,
New York. Committee on Publication, R. M. Upjohn, New York; T. M. Clark,
Boston; John McArthur, Jr., Philadelphia; A. J. Blood, H. M. Congdon,
New York. Committee on Education, W. R. Narr, Boston; Russell Sturgis,
New York; N. Clifford Ricker, Champagne, Ill.; Henry Van Brunt, Boston;
Alfred Stone, Providence. Corresponding Secretary, T. M. Clark, Boston.

The time and place of the next annual convention were left to the Board
of Trustees, with a request that Washington be selected.

       *       *       *       *       *




VENNOR'S WINTER PREDICTIONS.


He communicates as follows to the Albany _Argus_: "December will, in
all probability, open with little snow, but the weather will be cloudy,
threatening snow falls. During the opening days of the month, dust, with
the very light mixture of snow which may have fallen, will be swept in
flurries by the gusty wind. There will probably be some snow from about
the 4th of the month. With the second quarter of the month colder
weather will probably set in with falls of snow. The farmers will be
able to enjoy sleigh rides in the cold, exhilarating air, but good
sleighing need not be expected until after the middle of the month.
There will be a spell of mild weather about the 13th and 14th. After a
brief interval of mild weather, during which more snow will fall, the
third quarter of the month will probably see blustering and cold
weather--a cold snap with heavy snow storms and consequent good
sleighing. Very cold weather may be expected during this quarter. The
last quarter of the month will bring milder weather, but will terminate,
probably, with heavy snow-falls and stormy weather; in fact, the
heaviest snow falls will be toward the end of the month, and snow
blockades may be looked for, the snow falls extending far to the
southward, possibly as far as Washington, with very stormy weather
around New York and Boston." Mr. Vennor's latest predictions are that
the coming month will be "decidedly cold, with tremendous snow-falls
during the latter half and early part of January, causing destructive
blockades to railroads."

       *       *       *       *       *




THE LONDON UNDERGROUND RAILWAY.


The opening recently of the extension of the Metropolitan Railway to
Harrow, and the early commencement of another of the lines of the
company, give especial prominence to it. The Metropolitan Underground
Railway is emphatically the great passenger railway of the country, for
its few miles of line carry more than the hundreds of miles of line of
companies such as the London and North Western or Great Western.
Seventeen years ago--in 1868--the Metropolitan carried less than
10,000,000 passengers, and in the full year's work of the following
twelve months it carried less than 12,000,000. But year by year, almost
without exception, the number of passengers has grown. In 1865, over
15,000,000 passengers were carried; in 1867, over 23,000,000; and in
1870, over 39,000,000 passengers traveled on the line. The years that
have since passed have swollen that number. In 1872, over 44,300,000
were carried, but in the following year there was one of the few checks,
and not till 1875 was the number of 1872 exceeded. In 1875 it rose to
48,302,000; in 1877 it had advanced to 56,175,000; in 1878 to
58,807,000; and in 1879 to 60,747,000. In the present year there has
been a further advance, the number carried for the first six months of
the present year being 31,592,429. When it is borne in mind that this is
equal to 7,272 passengers every hour, and that the length of line worked
by the company's engines, including that of the "foreign" line worked,
is slightly less than 25 miles, the fecundity in traffic of the
metropolitan district must be said to be marvelous. It is to be
regretted that the official account from which these figures are given
does not give any idea of the number of passengers in the different
classes, for such a return would be of value. It is a marvelous fact in
the history of locomotion that this great passenger traffic is worked
with not more than 53 engines, while the total number of carriages, 195,
is in comparison with the number of travelers in them a marvel in
railway history. But it is tolerably clear that there is yet a vast
amount of undeveloped metropolitan traffic, and it is also certain that
as that traffic is developed the future of the Metropolitan as it
attains more completeness will be brighter even than it has been in the
past. The great city is more and more the mart of the world, and the
