out, with at least twice the acceleration we could get with both motors
full on. He saw us all the time, and was waiting for us."

"Go on--get away if you can. You can stand a higher acceleration than we
can. We'll hold him as long as possible."

"I would, if it would do any good, but it won't. He's so much faster
than we are that he could catch us anyway, if he wanted to, no matter
how much of a start we had--and it looks now as though he wanted us. Two
of us stand a lot better chance than one of licking him if he's looking
for trouble. Spread out a mile or two, and pretend this is all the speed
we've got. What'll we give him first?"

"Give him everything at once. Rays six, seven, eight, nine, and ten...."
Crane, with Seaton, began making contacts, rapidly but with precision.
"Heat wave two-seven. Induction, five-eight. Oscillation, everything
under point oh six three. All the explosive copper we can get in.
Right?"

"Right--and if worse comes to worst, remember the zone of force. Let him
shoot first, because he may be peaceable--but it doesn't look like olive
branches to me."

"Got both your screens out?"

"Yes. Mart, you might take number two visiplate and work the guns--I'll
handle the rest of this stuff. Better strap yourselves in solid,
folks--this may develop into a kind of rough party, by the looks of
things right now."

       *       *       *       *       *

As he spoke, a pyrotechnic display enveloped the entire ship as a
radiation from the foreign vessel struck the other neutralizing screen
and dissipated its force harmlessly in the ether. Instantly Seaton threw
on the full power of his refrigerating system and shot in the master
switch that actuated the complex offensive armament of his dreadnought
of the skies. An intense, livid violet glow hid completely main and
auxiliary power bars, and long flashes leaped between metallic objects
in all parts of the vessel. The passengers felt each hair striving to
stand on end as the very air became more and more highly charged--and
this was but the slight corona-loss of the frightful stream of
destruction being hurled at the other space-cruiser, now scarcely a mile
away!

Seaton stared into number one visiplate, manipulating levers and dials
as he drove the _Skylark_ hither and yon, dodging frantically, the while
the automatic focusing devices remained centered upon the enemy and the
enormous generators continued to pour forth their deadly frequencies.
The bars glowed more fiercely as they were advanced to full working
load--the stranger was one blaze of incandescent ionization, but she
still fought on; and Seaton noticed that the pyrometers recording the
temperature of the shell were mounting rapidly, in spite of the
refrigerators.

"Dunark, put everything you've got upon one spot--right on the end of
his nose!"

As the first shell struck the mark, Seaton concentrated every force at
his command upon the designated point. The air in the _Skylark_ crackled
and hissed and intense violet flames leaped from the bars as they were
driven almost to the point of disruption. From the forward end of the
strange craft there erupted prominence after prominence of searing,
unbearable flame as the terrific charges of explosive copper struck the
mark and exploded, liberating instantaneously their millions upon
millions of kilowatt-hours of intra-atomic energy. Each prominence
enveloped all three of the fighting vessels and extended for hundreds of
miles out into space--but still the enemy warship continued to hurl
forth solid and vibratory destruction.

A brilliant orange light flared upon the panel, and Seaton gasped as he
swung his visiplate upon his defenses, which he had supposed
impregnable. His outer screen was already down, although its mighty
copper generator was exerting its utmost power. Black areas had already
appeared and were spreading rapidly, where there should have been only
incandescent radiance; and the inner screen was even now radiating far
into the ultra-violet and was certainly doomed. Knowing as he did the
stupendous power driving those screens, he knew that there were
superhuman and inconceivable forces being directed against them, and his
right hand flashed to the switch controlling the zone of force. Fast as
he was, much happened in the mere moment that passed before his flying
hand could close the switch. In the last infinitesimal instant of time
before the zone closed in, a gaping black hole appeared in the
incandescence of the inner screen, and a small portion of a ray of
energy so stupendous as to be palpable, struck, like a tangible
projectile, the exposed flank of the _Skylark_. Instantly the refractory
arenak turned an intense, dazzling white and more than a foot of the
forty-eight-inch skin of the vessel melted away, like snow before an
oxy-acetylene flame: melting and flying away in molten globes and
sparkling gases--the refrigerating coils lining the hull were of no
avail against the concentrated energy of that titanic thrust. As Seaton
shut off his power, intense darkness and utter silence closed in, and he
snapped on the lights.

"They take one trick!" he blazed, his eyes almost emitting sparks, and
leaped for the generators. He had forgotten the efforts of the zone of
force, however, and only sprawled grotesquely in the air until he
floated within reach of a line.

"Hold everything, Dick!" Crane snapped, as Seaton bent over one of the
bars. "What are you going to do?"

"I'm going to put as heavy bars in these ray-generators as they'll stand
and go out and get that bird. We can't lick him with Osnomian rays or
with our explosive copper, but I can carve that sausage into slices with
a zone of force, and I'm going to do it."

"Steady, old man--take it easy. I see your point, but remember that you
must release the zone of force before you can use it as a weapon.
Furthermore, you must discover his exact location, and must get close
enough to him to use the zone as a weapon, all without its protection.
Can those ray-screens be made sufficiently powerful to withstand the
beam they employed last, even for a second?"

"Hm ... m ... m. Never thought of that, Mart," Seaton replied, the fire
dying out of his eyes. "Wonder how long the battle lasted?"

"Eight and two-tenths seconds, from first to last, but they had had
that heavy ray in action only a fraction of one second when you cut
in the zone of force. Either they underestimated our strength at first,
or else it required about eight seconds to tune in their heavy
generators--probably the former."

"But we've _got_ to do something, man! We can't just sit here and
twiddle our thumbs!"

"Why, and why not? That course seems eminently wise and proper. In fact,
at the present time, thumb-twiddling is distinctly indicated."

"Oh, you're full of little red ants! We can't do a thing with that zone
on--and you say just sit here. Suppose they know all about that zone of
force? Suppose they can crack it? Suppose they ram us?"

"I shall take up your objections in order," Crane had lighted a
cigarette and was smoking meditatively. "First, they may or may not know
about it. At present, that point is immaterial. Second, whether or not
they know about it, it is almost a certainty that they cannot crack it.
It had been up for more than three minutes, and they have undoubtedly
concentrated everything possible upon us during that time. It is still
standing. I really expected it to go down in the first few seconds, but
now that it has held this long it will, in all probability, continue to
hold indefinitely. Third, they most certainly will not ram us, for
several reasons. They probably have encountered few, if any, foreign
vessels able to stand against them for a minute, and will act
accordingly. Then, too, it is probably safe to assume that their vessel
is damaged, to some slight extent at least; for I do not believe that
any possible armament could withstand the forces you directed against
them and escape entirely unscathed. Finally, if they did ram us, what
would happen? Would we feel the shock? That barrier in the ether seems
impervious, and if so, it could not transmit a blow. I do not see
exactly how it would affect the ship dealing the blow. You are the one
who works out the new problems in unexplored mathematics--some time you
must take a few months off and work it out."

"Yes, it would take that long, too, I guess--but you're right, he can't
hurt us. That's using the old bean, Mart! I was going off half-cocked
again, darn it! I'll pipe down, and we'll go into a huddle."

       *       *       *       *       *

Seaton noticed that Dorothy's face was white and that she was fighting
for self-control. Drawing himself over to her, he picked her up in a
tight embrace.

"Cheer up, Red-Top! This man's war ain't started yet!"

"Not started? What do you mean? Haven't you and Martin just been
admitting to each other that you can't do anything? Doesn't that mean
that we are beaten?"

"Beaten! Us? How do you get that way? Not on your sweet young life!" he
ejaculated, and the surprise on his face was so manifest that she
recovered instantly. "We've just dug a hole and pulled the hole in after
us, that's all! When we get everything doped out to suit us, we'll snap
out of it and that bird'll think he's been petting a wildcat!"

"Mart, you're the thinking end of this partnership," he continued,
thoughtfully. "You've got the analytical mind and the judicial
disposition, and can think circles around me. From what little you've
seen of those folks, tell me who, what, and where they are. I'm getting
the germ of an idea, and maybe we can make it work."

"I will try it." Crane paused. "They are, of course, neither from the
Earth nor from Osnome. It is also evident that they have solved the
secret of intra-atomic energy. Their vessels are not propelled as ours
are--they have so perfected that force that it acts upon every particle
of the structure and its contents...."

"How do you figure that?" blurted Seaton.

"Because of the acceleration they can stand. Nothing even semi-human,
and probably nothing living, could endure it otherwise. Right?"

"Yes--I never thought of that."

"Furthermore, they are far from home, for if they were from anywhere
nearby, the Osnomians would have known of them--particularly since it is
evident from the size of the vessel that it is not a recent development
with them, as it is with us. Since the green system is close to the
center of the Galaxy, it seems reasonable, as a working hypothesis, to
assume that they are from some system far from the center, perhaps close
to the outer edge. They are very evidently of a high degree of
intelligence. They are also highly treacherous and merciless...."

"Why?" asked Dorothy, who was listening eagerly.

"I deduce those characteristics from their unprovoked attack upon
peaceful ships, vastly smaller and supposedly of inferior armament; and
also from the nature of that attack. This vessel is probably a scout or
an exploring ship, since it seems to be alone. It is not altogether
beyond the bounds of reason to imagine it upon a voyage of discovery, in
search of new planets to be subjugated and colonized...."

"That's a sweet picture of our future neighbors--but I guess you're
hitting the old nail on the head, at that."

"If these deductions are anywhere nearly correct, they are terrible
neighbors. For my next point, are we justified in assuming that they do
or do not know about the zone of force?"

"That's a hard one. Knowing what they evidently do know, it's hard to
see how they could have missed it. And yet, if they had known about it
for a long time, wouldn't they be able to get through it? Of course it
may be a real and total barrier in the ether--in that case they'd know
that they couldn't do a thing as long as we keep it on. Take your
choice, but I believe that they know about it, and know more than we
do--that it is a total barrier set up in the ether."

"I agree with you, and we shall proceed upon that assumption. They know,
then, that neither they nor we can do anything as long as we maintain
the zone--that it is a stalemate. They also know that it takes an
enormous amount of power to keep the zone in place. Now we have gone as
far as we can go upon the meager data we have--considerably farther than
we really are justified in going. We must now try to come to some
conclusion concerning their present activities. If our ideas as to their
natures are even approximately correct, they are waiting, probably
fairly close at hand, until we shall be compelled to release the zone,
no matter how long that period of waiting shall be. They know, of
course, from our small size, that we cannot carry enough copper to
maintain it indefinitely, as they could. Does that sound reasonable?"

"I check you to nineteen decimal places, Mart, and from your ideas I'm
getting surer and surer that we can pull their corks. I can get into
action in a hurry when I have to, and my idea now is to wait until they
relax a trifle, and then slip a fast one over on them. One more bubble
out of the old think-tank and I'll let you off for the day. At what time
will their vigilance be at lowest ebb? That's a poser, I'll admit, but
the answer to it may answer everything--the first shot will, of course,
be the best chance we'll ever have."

"Yes, we should succeed in the first attempt. We have very little
information to guide us in answering that question." He studied the
problem for many minutes before he resumed, "I should say that for a
time they would keep all their rays and other weapons in action against
the zone of force, expecting us to release it immediately. Then, knowing
that they were wasting power uselessly, they would cease attacking, but
would be very watchful, with every eye fastened upon us and with every
weapon ready for instant use. After this period of vigilance, regular
ship's routine would be resumed. Half the force, probably, would go off
duty--for, if they are even remotely like any organic beings with which
we are familiar, they require sleep or its equivalent at intervals. The
men on duty--the normal force, that is--would be doubly careful for a
time. Then habit will assert itself, if we have done nothing to create
suspicion, and their watchfulness will relax to the point of ordinary
careful observation. Toward the end of their watch, because of the
strain of the battle and because of the unusually long period of duty,
they will become careless, and their vigilance will be considerably
below normal. But the exact time of all these things depends entirely
upon their conception of time, concerning which we have no information
whatever. Though it is purely a speculation, based upon Earthly and
Osnomian experience, I should say that after twelve or thirteen hours
would come the time for us to make the attack."

"That's good enough for me. Fine, Mart, and thanks. You've probably
saved the lives of the party. We will now sleep for eleven or twelve
hours."

"Sleep, Dick! How could you?" Dorothy exclaimed.




CHAPTER V

First Blood


The next twelve hours dragged with terrible slowness. Sleep was
impossible and eating was difficult, even though all knew that they
would have need of the full measure of their strength. Seaton set up
various combinations of switching devices connected to electrical
timers, and spent hours trying, with all his marvelous quickness of
muscular control, to cut shorter and ever shorter the time between the
opening and the closing of the switch. At last he arranged a powerful
electro-magnetic device so that one impulse would both open and close
the switch, with an open period of one one-thousandth of a second. Only
then was he satisfied.

"A thousandth is enough to give us a look around, due to persistence of
vision; and it is short enough so that they won't see it unless they
have a recording observer on us. Even if they still have rays on us,
they can't possibly neutralize our screens in that short an exposure.
All right, gang? We'll take five visiplates and cover the sphere. If any
of you get a glimpse of him, mark the exact spot and outline on the
glass. All set?"

He pressed the button. The stars flashed in the black void for an
instant, then were again shut out.

"Here he is, Dick!" shrieked Margaret. "Right here--he covered almost
half the visiplate!"

She outlined for him, as nearly as she could, the exact position of the
object she had seen, and he calculated rapidly.

"Fine business!" he exulted. "He's within half a mile of us,
three-quarters on--perfect! I thought he'd be so far away that I'd have
to take photographs to locate him. He hasn't a single ray on us, either.
That bird's goose is cooked right now, folks, unless every man on watch
has his hand right on the controls of a generator and can get into
action in less than a tenth of a second! Hang on, gang, I'm going to
step on the gas!"

After making sure that everyone was fastened immovably in their seats he
strapped himself in the pilot's seat, then set the bar toward the
strange vessel and applied fully one-third of its full power. The
_Skylark_, of course, did not move. Then, with bewildering rapidity, he
went into action; face glued to the visiplate, hands moving faster than
the eye could follow--the left closing and opening the switch
controlling the zone of force, the right swinging the steering controls
