is at? Or I can't make the approach? Why ain't _you_ in subspace?"

"I see." Lopresto forced his anger down. "But I've got to be _sure_ we
can get back without 'em."

"You can be _damn_ sure. I got to get back myself, don't I? But get one
thing down solid. _I_ get the big peroxide blonde."

"You can have her. Too big. I like the little yellowhead a lot better."

Newman sneered into the hard-held face so close to his and said: "And
don't think for a second _you_ can make me crawl, you small-time,
chiseling punk. Rub _me_ out after we kill them off and you get nowhere.
You're dead. Chew on that a while, and you'll know who's boss."

After just the right amount of holding back and objecting, Lopresto
agreed. "You win, Newman, the way the cards lay. Have you ever planned
this kind of an operation or do you want me to?"

"You do it, Vince," Newman said, grandly. He had at least one of the
qualities of a leader. "Besides, you already have, ain't you?"

"Of course. Ferdy will take Deston----"

"No he won't! He's _mine_, the louse!"

"If you're _that_ dumb, all bets are off. What are you using for a
brain? Can't you see the guy's chain lightning on ball bearings?"

"But we're going to surprise 'em, ain't we?"

"Sure, but even Ferdy would just as soon not give _him_ an even break.
_You_ wouldn't stand the chance of a snowflake in hell, and if you've
got the brains of a louse you know it."

"O. K., we'll let Ferdy have him. Me and you will match draws to see
who----"

"I can draw twice to your once, but I suppose I'll have to prove it to
you. I'll take Jones; you will gun the professor; Moose will grab the
dames, one under each arm, and keep 'em out of the way until the
shooting's over. The only thing is, when? The sooner the better.
Tomorrow?"

"Not quite, Vince. Let 'em finish figuring course, time, distance, all
that stuff. They can do it a lot faster and some better than I can. I'll
tell you when."

"O. K., and I'll give the signal. When I yell 'NOW' we give 'em the
business."

Newman went to his cabin and the muscle called Moose spoke thoughtfully.
That is, as nearly thoughtfully as his mental equipment would allow.

"I don't like that ape, boss. Before you gun him, let me work him over
just a little bit, huh?"

"It'll be quite a while yet, but that's a promise, Moose. As soon as his
job's done he'll wish he'd never been born. Until then, we'll let him
think he's Top Dog. Let him rave. But Ferdy, any time he's behind me or
out of sight, watch him like a hawk. Shoot him through the right elbow
if he makes one sour move."

"I get you, boss."

       *       *       *       *       *

A couple of evenings later, in Lifecraft Two, Barbara said: "You're
worried, Babe, and everything's going so smoothly. Why?"

"Too smoothly altogether. That's why. Newman ought to be doing a slow
burn and goldbricking all he dares; instead of which he's happy as a
clam and working like a nailer ... and I wouldn't trust Vincent Lopresto
or Ferdinand Blaine as far as I can throw a brick chimney by its smoke.
This whole situation stinks. There's going to be shooting for sure."

"But they couldn't do _anything_ without you two!" Bernice exclaimed.
"It'd be suicide ... and with no motive ... _could_ they, Ted,
possibly?"

Jones' dark face did not lighten. "They could, and I'm very much afraid
they intend to. As a crew-chief, Newman is a jack-leg engineer and a
very good practical 'troncist; and if he's what I _think_ he is----" He
paused.

"Could be," Deston said, doubtfully. "In with a mob of normal-space
pirate-smugglers. I'll buy that, but there wouldn't be enough plunder
to----"

"Just a sec. So he's a pretty good rule-of-thumb astrogator, too, and
we're computing every element of the flight. As for motive--salvage.
With either of us alive, none. With both of us dead, can you guess
within ten million bucks of how much they'll collect?"

"_Blockhead_!" Deston slapped himself on the forehead. "I never even
_thought_ of that angle. That nails it down solid."

"With the added attraction," Jones went on, coldly and steadily, "of
having two extremely desirable female women for eleven months before
killing them, too."

Both girls shrank visibly, and Deston said: "Check. I thought that was
the main feature, but it didn't add up. This does. Now, how will they
figure the battle? Both of us at once, of----"

"Why?" Barbara asked. "I'd think they'd waylay you, one at a time."

"Uh-uh. The survivor would lock the ship in null-G and it'd be like
shooting fish in a barrel. Since we're almost never together on duty ...
and it won't come until after we've finished the computations ...
they'll think up a good reason for _everybody_ to be together, and that
itself will be the tip-off. Ferdy will probably draw on me----"

"And he'll kill you," Jones said, flatly. "So I think I'll blow his
brains out tomorrow morning on sight."

"And get killed yourself? No ... much better to use their own trap----"

"We _can't_! Fast as you are, you aren't in _his_ class. He's a
professional--probably one of the fastest guns in space."

"Yes, but ... I've got a ... I mean I think I can----"

Bernice, grinning openly now, stopped Deston's floundering. "It's high
time you fellows told each other the truth. Bobby and I let our back
hair down long ago--we were both tremendously surprised to know that
both you boys are just as strongly psychic as we are. Perhaps even more
so."

"Oh ... so _you_ get hunches, too?" Jones demanded. "So you'll have
plenty of warning?"

"All my life. The old alarm clock has never failed me yet. But the girls
can't start packing pistols now."

"I wouldn't know how to shoot one if I did," Bernice laughed. "I'll
throw things I'm very good at that."

"Huh?" Jones asked. He didn't know his new wife very well, either. "What
can _you_ throw straight enough to do any good?"

"Anything I can reach," she replied, confidently. "Baseballs, medicine
balls, cannon balls, rocks, bricks, darts, discus, hammer,
javelin--what-have-you. In a for-real battle I'd prefer ... chairs, I
think. Flying chairs are really hard to cope with. Knives are too ...
uh-uh, I'd much rather have you fellows do the actual executing. I'll
start wearing a couple of knives in leg-sheaths, but I won't throw 'em
or use 'em unless I absolutely have to. So who will I knock out with the
first chair?"

"I'll answer that," Barbara said, quietly. "If it's Blaine against Babe,
it'll be Lopresto against Herc. So you'll throw your chairs or whatever
at that unspeakable oaf Newman."

"I'd rather brain him than anyone else I know, but that would leave that
gigantic gorilla to ... why, he'd ... listen, you'll simply _have_ to go
armed."

"I always do." Barbara held out her hands. "Since they don't want to
shoot us two--yet--these are all the weapons I'll need."

"Against a man-mountain like that? You're _that_ good? Really?"

"Especially against a man-mountain like that. I'm that good. Really,"
and both Joneses began to realize what Deston already knew--just how
deadly those harmless-seeming weapons could be.

Barbara went on: "We should have a signal, in case one of us gets
warning first. Something that wouldn't mean anything to them ...
musical, say ... Brahms. That's it. The very instant any one of us feels
their intent to signal their attack he yells 'BRAHMS!' and we _all_ beat
them to the punch. O. K.?"

It was O. K., and the four--Adams was still hard at work in the
lounge--went to bed.

       *       *       *       *       *

And three days later, within an hour after the last flight-datum had
been "put in the tank," the four intended victims allowed themselves to
be inveigled into the lounge. Everything was peaceful; everyone was full
of friendship and brotherly love. But suddenly "BRAHMS!" rang out, with
four voices in absolute unison; followed a moment later by Lopresto's
stentorian "NOW!"

It was a very good thing that Deston had had ample warning, for he was
indeed competing out of his class. As it was, his bullet crashed through
Blaine's head, while the gunman's went harmlessly into the carpet. The
other pistol duel wasn't even close! Lopresto's hand barely touched his
gun.

Bernice, even while shrieking the battle-cry, leaped to her feet, hurled
her chair, and reached for another; but one chair was enough. That
fiercely but accurately-sped missile knocked the half-drawn pistol from
Newman's hand and sent his body crashing to the floor, where Deston's
second bullet made it certain that he would not recover consciousness.

Barbara's hand-to-hand engagement took about one second longer. Moose
Mordan was big and strong; and, for such a big man, was fairly fast
physically. If he had had time to get his muscles ready, he might have
had a chance. His thought processes, however, were lamentably slow; and
Barbara Warner Deston was almost as fast physically as she was mentally.
Thus she reached him before he even began to realize that this
pint-sized girl actually intended to hit him; and thus it was that his
belly-muscles were still completely relaxed when her small but extremely
hard left fist sank half-forearm-deep into his solar plexus.

With an agonized "_WHOOSH_!" he began to double up, but she scarcely
allowed him to bend. Her right hand, fingers tightly bunched, was
already boring savagely into a selected spot at the base of his neck.
Then, left hand at his throat and right hand pulling hard at his belt,
