
Harper knew he was gazing upon a being of the fourth
dimension--doubtless the Entity that had caused the phenomena in
the laboratory, which had snatched him into the fourth dimension,
and was even now observing him with its four dimensional sight!
There was a shape above him that strained his eyes, gave hint of
Form just beyond his comprehension.

Harper hardly noticed that Pillbot was beside him, shaking him.
He had suddenly grasped a fundamental law of spacial stresses,
and he whipped out a pad and pencil, began scribbling down the
mathematical formula of these laws. He began to see now why
skyscrapers encountered the "stress-barrier" at a certain height.
He understood it just as a person of innate musical ability,
hearing music for the first time, would understand the laws of
that music.

"Look out, It's moving, descending!" Pillbot was yelling into his
ear. "It is about to act. Became active the moment you got here.
How did you induce it to bring you here?"

"Huh?" Harper looked up from his scribbling. "Oh." Harper
explained quickly how he had induced the Being to act on himself.

"That's it!" cried Pillbot hoarsely. "You switched the pattern of
imitation on It--tricked It into bringing you here. That's what
made it angry--"

"Angry?" Harper almost dropped his pad, clutched at Pillbot as
there was a sudden upheaval of the invisible tension-surface on
which they stood. A violent shake sprawled them on the "ground"
and now Harper saw the torso of Gault, a few feet away,
apparently hovering above the surface.

"Yes, angry!" Pillbot was pale. "As long as you merely gave it
something to imitate it was pacified. But now it recognizes
opposition, an effort to outwit it due to your switching the
pattern of imitation. Its condition is dangerous--it's bound to
react violently. We have to get out of here. You must know some
way--"

Harper again scribbled some figures on his pad. "As soon as I've
worked out this formula--"

Pillbot shook him frantically. "Can't you understand! This
Creature is a mental patient of a violent type. We are in a
_fourth dimensional insane asylum_!" Pillbot gazed upward
fearfully at a descending mass. "The pattern of its action fits
perfectly," he went on. "Some violent type of insanity, combined
with delusions of grandeur. Any slightest opposition will cause a
spasm of fury. It recognizes such opposition in the way you
tricked it into bringing you here. At first I thought it was a
primitive mentality, but now I know it is a highly evolved, but
insane creature, thinks it's Napoleon, wants to conquer the three
dimensional plane which its attention has been attracted to in
some way--"

Harper looked up in surprise. "Does it know about Napoleon?"

"Of course not, you fool!" screamed Pillbot. "It has the
Napoleonic complex, identifies itself with some great conqueror
of its own realm. And now it's on the rampage. We have to get
out of here--" He clutched at Harper as another upheaval of the
surface threw them down.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rising, Harper put away his pad. His calculations were complete.
He could now show engineers how to build high buildings, taking
advantage of space stress instead of trying to fight the stress.

For the first time, the danger of their position seemed to
penetrate to his consciousness. He looked about--and his eyes
rested on a strange familiar projection rising from the invisible
floor a few feet away. It was the section of his clay statue that
had vanished--vanished because its peculiar shape had somehow
caused it to be warped into the fourth dimension!

Why hadn't he been able to move it--Professor Gault moved about
freely.

He and Pillbot went over to it, tried to move it. A slight filmy
webwork around the projection caught Harper's eye. Now he
knew--the Being had somehow affixed it to the spot as a landmark,
so It could locate the laboratory. It must have been this
projection that had first attracted the Being's attention to the
three dimensional world, since, ordinarily, It would never have
noticed the presence of three dimensional life, any more than
humans would notice the presence of two dimensional life if such
existed!

Harper looked up at a bleat from Pillbot. Above them was a sudden
furious play of lights and shades. Vast masses seemed shifting in
crazy juxtapositions, now descending rapidly toward them.

"Quick," Harper, now fully aroused, gasped to Pillbot. "Climb
down this projection!"

"Climb down it--?"

"Yes, there is a fluid condition of space where it penetrates
between the two planes. By hugging its contours you will emerge
into the laboratory--I hope!"

Pillbot glanced overhead nervously, then experimentally slid a
font down the projection. The foot vanished. With a cry of
relief, Pillbot lowered himself until only head and shoulders
were visible. Then that too vanished.

Harper looked up. Some monstrous suggestion of Form was almost
upon him. He grasped the projection and just as his head sank out
of sight the Form seemed to smash down on him.

Pillbot helped Harper to his feet, from where he had sprawled at
the base of the statue, on the laboratory floor.

"Quick," he gasped. "The Creature will be infuriated now, by our
escape from Its realm. A maniacal spasm is sure to follow. We
