consequence of an imprudent exposure to cold, he was attacked with
Bronchitis, and Meningitis supervened. Leeches were applied to the head,
and other depletory measures actively employed, which were followed by
recovery.


CASE XLI.

---- Sloggat, aged thirteen months, died of _Meningitis_ supervening
upon Pneumonia--_suckled until the time of its death_.


CASE XLII.

John Scott, aged eleven months; admitted for Hooping-cough, with a
_well-marked affection of the head_--_still at the breast_.


CASE XLIII.

---- Scott, aged fifteen months,--died of 'Hooping-cough, with
convulsions,' _being then at the breast_.


CASE XLIV.

Isaac Berwick, aged one year two months, admitted for Hooping-cough,
_with an affection of the head_--_still at the breast_.


CASE XLV.

Frederick Cousins, aged three years four months, brought to me labouring
under Hooping-cough, with Meningitis, which latter terminated in
effusion. Calomel was then given every two hours, the stronger mercurial
ointment rubbed upon the temples, and blisters applied to the head. The
mercurial influence being established, a profuse discharge of urine
occurred; the pupils which had previously been _permanently_ dilated,
became once more obedient to light; sensibility was restored, and great
weakness appeared to be the only urgent symptom. The cough, however, now
returned, the head became again affected, and the child sunk. Upon
opening the head, about four ounces of fluid was found in the
ventricles[K]. This child was _suckled sixteen months_.


CASE XLVI.

Sarah Swann, aged four years six months, admitted for Hooping-cough with
convulsions,--_suckled one year_.


CASE XLVII.

Henry Harris, aged two years three months, admitted for Hooping-cough,
_with an affection_ of the head,--_suckled one year four months_.


CASE XLVIII.

Maria Hughes, aged two years, admitted for _Convulsions_ supervening
upon Hooping-cough--_suckled one year three months_.


CASE XLIX.

Thomas Benson, aged one year six months, admitted for Pneumonia, with
_well-marked affection of the head_--_suckled one year four months_.


CASE L.

Mary Kenner, aged six years, admitted for Hooping-cough, with
_well-marked affection of the head_--_suckled one year six months_.


CASE LI.

John Ennis, aged one year seven months, admitted for Bronchitis, to
which _a decided affection of the head succeeded_--_suckled one year_.


IV.

_Case of Meningitis produced in consequence of the Child being suckled
from its birth by a Woman who had at that time been delivered one Year._


CASE LII.

Ellen Willoughby, aged nine months, admitted for Meningitis; at present
suckled by a woman who has been _delivered one year and nine months_.

       *       *       *       *       *

With respect to the manner in which protracted lactation causes the
complaint that forms the subject of these remarks, I formerly was
undecided; but have now no doubt whatever of its arising _secondarily_
from derangement in the functions of the abdominal viscera, occasioned
by the depraved condition of the breast-milk.

It is universally allowed among medical men that irritations in the
stomach and bowels will, through the agency of particular nerves,
produce sympathetic irritation in the brain,--that peculiar action
being thus elicited which terminates in the effusion of serum,
constituting the disease named Hydrocephalus.--'The continued irritation
of important or very sensible nerves is, perhaps,' says Mr. Burns, '_one
of the most common causes_' (of Hydrocephalus); 'hence it may follow
dentition, and _very often arises from a bad state of the chylopoietic
viscera_.'

It is also no less generally known that food of a bad quality or
improper description will produce derangements in the digestive organs.
Now, having already shewn that the milk when lactation is protracted
becomes deteriorated, it plainly appears that such milk is capable of
occasioning derangement of the chylopoietic viscera; and it being
allowed that derangement of these viscera, from any source, may give
rise to inflammation of the brain, I conceive it follows that protracted
lactation must be admitted as one cause of such effect. This train of
reasoning, therefore, from generally admitted data, seems to _prove that
Meningitis_, or inflammation of the brain, _in children can be produced
by their being suckled for too long a period_, and _that it is so
produced I assert from repeated experience_.

An accidental perusal of Mr. Dendy's able work on the cutaneous diseases
of children, published shortly after the appearance of my paper before
referred to in the Medical and Physical Journal, has recently afforded
me the pleasure of finding that the author had been led to entertain
similar general views on the subject under discussion with myself; I
have, therefore, taken the opportunity of adding that gentleman's
testimony to my own, by quoting the following passage from his work
above mentioned.

'It may be truly said, that _the infantine disease excited by milk of a
deleterious, or simply impoverished quality, "grows by what it feeds
on;"_ and we shall witness the internal debility and the infantine
disorder running their course together. Tabes is the natural consequence
of this error; but its effect is evinced by the occurrence of other
disorders. A defective degree of nutrition, as I have elsewhere stated,
predisposes the system to become influenced by comparatively slight
excitement; and thus, in addition to the direct excitement of disease,
it becomes indirectly its predisposing cause. _Under its influence the
serous_[L] and mucous _membranes become readily the seat of
inflammatory action_.'

Those who feel a difficulty in relinquishing old opinions and adopting
new views upon any particular subject, may perhaps ask how it has
happened, if inflammation of the brain from protracted suckling be so
common as the preceding observations and cases would appear to prove,
that medical men of more advanced age and far greater experience than
myself have not previously noticed the circumstance. I would observe, in
reply, that until Harvey pointed out the circulation of the blood, no
one ever suspected the existence of such a phenomenon; yet now the
wonder appears to be, not that Harvey made the discovery, but that
others had not previously done the same. Multitudes, it may be added,
and among them the great Newton, had witnessed the fall of objects to
the ground without thinking of the cause which produced their downward
tendency; the propitious moment, however, arrived--the apple fell, and
the philosopher was led to those deductions which have rendered his name
immortal. So is it with observers of every class, from those most
distinguished by intellectual superiority and its successful
application, down to the humble writer of the present observations.
Facts are continually passing before us unnoticed, till, from their
repeated coincidence, or some accidental impulse, we attempt, and
finally are enabled, to trace their origin.

Thus, until the possibility of Meningitis originating from protracted
lactation had been suggested, practitioners were, of course, unable to
notice the fact--not from its non-occurrence, but because their
unconsciousness of its existence must necessarily preclude the inquiries
from which alone its cause could be determined. Hence a practitioner may
have treated many hundred cases of water on the brain in children,
without being able to attribute any one of them to protracted suckling;
yet this is no proof that such cases did not happen, for, had he made
the requisite inquiries, very probably many among them might have been
found which had thus arisen.

Another objection that may possibly be made to my views, is, that
instances might be adduced where lactation had been persevered in for a
very long period, without any ill effects supervening. That such
frequently occur, there is no doubt; and with respect to them, I have
merely to observe, that they do not in the slightest degree invalidate
the correctness of my conclusions. As well might it be argued, that
because persons have fallen from a very great height without sustaining
any injury, or, because poisonous doses of various drugs have sometimes
been swallowed without death supervening, that, therefore, there is no
danger in jumping from a precipice, or in taking a virulent poison; or
