All he could do was head for the offices of the Society for the
Protection of the Native Born and hope he could catch Adao before he ran
into any trouble.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two blocks away from the address he heard the sirens. Trying to act as
natural as the other pedestrians, he turned to look as the armored cars
and trucks hurtled by. Packed with armed police, their sirens and
revolving lights cleared a path through the dark streets. Neel kept
walking, following the cars now.

The street he wanted to go into was cordoned off.

Showing more than a normal interest would have been a giveaway. He let
himself be hurried past, with no more than a glance down the block, with
the other pedestrians. Cars and men were clustered around a doorway that
Neel felt sure was number 265, his destination. Something was very
wrong.

Had Costa walked into a trap--or tripped an alarm? It didn't really
matter which, either way the balloon had gone up. Neel walked on slowly,
painfully aware of his own inadequacy in dealing with the situation. It
was a time for action--but what action? He hadn't the slightest idea
where Costa was or how he could be of help to him.

Halfway down the block there was a dark mouth of an alleyway--unguarded.
Without stopping to think, Neel turned into it. It would bring him
closer to the building. Perhaps Costa was still trapped in there. He
could get in, help him.

The back of 265 was quiet, with no hint of the activity on the other
side of the building. Neel had counted carefully and was sure he had the
right one. It was completely dark in the unlit alley, but he found a
recessed door by touch. The chances were it was locked, but he moved
into the alcove and leaned his weight against it, pulling at the handle,
just in case. Nothing moved.

An inch behind his back the alley filled with light, washed with it, eye
burning and strong. His eyes snapped shut, but he forced them open
again, blinking against the pain. There were searchlights at each end of
the alley, sealing it off. He couldn't get out.

In the instant before the fear hit him he saw the blood spots on the
ground. There were three of them, large and glistening redly wet. They
extended in a straight line away from him, pointing towards the gaping
entrance of a cellar.

When the lights went out, Neel dived headlong towards the cracked and
filthy pavement. The darkness meant that the police were moving slowly
towards him from both ends of the alley, trapping him in between. There
was nothing doubtful about the fate of an armed Earthman caught here. He
didn't care. Neel's fear wasn't gone--he just had not time to think
about it. His long shot had paid off and there was still a chance he
could get Costa out of the trap he had let him walk into.

The lights had burned an after-image into his retina. Before it faded he
reached out and felt his fingers slide across the dusty ground into a
patch of wetness. He scrubbed at it with his sleeve, soaking up the
blood, wiping the spot fiercely. With his other hand he pushed together
a pile of dust and dirt, spreading it over the stain. As soon as he was
sure the stain was covered he slid forward, groping for the second
telltale splash.

Time was his enemy and he had no way to measure it. He could have been
lying in the rubble of that alley for an hour--or a second. What was to
be done, had to be done at once without a sound. There were silent,
deadly men coming towards him through the darkness.

After the second smear was covered there was a drawn out moment of fear
when he couldn't find the third and last. His fingers touched it
finally, much farther on than he had expected. Time had certainly run
out. Yet he forced himself to do as good a job here as he had with the
other two. Only when it was dried and covered did he allow himself to
slide forward into the cellar entrance.

Everything was going too fast. He had time for a single deep breath
before the shriek of a whistle paralyzed him again. Footsteps slapped
towards him and one of the searchlights burned with light. The footsteps
speeded up and the man ran by, close enough for Neel to touch if he had
reached out a hand. His clothing was shapeless and torn, his head and
face thick with hair. That was all Neel had time to see before the guns
roared and burned the life from the runner.

Some derelict, sleeping in the alley, who had paid with his life for
being in the wrong spot at the wrong time. But his death had bought Neel
a little more time. He turned and looked into the barrel of a gun.

Shock after shock had destroyed his capacity for fear. There was nothing
left that could move him, even his own death. He looked
quietly--dully--at the muzzle of the gun. With slow determination his
mind turned over and he finally realized that this time there was
nothing to fear.

"It's me, Adao," he whispered. "You'll be all right now."

"Ahh, it is you--" the voice came softly out of the darkness, the gun
barrel wavered and sank. "Lift me up so I can get at this door. Can't
seem to stand too well any more."

       *       *       *       *       *

Neel reached down, found Costa's shoulders and slowly dragged him to his
feet. His eyes were adjusting to the glare above them now, and he could
make out the gleam of reflected light on the metal in Costa's fingers.
The UN man's other hand was clutched tightly to his waist. The gun had
vanished. The metal device wasn't a key, but Costa used it like one. It
turned in the lock and the door swung open under their weight. Neel half
carried, half dragged the other man's dead weight through it, dropping
him to the floor inside. Before he closed the door he reached down and
felt a great pool of blood outside.

There was no time to do a perfect job, the hard footsteps were coming,
just a few yards away. His sleeves were sodden with blood as he blotted,
then pushed rubble into the stain. He pulled back inside and the door
closed with only the slightest click.

"I don't know how you managed it, but I'm glad you found me," Costa
said. There was weakness as well as silence in his whisper.

"It was only chance I found you," Neel said bitterly. "But criminal
stupidity on my part that let you walk into this trap."

"Don't worry about it, I knew what I was getting into. But I still had
to go. Spring the trap to see if it _was_ a trap."

"You suspected then that Hengly was--" Neel couldn't finish the
sentence. He knew what he wanted to say, but the idea was too unbearable
to put into words. Costa had no such compunction.

"Yes. Dear Hengly, graduate of the University and Practitioner of
Societics. A traitor. A warmonger, worse than any of his predecessors
because he knew just what to sell and how to sell it. It's never
happened before ... but there was always the chance ... the weight of
responsibility was too much ... he gave in--" Costa's voice had died
away almost to a whisper. Then it was suddenly loud again, no louder
than normal speaking volume, but sounding like a shout in the secret
basement.

"Neel!"

"It's all right. Take it easy--"

"Nothing is all right--don't you realize that. I've been sending my
reports back, so the UN and your Societics people will know how to
straighten this mess out. But Hengly can turn this world upside down and
might even get a shooting-war going before they get here. I'm out of it,
but I can tell you who to contact, people who'll help. Hold the k-factor
down--"

"That wouldn't do any good," Neel said quietly. "The whole thing is past
the patch and polish stage now. Besides--I blew the whole works up. My
machines and records, your--"

"You're a fool!" For the first time there was pain in Costa's voice.
