
Hall came out of the entrance and tried to walk around the two men, but
the farmer caught him by the sleeve.

"A reporter, huh? Well, I got some news for you. That thing from Grismet
just killed a kid."

Hall could restrain himself no longer.

"That's a lie," he said coldly.

The farmer looked him up and down.

"What do you know about it," he demanded. "My brother-in-law got it from
somebody in the state guard."

"It's still a lie."

"Just because it's not on the teledepth, you say it's a lie," the farmer
said belligerently. "Not everything is told on the teledepth, Mr.
Wiseheimer. They're keeping it a secret. They don't want to scare the
people."

Hall started to walk away, but the farmer blocked his path.

"Who are you anyway? Where do you live? I never saw you before," he said
suspiciously.

"Aw, Randy," his companion said, "don't go suspecting everybody."

"I don't like anyone to call me a liar."

Hall stepped around the man in his path, and turned down the street. He
was boiling inside with an almost uncontrollable fury.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few feet away, catastrophe suddenly broke loose. A faulty section of
the sidewalk split without warning under his feet and he went pitching
forward into the street. He clutched desperately at the trunk of a tall
palm tree, but with a loud snap, it broke, throwing him head on into a
parked road car. The entire front end of the car collapsed like an egg
shell under his weight.

For a long moment, the entire street was dead quiet. With difficulty,
Hall pulled himself to his feet. Pale, astonished faces were staring at
him from all sides.

Suddenly the farmer started screaming. "That's him. I knew it. That's
him." He was jumping up and down with excitement.

Hall turned his back and walked in the other direction. The people in
front of him faded away, leaving a clear path.

He had gone a dozen steps when a man with a huge double-barreled shotgun
popped out from a store front just ahead. He aimed for the middle of
Hall's chest and fired both barrels.

The blast and the shot struck Hall squarely, burning a large hole in his
shirt front. He did not change his pace, but continued step by step.

The man with the gun snatched two shells out of his pocket and
frantically tried to reload. Hall reached out and closed his hand over
the barrel of the gun and the blue steel crumpled like wet paper.

From across the street, someone was shooting at him with a rifle.
Several times a bullet smacked warmly against his head or his back.

He continued walking slowly up the street. At its far end several men
appeared dragging a small howitzer--probably the only piece in the local
armory. They scurried around it, trying to get it aimed and loaded.

"Fools. Stupid fools," Hall shouted at them.

The men could not seem to get the muzzle of the gun down, and when he
was a dozen paces from it they took to their heels. He tore the heavy
cannon off of its carriage and with one blow of his fist caved it in. He
left it lying in the street broken and useless.

Almost as suddenly as it came, his anger left him. He stopped and looked
back at the people cringing in the doorways.

"You poor, cruel fools," Hall said again.

He sat down in the middle of the street on the twisted howitzer barrel
and buried his head in his hands. There was nothing else for him to do.
He knew that in just a matter of seconds, the ships with their
permallium nets and snares would be on him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Since Jordan's ship was not large enough to transport Jon Hall's great
weight back to Grismet, the terrestrial government put at the agent's
disposal a much heavier vessel, one room of which had been hastily lined
with permallium and outfitted as a prison cell. A pilot by the name of
Wilkins went with the ship. He was a battered old veteran, given to
cigar smoking, clandestine drinking and card playing.

The vessel took off, rose straight through the atmosphere for about
forty miles, and then hung, idly circling Earth, awaiting clearance
before launching into the pulse drive. A full course between Earth and
Grismet had to be plotted and cleared by the technicians at the dispatch
center because the mass of the vessel increased so greatly with its
pulsating speed that if any two ships passed within a hundred thousand
miles of each other, they would at least be torn from their course, and
might even be totally destroyed.

Wilkins had proposed a pinochle game, and he and Jordan sat playing in
the control room.

The pilot had been winning and he was elated. "Seventy-six dollars so
far," he announced after some arithmetic. "The easiest day's pay I made
this month."

Jordan shuffled the cards and dealt them out, three at a time. He was
troubled by his own thoughts, and so preoccupied that he scarcely
followed the game.

"Spades, again," the pilot commented gleefully. "Well, ain't that too
bad for you." He gave his cigar a few chomps and played a card.

Jordan had been looking out of the window. The ship had tilted and he
could see without rising the rim of Earth forming a beautiful geometric
arc, hazy and blue in its shimmering atmosphere.

"Come on, play," the pilot said, impatiently. "I just led an ace."

Jordan put down his cards. "I guess I better quit," he said.

"What the devil!" the pilot said angrily. "You can't quit like that in
the middle of a deal. I got a flush and aces."

"I'm sorry," Jordan said, "but I'm going to lie down in my cabin until
we are given clearance."

He opened the door of the little room and went into the hall. He walked
down past his own cabin and stopped in front of another door, a new one
that was sheathed in permallium. He hesitated a few moments; then he
snapped open the outside latch and walked in, letting the door swing
closed behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hall lay unmoving in the middle of the floor, his legs and arms fastened
in greaves of permallium.

Jordan was embarrassed. He did not look directly at the robot.

"I don't know whether you want to talk to me or not," he started. "If
you don't want to, that's all right. But, I've followed you since you
landed on Earth, and I don't understand why you did what you did. You
don't have to tell me, but I wish you would. It would make me feel
better."

The robot shrugged--a very human gesture, Jordan noted.

"G-go ahead and ask me," he said. "It d-doesn't make any difference
now."

Jordan sat down on the floor. "The boy was the one who gave you away. If
not for him, no one would have ever known what planet you were on. Why
did you let the kid get away?"

The robot looked straight at the agent. "Would you kill a child?" he
asked.

"No, of course not," Jordan said a little bit annoyed, "but I'm not a
robot either." He waited for a further explanation, but when he saw none
was coming, he said: "I don't know what you were trying to do in that
powerhouse at Ballarat, but, whatever it was, that old man couldn't have
stopped you. What happened?"

"I l-lost my head," the robot said quietly. "The alarm and the lights
