helpless victim--he had resisted none of them. He had resisted nothing
until that day he had poured the jugful of liquor on the ground and
smashed the jug itself.

But could he blame his mother for all that? It had all been his own
fault.

       *       *       *       *       *

And it would be his own fault if he failed to resist the new temptation
that now reared its pretty head--Aoooya. She had taken to coming to his
hut-shrine for a private little ceremony of her own. You might almost
have thought that she had fallen in love with him as an individual. He
wondered whether she had been impressed by his helmet. Did she take that
to be his actual head? No, of course not. They had made helmets for
themselves, therefore they knew that the thing he wore was also a
helmet. Perhaps they knew more about him than he thought.

But they continued to worship him, that was the main thing. And Aoooya
brought him, every day, little presents, special flowers and food
delicacies, that argued a personal affection.

This was a danger that he recognized from the beginning. Perhaps a god
_might_ fall in love with a mortal without losing his godliness.
Perhaps. It had happened before. But, however the rest of the tribe
might react to the idea, Bradley had noticed one young man who liked to
stay near the girl, and he knew that this rival wouldn't take kindly to
it at all. He might resent the god's behavior. And what happened when
these people didn't like the way a god behaved? Why, they struck his
head off.

The god might act first, of course. The young man wouldn't stand a
chance against him if he used his gun. In fact, Bradley could blast the
other man unobserved, make him disappear into vapor, without leaving any
traces of how he died. That was murder, but if a god couldn't get away
with murder, what sort of god was he? A pretty poor, cheap sort indeed.
Yes, he could make his own rules.

And he could go on, maintaining his godhood by little murders of that
sort, and other deadly miracles, until they hated him more than they
loved him. That would follow inevitably. And then, when they all hated
him, not even his gun would save him. Then--

"You're a liar," he told himself fiercely. "That isn't the thing you're
afraid of. Your weakness is that you don't have a murderous nature. You
could kill one or two of them and get away with it, and you'd be able to
control yourself and kill no more. That time you hit the man over the
head, you didn't intend to kill him either. You were more frightened, at
first, anyway, by the thought that you might have killed him, than by
the danger of being caught. You were overjoyed when he lived.

"You hate to kill, that's your trouble. You've had a sense of
responsibility all along, but it never had a chance to develop. Now it's
developed. You feel responsible for these people, for Aoooya and for the
rest of them. That's why you can't take advantage of them. You've been
posing as a rebel all your life, and you're just a respectable,
law-abiding citizen at heart."

He winced at the thought. His own society had never accepted him at his
own valuation. This one took him for a much greater being than he took
himself, and there seemed to be nothing to do but to live up to what he
was expected to be.

       *       *       *       *       *

All the same, Aoooya continued to be a tempting morsel, and sooner or
later, he feared, he would not be able to resist her. And then the
planet itself provided a diversion.

They had never seen such a thing and had no idea of what it presaged,
but he knew. He had heard of it on Earth and on Venus, and he had seen
it on other planets where the rock formations had not yet settled down.
A little hollow appeared first in the ground, and then the hollow was
pushed out and suddenly blown into the air. Steam whistled through the
newly made vent, a shower of steam and hot dust and red hot fragments of
rock. Slowly the vent grew, until the cloud from the terrifying geyser
darkened the sky and spread panic through the tribe.

He knew what would happen next. They were running around in terror, but
not for one moment was he himself in doubt. He donned his complete space
suit, in order to impress them the more, then stalked into the middle of
them, and said, "Pick up all your possessions and follow me."

They stared at him, and he showed them what he meant by picking up the
belongings of one household in his gloved hands, and handing them to a
waiting woman. Then, when they had grasped the idea and were gathering
all they owned, he led them toward the safety of the trees. Five minutes
after they had set off, the lava began to flow from the new-born
volcano, scorching the ground for a hundred yards around, sparks smoking
and smoldering in the treetops.

The head start he had given them was enough to help them escape the
resultant forest fire. All that day they traveled, until finally they
came to a forest which couldn't burn, and here they rested. And here
they settled down to build their lives anew.

It must have been a comfort to know that a god had led them to safety
and was helping them make the new start. Bradley helped them with his
gun, which blasted dangerous beasts, and even more with his slightly
superior knowledge. He showed them how to fashion tools from stone and
how to use these to build better huts. He taught them how to make swords
and other weapons, so that henceforth they wouldn't be forced to rely
for defense on poison alone. He was the most industrious god since
Vulcan. And in helping them he found that he had no time for Aoooya.

Came the day when the new village settled down to its changed routine of
life. The morning ceremony before his new shrine had just been
completed, but Bradley was not satisfied. Something was wrong. Yanyoo's
demeanor, Aoooya's--

With a shock, Bradley realized what it was. From old Yanyoo down the
line, none of the natives seemed to have their original fear of him.
