Wheel Co.  of Bedford, Mass, U.S.A.--in England through Messrs.
Churchill and Co.  of London, importers.

Sec. 31.  To blow a Bulb at the End of a Tube.

I must admit at once that this is a difficult operation--at all
events, if a large bulb is required.  However, all there is to be said
can be said in few words.  In general, when a bulb is required at the
end of a tube it will be necessary to thicken up the glass.  A
professional glass-worker will generally accomplish this by "jumping
up" the tube, i.e.  by heating it where the bulb is required, and
compressing it little by little until a sufficient amount of glass is
collected.  The amateur will probably find that he gets a very
irregular mass in this way, and will be tempted to begin by welding on
a short bit of wide and thick tubing preparatory to blowing out the
bulb.

However, supposing that enough glass is assembled by-either of these
methods, and that it is quite uniform in thickness, let the thickened
part be heated along a circle till it becomes moderately soft, and let
it then be expanded about one-fifth, say by gently blowing.  It is
perhaps more important to keep turning the glass during bulb-blowing
than in any other operation, and this both when the glass is in the
flame and while the bulb is being blown.  It is also very important to
avoid draughts.  In general, a bulb is best blown with the tube in a
nearly horizontal position, but sloping slightly upwards from the
mouth.  If it be noticed that a bulb tends to blow out more at one
side than another, let the side of greatest protuberance be turned
down, so that it is at the lowest point, reduce the pressure for an
instant, and then blow again.  It will be observed that the bulb will
now expand at the top.

The reason of this is chiefly that the under side cools most rapidly
(according to Faraday, Chemical Manipulation, Sec. 1194), and
consequently can expand no further;  but also it is not unlikely that
the glass tends to flow somewhat from the upper side, which remains
hot, and consequently the bulb, when the next puff reaches it, will
tend to yield at this point.  By heating several zones the tube will
become gradually expanded.

Fig. 24.

Fig.  25.

Fig. 26.

When the length of the thickened part of the tube only slightly
exceeds its diameter (Fig.  25), let the whole be brought to a
temperature which, with flint glass, should be just short of that of
perfect fluidity;  and then, holding the tube horizontally and
constantly turning it, let the bulb be blown out to its full size,
noting the appearances and correcting too great protuberance on any
side by the means above mentioned.  If the bulb appears pear-shaped
turn the tube so that the melted mass is directed upwards;  if the
bulb have the contrary fault, correct in the corresponding manner.

The bulb when finished may be lightly tapped on the table, when, if
there is any weak place owing to inequality of thickness, the bulb
will break, and the operation may be started afresh.  "A good bulb is
round, set truly on the tube, and free from lumps of thick glass or
places of excessive thinness."  When the amateur has succeeded in
blowing a bulb two inches in diameter on the end of a strong bit of
thermometer tube--say for an air thermometer--he may well seek the
congratulations of his friends.

In case the bulb is not satisfactory on a first attempt, it may be
melted down again, if the following precautions are taken.  Directly
creases begin to appear in the bulb let it be withdrawn from the
flame, and gently blown till the creases come out.  By alternate
heating and blowing the glass can be got back to its original form, or
nearly so, but unless the operator shows great skill and judgment, the
probability is that the glass will be uneven.  By heating and keeping
the thicker parts in the higher position, and blowing a little now and
again, the glass may be got even, and a new attempt may be made.  It
must not be supposed that this process can be carried on indefinitely,
for the glass tends to lose its viscous properties after a time, or,
at all events, it "perishes" in some way, especially if it has been
allowed to get very thin;  consequently too frequent attempts on the
same glass are unprofitable.  Two or three trials are as many as it
generally pays to make.  As a rule the largest possible flame may be
used with advantage in this operation.

Sec. 32.  To blow a bulb in the middle of a tube, the procedure is much
like that already treated, but the manipulation is, if anything,
more difficult, for the further end of the tube must be carried and
turned as well as the end which is held to the lips.

Sec. 33.  To make a side Weld.

This is by no means difficult, but is easier with lead glass than with
soda glass.  The tube to which it is desired to make a side connection
having been selected, it is closed at one end by rubber tube stops, or
in any other suitable manner.  The zone of the proposed connection is
noted, and the tube is brought to near softness round that circle (if
the tube is made actually soft, inconvenience will arise from the
bending, which is sure to occur).  Two courses are then open to the
operator, one suitable to a thick tube, the other to a tube of
moderate thickness.

Taking the former first.  Provide a piece of glass rod and warm its
end.  Direct a small flame against the spot on the thick tube where
the proposed joint is to be.  When the glass becomes almost
incandescent at this spot, put the end of the rod against it and draw
out a thread of glass till sufficient "metal" has been removed.  Then
fuse off the thread close to the tube.

Fig.  27.

The subsequent procedure is the same as for thin tubes.  In this case
heat the spot by the smallest flame available, and get the spot very
hot.  Blow it out gently into a bubble, perhaps extending to a height
equal to its diameter.  Then heat the top of the bubble till it is
incandescent and blow violently.  This will produce an opening fringed
by glass so thin as to exhibit interference colours.  Remove the filmy
part, and heat the frayed edges till they cohere and form an incipient
tube.  If the flame has been of a correct size, the tube will now be
of the same diameter as the tube to be welded on, and will project
perhaps one-sixteenth of an inch from the surface of the main tube
(Fig.  28).

Fig. 28.

Fig.  29.

When this stage is reached, again heat the tube all round till it
nearly softens, and by means of the other hand heat the end of the
other tube which it is proposed to weld.  Just before the main tube
actually softens, turn it so as to heat the edges of the aperture, and
at the same time get the end of the side tube very hot.  Take both out
of the flame for an instant, and press the parts together, instantly
slightly withdrawing the side tube.  If the operation is well
performed, it will be found that the point of maximum thickness of
glass is now clear of the main tube.  The joint is then to be heated
all round and blown out--a rather awkward operation, and one
requiring some practice, but it can be done.

Fig.  30.

If great strength is wanted, heat the main tube all round the joint
bit by bit, and blow each section slightly outwards.  If the operator
is confident in his skill, he should then heat the whole joint to the
softening point, blow it out slightly, and then adjust by pulling and
pushing.  Cool first in the gas flame, and then plunge the joint into
the asbestos and cover it up--or if too large, throw the asbestos
cloth round it.

In the case of soda glass this final "general heat" is almost
essential, but it is not so with flint glass, and as the general heat
is the most difficult part of the job, it will be found easier to use
lead glass and omit the general heating.  With soda glass a very small
irregularity will cause the joint to break when cold, but flint glass
is much more long-suffering.  It is easy to perform the above
operation on small tubes.  For large ones it will be found best to
employ flint glass and use the clip stands as in the case of direct
welds, treated above, but, of course, with suitable modifications.
Never let the main tube cool after the hole is made until the work is
done.

Sec. 34.  Inserted Joints.

In many instances the performance of apparatus is much improved by
joints of this kind, even when their use is not absolutely essential.

There are two ways in which inserted joints may be made.  The first
method is the easier, and works well with flint glass; but when one
comes to apply it to soda glass there is a danger of the glass
becoming too thick near the joint, and this often leads to a cracking
of the joint as the glass cools.

Fig.  31.

Suppose it is desired to insert the tube B into the tube A (Fig.  31).
Begin by reducing the size of the end of tube A till B will just slip
in quite easily.  With B about one-quarter inch in diameter, a
clearance of about one-twentieth of an inch, or less, in all (i.e.
one-fortieth of an inch on each side) will be proper.

Heat B by itself at the proposed zone of junction, and blow out a very
narrow ring;  then compress this slightly so that it forms an almost
closed ring of glass.  The figure refers to the close of this
operation (Fig.  31, B).  It does not matter much whether the ring
remains a mere flattened bulb, or whether it is a solid ring, but it
must be one or the other.  Some judgment must be exercised in
preparing the ring.  In general, the beginner will collect too much
glass in the ring, and consequently the joint, when made, will either
be thick and liable to crack easily, or it will be blown out into an
erratic shape in endeavours to reduce this thickness.  Accordingly,
the operator will, if necessary, thin the tube B by drawing slightly,
if he considers it desirable, before the little enlargement is blown
out.  In general, two heats must be used for this operation.

Fig.  32.

Get the approximating parts of both A and B up to a temperature just
below that at which they will adhere, and having closed the other end
of A, place B carefully within it up to the ring, and if it can be
arranged, have a mica wad in A, with a central hole through which the
end of B can project.  This will very much facilitate the operation,
especially if B is long, but may be dispensed with by the exercise of
care and skill.

The operation is now simple.  Fuse the junction and press the tubes
lightly together, being careful not to collect more glass than can be
helped;  finally, blow out the joint and reduce the thickness by mild
drawing (Fig.  33).  In order to make a really good joint, two points
must be particularly attended to--the rim must be thin and its plane
perfectly perpendicular to the axis of tube B;  the end of tube A must
be cut off quite clean and perpendicular to its axis before B is
inserted.  So important are these conditions--especially the latter
that the writer has even occasionally used the grindstone to get the
end of A into a proper condition, an admission which will probably
earn the contempt of the expert glass-worker.

Fig. 33.

Now for the second method, which is often practised in Germany, where
soda glass is chiefly used.  With this glass the chief point is to get
a very even and not too thick ring at the junction, and consequently
the extra thickening produced by making a rim on B is rather a
drawback.  The method consists in cutting off from B the length which
it is desired to insert, slipping this into A (which may be an
otherwise closed bulb, for instance), and then gradually melting up
the open end of A till the piece of B inside will no longer fall out.
By holding the joint downwards so that the inserted portion of B rests
on the edges of the opening, a joint may be made with the minimum
thickening.

The external part of B, previously heated, is then applied, and the
joint subjected to a "general" heat and blown out.  Very nice joints
may be made by this method, and it is perhaps the better one where the
external part of B is to be less in diameter than the inserted part.
It was in this manner that the writer was taught to make glass
velocity pumps, one of which, of a good design, is figured as an
example.

In all cases good annealing should follow this operation.  If the
inserted part of the inner tube (B) is anything like an inch in
diameter, and especially if it is of any length, as in some forms of
ozone apparatus, or in a large Bunsen's ice calorimeter, the
arrangements for supporting the inner part must be very good.  A
convenient way of proceeding when the inner tube is well supported is
to make the mouth of A only very little larger than the diameter of B,
so that B will only just slip in.  Then the mouth of A and the zone of
B may be heated together, and B blown out upon A.  This, of course,
must be arranged for, if necessary, by temporarily stopping the inner
end of B.

The inner support of B should be removed as soon as practicable after
the joint is made, or, at all events, should not be perfectly rigid; a
tightly-fitting cork, for instance, is too rigid.  The reason is, of
course, that in cooling there may be a tendency to set B a little to
one side or the other, and if it is not free to take such a set, the
joint most probably will give way.  Good annealing both with flame and
asbestos is a sine qua non in all inserted work.

Fig. 34.

Sec. 35.  Bending Tubes.

I have hitherto said nothing about bending tubes, for to bend a tube
of a quarter of an inch in diameter, and of ordinary thickness, is
about the first thing one learns in any laboratory, while to bend
large tubes nicely is as difficult an operation as the practice of
glass-blowing affords.  However, even in bending a narrow tube it is
possible to proceed in the wrong way.  The wrong way is to heat a
short length of the tube and then bend it rapidly, holding the plane
of the bend horizontal.  The right way, per contra, is to use a
batswing burner to heat, say, two inches of the tube with constant
turning till it is very soft, and then, holding the glass so that the
bend will be in a vertical plane passing through one eye (the other
being shut), to make the bend rather slowly.

If an exact angle is required, it is as well to have it drawn out on a
sheet of asbestos board.  In this case bend the glass as described
till it is approximately right, and finish by laying it on the
asbestos board and bringing it up to the marks.  A suitable bit of
wood may be substituted for the asbestos on occasion.

N.B: The laboratory table is not a suitable piece of wood.  A
right-angled bend is often wanted.  In this case the corner of a table
will serve as a good guide to the eye, the glass being finished by
being held just above it.  If great accuracy is wanted, make a wooden
template and suspend it by a screw from the side of the table, so that
the vertex of the gauge for the interior angle projects downwards,
then finish by bending the tube round it.  The wood may be about half
an inch thick.

If a sharp bend is required, heat the tube in the blow-pipe, and bend
it rapidly, blowing out the glass meanwhile.  The reason why a long
bend should be held in a vertical plane is that the hot part tends to
droop out of the plane of the bend if the latter be made in a
horizontal position.  To bend a tube above half an inch in diameter is
a more or less difficult operation, and one which increases in
difficulty as the diameter of the tube increases.

A U-tube, for instance, may be made as follows:  Use the four
blow-pipe arrangement so as to heat a fair length of tube, and get,
say, two inches of tube very hot--almost fluid, in fact--by means of
the carbon block supported from a stand.  Remove the tube rapidly from
the flame and draw the hot part out to, say, three inches.  Then,
holding the tube so as to make the bend in a vertical plane, bend it
and blow it out together to its proper size.

This operation seems to present no difficulties to experienced
glass-workers, even with tubes of about one inch in diameter, but to
the amateur it is very difficult.  I always look on a large U-tube
with feelings of envy and admiration, which the complex trick work of
an elaborate vacuum tube does not excite in the least.  It will be
noted that this method may, and often does, involve a preliminary
thickening of the glass.

With tubes over an inch in diameter I have no idea as to what is the
best mode of procedure--whether, for instance, a quantity of sand or
gas coke might not be used to stuff out the tube during bending, but
in this case there would be the difficulty of removing the fragments,
which would be sure to stick to the glass.

Of course, if the bend need not be short, the tube could be softened
in a tube furnace and bent in a kind of way.  I must admit that with
tubes of even less than one inch in diameter I have generally managed
best by proceeding little by little.  I heat as much of the glass as I
can by means of a gigantic blow-pipe, having a nozzle of about an inch
in diameter, and driven by a machine-blower.

When I find that, in spite of blowing, the tube begins to collapse, I
suspend operations, reheat the tube a little farther on, and so
proceed.  If by any chance any reader knows a good laboratory method
of performing this operation, I hope he will communicate it to me.
After all, the difficulty chiefly arises from laboratory heating
appliances being as a rule too limited in scope for such work.

The bending of very thin tubes also is a difficulty.  I have only
succeeded here by making very wide bends, but of course the blowing
method is quite applicable to this case, and the effect may be
obtained by welding in a rather thicker bit of tube, and drawing and
blowing it till it is of the necessary thinness.  This is, however, a
mere evasion of the difficulty.

Sec. 36.  Spiral Tubes.

These are easily made where good heating apparatus is available.  As,
however, one constantly requires to bend tubes of about one-eighth
inch in diameter into spirals in order to make spring connections for
continuous glass apparatus, I will describe a method by which this is
easily done.  Provide a bit of iron pipe about an inch and a quarter
in outside diameter.  Cover this with a thick sheath of asbestos
cloth, and sew the edges with iron wire.  Hammer the wire down so that
a good cylindrical surface is obtained.  Make two wooden plugs for the
ends of the iron pipe.  Bore one to fit a nail, which may be held in a
small retort clip, and fasten a stout wire crank handle into the other
one.  Support the neck of the handle by means of a second clip.  In
