shrine of a maiden heart his image is set up to receive the incense of
a tenderness that needs not to restrain itself through fear of possible
cross or separation.

"In due time their converging lives come together. The lovers meet,
gaze a moment into each other's eyes, then throw themselves each on
the other's breast. The maiden has all the charms that ever stirred the
blood of an Earthly lover, but there is another glamour over her which
the eyes of Earthly lovers are shut to,--the glamour of the future.
In the blushing girl her lover sees the fond and faithful wife, in the
blithe maiden the patient, pain-consecrated mother. On the virgin's
breast he beholds his children. He is prescient, even as his lips take
the first-fruits of hers, of the future years during which she is to
be his companion, his ever-present solace, his chief portion of God's
goodness. We have read some of your romances describing love as you know
it on Earth, and I must confess, my friend, we find them very dull.

"I hope," he added, as I did not at once speak, "that I shall not offend
you by saying we find them also objectionable. Your literature possesses
in general an interest for us in the picture it presents of the
curiously inverted life which the lack of foresight compels you to lead.
It is a study especially prized for the development of the imagination,
on account of the difficulty of conceiving conditions so opposed to
those of intelligent beings in general. But our women do not read your
romances. The notion that a man or woman should, ever conceive the idea
of marrying a person other than the one whose husband or wife he or she
is destined to be is profoundly shocking to our habits of thought. No
doubt you will say that such instances are rare among you, but if
your novels are faithful pictures of your life, they are at least not
unknown. That these situations are inevitable under the conditions of
earthly life we are well aware, and judge you accordingly; but it is
needless that the minds of our maidens should be pained by the knowledge
that there anywhere exists a world where such travesties upon the
sacredness of marriage are possible.

"There is, however, another reason why we discourage the use of your
books by our young people, and that is the profound effect of sadness,
to a race accustomed to view all things in the morning glow of
the future, of a literature written in the past tense and relating
exclusively to things that are ended."

"And how do you write of things that are past except in the past tense?"
I asked.

"We write of the past when it is still the future, and of course in the
future tense," was the reply. "If our historians were to wait till after
the events to describe them, not alone would nobody care to read about
things already done, but the histories themselves would probably be
inaccurate; for memory, as I have said, is a very slightly developed
faculty with us, and quite too indistinct to be trustworthy. Should the
Earth ever establish communication with us, you will find our histories
of interest; for our planet, being smaller, cooled and was peopled ages
before yours, and our astronomical records contain minute accounts
of the Earth from the time it was a fluid mass. Your geologists and
biologists may yet find a mine of information here."

In the course of our further conversation it came out that, as a
consequence of foresight, some of the commonest emotions of human nature
are unknown on Mars. They for whom the future has no mystery can, of
course, know neither hope nor fear. Moreover, every one being assured
what he shall attain to and what not, there can be no such thing as
rivalship, or emulation, or any sort of competition in any respect; and
therefore all the brood of heart-burnings and hatreds, engendered on
Earth by the strife of man with man, is unknown to the people of Mars,
save from the study of our planet. When I asked if there were not, after
all, a lack of spontaneity, of sense of freedom, in leading lives fixed
in all details beforehand, I was reminded that there was no difference
in that respect between the lives of the people of Earth and of Mars,
both alike being according to God's will in every particular. We knew
that will only after the event, they before,--that was all. For the
rest, God moved them through their wills as He did us, so that they had
no more dense of compulsion in what they did than we on Earth have
in carrying out an anticipated line of action, in cases where our
anticipations chance to be correct. Of the absorbing interest which
the study of the plan of their future lives possessed for the people
of Mars, my companion spoke eloquently. It was, he said, like the
fascination to a mathematician of a most elaborate and exquisite
demonstration, a perfect algebraical equation, with the glowing
realities of life in place of figures and symbols.

When I asked if it never occurred to them to wish their futures
different, he replied that such a question could only have been asked by
one from the Earth. No one could have foresight, or clearly believe that
God had it, without realizing that the future is as incapable of being
changed as the past. And not only this, but to foresee events was to
foresee their logical necessity so clearly that to desire them different
was as impossible as seriously to wish that two and two made five
instead of four. No person could ever thoughtfully wish anything
different, for so closely are all things, the small with the great,
woven together by God that to draw out the smallest thread would unravel
creation through all eternity.

While we had talked the afternoon had waned, and the sun had sunk below
the horizon, the roseate atmosphere of the planet imparting a splendor
to the cloud coloring, and a glory to the land and sea scape, never
paralleled by an earthly sunset. Already the familiar constellations
appearing in the sky reminded me how near, after all, I was to the
Earth, for with the unassisted eye I could not detect the slightest
variation in their position. Nevertheless, there was one wholly novel
feature in the heavens, for many of the host of asteroids which circle
in the zone between Mars and Jupiter were vividly visible to the naked
eye. But the spectacle that chiefly held my gaze was the Earth, swimming
low on the verge of the horizon. Its disc, twice as large as that of any
star or planet as seen from the Earth, flashed with a brilliancy like
that of Venus.

"It is, indeed, a lovely sight," said my companion, "although to
