face or his expression.

"I do not entirely understand this, David," the general said
conversationally. "The investigation. I thought I had powerful friends
in the Corps. Though a man makes enemies." The general lurched awkwardly
over the broken surface of Miracastle, drawing the safety line taut. He
moved toward the connection rail again. "A general is separated from
much of his command. Some of the technical refinements are too
involved--and, of course, men hide their feelings." Once again he
struggled with the wind, turning slowly at the end of the safety line:
held from the devouring anger of the planet only by the slender
umbilical cord from the stars. "General Grisley, now. I think he's
sixteen star, in headquarters. He was a politician. He came up fast. In
fact, he was my adjutant a few years ago. He was always a man to hold a
grudge."

Captain Arnold made no reply.

"You know how politics is in the Corps."

Dome Nine rose from the swirling mist before them. The wind seemed to
increase in fury. And still, inside the suits, there was the sound only
of labored breathing and the general's voice.

"These natives," the general said. "They were very primitive, David."
Neither could see the other's face. "I can't think of them as
intelligent at all. I feel they were very low on the evolutionary
ladder. I wouldn't call it a city, as I've heard it called. Natural
formation, more likely. Nature plays strange tricks."

       *       *       *       *       *

They were at the lock of Dome Nine.

Inside, the general removed his helmet. "David," he said, "I've been
meaning to talk to you for some time now. You've got a good career in
front of you in the Corps. You're going to move up. With a few breaks,
right to the top. I'm just now writing up my evaluation for your files.
I plan to give you a very fine recommendation, Captain. Normally, I
don't talk about this sort of thing, but I thought you might like to
know."

"Thank you, sir," Captain Arnold said uneasily, opening his surface
suit.

"Well, let's inspect the area, Captain."

The inspection was perfunctory. As he always did, the general paused at
the pile monitor and watched, in the Dante screen, the virtually
indescribable reactions being sustained far beneath the surface: molten
rock flowing and smoking. Orange, blue and white flames danced as though
in agony in the great, expanding cavern, danced and merged and vanished
and reappeared in an ever-changing pattern.

Back at the locks, the general bid Captain Arnold good-by and turned to
leave. Then, as if an afterthought came forward, he turned back.

"David, oh, David!"

"Yes, sir."

"Perhaps you remember a conversation we had a few weeks ago? I called on
you for some technical advice." He held his helmet in his hands.

"When was that, sir?"

"Oh, it was about the technical feasibility of reversing the
air-changing equipment, I believe. As you know, I can't be up on all the
technical, purely detailed procedure, for all phases of the operation.
That's what we have experts for." The last statement was unusually
jovial. "I believe you told me, David, that the process was too far
along at that time. Perhaps you remember?"

"General Shorter, when was that?"

"I thought you would remember, David. I'm sure it was you. Yes, I'm
almost positive it was. But if you say.... Well, David, it wasn't quite
so much as exactly a statement like that. But that was the general
meaning of it, you know, stripped of all the technical language. You
have to take it in the over-all context. That was the meaning I got." He
laughed tactfully. "You're like lawyers, all you technicians. You answer
everything yes and no at the same time. I hoped you'd remember the
conversation. I got that idea from it." The general waited. "Well,
David--don't look like that--it's not at all important. Just trying to
refresh my own memory. It's not important, really.... Good night,
David." He placed the helmet over his head.

"Good night, General."

Methodically the general completed his rounds. He laughed often and
joked with the men and seemed in exceptionally good spirits.

Back in his own quarters, he brought out his diary. With a weary sigh,
he sat down to it. He glanced at his timepiece. The day extended
backward almost beyond memory but it was not yet late.

After thumbing the diary listlessly for several minutes--pausing now and
then at a paragraph--he began to write. He put the events of the day
down precisely in their logical sequence.




IV


The Committee took over the dining area when the general left for his
tour of inspection. While the steward's department was preparing coffee
for the interviewees, now assembling in the corridor, the four members
of the Committee arranged themselves at the larger of the tables.
Notepaper lay before them.

Mr. Tucker lighted a cigar and fingered it. "A rather good meal," he
said.

The others nodded.

"I may as well start off, while we're waiting," Mr. Wallace said. "I'll
summarize my somewhat contradictory observations.

"Superficially, the cultural level of the natives appeared quite
primitive. The absence of tools would normally be indicative. On the
other hand, the city was carved from rock in a way so as to suggest a
very sophisticated technology. And writing, while apparently not
practiced to any considerable extent, was known--or, if not writing as
we understand it, some advanced decorative technique. We've found two
lines of it, at least.

"Again superficially, the city would suggest a nomadic tradition, but
for its craftsmanship. It seems independent of any obvious supply of
food and their equivalent of water, if any. Nor were any provisions in
evidence for the disposal of waste products. Yet the city had the
appearance of age and continual usage. If you notice, the floor of the
recess was worn unevenly toward the center by what I should guess to be
the traffic of several centuries.

"The thought naturally occurs that the aliens were the rather decadent
relics of a highly developed technological civilization existing on the
planet in the not too distant past. Yet Miracastle offers no evidence
for the existence of a prior technology--no ruins, no residual
radioactivity from atomic operations. In short, the city has no apparent
genesis in the past.

"The alternative arises: perhaps the natives were not natives at all,
but immigrants or colonists like ourselves. Yet the age of the city
contradicts this.

