third. According to the economics of crime, it was feasible. Anyhow it
was being done.

Pop reached the dust-heap which was his shack and went in the air lock.
Inside, he went to the vision-phone and called the mine-colony down in
the Crack. He gave the message he'd been told to pass on. Sattell to
come up, with what diamonds had been dug since the regular cannister was
sent up for the Lunar City ship that would be due presently. Otherwise
the ship on the landing strip would destroy shack and Pop and the colony
together.

"I'd guess," said Pop painstakingly, "that Sattell figured it out. He's
probably got some sort of gun to keep you from holding him down there.
But he won't know his friends are here--not right this minute he won't."

A shaking voice asked questions from the vision-phone.

"No," said Pop, "they'll do it anyhow. If we were able to tell about
'em, they'd be chased. But if I'm dead and the shacks smashed and the
cable burnt through, they'll be back on Earth long before a new cable's
been got and let down to you. So they'll do all they can no matter what
I do." He added, "I wouldn't tell Sattell a thing about it, if I were
you. It'll save trouble. Just let him keep on waiting for this to
happen. It'll save you trouble."

Another shaky question.

"Me?" asked Pop. "Oh, I'm going to raise what hell I can. There's some
stuff in that ship I want."

He switched off the phone. He went over to his air apparatus. He took
down the cannister of diamonds which were worth five millions or more
back on Earth. He found a bucket. He dumped the diamonds casually into
it. They floated downward with great deliberation and surged from side
to side like a liquid when they stopped. One-sixth gravity.

Pop regarded his drawings meditatively. A sketch of his wife as he now
remembered her. It was very good to remember. A drawing of his two
children, playing together. He looked forward to remembering much more
about them. He grinned.

"That stair-rail," he said in deep satisfaction. "That'll do it!"

He tore bed linen from his bunk and worked on the emptied cannister. It
was a double container with a thermware interior lining. Even on Earth
newly-mined diamonds sometimes fly to pieces from internal stress. On
the Moon, it was not desirable that diamonds be exposed to repeated
violent changes of temperature. So a thermware-lined cannister kept them
at mine-temperature once they were warmed to touchability.

Pop packed the cotton cloth in the container. He hurried a little,
because the men in the rocket were shaky and might not practice
patience. He took a small emergency-lamp from his spare spacesuit. He
carefully cracked its bulb, exposing the filament within. He put the
lamp on top of the cotton and sprinkled magnesium marking-powder over
everything. Then he went to the air-apparatus and took out a flask of
the liquid oxygen used to keep his breathing-air in balance. He poured
the frigid, pale-blue stuff into the cotton. He saturated it.

All the inside of the shack was foggy when he finished. Then he pushed
the cannister-top down. He breathed a sigh of relief when it was in
place. He'd arranged for it to break a frozen-brittle switch as it
descended. When it came off, the switch would light the lamp with its
bare filament. There was powdered magnesium in contact with it and
liquid oxygen all about.

He went out of the shack by the air lock. On the way, thinking about
Sattell, he suddenly recovered a completely new memory. On their first
wedding anniversary, so long ago, he and his wife had gone out to dinner
to celebrate. He remembered how she looked: the almost-smug joy they
shared that they would be together for always, with one complete year
for proof.

Pop reflected hungrily that it was something else to be made permanent
and inspected from time to time. But he wanted more than a drawing of
this! He wanted to make the memory permanent and to extend it--

If it had not been for his vacuum suit and the cannister he carried, Pop
would have rubbed his hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tall, jagged crater-walls rose from the lunar plain. Monstrous, extended
inky shadows stretched enormous distances, utterly black. The sun, like
a glowing octopod, floated low at the edge of things and seemed to hate
all creation.

Pop reached the rocket. He climbed the welded ladder-rungs to the air
lock. He closed the door. Air whined. His suit sagged against his body.
He took off his helmet.

When the red-headed man opened the inner door, the hand-weapon shook and
trembled. Pop said calmly:

"Now I've got to go handle the hoist, if Sattell's coming up from the
mine. If I don't do it, he don't come up."

The red-headed man snarled. But his eyes were on the cannister whose
contents should weigh a hundred pounds on Earth.

"Any tricks," he rasped, "and you know what happens!"

"Yeah," said Pop.

He stolidly put his helmet back on. But his eyes went past the
red-headed man to the stair that wound down, inside the ship, from some
