before they, themselves, are killed. They would call your speech
nonsense. And I would agree with them."

Bors said respectfully, "Yes, Majesty. It may also be said that copies
of the first Talents, Incorporated launching-data tables have already
been distributed to the missile crews throughout the fleet. More are
being distributed as fast as Logan calculates them. I don't think you
can keep our ships from trying the new missiles when the fighting
starts!"

Indignantly, the bearded man said, "I protest! This is a War Council! If
the council is to be lectured by strangers and if its orders won't be
obeyed, why hold it?"

"Why, indeed?" King Humphrey looked sternly about the council-table.
Sternness did not become him, but dignity did. He said with dignity,
"You who are to stay here have to think of dealing with a victorious
Mekin. We who are to go have to think of making our defeat count. There
is no point in further discussion. The fleet will take off immediately."

He rose from his seat. The bearded man protested, "But the Mekinese
aren't here yet! They won't arrive until day after tomorrow!"

"You're using Talents, Incorporated information," objected Bors. "And it
is wise for the fleet to move off-planet at once! You are reasonable
men. Too reasonable! Nothing can destroy a nation so quickly as for it
to fall into the hands of practical, hard-headed, reasonable men who act
upon the best scientific data and the opinions of the best experts! That
happened on Tralee, and my uncle and myself are exiles and Tralee is
subjugated in consequence. But I am beginning to have hope for Kandar!"

He followed King Humphrey out of the council-room. Fleet admirals
brought up the rear. The stodgy, dumpy figure of the king tramped
onward. It became obvious that he was bound for the ground-cars that
waited to take him and those who would follow him to the launching area
of the fleet.

A lean, gray, vice-admiral fell into step beside Bors.

"You don't think things are hopeless, Captain?" he asked curiously. "I
don't see the shred of a chance for us. But my whole life's been in the
fleet. Under Mekin I'd be drafted to work in a factory or serve as an
under-officer on a guard-ship, one or the other! I'd rather end in a
good fight. How can you have hope?"

Bors said grimly, "I'm not sure that I have. But I can't believe that
nations can be saved by reasonable, practical men. They aren't made by
them! I've no hope except that acting foolishly may be wisdom. Sometimes
it is."

"Ha!" The vice-admiral grinned wryly. "But fortunes are made by
businessmen, and only history by heroes. No sensible man is ever a hero.
But, like you, I don't like practical men."

They went out-of-doors. The king climbed sturdily into a ground-car. It
hummed away. There was a sort of ordered confusion, and then other
ground-cars began to stream away from the palace.

Morgan appeared and waved to Bors. He hesitated, and Morgan pointed to
an unofficial vehicle. Inside, Gwenlyn was smiling cheerfully at Bors.
He found himself returning the smile, and allowed himself to be guided
to her. The ground-car rolled swiftly after the others.

"I've a little more Talents, Incorporated information," said Morgan.
"It's written down for you to read when you get to wherever you're
going. It's rather important. Please be sure to read it fairly soon, it
may affect the fight."

"I'm headed for the fleet," said Bors. "Take me there, will you? I
wanted to say something before I left, anyhow."

Morgan waved his hand.

"I can guess," he said blandly. "Deepest gratitude and all that, but the
rush of events blocked any way to arrange a suitable recompense for what
Talents, Incorporated has done."

Bors blinked. "That's the substance of what I meant to say," he
admitted.

"We'll take it up later," Morgan told him. "We'll get in touch with you
after the battle."

"I doubt it," said Bors. "I'm not likely to be around."

Gwenlyn laughed a little.

"What's so amusing?" asked Bors. "I don't mean to strike an attitude,
but I do hate everything Mekin stands for, and I've a chance to throw a
brick at it. The price may be high but throwing the brick is necessary!"

"We," said Gwenlyn, "have Talents, Incorporated information, some of
which is in that letter Father gave you. Our Department for Predicting
Dirty Tricks has been busy. You'll see. But we've other information,
too."

Bors frowned at her. He put the letter away.

"More information--and you'll see me after the fight. You're not telling
me you know the future?"

Morgan waved a cigar.

"Of course not! That's nonsense! If one knew the future, one could
change it, and then it wouldn't be what one knew! You haven't had any
prophecies from me! Prophecy's absurd! All we've told you is about
events whose probability approaches unity."

"But--"

"What Father means," Gwenlyn told him, "is that you can't be told
beforehand about anything you can prevent, because if you can prevent it
you can make your knowledge false. So it isn't knowledge. What we want
to say, though, is that we aren't through."

"Why not?"

"I'm going to retire," said Morgan blandly. "But I want to do something
first that I can gloat over later."

"He wants," added Gwenlyn, "to repose in the satisfaction of his
vanity." She laughed again at her father's expression.

"Seriously, Captain, we wanted to give you the letter and to ask you not
to be surprised if we turn up somewhere. There's a Talent," she added,
"a young boy who can find people. He doesn't know how he does it,
but.... We'll find you!"

The ground-car turned in at the fleet's take-off ground. The normal
interstellar traffic of a planet, of course, was handled by a spaceport,
with ships brought down to ground and lifted out to space again by the
force-fields generated in a giant landing-grid. But a war-fleet could
not depend solely on ground installations. The fighting ships of Kandar
were allowed to use the planet's spaceport only for special reasons.
Emergency rocket take-offs and landings were necessary training for war
conditions anyhow. So the take-off ground was pitted and scarred with
burnt-over circles, where no living thing grew and where very often the
clay beneath the humus top-layer was vitrified by rocket-flames.

A guard at the gate brought the ground-car to a halt.

"War alert," said Bors. "Only known officers and men admitted here. It's
not worth arguing about."

He got out of the car and shook hands.

"I still regret," he told Morgan, "that we've had no chance to do
something in return for the information you've given us." To Gwenlyn he
said obscurely, "I'm glad I didn't know you sooner."

He turned and walked briskly into the fenced-off area. Behind him,
Morgan looked inquisitively at his daughter.

"What was that he just said?"

"He's glad he didn't know me sooner," said Gwenlyn. She looked smugly
pleased. "Considering everything, it was a very nice thing to say. I
like him even if he doesn't smile."

Morgan did not seem enlightened. "It doesn't make sense to me."

"That's because you are my father," said Gwenlyn. She stirred
restlessly. She was no longer smiling. "I hope Talents, Incorporated
information isn't wrong this time! Remember, we heard on Norden that the
dictator of Mekin consults fortune-tellers!"

"Ah!" said her father. "But they're only fortune-tellers!"

"One could be a Talent," said Gwenlyn worriedly, "maybe without even
knowing it."

There came a far-distant, roaring sound. Something silvery and
glistening rose swiftly toward the sky. It dwindled to a speck. There
were more roarings. Three more silvery, glistening objects flung
themselves heavenward, leaving massive trails of seemingly solid smoke
behind them. Then there were bellowings. Larger ships rose up. As the
din of their rising began to diminish, there were louder, booming
uproars and other silvery objects seemed to fling themselves toward the
sky.

Then thunder rolled, and huge shapes plunged in their turn toward the
heavens. The space-fleet of Kandar left its native world. It departed in
the formation used for space maneuvering, much like the tactical
disposition of a column of marching soldiers in doubtful territory.
There was a "point" in advance of all the rest, to be the first to
detect or be fired on by an enemy. Then flankers reached straight out,
and to the right and left, and then an advance-guard, and then the main
force with a rear-guard behind it.

The take-off area became invisible under a monstrous, roiling mountain
of smoke, from which threads of vapor reached to emptiness. It became
impossible to hear oneself talk; it was unlikely that one could have
heard a shot, as the heavy ships took off. But presently there were only
lesser clamors and then mere roarings after them, and the last of the
rocket-boomings died away. The smoke remained, rolling very slowly
aside. Then there were unexpected detonations. As the rocket-fume mist
dissolved, the detonations were explained. Every building in the fleet's
home area, the sunken fuel-tanks, the giant rolling gantries--every bit
of ground equipment for the servicing of the fleet was methodically and
carefully being blown to bits. The fleet was not expected back.

The ships rose above the atmosphere, and rose still higher, and the
planet Kandar became a gigantic ball which filled an enormous part of
the firmament. Then there were cracklings of communicators, and orders
flittered through emptiness in scrambled and re-scrambled broadcasts of
gibberish which came out as lucid commands in the control-rooms of the
ships. Then, first, the point, then the advanced flankers, and then the
main fleet, line by line and rank by rank--every ship drove on outward
under top-speed solar-system drive.

The last of the four chartered space-liners, come to take refugees away
before the Mekinese arrived, saw the disappearance of the ships in the
rear of the fleet's formation. The liner was lowered to the ground by
the landing-grid. It reported what it had seen. Those who were entitled
to depart on it crowded aboard. With the fleet gone, panic began.

Morgan had to spend lavishly to get copies of the news reports that the
liner had brought along as a matter of course. He took them back to the
_Sylva_, where a frowning man with rings on his fingers read them with
dark suspicion. Presently, triumphantly, he dictated predictions of
dirty tricks from indications in the news.

Morgan returned to what he'd called the family room of the yacht. He
relaxed. Gwenlyn tried to read. She did not succeed. She was excessively
nervous.

Bors was not. The fleet re-formed itself well out from Kandar. It made
for a rendezvous over a pole of the gas-giant planet which was the
fourth planet from Kandar's sun. It was almost, but not quite in line
with that yellow star toward the base, from which the Mekinese flotilla
would come. The fleet went into a polar orbit around that gigantic
planet, which was useless to mankind because its atmosphere was partly
gaseous ammonia and partly methane.

The cosmos paid no attention. An unstable sol-type star in Cygnus
collapsed abruptly and a number of otherwise promising planets became
unfit for human exploitation. In Andromeda, a super-nova flared. The
light of its explosion would not reach Kandar for very many thousands of
years. The largest comet in the galaxy reached perihelion, and
practically outshone the sun it circled. Nobody saw it, because nobody
lived there. On a dreary, red-sky planet in Mousset, a thing squirmed
heavily out of a stagnant sea and blinked stupidly at the remarkable
above-water cosmos it had discovered. Suns flamed and spouted flares.
Small dark stars became an infinitesimal fraction of a degree colder.
There was a magnetic storm in the photosphere of a sun which was not
supposed to have such things.

The war-fleet of Kandar, in very fine formation, flowed in its polar
orbit around the fourth planet out from Kandar's sun. In carefully
scrambled and re-scrambled communications, certain ships were authorized
to modify the settings of Mark 13 missiles in this exact fashion, to
remove their warheads, and to diverge in pairs from the fleet proper.
They were to familiarize themselves with the results of making the
acceleration of such missiles variable during flight. They would use the
supplied data-tables to compute firing constants for given ranges and
relative speeds. They would, of course, return to formation to permit
other ships the same practice with the new method of missile handling.

Bors read the letter from Talents, Incorporated. It gave an exact time
for the breakout of the Mekinese fleet. The rest consisted mostly of
specific warnings from the Talents, Incorporated Department for
Predicting Dirty Tricks. It listed certain things to be looked for among
the ships of the fleet. The information was like the news of an enemy
ship aground on Kandar; it was self-evidently plausible once one thought
of it. Mekin was ruled and its military practices governed by men with
the instincts of conspirators, using other men with the
psychopathological impulses which make for spies. They thought of
devices neither statesmen nor fighting men would have invented. But a
paranoid Talent could think of them, and know that they were true.

As a result of the warnings, the flagship was found to have been somehow
equipped, by Mekin, with a tiny, special microwave transmitter which
used a frequency not usual on Kandar. It was, in effect, a radio beacon
on which enemy missiles could home. Also, the lead ship of a
cruiser-squadron had been mysteriously geared to reveal its exact
position, course and speed while in space. There were other concealed
devices. Some would make the controls of predetermined ships useless
when beams of specific frequency and form were trained upon them.

Once the basic idea was discovered, it was possible to make sure that
all such enemy-supplied equipment was out of operation. The fleet was
still in no promising situation, with a ten-to-one disadvantage. But it
could not have put up even the beginning of a fight, had these
spy-installed devices remained undiscovered.

Bors said carefully, by scrambled and re-scrambled communicator,
"Majesty, I'm beginning to be less than despairing. If they expect our
ships either to have been destroyed aground, or to be made helpless the
instant combat begins, we may give them a shock. We hoped to smash them
ship for ship. Finding out their tricks in advance may give us that! And
if our missiles work as they've promised, we may get two for one!"

King Humphrey's voice was dogged. "_I will settle for anything but
surrender! From an honorable enemy I would take severe terms rather than
see my spacemen die. But I would do nobody any good by yielding to
Mekin!_"

Bors clicked off. He looked at a clock. The prediction from Talents,
Incorporated was that the Mekinese fleet would break out of overdrive at
11.19 hours astronomical time.

He went over his ship. His crew was by no means depressed. There had
been a terrific lift in spirits when dummy-warheaded missiles made
theoretic hits, though fifteen interceptors tried to stop them. The
crewmen now tended elaborately to explain the process. A part of the
trick was the curved path along which the re-set missiles flashed. Such
courses alone could never be computed by an unwarned enemy under battle
conditions. But the all-important thing was that the missiles changed
their acceleration as they drove. That couldn't be solved and the
solution put into practice during one fleet-action. Once the enemy had
experienced it, they could later duplicate it without doubt, but it
would still be impossible to counter.

So Bors's men were cheerful to the point of gaiety. They would fight
magnificently because they were thinking of what they would do to the
enemy instead of what the enemy might do to them. If enemy crews had
been assured that the fleet was half defeated before the fight began, to
find the fleet not crippled by spy-set devices would be startling. To
find them fighting like fiends would be alarming. And if--Bors grimly
repeated to himself, _if_--the modified missiles worked as well in
battle as in target practice....

He turned in and, despite his tensions, fell asleep immediately and
slept soundly. When he awoke he felt curiously relaxed. It took him a
moment to realize he had dreamed about Gwenlyn. He couldn't remember
what he had dreamed, but he knew it was comfortable and good. He
wouldn't let himself dwell on it, however. There was work to be done.

It was singularly like morning on a planet. The ship was spotless,
immaculate. There was the fresh smell of growing things in the air. To
save tanked oxygen the air-room used vegetation to absorb CO{2} and
excess moisture from the breathing of the crew. There was room to spare
everywhere, because unlike aircraft and surface ships, the size of a
space-ship made no difference in its speed. There was no resistance due
