to build rafts might possibly be managed, but during the loading the
little company would be too vulnerable to attack.

The commander was seated bleakly in the hut he had taken as his
headquarters, trying to devise a scheme for getting to the mainland,
when the deadlock was finally broken.

There was a flurry of footsteps outside, a thump of heavy boots as one
of the younger officers burst into the room.

"Commander!" he yelled. "Commander! Come outside!"

The commander leaped to his feet. "Another attack?"

"No, sir! Come look!"

The commander strode quickly to the door. His sight followed the line of
the young officer's pointing finger.

There, outlined against the blue of the sky, was a ship!

       *       *       *       *       *

The news from home was encouraging, but it was a long way from being
what the commander wanted. Another hundred men and more carriers had
been added to the original company of now hardened veterans, and the
recruits, plus the protection of the ship's guns, were enough to enable
the entire party to leave the island for the mainland.

By this time, the commander had gleaned enough information from the
natives to be able to plan the next step in his campaign. The present
Greatest Noble, having successfully usurped the throne from his
predecessor, was still not in absolute control of the country. He had
won a civil war, but his rule was still too shaky to allow him to split
up his armies, which accounted for the fact that, thus far, no action
had been taken by the Imperial troops against the invading Earthmen.

The commander set up a base on the mainland, near the coast, left a
portion of his men there to defend it, and, with the remainder, marched
inland to come to grips with the Greatest Noble himself.

As they moved in toward the heart of the barbarian empire, the men
noticed a definite change in the degree of civilization of the
natives--or, at least, in the degree of technological advancement.
There were large towns, not small villages, to be dealt with, and there
were highways and bridges that showed a knowledge of engineering
equivalent to that of ancient Rome.

The engineers of the Empire of the Great Nobles were a long way above
the primitive. They could have, had they had any reason to, erected a
pyramid the equal of great Khufu's in size, and probably even more
neatly constructed. Militarily speaking, the lack of knowledge of iron
hampered them, but it must be kept in mind that a well-disciplined and
reasonably large army, armed with bronze-tipped spears, bronze swords,
axes, and maces, can make a formidable foe, even against a much better
equipped group.

The Imperial armies were much better disciplined and much better armed
than any of the natives the commander had thus far dealt with, and there
were reputed to be more than ten thousand of them with the Greatest
Noble in his mountain stronghold. Such considerations prompted the
commander to plan his strategy carefully, but they did not deter him in
the least. If he had been able to bring aircraft and perhaps a
thermonuclear bomb or two for demonstration purposes, the attack might
have been less risky, but neither had been available to a man of his
limited means, so he had to work without them.

But now, he avoided fighting if at all possible. Working with Frater
Vincent, the commander worked to convince the natives on the fertile
farms and in the prosperous villages that he and his company were merely
ambassadors of good will--missionaries and traders. He and his men had
come in peace, and if they were received in peace, well and good. If not
... well, they still had their weapons.

The commander was depending on the vagueness of the information that may
have filtered down from the north. The news had already come that the
invaders were fierce and powerful fighters, but the commander gave the
impression that the only reason any battles had taken place was because
the northern tribes had been truculent in the extreme. He succeeded
fairly well; the natives he now met considered their brethren of the
northern provinces to be little better than savages, and therefore to be
expected to treat strangers inhospitably and bring about their own ruin.
The southern citizens of the empire eyed the strangers with
apprehension, but they offered very little resistance. The commander and
his men were welcomed warily at each town, and, when they left, were bid
farewell with great relief.

It took a little time for the commander to locate the exact spot where
the Greatest Noble and his retinue were encamped. The real capital of
the empire was located even farther south, but the Greatest Noble was
staying, for the nonce, in a city nestled high in the mountains, well
inland from the seacoast. The commander headed for the mountains.

The passage into the mountains wasn't easy. The passes were narrow and
dangerous, and the weather was cold. The air became thinner at every
step. At eight thousand feet, mountain climbing in heavy armor becomes
more than just hard work, and at twelve thousand it becomes exhausting
torture. But the little company went on, sparked, fueled, and driven by
the personal force of their commander, who stayed in the vanguard, his
eyes ever alert for treachery from the surrounding mountains.

When the surprise came, it was of an entirely different kind than he had
expected. The commander's carrier came over a little rise, and he
brought it to an abrupt halt as he saw the valley spread out beneath
him. He left the carrier, walked over to a boulder near the edge of the
cliff, and looked down at the valley.

It was an elongated oval of verdant green, fifteen miles long by four
wide, looking like an emerald set in the rocky granite of the
surrounding peaks that thrust upward toward the sky. The valley ran
roughly north-and-south, and to his right, at the southern end, the
commander could see a city, although it was impossible to see anyone
moving in it at this distance.

To his left, he could see great clouds of billowing vapor that rolled
across the grassy plain--evidently steam from the volcanic hot springs
which he had been told were to be found in this valley.

But, for the moment, it was neither the springs nor the city that
interested him most.

In the heart of the valley, spreading over acre after acre, were the
tents and pavilions of a mighty army encampment. From the looks of it,
the estimate of thirty thousand troops which had been given him by
various officials along the way was, if anything, too small.

It was a moment that might have made an ordinary man stop to think, and,
having thought, to turn and go. But the commander was no ordinary man,
and the sheer remorseless courage that had brought him this far wouldn't
allow him to turn back. So far, he had kept the Greatest Noble off
balance with his advancing tactics; if he started to retreat, the
Greatest Noble would realize that the invaders were not invincible, and
would himself advance to crush the small band of strangers.

The Greatest Noble had known the commander and his men were coming; he
was simply waiting, to find out what they were up to, confident that he
could dispose of them at his leisure. The commander knew that, and he
knew he couldn't retreat now. There was no decision to be made,
really--only planning to be done.

He turned back from the boulder to face the officers who had come to
take a look at the valley.

"We'll go to the city first," he said.




XIII


The heavy tread of the invaders' boots as they entered the central
plaza of the walled city awakened nothing but echoes from the stone
walls that surrounded the plaza. Like the small villages they had
entered farther north, the city seemed devoid of life.

There is nothing quite so depressing and threatening as a deserted city.
The windows in the walls of the buildings seemed like blank, darkened
eyes that watched--and waited. Nothing moved, nothing made a sound,
except the troopers themselves.

The men kept close to the walls; there was no point in bunching up in
the middle of the square to be cut down by arrows from the windows of
the upper floors.

The commander ordered four squads of men to search the buildings and
smoke out anyone who was there, but they turned up nothing. The entire
city was empty. And there were no traps, no ambushes--nothing.

The commander, with Lieutenant commander Hernan and another officer,
climbed to the top of the central building of the town. In the distance,
several miles away, they could see the encampment of the monarch's
troops.

"The only thing we can do," the commander said, his face hard and
determined, "is to call their bluff. You two take about three dozen men
and go out there with the carriers and give them a show. Go right into
camp, as if you owned the place. Throw a scare into them, but don't hurt
anyone. Then, very politely, tell the Emperor, or whatever he calls
himself, that I would like him to come here for dinner and a little
talk."

The two officers looked at each other, then at the commander.

"Just like that?" asked Hernan.

"Just like that," said the commander.

       *       *       *       *       *

The demonstration and exhibition went well--as far as it had gone. The
native warriors had evidently been quite impressed by the onslaught of
the terrifying monsters that had thundered across the plain toward them,
right into the great camp, and come to a dead halt directly in front of
the magnificent pavilion of the Greatest Noble himself.

The Greatest Noble put up a good face. He had obviously been expecting
the visitors, because he and his lesser nobles were lined up before the
pavilion, the Greatest Noble ensconced on a sort of portable throne. He
managed to look perfectly calm and somewhat bored by the whole affair,
and didn't seem to be particularly effected at all when Lieutenant
commander Hernan bowed low before him and requested his presence in the
city.

And the Greatest Noble's answer was simple and to the point, although it
was delivered by one of his courtiers.

"You may tell your commander," said the noble, "that His Effulgence must
attend to certain religious duties tonight, since he is also High
Priest of the Sun. However, His Effulgence will most graciously deign to
speak to your commander tomorrow. In the meantime, you are requested to
enjoy His Effulgence's gracious hospitality in the city, which has been
emptied for your convenience. It is yours, for the nonce."

Which left nothing for the two officers and their men to do but go
thundering back across the plain to the city.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Greatest Noble did not bring his whole army with him, but the
pageant of barbaric splendor that came tootling and drumming its way
into the city the next evening was a magnificent sight. His Effulgence
himself was dressed in a scarlet robe and a scarlet, turbanlike head
covering with scarlet fringes all around it. About his throat was a
necklace of emerald-green gems, and his clothing was studded with more
of them. Gold gleamed everywhere. He was borne on an ornate, gilded
palanquin, carried high above the crowd on the shoulders of a dozen
stalwart nobles, only slightly less gorgeously-dressed than the Greatest
Noble. The nobility that followed was scarcely less showy in its finery.

When they came into the plaza, however, the members of the procession
came to a halt. The singing and music died away.

The plaza was absolutely empty.

No one had come out to greet the Emperor.

There were six thousand natives in the plaza, and not a sign of the
invaders.

The commander, hiding well back in the shadows in one of the rooms of
the central building, watched through the window and noted the evident
consternation of the royal entourage with satisfaction. Frater Vincent,
standing beside him, whispered, "Well?"

"All right," the commander said softly, "they've had a taste of what we
got when we came in. I suppose they've had enough. Let's go out and act
like hosts."

The commander and a squad of ten men, along with Frater Vincent, strode
majestically out of the door of the building and walked toward the
Greatest Noble. They had all polished their armor until it shone, which
