       *       *       *       *       *

Sam went back into the front room with the revolver in his jacket pocket
and his hand ready to fire it.

"Who is it?" he called, in what he hoped was a steady voice.

"We're Special Agents of the FBI," said a voice. "May we see you for a
few moments, Mr. Bending?"

"Certainly. Come on in; the door's unlocked." _Just walk in, you
phonies! Just trot right on in, he thought._

And they did. The two men walked in, removing their hats as they did so.

"We--" one of them began. He stopped when he saw that he was addressing
a round, black hole that was only a fraction more than a third of an
inch in diameter but looked much, _much_ larger from his viewpoint.

"Get your hands in the air and turn around very slowly," said Bending.
"Lean forward and brace your hands against the wall."

They did as they were told. Bending frisked them carefully and
thoroughly, thankful that the two years he had spent in the Army hadn't
been completely wasted. Neither one of them was carrying a gun.

Bending stepped back and pocketed his own weapon. "All right. You two
can turn around now. If you want to try anything, come ahead--but I
don't advise it."

The two men turned around. Neither of them was exactly a small man, but
the two of them together didn't outweigh Samson Bending by more than
fifty pounds.

"What's the idea of the gun, Mr. Bending?" the taller of the two asked.
He seemed to be the spokesman for the team.

"I'll ask the questions," Bending said. "But first, I want to tell you
that, in the first place, you can get in trouble for impersonating a
Federal officer, and, in the second, I don't like being followed. So you
just trot right back to the boys at Power Utilities and tell them that
if they want to play rough, I am perfectly willing to do likewise. That
if they come after me again, I'm going to do some very unpleasant
things. Understand?"

"I think we understand," said the spokesman, still relatively unruffled.
"But I don't think _you_ do. Would you care to look at our credentials,
Mr. Bending?"

"Credentials?" Sam looked startled. Had he made a mistake?

"That's right. May I take my billfold out?"

Bending took his gun out again. "Go ahead. But slowly."

The billfold came out slowly. Bending took it. The identification card
and the small gold badge said very plainly that the man was a Special
Agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

"I ... I'm sorry," Bending said weakly. "I thought you were someone else.
Some men were following me this afternoon, and--"

"That was us, Mr. Bending. Sorry."

"May I verify this?" Bending asked.

"Certainly. Go right ahead."

Bending phoned the local office of the FBI and verified the identities
of the two men. When he cut off, he asked dazedly: "What was it you
wanted?"

"Would you mind coming with us--downtown? We'd like to have you see some
people."

"Am I under arrest?"

"No." The agent smiled a little. "I suppose, if we had to, we could get
you for speeding and reckless driving; that was pretty fancy dodging you
did. But we're not supposed to be traffic cops."

Sam smiled feebly. "What's this all about?"

"I haven't the faintest notion, Mr. Bending. Honestly. We were told to
stick with you until we got word to pick you up. We got that word just
shortly after you ... hm-m-m ... after you left us. Fortunately, we
found you at home. It might have been difficult ..."

"Can we go in my car?" Bending asked. "I'd rather not leave it unguarded
just now."

"Certainly. I'll go with you, and Steve can follow." He paused. "But I'm
afraid you'll have to take that revolver out of your pocket and put it
away."

"Sure," Bending said. "Sure."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bending's mind simply refused to function during the drive back to the
city. The FBI agent beside him just sat silently while Sam drove the
car.

Once, Sam asked: "Who is it that wants to see me?"

And the FBI man said: "Sorry, Mr. Bending; I can't answer any
questions. My job is over as soon as I deliver you."

A little later, Sam had another question. "Can you tell me where we're
going, at least?"

"Oh--" the agent laughed, "sure. I thought I had. The General Post
Office Building, on Kenmore Drive."

After that, Sam didn't say anything. That this whole affair had
something to do with the Converter, Sam had no doubt whatsoever. But he
couldn't see exactly what, and none of his wild speculations made sense.

He pulled up at last into the parking lot behind the Post Office
Building. The second FBI man came up in the steel-blue Ford, and the
three of them got out of the cars and went towards the building. It was
quite dark by now, and the street lights were glowing against a faint
falling of February mist. Bending, in spite of his topcoat, felt chilly.

They went in the back way, past the uniformed Postal Service guard, and
took an elevator to the sixth floor. None of the three had anything to
say. They walked down the hall, toward the only office that showed any
light behind the frosted glass. The lettering on the glass simply said:
_Conference Room A-6_.

The FBI man who had driven with Sam rapped on the door with gentle
knuckles.

"Yes?" said a questioning voice from the other side.

"This is Hodsen, sir. Mr. Bending is with us."

The door opened, and Sam Bending felt mild shock as he saw who it was.
He recognized the man from his news photos and TV appearances. It was
the Honorable Bertram Condley, Secretary of Economics for the President
of the United States.

"Come in, Mr. Bending," the Secretary said pleasantly. Unnecessarily, he
added, "I'm Bertram Condley."

He held out his hand, and Sam took it. "It's a pleasure, Mr. Secretary."

Condley gave out with his best friendly-politico smile. "I'm sorry to
have to drag you up here like this, Mr. Bending, but we felt it best
this way."

Sam smiled back, with a trace of irony in the smile. "It's a pleasure,
Mr. Secretary," he repeated.

Condley nodded, still smiling--but there was a spark in his eyes now. "I
see we understand each other. Come on in; I want you to meet the
others." He looked at the FBI men. "That's all. For now."

The Federal agents nodded and moved away into the dimness of the
corridor.

"Come in, man, come in," the Secretary urged, opening the door wider.

Sam hesitated. The light within the room was none too bright. Then he
stepped forward, following the Secretary.

       *       *       *       *       *

The outer room was dark. Not too dark, but illuminated only by the dim
light from the corridor and from the inner room. From that inner room,
there was only a glow of light from the frosted glass panel of the door
that separated the two rooms.

Condley closed the hall door, and, as Sam stepped forward toward the
lighted door, held out a hand to stop him. "Just a moment," he whispered
softly. "I think you ought to know what you're walking in to, Mr.
Bending."

Bending stood stock-still. "Yes, sir?" he asked, questioningly.

"I suppose you know what this is all about?" Secretary Condley asked
softly.

"The Converter, I imagine," Sam Bending said.

Condley nodded, his gray hair gleaming silver in the dim light.
"Exactly. I'm sorry we had to drag you up here this way, Mr. Bending,
but, in the circumstances, we felt it to be the best way." He took a
breath. "Do you know why we called you here?"

"No," Sam said honestly.

Condley's head nodded again. "You're in for an argument, Mr. Bending. A
very powerful one, I hope. We want to convince you of something." Again
he paused. "Are you an open-minded man, Mr. Bending?"

Sam Bending followed the Secretary's lead, and kept his voice low. "I
like to think so, Mr. Secretary." He recognized that Condley was
preparing him for something, and he recognized that the preliminary
statements were calculated to soften him. And he recognized the fact
that they _did_ soften him. All right--what was the argument?

"You're an engineer, Mr. Bending," Condley said, in the same low voice.
"You have been trained to evaluate facts. All I ask is that you use that
training. Now, let's get in there before _Tovarishch_ Artomonov begins
to think we might be stalling him."

Condley strode toward the door and grasped the knob with a firm hand.
Sam Bending followed, wondering. Artomonov? Who was Artomonov? The
Secretary of Economics had indicated, by his precise enunciation of
_tovarishch_, that the man was a Russian--or at least a citizen of one
of the Soviet satellites. Sam Bending took a deep breath and decided
that he was prepared for almost anything.

There were four men seated around the conference table in the back room,
and the most surprising thing, as far as Sam was concerned, was that he
recognized only one of them. From the big buildup, he had had half a
notion that the President himself might be there.

"Mr. Samson Bending, gentlemen," said Secretary Condley to the group.
They all rose and made half-hearted attempts to smile, but Sam could see
that they were watching him as though he had a live grenade in his
pocket.

"Mr. Bending, I believe you know Mr. Richard Olcott," the Secretary
said.

Bending gave the Power Utilities executive a sardonic smile, which was
returned by a solemn nod of the head.

_Sure I know you, you crook_, Bending thought.

"And, around the table," Condley continued, "are Dr. Edward Larchmont,
the research departmental head of Power Utilities--Dr. Stefan Vanderlin,
of the United States Bureau of Standards--and Dr. Alexis Andreevich
Artomonov, of the Soviet Socialist Republics' representative office at
the United Nations."

Sam Bending managed not to blink in astonishment as the last man was
introduced--a feat which took every milligram of his self-possession. He
recognized the name; A. A. Artomonov, head of the United Nation's
International Trade Bureau. What was _he_ doing here?

"If you'll sit down, Mr. Bending," Condley was saying, "we can get to
business."
