He put his hands on his hips. "None of you have ever seen a really
regimented society--and I'm thankful that you haven't. I hope that you
never will."

Chief Samas twisted his lips into an expression of hatred. "Freedom?
Freedom from _what_! Freedom to _do_ what?

"I'll tell you. Freedom to work in their factories for twelve hours a
day! Freedom to work until you are no longer of any use to them, and
then be turned out to die--with no home, and no food to support you.
Freedom to live by yourselves, with every man's hand against you, with
every pittance that you earn taxed to support a government that has no
thought for the individual!

"Is that what you want? Is that what you've worked for all your lives?"

A visual chorus of shaken heads accompanied the verbal chorus of "No."

Chief Samas dropped his hands to his sides. "I thought not. But I will
repeat: If any of you want to go to the Invaders, you may do so now."

Anketam noticed a faint movement to his right, but it stopped before it
became decisive. He glanced over, and he noticed that young Basom was
standing there, half poised, as though unable to make up his mind.

Then The Chief's voice bellowed out again. "Very well. You are with me.
I will leave the work of the barony in your hands. I ask that you
produce as much as you can. Next year--next spring--we will not plant
_cataca_."

There was a low intake of breath from the assembled men. Not plant
_cataca_? That was the crop that they had grown since--well, since
_ever_. Anketam felt as though someone had jerked a rug from beneath
him.

"There is a reason for this," The Chief went on. "Because of the
blockade that surrounds Xedii, we are unable to export _cataca_ leaves.
The rest of the galaxy will have to do without the drug that is
extracted from the leaves. The incident of cancer will rise to the level
it reached before the discovery of _cataca_. When they understand that
we cannot ship out because of the Invader's blockade, they will force
the Invader to stop his attack on us. What we need now is not _cataca_,
but food. So, next spring, you will plant food crops.

"Save aside the _cataca_ seed until the war is over. The seedlings now
in the greenhouses will have to be destroyed, but that cannot be
helped."

He stopped for a moment, and when he began again his voice took on a
note of sadness.

"I will be away from you until the war is won. While I am gone, the
barony will be run by my wife. You will obey her as you would me. The
finances of the barony will be taken care of by my trusted man,
Kevenoe." He gestured to one side, and Kevenoe, who was standing there,
smiled quickly and then looked grim again.

"As for the actual running of the barony--as far as labor is
concerned--I think I can leave that in the hands of one of my most
capable men."

He raised his finger and pointed. There was a smile on his face.

Anketam felt as though he had been struck an actual blow; the finger was
pointed directly at him.

"Anketam," said The Chief, "I'm leaving the barony in your hands until I
return. You will supervise the labor of all the men here. Is that
understood?"

"Yes, sir," said Anketam weakly. "Yes, sir. I understand."


IV

Never, for the rest of his life, would the sharp outlines of that moment
fade from his memory. He knew that the men of the barony were all
looking at him; he knew that The Chief went on talking afterwards. But
those things impressed themselves but lightly on his mind, and they
blurred soon afterwards. Twenty years later, in retelling the story, he
would swear that The Chief had ended his speech at that point. He would
swear that it was only seconds later that The Chief had jumped down from
the gate and motioned for him to come over; his memory simply didn't
register anything between those two points.

But The Chief's words after the speech--the words spoken to him
privately--were bright and clear in his mind.

The Chief was a good three inches shorter than Anketam, but Anketam
never noticed that. He just stood there in front of The Chief, wondering
what more his Chief had to say.

"You've shown yourself to be a good farmer, Anketam," Chief Samas said
in a low voice. "Let's see--you're of Skebbin stock, I think?"

Anketam nodded. "Yes, sir."

"The Skebbin family has always produced good men. You're a credit to the
Skebbins, Anketam."

"Thank you, sir."

"You've got a hard job ahead of you," said The Chief. "Don't fail me.
Plant plenty of staple crops, make sure there's enough food for
everyone. If you think it's profitable, add more to the animal stock.
I've authorized Kevenoe to allow money for the purchase of breeding
stock. You can draw whatever you need for that purpose.

"This war shouldn't last too long. Another year, at the very most, and
we'll have forced the Invaders off Xedii. When I come back, I expect to
find the barony in good shape, d'you hear?"

"Yes, sir. It will be."

"I think it will," said The Chief. "Good luck to you, Anketam."

As The Chief turned away, Anketam said: "Thank you, sir--and good luck
to you, sir."

Chief Samas turned back again. "By the way," he said, "there's one more
thing. I know that men don't always agree on everything. If there is any
dispute between you and Kevenoe, submit the question to my wife for
arbitration." He hesitated. "However, I trust that there will not be
many such disputes. A woman shouldn't be bothered with such things any
more than is absolutely necessary. It upsets them. Understand?"

Anketam nodded. "Yes, sir."

"Very well. Good-by, Anketam. I hope to see you again before the next
harvest." And with that, he turned and walked through the gate, toward
the woman who was standing anxiously on the porch of his home.

       *       *       *       *       *

Anketam turned away and started towards his own village. Most of the
others had already begun the trek back. But Jacovik, Blejjo, and Basom
were waiting for him. They fell into step beside him.

After a while, Jacovik broke the silence. "Well, Ank, it looks like
you've got a big job on your hands."

"That's for sure," said Anketam. He knew that Jacovik envied him the
job; he knew that Jacovik had only missed the appointment by a narrow
margin.

"Jac," he said, "have you got a man on your crew that you can trust to
take over your job?"

"Madders could do it, I think," Jacovik said cautiously. "Why?"

"This is too big a job for one man," said Anketam quietly. "I'll need
help. I want you to help me, Jac."

There was a long silence while the men walked six paces. Then Jacovik
said: "I'll do whatever I can, Ank. Whatever I can." There was honest
warmth in his voice.

Again there was a silence.

"Blejjo," Anketam said after a time, "do you mind coming out of
retirement for a while?"

"Not if you need me, Ank," said the old man.

"It won't be hard work," Anketam said. "I just want you to take care of
the village when I'm not there. Settle arguments, assign the village
