
Earth, he thought; Earth again, coddling and protecting aliens, forming
them into a conspiracy against the humanoid worlds. If Kel or any part
of the Federation survived, that debt would be paid!




VII


Earth lay fat and smug under the sun, seemingly unchanged since Duke
had left it. For generations the populace had complained that they were
draining themselves dry to rebuild other worlds, but they had grown
rich on the investment. It was the only planet where men worked shorter
and shorter hours to give them more leisure in which to continue a
frantic effort to escape boredom. It was also the only world where the
mention of aliens made men think of their order books instead of their
weapons.

Duke walked steadily away from the grotesquely elaborate landing field.
He had less than thirty cents in his pocket, but his breakfast aboard
had left him satisfied for the moment. He turned onto a wider street,
heading the long distance across the city toward the most probable
location of the recruiting stations.

The Outer Federation station would be off the main section, since the
official line was disapproving of such a union. But he was sure there
would be one. The system of recruiting was a tradition too hard to
break. Earth used it as an escape valve for her troublemakers. And
since such volunteers made some of the best of all fighters, they had
already decided the outcome of more than one war. By carefully juggling
the attention given the stations, Earth could influence the battles
without seeming to do so.

The air was thick with the smell of late summer, and there was pleasure
in that, until Duke remembered the odor of Meloa, and its cause. Later
the cloying perfume of women mixed with the normal industrial odors of
the city, until his nose was overdriven to the point of cutoff. He saw
things in the shop windows that he had forgotten, but he had no desire
for them. And over everything came the incessant yammer of voices
saying nothing, radios blaring, television babbling, and vending
machines shouting.

He gave up at last and invested half his small fund in a subway. It was
equally noisy, but it took less time. Beside him, a fungoid creature
from Clovis was busy practicing silently on its speaking machine, but
nobody else seeemed to notice.

Duke's head was spinning when he reached the surface again. He stopped
to let it clear, wondering if he'd ever found this world home. It
wouldn't matter soon, though; once he was signed up at the recruiting
station, there would be no time to think.

He saw the sign, only a few blocks from where the recruiting posters
for Meloa had been so long ago. It was faded, but he could read the
lettering, and he headed for it. As he had expected, it was on a dirty
back street, where the buildings were a confusion of shipping concerns
and cheaper apartment houses.

He knew something was wrong when he was a block away. There was no
pitch being delivered by a barking machine, and no idle group watching
the recruiting efforts on the street. In fact, nobody was in front of
the vacant store that had been used, and the big posters were ripped
down.

He reached the entrance and stopped. The door was half open, but it
carried a notice that the place had been closed by order of the World
Foreign Office. Through the dirty glass, Duke could see a young man of
about twenty sitting slumped behind a battered desk.

He stepped in and the boy looked up apathetically. "You're too late,
captain. Neutrality went on hours ago when the first word came through.
Caught me just ready to ship out--after two lousy months recruiting
here, I have to be the one stranded."

"You're lucky," Duke told him mechanically, not sure whether he meant
it or not. Oddly, the idea of a kid like this mixed up in an
interplanetary war bothered him. He turned to go, then hesitated. "Got
a newspaper or a directory around that I could borrow?"

The boy fished a paper out of a wastebasket. "It's all yours, captain.
The whole place is yours. Slam the door when you go out. I'm going over
to the Cathay office."

"I'll go along," Duke offered. The address of that place was all he'd
wanted from the paper. He'd have preferred the Federation to joining up
with Earth colonists, but beggars never made good choosers.

The kid shook his head. He dragged open a drawer, found a slip of
paper, and handed it over. It was a notice that the legal maximum age
for recruiting had been reduced to thirty! "You'd never make it,
captain," he said.

Duke looked at the paper in his hands and at the dim reflection of his
face in a window. "No," he agreed. "I didn't make it."

He followed the boy to the door, staring out at the street, thick with
its noises and smells. He dropped to the doorsill and looked briefly up
at the sky where two ships were cutting out to space. Flannery had
known the regulation and hadn't told him. Yet it was his own fault; the
age limit was lower now, but there had always been a limit. He had
simply forgotten that he'd grown older.

He found it hard to realize he'd been no older than the kid when he'd
signed up for the war with Throm.

                    *      *      *      *      *

For a while he sat looking at the street, trying to realize what had
happened to him. It took time to face the facts. He listened with half
his attention as a small group of teen-age boys came from one of the
buildings and began exchanging angry insults with another group
apparently waiting for them on the corner. From their attitudes, some
of them were carrying weapons and were half-eager, half-afraid to use
them. It was hard to remember back to the time when such things had
seemed important to him. He considered putting a stop to the argument,
before it got out of hand, since no police were near; but adults had no
business in kid fights. He watched them retreat slowly back to an
alley, still shouting to work up their courage. Maybe he should be glad
that there was even this much fire left under the smug placidity of
Earth.

Finally, he picked up the newspaper from where he'd dropped it and
began turning back to the want ads. His needs were few, and there
should be dishwashing jobs, at least, somewhere in the city. He still
had to eat and find some place to sleep.

A headline glared up at him, catching his attention. He started to skim
the story, and then read it thoroughly. Things weren't going at all as
he'd expected in the Outer Worlds, if the account were true; and
usually, such battle reports weren't altered much.

The aliens had developed a union of their own--if anything, a stronger
one than the humanoids had. Apparently they'd chased the Federation
ships into some kind of a trap. Losses on both sides were huge. And
raids had begun on all the alien and humanoid planets.

He scowled as he came to the latest developments. One section of the
Federation fleet under Sra of Chumkt had pulled out, accusing the
faction headed by Barth Nevesh of leading the aliens to the humanoid
rendezvous. Kel's leader had gone after the deserters, fought it out
with them in the middle of the larger battle, killed Sra, and declared
himself the head of the whole Federation. It was madness that should
have led to complete annihilation; only the fumbling, uncooerdinated
leadership of the aliens had saved the humanoid fleets. And now the
Federation was coming apart at the seams, with Barth Nevesh frantically
scurrying around to catch up the pieces.

Duke read it through again, but with no added information. It was a
shock to know that the aliens had combined against the humanoid
Federation. Still, looking back on that, he could begin to see that
they would have to, once they knew of the Federation. But the rest of
the account--

Flannery's words came back to him. The director had been right. His
prediction was already coming true, after only three days--unless he
had either had prior knowledge or juggled things to make it come true!
Duke considered it, but he could see no way Flannery could either learn
or act in advance of the arrival of the ship on Earth. The Federation
was farther from Meloa than from this planet. He'd been forced to
depend on the same accounts Duke had read in the papers on board the
ship.

Then Duke glanced at the date on the current paper idly, and his
thoughts jolted completely out of focus. It was dated only three days
later than the paper he had seen when they were docked on Clovis!
Without instantaneous communication, it was impossible. He might have
been mistaken about the date before, but--

Nothing fitted. The feeling of uncertainty came back, crowding out the
minor matter of his memory of the date. He stared at the richness of
even this poor section of an Earth that huddled here as if afraid of
its own shadows, yet reeked with self-satisfaction. He thought of Meloa
and Throm, and the gallant try at Federation that had been made on the
Outer Worlds. Strength had to lie in union and action; yet all the
evidence seemed to say that it lay in timidity and sloth.

Reluctantly he turned the page away from the news, to seek for the job
sections. From the alley, there came the sound of a police whistle, and
shouts that faded into the distance. It was probably the breaking up of
the teen-age argument. A few people ran by, heading for the excitement,
but Duke had lost all interest. A taxi stopped nearby and he heard a
patter that might have been that of children's feet, but he didn't look
up.

                    *      *      *      *      *

Then a sharper whistle shrilled almost in his ear and he twisted around
to stare at a creature who was gazing at him. Four spindly legs led up
to a globular body encased in a harness-like contraption. Above the
body, two pairs of thin arms were waving about, while a long neck ended
in a bird-like head, topped by two large ears.

The ears suddenly seemed to shimmer in the air, and a surprisingly
human voice sounded. "You're Captain Duke O'Neill!"

Before Duke could answer, a small hand came out quickly to find his and
begin shaking it, while the ears twittered on in excitement. "I'm
honored to meet you, Captain O'Neill. I've been studying your work
against Throm. Amazingly clever strategy! Permit me--I'm Queeth, lately
a prince of Sugfarth. Perhaps you noticed our ship? No, of course not.
You must have landed at the government field. My crew and I are on the
way to the war about to begin between Kloomiria and Cathay."

"Why tell me about it?" Duke asked roughly. Sugfarth--the ship he'd
seen diagrammed had come from there. If one of those titans was to be
used against Cathay, Earth's colony was doomed. And the impertinent
little monster--!

The creature tried to imitate a shrug with his upper set of arms. "Why
not, captain? We're registered here as a recruiting ship for Cathay, so
it's no secret. We thought we might as well carry along some of the men
going out to help, since we had to pass near Earth anyhow. And I
dropped by here in the hope that there might be a few who had failed to
join the Federation and who would like to switch to Cathay."

"Wait a minute," Duke said. He studied the alien, trying to rake what
he'd learned from the article out of his memory. But no record of
subtlety or deceit had been listed there. The Sugfarth were supposed to
be honest--in fact, they'd been one of the rare races to declare their
war in advance. Somehow, too, the words had a ring of truth in them.
"_For_ Cathay?"

"Certainly, captain. For whom else? The civilized Earth races naturally
have to stick together against the barbarians."

Duke stared at the almost comic figure, juggling the words he had heard
with the obvious facts. "What Earth races? Do you mean that Earth is
now giving citizenship to your people?"

"Not on this planet, of course." A pair of beady black eyes stared
back, as if trying to understand a ridiculous question. "But we're
citizens of Earth's economic-cultural-diplomatic system, naturally."

Duke felt something nibble at his mind, but he couldn't grasp it. And
he wasn't accustomed to carrying on long chitchat with aliens. He
shoved the thoughts away and reached for the paper again. "You won't
find recruits here, Queeth. Only me. And I'm too old for the recruiting
law. Besides, I've got to find a job."

He turned the pages, locating the column he wanted. What had Flannery
meant about Republican Rome? Duke could remember dimly something about
Rome's granting citizenship to her conquered neighbors. It had been the
