
Nelson stood up.

"Will you excuse me, Bert?" he asked. "I'd better see if I can help the
warden."

Doyle, too, sat up, swung his feet to the steel floor, stood up and
stretched. "Sure," he said. His hard face was pale but otherwise he
seemed quite calm. "You've been a great help, Father." He looked
quizzically at the old inmate. "You lying, Danny? Seems to me the boys
have got nothing to beef about here."

"Heh, they sure have now."

"What?"

"Well, I got this from a guy who got it from Vukich who heard it from
Joe Mario. Seems there's a big-shot general and some kinda scientist in
Mr. Halloran's office." He shifted his grip on the mop-handle. "You
gents maybe won't believe this, but it's what Joe heard 'em say to the
warden. Outside is all covered with radium and this general and this
here scientist are goin' to Mars an' they want the warden to go along.
Leavin' us behind, of course. That's what the boys are riotin' about."

Bert Doyle burst into harsh laughter.

"Danny! Danny!" he cried. "I've been predicting this! You've gone
stir-bugs!"

"Ain't neither!"

"Just a moment, Bert," Nelson whispered. Aloud he said, "Dan, go call
the guard for me, please." When the old man had shuffled out of earshot
the priest said to the condemned man, "It could be true, Bert. By
radium, he means radioactive material. And there's no reason spaceships
can't get to Mars. We'd reached the Moon before the war started, you
know."

Doyle sank back on his bunk.

"Well, I'll be damned!" he breathed.

"Bert!"

Doyle grinned sheepishly. "Force of habit." Then, more soberly, "So
they're off to Mars, eh? Father, you better get down there and pick up
your reservations!"

"Don't be ridiculous!" The priest's voice softened and he patted the
killer's shoulder. "I will go down and see what's what, Bert. And I'll
be back just as soon as the men have quieted down. That is, if they
_are_ creating a disturbance."

The footsteps of the approaching guard sounded loud in the corridor.
Doyle frowned a little.

"When you come back, Father, you'll tell me the truth? No kidding, now!"

The guard stood in front of the door of heavy steel bars. Father Nelson
looked down at the man on the bunk.

"I'll tell you everything, Bert. I swear it."

"Uh, Father?" the guard's voice was nervous--and embarrassed.

"Yes, Perkins?"

"I ... I can't let you out right now. Orders from the warden. Not a
cell door opens till I hear from him direct."

[Illustration]

Doyle chuckled.

"Might as well sit down, Father," he said, "and make yourself
comfortable--"

       *       *       *       *       *

"What will you do?" cried Lansing.

"Go out and talk to them, of course," replied Halloran. He arose from
his desk, a calm, unhurried man.

"Look," growled Knox, "you get me through to the town. Some of our
people are still there. I'll order out as many soldiers as you want.
I'll see to it that they get here--on the double!"

Halloran flushed. "Would it ease your conscience, general," he grated,
"if you killed off my men instead of leaving them--behind! Now, you will
please keep quiet. You'll be perfectly safe!"

"What will we do with them, sir?" Court gestured at Lansing and Knox.

Halloran strode from behind his desk to the opposite end of the room. As
he twirled the dials of a wall safe he said, "They'll have to remain
here, for now. The men have got between this building and the gate
office." The safe swung open and he reached far inside and took out a
submachine gun. "Here," he held the weapon out to Court. "If I don't
come back, use this to get them to the gate office."

"Didn't know you had an arsenal in here!" cried Slade.

"No one else did, either, except Alfred. Now Doc, think you and Pete had
better stay here."

Slade and Goldsmid pulled themselves out of their chairs as one man.
Their timing was perfect.

"No, you don't, hero!" growled Slade.

"Warden," Goldsmid said, "perhaps _I_ could talk to the men--"

The warden smiled and walked toward the door. There he stopped and said
to Court, "Switch on the speaker system, Alfred. I'll take the portable
mike from the next office. While I'm out there, get word to all
custodial and operating personnel that they will be permitted to leave
tonight. Meantime, I hope they will stay on their jobs. Better phone Mr.
Tate, have someone try to locate Mr. Briggs, be sure and call Dr.
Slade's staff."

"Right, sir."

The three men left the office. Court, the gun cradled under one arm,
picked up the phone and spoke into it. His voice was a low, crisp
monotone. After a while, he replaced the receiver and stood quiet,
staring impassively at the others.

"You might say the warden's career has been twenty years of futility,"
he muttered. Lansing and Knox felt he wasn't actually speaking to them.
"Now me, I'm a screw of the old school. Hardboiled, they say. _I_ never
expected a thing from a con ... and cons have lied to him, politicians
have broken their promises ... but the liars have loved him and the
dumbest dope in the legislature has respected him."

"Will he ... be all right?" Lansing asked.

Court shrugged. "Who knows? You handled this very badly," he said
dispassionately. "Five minutes after you stepped through the main gate
every inmate in the place knew you were here and started wondering. Why
