He raised one hand, clawing the fingers slightly. He took a deep breath,
as if he were about to spit out an incantation. His eyes glittered. The
smile broadened.

A long second passed.

"I will tell the Inquisitor you wish to see him," the bald guard said.

Jonas relaxed and stepped back. "I shall be most grateful," he said
formally. The guard turned and started to walk away. Five paces down the
corridor, the walk turned into a run. Jonas watched him go, and then sat
down on his louse-infested cot to await developments.

The minutes ticked by endlessly. He thought of trying to reach Claerten,
but decided, not entirely with regret, that the contact would use up too
much energy. And he needed all the energy he could conserve now. The
second step had been taken--the fact that he sat in a cell in prison was
proof of that.

[Illustration]

The third step--the all-important final step--was about to begin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Georg Knupf was a tall man with skin the color and apparent texture of
good leather. He had a face like an eagle, and his eyes were ice-blue.
He moved his thin, strong hands gently back and forth on the table that
held his papers, inkstand and pen, and said in a voice like audible
sandpaper: "You wanted to see me."

"True," Jonas said pleasantly. Knupf was sitting behind the table. Jonas
had not been asked to sit; he remained standing, and he was reasonably
sure that his feet were going to hurt in a minute. He tried not to let
the thought disturb him.

The man's mind was like his office in the Town Hall: sparsely furnished,
almost austere, but with all the necessaries laid out for easy access.
Underneath the strength and iron of the mind Jonas caught the spark
glowing, and nearly smiled. In spite of the reports, in spite of logic,
there had been a chance the Brotherhood had guessed wrongly about this
man.

[Illustration]

Now that chance was gone, and the Brotherhood was right again.

"Not many ask to see me," Knupf said in the same voice. He went on
looking at his hands. There was bitterness in his mind, bitterness that
had changed to hate. "Their pleas tend to be exactly the opposite."

"I did not plead," Jonas pointed out. "It was necessary that I come to
see you."

The question was, he told himself, exactly what were the Inquisitor's
real beliefs? His public professions were well-known; Jonas searched and
found the answer. Knupf was an honest man.

That, of course, made matters simpler.

"Necessary?" Knupf said, looking up for the first time. His gaze stabbed
like a sword. He was uneasy, Jonas knew; with another mind probing his,
he could not help but be uneasy. But he could not find a cause; it would
never occur to him. And he controlled his feelings superbly.

"You believe that I am a wizard," Jonas said.

Knupf waited a bare second, and then nodded.

"I can do many things," Jonas went on. "It was necessary that I bring
these to your attention--and prove to you that they are not wizardry, or
magic."

"Many have told me," Knupf muttered, "that their feats were natural. It
is a common defense."

"So I have heard," Jonas said easily. "But I shall prove what I say."

"I am under no compulsion to listen to you," Knupf said after a pause.

Jonas shrugged. His feet _were_ beginning to hurt, he realized; he
sighed briefly, but there was no time or attention to spare for them. "I
could only see you by having myself accused of witchcraft," he said. "In
that way, you would be forced to listen to me. You may listen now, or
later at a full hearing of the Inquisitor's Court."

"And I am to take my choice?" Knupf said. He smiled briefly; his face
remained cold. The strong hands moved on the tabletop.

"It is a matter of indifference to me," Jonas said. "But the wait
becomes boring, after a time."

Knupf's eyebrows went up. "Boring is--hardly the word others would use."

"I am not like others," Jonas said. He wished for Claerten suddenly, but
there was no way to reach him safely. He had to make his move alone.

Well, he told himself, that was what he had wanted.

"I can tell you what is in your mind," he said.

The words hung in the air of the room for a long time. At last Knupf
nodded. "The Devil grants to many his power of seeing the minds of men,"
he said quietly.

"This is not Devil's work--as I shall prove," Jonas said. He shifted his
feet. "But let me establish one point at a time, in the most scholastic
manner; if you will permit."

"I permit," Knupf said. There was interest in his mind, overlaid with
skepticism, of course, but interest all the same. That, Jonas thought,
was a better sign than he had dared to hope for.

"Very well," he said. "Think of a word. Think of any single word. I
shall tell it to you."

"As any wizard might do, who had the help of his lord the Devil," Knupf
muttered. "Do you expect this to prove--"

"One thing at a time," Jonas said.

Knupf nodded. A second passed.

Jonas licked his lips. The possibilities paraded before him; on one
hand, success. On the other there was the torture and death of the
Inquisition. Jonas took a deep breath; there was no way to back out now.
Heroism looked a little empty, though.

He closed his eyes. "Cabbages," he said.

Knupf neither applauded, nor looked surprised. "As I have said," he
murmured, "that which the Devil can grant--" He paused and looked down
at his hands. "Am I to take this as a confession?" he said. "Do you wish
to hurry your own death?"

"I am no wizard," Jonas said.

"A stranger," Knupf said, "who enters a small city, is seen at
mysterious undertakings, plucks words out of the center of a man's mind
 ... why, the picture is a classic one. Del Rio himself, Holzinger or any
of the others could not describe a better."

