only two stories high. The door at the end of my corridor opened out
onto the roof. When I had calmed down, I stepped through the door into
the cool of the desert night.

       *       *       *       *       *

The gravel on the built-up roof crunched in the darkness under my feet
as I walked cautiously to the parapet and looked over its edge to the
hunk of desert that stretched away toward Reno, out behind the motel.
The third story, behind me, cut off the neon glare from the Strip and
left the place in inky darkness. There was silence and invisibility out
behind the motel.

Feeling a little creaky about falling a couple stories to the ground, I
lay down on my back on the narrow parapet, with my hands behind my head
to soften the concrete a little, and looked straight up into the night
sky. A dawdling August Perseid scratched a thin mark of light across the
blackness. I heard a coyote howl. This was desert. This was peace. The
dice and chuck-a-luck seemed ten thousand miles away.

I heard a sound. Gravel crunched dimly under another foot. Somebody had
stepped invisibly onto the roof. It scared the daylights out of me, more
so because I was flat on my back. Cautiously I turned my head toward the
door I had come through. I could see the fuzzy redness of a cigarette in
the dark. It brightened as the smoker took a drag. Then I heard the
sniffle, and knew who it was.

She stood there, apparently leaning against the wall behind her,
silently, invisible but for the glow of her cigarette, and not moving
her feet. "Hello," I said at last.

"Wasn't sure you wanted to talk," she said out of the dark. It shook me
up. She certainly couldn't _see_ me.

"How'd you know I was here?" I asked her.

"I don't know how. But I knew you would be." That wasn't what I had
asked, exactly. She sniffled, and I could almost see the back of her
hand swipe at the bead of moisture that kept forming at the tip of her
skinny nose. Made me think. Psi powers crop up more often than they
should in folks who are marked with a debility. It's the old
compensation story. Look at my weak right arm. What she had said about
_expecting_ to find me on the roof sounded like precognition. And she
sniffled and sniffled. Maybe it was one more of those tied-in hysterical
Psi weaknesses.

"What are you doing out here?" I asked her.

"Resting," she said wearily. "I just hit town today."

"And tired already?"

"I was broke," she said. "Worked in a hotel laundry till dinner time to
get eatin' money. Hot work. But I swiped a nice dress to wear when I
went looking for you, Billy Joe."

"Yeah," I said, hiding my snicker over the dress. "Say, I wanted to
thank you for handling my chips. I'd have lost my shirt if I hadn't let
you show me how. I wanted to slip you a cut, but you bugged out of
there."

"I figured you should handle our money, Billy Joe," she said. "Anyway,
can't take money for my gift."

She had me shaking with excitement. "You have a gift?" I said, trying to
keep my voice calm.

"Just some nights. Since I broke my vow, I've lost most of my prophecy.
My real gift is healing. Lost _all_ of that," she concluded, not
bitterly. "God is punishing me."

Gravel crunched as she came slowly across the roof toward me. The fag
end of her cigarette made a spinning arc in the night as she snapped it
over the side of the roof. Now there was no way to see her at all.
Perception is nice in the dark. I tracked her automatically.

"What was the vow you broke?" I said.

She sighed, near me. "I divorced my husband, my own darlin' Billy," she
said. "There's no divorce in Heaven."

"Tough," I said. I thought _I_ was her darlin' Billy. Talk about
Double-think! "Will you miss never having a man again? I mean, once
you've been a wife--" I added, letting it drift off.

"God has been good to me," she said out of the dark. "He let me see my
own future, that he would give me a husband again."

That was a curve. "Isn't that an even worse breaking of vows?" I said.
"I mean, if in God's sight you're still married to Billy Joe?"

"Would be," she conceded from the black, now right next to me. "But He
told me that the man I should seek _would be_ Billy Joe--hit's a miracle
worked for me." Her voice lowered. "A miracle that come to pass tonight,
my darlin' Billy." A shiver ran its fingers up my spine. She meant every
word of it. I _was_ her darlin' Billy.

       *       *       *       *       *

I wasn't in any mood to get married, and least of all to a seeress.
Precognition is the least understood of the Psi powers, and the most
erratic. But of all people, I could least afford to sneer at the power
of Psi.

For the first time, I guess, I realized the awful helplessness that
comes over the Psiless when a TK invokes his telekinetic power. I wanted
no part of the future this corn-fed oracle had conjured up. But it might
be the only future I'd ever have.

I tried to recall her looks. Thinking about them, they really added up
to no more than hysterical sniffles, not enough to eat, and the pathetic
evidence that there hadn't been any money for orthodonture. Fatten her
up, straighten her teeth and--Talk about _religious_ rationalization!

I snapped out of it. Maybe she could call the turn of dice. But I'd be
damned if she could call the turn of people. Let her try _me_.

I sat up on the parapet, swinging to put my feet on the gravel of the
root. "So tonight you found the husband God's been going to give you?" I
asked.

"Yes," she said softly.

"And I'm the one?"

"Yes!"

"Not that again!" I growled, grabbing her thin shoulders and shaking
her. Her glasses bobbled on her nose. "I'm _not_ your darlin' Billy, and
you well know it. Admit it!"

She closed her lips over her buck teeth and sniffled. "I reckon not,"
she said, raising her head and looking at me without flinching. "I lied
to you."

"Why?"

"Kind of made me feel more decent about bein' divorced."

I gave her a last shake for the lie. "Let's have it," I went after her.
"How much of what you've been feeding me is just window dressing?"

She shrugged, but stayed silent.

"_Have_ you been married?" I insisted.

"Yes, Billy Joe."

"_And_ divorced?"

"Oh, darlin' Billy," she sighed. "I jest shouldn't never a _done_ that.
But I did," she added.

"Talk English," I snapped. "This chitterlin's and corn pone are just
more window dressing, right?"

Her face was solemn behind the glasses. "When you are a smart girl, and
you know the future, too, they hate you and try to hurt you," she said.
"They don't seem to mind it so much if it comes from a piece of white
trash that never could be 'no account.' By the time I was twelve or so I
had learned to act just a little stupid and corn-fed."

       *       *       *       *       *

This, her longest speech, she delivered in quiet, Neutral American, the
speech that covers the great prairie states and is as near accentless
and pure as American English ever is. It branded her Ozark twang as a
lie, and a great many other things about her. But it added something
very solid to her claims of prophecy.

"All this," I said. "Because you see the future?"

"Yes, Billy Joe."

"And this talk about losing your prophecy because of divorce was just
