now do you? This is for breakfasts in bed, too.'

"And that's when he said he'd seen the boys and said we ought to name
them Ike and Mike."

The tears were coming down Mrs. Stanton's cheeks heavily now, and the
grief made her look older than her twenty-four years, but the doctor
said nothing, letting her spill out her emotions in words.

"We'd talked about it before, you know--soon as the obstetrician found
out that I was going to have twins. And Jim ... Jim said that we
shouldn't name them alike unless they were identical twins or mirror
twins. If they were fraternal twins, we'd just name them as if they'd
been ordinary brothers or sisters or whatever. You know?" She looked at
the doctor, her eyes pleading for understanding.

"I know," he said.

"And Jim was always kidding. If they were girls, he said, we ought to
call them Flora and Dora, or Annie and Fanny, or maybe Susie and
Floozie. He was always kidding about it. You know?"

"I know," said the doctor.

"And then ... and then when they _were_ identical boys, he was very
sensible about it. He was always so sensible. 'We'll call them Martin
and Bartholomew,' he said. 'Then if they want to call themselves Mart
and Bart, they can, but they won't be stuck with any rhyming names if
they don't want them.' Jim was always very thoughtful that way, Doctor.
Very thoughtful."

She seemed suddenly to realize that she was crying and took a
handkerchief out of her sleeve to dab at her eyes and face.

"I'll have to quit crying," she said, trying to sound very brave and
very strong. "After all, it could have been worse, couldn't it? I mean,
the radiation could have killed my boy, too. Jim's dead, yes, and I've
got to get used to that. But I still have two boys to take care of, and
they'll need me."

"Yes, Mrs. Stanton, they will," said the doctor. "They'll both need you
very much. And you'll have to be very gentle and very careful with both
of them."

"How ... how do you mean that?" she asked.

The doctor settled back in his chair and chose his words carefully.
"Identical twins tend to identify with each other, Mrs. Stanton. There
is a great deal of empathy between people who are not only of the same
age, but genetically identical. If they were both completely healthy,
there would normally be very little trouble in their education at home
or in school. Any of the standard texts on psychodynamics in education
will show you the pitfalls to avoid when dealing with identical
siblings.

"But your sons are no longer identical, Mrs. Stanton. One is normal,
healthy, and lively. The other is ... well, as you know, he is slow,
sluggish, and badly co-ordinated. The condition may improve with time,
but, until we know more about such damage than we do now, he will remain
an invalid."

He had been watching her for further signs of emotional upset. But she
seemed to be listening calmly enough. He went on.

"That's the trouble with radiation damage, Mrs. Stanton. Even when we
can save the victim's life, we cannot always save his health.

"You can see, I think, what sort of psychic disturbances this might
bring about in such a pair. The ill boy tends to identify with the well
one, and, oddly enough, the reverse is also true. If they are not
properly handled during their formative years, Mrs. Stanton, both can be
badly damaged emotionally."

"I ... I think I understand, Doctor," the young woman said. "But what
sort of thing should I look out for? What sort of things should I
avoid?"

"First off, I suggest you get a good man in psychic development," the
doctor said. "I, myself, would hesitate to prescribe. It's out of my
field. But I can say that, in general, most of your trouble will be
caused by a tendency for the pair to swing into one of two extremes.

"At one extreme, you will have mutual antagonism. This arises when the
ill child becomes jealous of the other's health, while, on the other
hand, the healthy one becomes jealous of the extra consideration that is
shown to his crippled brother.

"At the other extreme, the healthy boy may identify so closely with his
brother that he feels every slight or hurt, real or imagined, which the
ill boy is subjected to. He becomes extremely over-solicitous,
over-protective. At the same time, the invalid brother may come to
depend completely on his healthy twin.

"In both these situations there is a positive feedback that constantly
worsens the condition. It requires a great deal of careful observation
and careful application of the proper educational stimuli to keep the
situation from developing toward either extreme. You'll need expert help
if you want both boys to display the full abilities of which they are
potentially capable."

"I see," the woman said. "Could you give me the name of a good man,
Doctor?"

The doctor nodded and picked up a book on his desk. "I'll give you the
names of several. You can pick the one you like best, the one with whom
you seem to be most comfortable. Try several or all of them before you
decide. They're all good men. There are many good women in the field,
too, but in this case I think a man would be best. Of course, if one of
them thinks a woman is indicated, that's up to him. As I said, that
isn't my field."

He opened the small book and riffled through it to find the names he
wanted.




_[7]_


The image of the Nipe on the glowing screen was clear and finely
detailed. It was, Stanton thought, as though one were looking through a
window into the Nipe's nest itself. Only the tremendous depth of focus
of the lens that had caught the picture gave the illusion a feeling of
unreality. Everything--background and foreground alike--was sharply in
focus.

Like some horrendous dream monster, the Nipe moved in slow motion,
giving Stanton the eerie feeling that the alien was moving through a
thicker, heavier medium than air, in a place where the gravity was much
less than that of Earth. With ponderous deliberation, the fingers of one
of his hands closed upon the handle of an oddly shaped tool and lifted
it slowly from the surface upon which he worked.

"That's our best-placed camera," said Colonel Mannheim, "but some of the
others can always get details that this one doesn't. The trouble is
that we'll never really have enough cameras in there--not unless we stud
the walls, ceilings, and floors with them, and even then I'm not so sure
we'd get everything. It isn't the same as having a trained expert on
camera who is _trying_ to demonstrate what he's doing. An expert plays
to the camera and never obstructs any of his own movements. But the
Nipe ..." He left the sentence unfinished and shook his head sadly.

Stanton narrowed his eyes at the image. To his own speeded-up perceptive
processes, the motion seemed intolerably slow. "Would you mind speeding
it up a little?" he asked the colonel. "I want to get an idea of the way
he moves, and I can't really get the feeling of it at this speed."

"Certainly." The colonel turned to the technician at the controls.
"Speed the tape up to normal. If there's anything Mr. Stanton wants to
look at more closely, we can run it through again."

As if in obedience to the colonel's command, the Nipe seemed to shake
himself a little and go about his business more briskly, and the air and
gravity seemed to revert to those of Earth.

"What's he doing?" Stanton asked. The Nipe was performing some sort of
operation on an odd-looking box that sat on the floor in front of him.

The colonel pointed. "He's got a screwdriver that he's modified to give
it a head with an L-shaped cross section, and he's wiggling it around
inside that hole in the box. But what he's doing is a secret between God
and the Nipe at this point," Colonel Mannheim said glumly.

Stanton glanced away from the screen for a moment to look at the other
men who were there. Some of them were watching the screen, but most of
them seemed to be watching Stanton, although they looked away as soon as
they saw his eyes on them. All, that is, except Dr. George Yoritomo,
who simply gave him a smile of confidence.

_Trying to see what kind of a bloke this touted superman is_, Stanton
thought. _Well, I can't say I blame 'em._

He brought his attention back to the screen.

So this was the Nipe's hideaway. He wondered if it were furnished in the
fashion that a Nipe's living quarters would be furnished on whatever
planet the multilegged horror had come from. Probably it had the same
similarity as Robinson Crusoe's island home had to a middle-class
nineteenth-century English home.

There was no furniture in it at all, as such. Low-slung as he was, the
Nipe needed no tables or workbenches; all his work was spread out on the
floor, with a neatness and tidiness that would have surprised many human
technicians. For the same reason, he needed no chairs, and, since true
sleep was a form of metabolic rest he evidently found unnecessary, he
needed no bed. The closest thing he did that might be called sleep was
his habit of stopping whatever he was doing and remaining quiet for
periods of time that ranged from a few minutes to a couple of hours.
Sometimes his eyes remained opened during these periods, sometimes they
were closed. It was difficult to tell whether he was sleeping or just
thinking.

"The difficulty was in getting cameras in there in the first place,"
Colonel Mannheim was saying. "That's why we missed so much of his early
work. There! Look at that!" His finger jabbed at the image.

"The attachment he's making?"

"That's right. Now, it looks as though it's a meter of some kind, but we
don't know whether it's a test instrument or an integral and necessary
part of the machine he's making. The whole machine might even be only a
test instrument for something else he's building. Or perhaps a machine
to make parts for some other machine. After all, he had to start out
from the very beginning--making the tools to make the tools to make the
tools, you know."

Dr. Yoritomo spoke for the first time. "It's not quite as bad as all
that, eh, Colonel? We must remember that he had our technology to draw
upon. If he'd been wrecked on Earth two or three centuries ago, he
wouldn't have been able to do a thing."

Colonel Mannheim smiled at the tall, lean man. "Granted," he said
agreeably, "but it's quite obvious that there are parts of our
technology that are just as alien to him as parts of his are to us.
Remember how he went to all the trouble of building a pentode vacuum
tube for a job that could have been done by transistors he already had
had a chance to get and didn't. His knowledge of solid-state physics
seems to be about a century and a half behind ours."

Stanton listened. Dr. Yoritomo was, in effect, one of his training
instructors. _Advanced Alien Psychology_, Stanton thought; _Seminar
Course. The Mental Whys & Wherefores of the Nipe, or How to Outthink the
Enemy in Twelve Dozen Easy Lessons. Instructor: Dr. George Yoritomo._

The smile on Yoritomo's face was beatific, but he held up a warning
finger. "Ah, ah, Colonel! We mustn't fall into a trap like that so
easily. Remember that gimmick he built last year? The one that blinded
those people in Baghdad? It had five perfect emeralds in it, connected
in series with silver wire. Eh?"

"That's true," the colonel admitted. "But they weren't used the way we'd
use semiconducting materials."

"Indeed not. But the thing _worked_, didn't it? He has a knowledge of
solid-state physics that we don't have, and vice versa."

"Which one would you say was ahead of the other?" Stanton asked. "I
don't mean just in solid-state physics, but in science as a whole."

"That's a difficult question to answer," Dr. Yoritomo said thoughtfully.
"Frankly, I'd put my money on his technology as encompassing more than
ours--at least, insofar as the physical sciences are concerned."

"I agree," said Colonel Mannheim. "He's got things in that little nest
of his that--" He stopped and shook his head slowly, as though he
couldn't find words.

"I will say this," Yoritomo continued. "Whatever his great technological
abilities, our friend the Nipe has plenty of good, solid guts. And
patience." He smiled a little, and then amended his statement. "From our
own point of view."

Stanton looked at him quizzically. "How do you mean? I was just about to
agree with you until you tacked that last phrase on. What does point of
view have to do with it?"

"Everything, I should say," said Yoritomo. "It all depends on the
equipment an individual has. A man, for instance, who rushes into a
building to save a life, wearing nothing but street clothes, has
courage. A man who does the same thing when he's wearing a nullotherm
suit is an unknown quantity. There is no way of knowing, from that
action alone, whether he has courage or not."

Stanton thought he saw what the scientist was driving at. "But you're
not talking about technological equipment now," he said.

"Not at all. I'm talking about personal equipment." He turned his head
slightly to look at the colonel. "Colonel Mannheim, do you think it
would require any personal courage on Mr. Stanton's part to stand up
against you in a face-to-face gunfight?"

The colonel grinned tightly. "I see what you mean."

Stanton grinned back rather wryly. "So do I. No, it wouldn't."

"On the other hand," Yoritomo continued, "if you were to challenge Mr.
Stanton, would that show courage on your part, Colonel?"

"Not really. Foolhardiness, stupidity or insanity--but not courage."

"Ah, then," said Yoritomo with a beaming smile, "neither of you can
prove you have guts enough to fight the other. Can you?"

Mannheim smiled grimly and said nothing. But Stanton was thinking the
whole thing out very carefully. "Just a second," he said. "That depends
on the circumstances. If Colonel Mannheim, say, knew that forcing me to
shoot him would save the life of someone more important than
himself--or, perhaps, the lives of a great many people--what then?"

Yoritomo bowed his head in a quick nod. "Exactly. That is what I meant
by viewpoint. Whether the Nipe has courage or patience or any other
human feeling depends on two things: his own abilities and exactly how
much information he has. A man can perform any action without fear if he
knows that it will not hurt him--or if he does _not_ know that it
_will_."

Stanton thought that over in silence.

The image of the Nipe was no longer moving. He had settled down into his
"sleeping position"--unmoving, although the baleful violet eyes were
still open. "Cut that off," Colonel Mannheim said to the operator.
"There's not much to learn from the rest of that tape."

As the image blanked out, Stanton said, "Have you actually managed to
build any of the devices he's constructed, Colonel?"

"Some," said Colonel Mannheim. "We have specialists all over the world
studying those tapes. We have the advantage of being able to watch every
step the Nipe makes, and we know the materials he's been using to work
with. But, even so, the scientists are baffled by many of them. Can you
imagine the time James Clerk Maxwell would have had trying to build a
modern television set from tapes like this?"

"I can imagine," Stanton said.

"You can see, then, why we're depending on you," Mannheim said.

Stanton merely nodded. The knowledge that he was actually a focal point
in human history, that the whole future of the human race depended to a
tremendous extent on him, was a realization that weighed heavily and, at
the same time, was immensely bracing.

"And now," the colonel said, "I'll turn you over to Dr. Yoritomo. He'll
be able to give you a great deal more information than I can."




_[8]_


The girl moved with the peculiar gliding walk so characteristic of a
person walking under low-gravity conditions, and the ease and grace with
which she did it showed that she was no stranger to low-gee. To the
three men from Earth who followed her a few paces behind, the gee-pull
seemed so low as to be almost nonexistent, although it was actually a
shade over one quarter of that of Earth, the highest gravitational pull
of any planetoid in the Belt. Their faint feeling of nausea was due
simply to their lack of experience with _really_ low gravity--the
largest planetoid in the Belt had a surface gravity that was only one
eighth of the pull they were now experiencing, and only one
thirty-second of the Earth gravity they were used to.

The planetoid they were on--or rather, _in_--was known throughout the
Belt simply as Threadneedle Street, and was nowhere near as large as
Ceres. What accounted for the relatively high gravity pull of this tiny
body was its spin. Moving in its orbit, out beyond the orbit of Mars, it
turned fairly rapidly on its axis--rapidly enough to overcome the feeble
gravitational field of its mass. It was a solid, roughly spherical mass
of nickel-iron, nearly two thirds of a mile in diameter and, like the
