colonel. "They won't find anything on me."

He finished his brandy while Senesin finished his second one. While the
younger man refilled both goblets, the colonel asked permission to use
the bathroom. He was gone less than three minutes, which he had spent
with thumb and middle finger to larynx and mastoid bone.

At eleven forty-five promptly, the phone chimed. No face appeared on the
screen when young Senesin answered it, but a voice gave an address on
Kalia Road.

Three minutes later, the two men were on the roof, signaling for a
skycab.

       *       *       *       *       *

At ten o'clock the next morning, a panel slid aside in a wall that had
previously seemed solid. Colonel Lord Barrick Sorban stepped into the
room, thinking as he did so that he really was a romantic. He actually
rather enjoyed the idea of using secret passages and hidden panels to
gain access to the Emperor's private apartments in the Imperial Palace.

He gave a gentle nod to the man in the blue lounging robe who sat in a
big easy-chair just across the room. "Good morning, Sire."

"'Morning, colonel," said His Imperial Majesty, Hannikar IV. "How are
things shaping up?"

The colonel chuckled. "Not a single one of the newsies printed a word of
it, Sire."

These men were close friends, and had been for years, yet they clung to
the formal titles, both from habit and for self-protection. The
accidental use of a first name could mean a dead giveaway at the wrong
time.

The Emperor was a smaller man than Colonel Sorban, but he was far more
impressive. While the colonel seemed rather mild, the Emperor
looked--well, Imperial. He looked just as an Emperor ought to
look--handsome, dark-haired, stern at times and kindly at others. The
square jaw gave an impression of firmness of character, while the
sapphire-blue eyes were penetrating without being harsh or hard.

"What about the Senesin boy?" he asked.

"He's in jail," said the colonel.

His Imperial Majesty raised an eyebrow. "Oh?" It was a question and a
command.

"Not by my orders," said the colonel quickly. "He got a little upset.
He'd taken those tapes and documents around to four editors and had been
thrown out four times. The fifth time--at the _Globe_, as a matter of
fact--he accused the editor of being in your pay. A hassle started, and
the editor called the Honolulu police. Don't worry, Sire; one of my boys
got the tapes and stuff."

"Is it genuine?"

"The evidence? Yes. The Federalists had the goods on you, all right." He
grinned. "As you said, everything but brainwashing."

"I'll take care of it," said the Emperor. "Prince Jaimie's been going
through the family files, and I rather want him to see this batch of
stuff, too. Meantime, get the Senesin boy out of that cell; I want to
see him. He's got guts, if nothing else."

"He has sense, too, Sire; he's just a little too young yet." He almost
added "and romantic," but he stopped himself in time.

"How long will it take to get him out?" His Majesty asked.

"I can have him here in half an hour. The editor of the _Globe_ will
drop the charges. I can put a little pressure on in the right places."

The Emperor nodded. After a moment, he thumbed a button on his chair
arm. "Inform Lord Senesin that he is requested to appear for a Royal
Audience in forty-five minutes," he said firmly.

"Yes, Sire," said a voice from a hidden speaker.

The Emperor looked at the colonel. "Get the boy."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jon Senesin sat in a soft chair, his hands gripping at the arms as
though it might at any time fall from under him. He looked at the three
other men in the room. His father, Lord Senesin, looking rather tired,
but with a slight smile on his lantern-jawed face, sat on his son's
left. One hand ran nervously through his gray hair.

On Jon's right sat the colonel, looking cool, unperturbed, and very
gentle.

Between them sat the Emperor.

Jon's face looked pale, and there was a slight nervous tic at the corner
of his mouth. "I ... I don't understand," he said. "I--" He swallowed
hard as his voice failed him.

"Nothing hard to understand, son," said the colonel mildly. "We've been
looking for evidence to break up the Federalists for several years. Some
of them are honest men who are simply against any kind of hereditary
monarchy--we'll let them go eventually. Some of them are fanatics--the
kind that is against any form of government that happens to be in power;
they'll get psychiatric treatment. But the leaders of the group are
agents of the Gehan Federation. My men are picking them up now. The man
that contacted you and me last night was arrested within two minutes
after we left."

"But--the _evidence_! Those tapes. The documents. They all seemed
genuine. They seemed so convincing."

"They should be convincing, Jon," said Lord Senesin in his smooth
oratorical baritone. "You see, they are perfectly true."

Jon Senesin looked at his father as though the older man had suddenly
sprouted an extra set of ears. "Y ... You've been brainwashed?"

The Prime Portfolio shook his head. "No, son, not that. Did you see
anything like that on the tapes?"

"N-no. But the others. Fileman Brenner, Portfolio for Defense Vane,
General Finster--all of them. I thought--"

"You thought wrong, son," said Lord Senesin. "I am and always have been
working loyally with His Majesty. He gives the orders, and I carry them
out."

Jon's voice became taut. "You mean you're helping him? You're trying to
get the Empire into a war with the Gehan Federation so that _he_ can
become another dictator, like Jerris the First?" He kept his eyes
carefully averted from the Emperor as he spoke.

Thus he didn't notice that His Majesty looked at Colonel Sorban with an
expression that said, "You're right. He does have guts."

Lord Senesin said: "No, son; I'm not working toward that at all. Neither
is His Majesty. There would be no point in it."

Then, for the first time, the Emperor spoke. His voice was soft, but
