
"Check-check. I'll call you if anything happens."

       *       *       *       *       *

He hung up and stepped out of the phone booth into the lobby of the
Murray Hotel. Across the lobby, a glowing sign said _cocktail lounge_ in
lower-case script.

He decided that a tall cool one wouldn't hurt him any on a day like this
and ambled over, fumbling in his pockets for pipe, tobacco pouch, and
other paraphernalia as he went. He pushed open the door, spotted a stool
at the bar of the dimly-lit room, went over to it and sat down.

He ordered his drink and had no sooner finished than the man to his left
said, "Good afternoon, Mr. Elshawe."

The reporter turned his head toward his neighbor. "Oh, hello, Mr.
Skinner. I didn't know you'd come to town."

"I came in somewhat earlier. Couple, three hours ago." His voice had the
careful, measured steadiness of a man who has had a little too much to
drink and is determined not to show it. That surprised Elshawe a little;
Skinner had struck him as a middle-aged accountant or maybe a high
school teacher--the mild kind of man who doesn't drink at all, much less
take a few too many.

"I'm going to hire a 'copter and fly back," Elshawe said. "You're
welcome if you want to come along."

Skinner shook his head solemnly. "No. Thank you. I'm going back to Los
Angeles this afternoon. I'm just killing time, waiting for the local
plane to El Paso."

"Oh? Well, I hope you have a good trip." Elshawe had been under the
impression that Skinner had come to New Mexico solely to see the test of
Porter's ship. He had wondered before how the man fitted into the
picture, and now he was wondering why Skinner was leaving. He decided he
might as well try to find out. "I guess you're disappointed because the
test has been called off," he said casually.

"Called off? Hah. No such thing," Skinner said. "Not by a long shot. Not
Porter. He'll take the thing up, and if the Army doesn't shoot him down,
the CAA will see to it that he's taken back to prison. But that won't
stop him. Malcom Porter is determined to go down in history as a great
scientist, and nothing is going to stop him if he can help it."

"You think his spaceship will work, then?"

"Work? Sure it'll work. It worked in '79; it'll work now. The way that
drive is built, it can't help but work. I just don't want to stick
around and watch him get in trouble again, that's all."

Elshawe frowned. All the time that Porter had been in prison, his
technicians had been getting together the stuff to build the so-called
"spaceship," but none of them knew how it was put together or how it
worked. Only Porter knew that, and he'd put it together after he'd been
released on parole.

But if that was so, how come Skinner, who didn't even work for Porter,
was so knowledgeable about the drive? Or was that liquor talking?

"Did you help him build it?" the reporter asked smoothly.

"_Help_ him build it? Why, I--" Then Skinner stopped abruptly. "Why,
no," he said after a moment. "No. I don't know anything about it,
really. I just know that it worked in '79, that's all." He finished his
drink and got off his stool. "Well, I've got to be going. Nice talking
to you. Hope I see you again sometime."

"Sure. So long, Mr. Skinner." He watched the man leave the bar.

Then he finished his own drink and went back into the lobby and got a
phone. Ten minutes later, a friend of his who was a detective on the Los
Angeles police force had promised to check into Mr. Samuel Skinner.
Elshawe particularly wanted to know what he had been doing in the past
three years and very especially what he had been doing in the past year.
The cop said he'd find out. There was probably nothing to it, Elshawe
reflected, but a reporter who doesn't follow up accidentally dropped
hints isn't much of a reporter.

He came out of the phone booth, fired up his pipe again, and strolled
back to the bar for one more drink before he went back to Porter's
ranch.

       *       *       *       *       *

Malcom Porter took one of the darts from the half dozen he held in his
left hand and hurled it viciously at the target board hung on the far
wall of the room.

_Thunk!_

"Four ring at six o'clock," he said in a tight voice.

_Thunk! Thunk! Thunk! Thunk! Thunk!_

The other five darts followed in rapid succession. As he threw each one,
Porter snapped out a word. "They ... can't ... stop ... Malcom ...
Porter!" He glared at the board "Two bull's-eyes; three fours, and a
three. Twenty-five points. You owe me a quarter, Elshawe."

The reporter handed him a coin. "Two bits it is. What can you do,
Porter? They've got you sewed up tight. If you try to take off, they'll
cart you right back to The Rock--if the Army doesn't shoot you down
first. Do you want to spend the next ten years engrossed in the scenic
beauties of San Francisco Bay?"

"No. And I won't, either."

"Not if the Army gets you. I can see the epitaph now:

    _Malcom Porter, with vexation,
    Thought he could defy the nation.
    He shot for space with great elation--
    Now he's dust and radiation._

Beneath it, they'll engrave a spaceship argent with A-bombs rampant on a
field sable."

Porter didn't take offense. He grinned. "What are you griping about? It
would make a great story."

"Sure it would," Elshawe agreed. "But not for me. I don't write the
obituary column."

"You know what I like about you, Elshawe?"

"Sure. I lose dart games to you."

"That, yes. But you really sound worried. That means two things. One:
You like me. Two: You believe that my ship actually will take off.
That's more than any of those other reporters who have been prowling
around and phoning in do."

Elshawe shrugged silently and puffed at his pipe. Malcom Porter's ego
was showing through. He was wrong on two counts. Elshawe didn't like
him; the man's arrogance and his inflated opinion of himself as a
scientific genius didn't sit well with the reporter. And Elshawe didn't
really believe there was anything but a rocket motor in that hull
outside. A new, more powerful kind of rocket perhaps--otherwise Porter
wouldn't be trying to take a one-stage rocket to the Moon. But a rocket,
nonetheless.

"I don't want to go back to prison," Porter continued, "but I'll risk
that if I have to. But I won't risk death just yet. Don't worry; the
Army won't know I'm even gone until I'm halfway to the Moon."

"Foo!" said Elshawe. "Every radar base from Albuquerque to the Mexican
border has an antenna focused on the air above this ranch. The minute
you get above those mountains, they'll have a fix on you, and a minute
after that, they'll have you bracketed with Cobras.

"Why don't you let the Government inspectors look it over and give you
an O.K.? What makes you think they're all out to steal your invention?"

"Oh, they won't _steal_ it," Porter said bitterly. "Heaven's-to-Betsy
_no_! But this invention of mine will mean that the United States of
America will be in complete control of the planets and the space
between. When the Government wants a piece of property, they try to buy
it at their price; if they can't do that, they condemn it and pay the
owner what they think it's worth--not what the owner thinks it's worth.
The same thing applies here; they'd give me what they thought I ought to
have--in ten years or so. Look what happened to Fermi.

"No, Elshawe; when the Government comes begging to me for this
invention, they can have it--on _my_ terms."

"Going to keep it a secret, eh? You can't keep a thing like that secret.
Look what happened with atomic energy after World War Two. We kept it a
secret from the Russians, didn't we? Fine lot of good that did us. As
soon as they knew it was possible, they went to work on it. Nature
answers any questions you ask her if you ask her the right way. As soon
as the Government sees that your spaceship works, they'll put some of
their bright physicists to work on it, and you'll be in the same
position as you would have been if you'd showed it to them in the first
place. Why risk your neck?"

Porter shook his head. "The analogy isn't valid. Suppose someone had
invented the A-bomb in 1810. It would have been a perfectly safe secret
because there wasn't a scientist on Earth who included such a thing as
atomic energy in his philosophy. And, believe me, this drive of mine is
just as far ahead of contemporary scientific philosophy as atomic energy
was ahead of Napoleon's scientists.

"Suppose I told you that the fuel my ship uses is a gas lighter than
hydrogen. It isn't, but suppose I told you so. Do you think any
scientist today could figure out how it worked? No. They _know_ that
there's no such thing as a gas with a lighter atomic weight than
hydrogen. They know it so well that they wouldn't even bother to
consider the idea.

"My invention is so far ahead of present-day scientific thought that no
scientists except myself could have even considered the idea."

"O.K.; O.K.," Elshawe said. "So you're going to get yourself shot down
to prove your point."

Porter grinned lopsidedly. "Not at all. You're still thinking in terms
of a rocket. Sure--if I used a rocket, they'd knock me down fast, just
as soon as I lifted above the mountains. But I don't have to do that.
All I have to do is get a few feet of altitude and hug the ground all
the way to the Pacific coast. Once I get out in the middle of the
Pacific, I can take off straight up without being bothered at all."

"All right. If your machine will do it," the reporter said, trying to
hide his skepticism.

"You still think I've got some kind of rocket, don't you?" Porter asked
accusingly. He paused a moment, then, as if making a sudden decision, he
said: "Look, Elshawe, I trust you. I'm going to show you the inside of
that ship. I won't show you my engines, but I _will_ prove to you that
there are no rocket motors in her. That way, when you write up the
story, you'll be able to say that you have first-hand knowledge of that
fact. O.K.?"

