"Well, you're still lucky," Robina said. "Ah'm a Sensitive and Ah'm not
allowed to go to anythin' but silly old musicals an' some comedies. Ah
can't even go to mah brother's feelies what with all the shootin' an'
everythin'."

       *       *       *       *       *

"EVERYBODY TO THEIR PLACES. RECORDING STARTS IN FIVE MINUTES." The
announcement boomed throughout the vast set and a population of extras
began to animate the streets with purposeful activity.

"Robee, honey, you'll have to go."

"Oh, Jay, can't Ah watch. Ah won't fuss around."

"'Tain't that. Nobody who ain't in the feelie can be in sight of any of
the actors they're recordin'. Why if Ah was to walk down that street as
Jed Carter and suddenly see you standin' over here in them men's
pants--"

"These ain't men's pants!" Robina said indignantly. "These are ladies
slacks."

"Ah know that but Jed Carter don't. All he knows is even a hussy
wouldn't strut around like that. Tell you what. You go over there to
where it says, Mrs. Hepple's Quality Boarding Home an' you can peek out
the parlor window at the doin's. Ah guess they had noseybodies then too.
Now get!"

Jason turned and hurried down the street, not bothering to glance after
Robina. She had crossed the street and was passing a saloon when the
omnipresent voice commanded her, "GIRL IN THE GREEN SLACKS GET OUT OF
SIGHT." She became so flustered she dashed into the saloon doorway.

Jed Carter escorted the lady from Nashville down the plank sidewalk to
her carriage. He was furious at her casual gay chatter mocking his
churning desire for her. His glance caught a movement across the street
and suddenly he went rigid with surprise and soft shock. A girl had
come out of the saloon and the hussy was wearing men's trousers. His
shock increased when he heard the delicate lady from Nashville say, "Oh,
damn, who the hell is that?" and he was further startled to see an oddly
dressed man wearing some sort of metal apparatus on his head follow the
girl out of the saloon, gesticulating angrily at her.

"CUT!" the omnipresent voice commanded and now Jed Carter was utterly
confused. The man wearing the metal apparatus crossed over to him and
spoke. "Jason, please. You know the rules about visitors on the set. No
one allowed during recording. Zack says we'll have to ask your sister to
leave."

Jed Carter saw the townspeople just standing around staring in his
direction. "What's goin' on?" he said to the odd man. "What are you
talkin' about? Who are you?"

"Oh, oh," the man with the headset exclaimed, "here we go again." He
made a signal with his hand and another man came running up. The man led
Jason up the steps of the hotel and into the lobby with a promise to
explain everything. He sat Jason in a chair. "Jason, Jason Rowe, Jason
Rowe," the man's voice pulled at him. He kept repeating the name.

A minute later Zack came into the lobby. "Jason!"

"Hello Zack," Jason said.

"Oh, you're back with us," Zack said. He stared at Jason a long moment.
"One of these days," he said with a wry grin, "you're not going to make
it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bob Herschell came out of the magnificent crystal palace that was
U-Live-It's New York feelie showcase and searched the garden plaza. "Cy!
I thought I'd find you here wringing your hands."

"We should never have premiered cold like this," Lemson complained. "We
should have at least had one private running for the reviewers. We
wouldn't be dangling like this."

"Stop worrying, Cy. A first night lets the critics get caught up in the
excitement. And even if they go sick and thumb down 'Land' it won't
stand against the top power voodoo job the publicity gang is saturating
the public with. And bigger than all the critics is Jason Rowe. He's
filled six thousand couches in there with the biggest voluntary
celebrity turnout for any preem."

"Jason Rowe," Lemson sighed, rolling supplicating eyes heavenward. "He
jeopardized a ten million dollar feelie; almost gave _me_ heart failure
when he had that heart attack."

"Cy, for the sake of the studio don't let people hear you say that. It's
not true! It wasn't a heart attack. He just played the death scene too
fully. You know how deep he goes into a role. That's what makes him the
world's greatest actor."

"I don't care what you call it," Lemson said heatedly, "the guy's heart
_stopped_ and it was only because of Zack's alertness that they got to
him in time. He almost died. I don't want to be ghoulish about it, Bob,
but the studio's putting a lot of time, money and sweat into making that
boy a star--"

"Nobody's making him a star," Herschell cut in, "he was born one."

Herschell had spoken with such honest emphasis that Lemson replied,
greatly subdued, "Okay, okay, but we have ourselves a pretty shaky
investment if every time he dies in a feelie he's liable to really go
over the edge."

"Zack thinks he can work out a receptor circuit to keep it from
happening again. Sort of a subliminal survival monitor that won't show
on the strip."

Lemson looked nervously at the theater entrance. "They should be coming
out soon," he muttered.

"Ten minutes yet," Herschell assured him.

