
"Dr. Wan will be there within ten minutes, so be alert."

"Yes, sir. All will be done to your satisfaction."

"Excellent," said Candron. He smiled as he hung up. Then he punched
another secret number. This one connected him with the guards outside
Ch'ien's apartment. As General Soong, he warned them of the coming of
Dr. Wan. Then he went to the window, stepped out, and headed for the
roof again.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no danger that the calls would be suspected. Those two phones
could not be contacted except from inside the Palace, and not even then
unless the number was known.

Again he dropped down Elevator Shaft Three. Only Number One was
operating this late in the evening, so there was no fear of meeting it
coming up. He dropped lightly to the roof of the car, where it stood
empty in the basement, opened the escape hatch in the roof, dropped
inside, opened the door, and emerged into the first basement. Then he
started down the stairs to the subbasement.

The guards were not the least suspicious, apparently. Candron wished he
were an honest-to-God telepath, so he could be absolutely sure. The
officer at the end of the corridor that led to Ch'ien's apartment was a
full captain, a tough-looking, swarthy Mongol with dark, hard eyes. "You
are Dr. Wan?" he asked in a guttural baritone.

"I am," Candron said. This was no place for traditional politeness. "Did
not General Soong call you?"

"He did, indeed, doctor. But I assumed you would be carrying--" He
gestured, as though not quite sure what to say.

Candron smiled blandly. "Ah. You were expecting the little black bag, is
it not so? No, my good captain; I am a psychologist, not a medical
doctor."

The captain's face cleared. "So. The persuasion is to be of the more
subtle type."

"Indeed. Only thus can we be assured of his co-operation. One cannot
force the creative mind to create; it must be cajoled. Could one have
forced the great K'ung Fu-tse to become a philosopher at the point of a
sword?"

"It is so," said the captain. "Will you permit me to search you?"

The affable Dr. Wan emptied his pockets, then permitted the search. The
captain casually looked at the identification in the wallet. It was,
naturally, in perfect order for Dr. Wan. The identification of Ying Lee
had been destroyed hours ago, since it was of no further value.

"These things must be left here until you come out, doctor," the captain
said. "You may pick them up when you leave." He gestured at the pack of
cigarettes. "You will be given cigarettes by the interior guard. Such
are my orders."

"Very well," Candron said calmly. "And now, may I see the patient?" He
had wanted to keep those cigarettes. Now he would have to find a
substitute.

The captain unlocked the heavy door. At the far end, two more guards
sat, complacently playing cards, while a third stood at a door a few
yards away. A television screen imbedded in the door was connected to an
interior camera which showed the room within.

The corridor door was closed and locked behind Candron as he walked
toward the three interior guards. They were three more big, tough
Mongols, all wearing the insignia of lieutenants. This was not a
prisoner who could be entrusted to the care of common soldiers; the
secret was too important to allow the _hoi polloi_ in on it. They
carried no weapons; the three of them could easily take care of Ch'ien
if he tried anything foolish, and besides, it kept weapons out of
Ch'ien's reach. There were other methods of taking care of the prisoner
if the guards were inadequate.

The two officers who were playing cards looked up, acknowledged Dr.
Wan's presence, and went back to their game. The third, after glancing
at the screen, opened the door to James Ch'ien's apartment. Spencer
Candron stepped inside.

It was because of those few seconds--the time during which that door was
open--that Candron had called the monitors who watched Ch'ien's
apartment. Otherwise, he wouldn't have bothered. He needed fifteen
seconds in which to act, and he couldn't do it with that door open. If
the monitors had given an alarm in these critical seconds....

But they hadn't, and they wouldn't. Not yet.

The man who was sitting in the easy-chair on the opposite side of the
room looked up as Candron entered.

James Ch'ien (B.S., M.S., M.I.T., Ph. D., U.C.L.A.) was a young man,
barely past thirty. His tanned face no longer wore the affable smile
that Candron had seen in photographs, and the jet-black eyes beneath the
well-formed brows were cold instead of friendly, but the intelligence
behind the face still came through.

As the door was relocked behind him, Candron said, in Cantonese: "This
unworthy one hopes that the excellent doctor is well. Permit me to
introduce my unworthy self: I am Dr. Wan Feng."

Dr. Ch'ien put the book he was reading in his lap. He looked at the
ceiling in exasperation, then back at Candron. "All right," he said in
English, "so you don't believe me. But I'll repeat it again in the hope
that I can get it through your skulls." It was obvious that he was
addressing, not only his visitor, but anyone else who might be
listening.

"I do not speak Chinese," he said, emphasizing each word separately. "I
can say 'Good morning' and 'Good-by', and that's about it. I _do_ wish I
could say 'drop dead,' but that's a luxury I can't indulge. If you can
speak English, then go ahead; if not, quit wasting my time and yours.
Not," he added, "that it won't be a waste of time anyway, but at least
it will relieve the monotony."

Candron knew that Ch'ien was only partially telling the truth. The
physicist spoke the language badly, but he understood it fairly well.

"Sorry, doctor," Candron said in English, "I guess I forgot myself. I am
Dr. Wan Feng."

Ch'ien's expression didn't change, but he waved to a nearby chair. "Sit
down, Dr. Feng, and tell me what propaganda line you've come to deliver
now."

Candron smiled and shook his head slowly. "That was unworthy of you, Dr.
Ch'ien. Even though you have succumbed to the Western habit of putting
the family name last, you are perfectly aware that 'Wan,' not 'Feng,' is
my family name."

The physicist didn't turn a hair. "Force of habit, Dr. Wan. Or, rather,
a little retaliation. I was called 'Dakta Chamis' for two days, and even
those who could pronounce the name properly insisted on 'Dr. James.' But
I forget myself. I am supposed to be the host here. Do sit down and tell
me why I should give myself over to Communist China just because my
grandfather was born here back in the days when China was a republic."

       *       *       *       *       *

Spencer Candron knew that time was running out, but he had to force
Ch'ien into the right position before he could act. He wished again that
he had been able to keep the cigarettes. Ch'ien was a moderately heavy
smoker, and one of those drugged cigarettes would have come in handy
now. As it was, he had to handle it differently. And that meant a
different approach.

"No, Dr. Ch'ien," he said, in a voice that was deliberately too smooth,
"I will not sit down, thank you. I would prefer that you stand up."

The physicist's face became a frozen mask. "I see that the doctorate you
claim is not for studies in the field of physics. You're not here to
worm things out of me by discussing my work talking shop. What is it,
_Doctor_ Wan?"

"I am a psychologist." Candron said. He knew that the monitors watching
the screens and listening to the conversation were recording everything.
He knew that they shouldn't be suspicious yet. But if the real General
Soong should decide to check on what his important guest was doing....
