the new world. Lord knew that the other natives were being as persuasive
with the rest of the crew. And the temptation was very real: to trade the
energetic, competitive, exhausting routine that he knew for the quiet
peace and relaxation here.

As the days passed the rigid scheduling of exploratory activities, always
practiced by a trade mission, began to break down. The charming savages of
this new world put no monetary value on time, and something of their spirit
began to infect Lord's crew. They stopped bucking for overtime; most of
them applied for accumulated sick leave--so they could walk in the forest
with the native women, or swim in the forest pools. Even Lord found time
to relax.

One afternoon, after a swim with Niaga, they lay in the warm sun on the
grassy bank of a stream. Niaga picked a blue, delicately scented water
lily, and gently worked it into his hair. Slowly she bent her face close
until her lips brushed his cheek.

"Must you really go away when the treaty is made?"

"I'm a Lord, Niaga."

"Does that matter? If you like it here--"

"Niaga, I wish--I wish--" He shrugged his shoulders helplessly.

"Why is it so important for you to build your trade cities?"

As he sought for words to answer her question, the spell of her presence
was broken. He saw her for what she was: an extremely beautiful woman,
sensuously very lovely, yet nonetheless a primitive--a forlorn child
without any conception of the meaning of civilization. "We keep our union
of planets economically sound," he explained patiently, "and at peace by
constantly expanding--"

"I have visited the schoolroom your teacher has put up beside the ship. I
have seen her models of the many machines your people know how to build.
But why do you do it, Martin Lord?"

"The machines make our lives easier and more comfortable; they--"

"More comfortable than this?" She gestured toward the stream and the
cultivated forest.

"Your world moves at the pace of a walk, Niaga; with our machines, you
could rise above your trees, reach your destination in minutes--when now
it takes you days."

"And miss all the beauty on the way. What point is there in saving
time, and losing so much that really matters? Do your machines give you
anything--you as a person, Martin Lord--that you couldn't have here
without them?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The question was unanswerable. It symbolized the enormous gulf that lay
between Niaga and himself. More than that, Lord saw clearly that the
trade cities would destroy her world utterly. Neither Niaga nor her way
of life could survive the impact of civilization. And the exotic charm,
the friendly innocence was worth saving. Somehow Lord had to find a way
to do it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lord was by no means surprised when the first three men jumped ship and
went to live in one of the quiet villages. Subconsciously he envied them;
subconsciously he wished he had the courage to make the same decision.
Although Ann Howard demanded it, Lord couldn't seriously consider taking
measures to stop further desertions.

When Don Howard jumped ship, he brought the issue to a head. Ann maneuvered
Lord so that he would have to take a stand. What and how, he didn't know.

It was the first time since the landing that Niaga had not been waiting
outside the ship for Lord. At his request she had gone to the village
to find what progress had been made in calling the council of elders.
Lord knew where to find her, but after his talk with Ann he walked slowly
along the forest path. He stopped to dip his face into the stream where
he had first met Niaga. Anything to put off the showdown. Lord was
trying desperately to understand and evaluate his own motivation.

He accepted the fact that he had not stopped the desertions because, if
enough men jumped ship, the _Ceres_ would be unable to take off again. Lord
could then have embraced Niaga's temptation without having to make the
decision for himself. But that was a coward's way out and no solution.
There would always be people like Ann Howard who would not accept the
situation. They would eventually make radio communication with the
Federation, and the location of Niaga's world would no longer be a secret.

Fundamentally that was the only thing that counted: to preserve this world
from the impact of civilization.

Then suddenly, as he listened to the music of the stream, Lord saw how that
could be done. Ann Howard had offered him a deal; she would keep her word.
Everything hinged on that.

Don Howard had to be brought back--if persuasion failed, then by force.

Martin Lord ran back to the clearing. From a supply shed he took a pair of
deadly atomic pistols. Their invisible, pin-point knife of exploding energy
could slice through eighteen feet of steel, transform a mountain into a
cloud of radioactive dust.

He ran through the forest to the village. As usual, the children were
playing games on the grass, while the adults lounged in front of their
dwellings or enjoyed community singing and dancing to the pulsing rhythm of
their music. The sound of gaiety suddenly died as Lord walked between the
rows of houses.

Strange, he thought; they seemed to guess what was in his mind. Niaga ran
from the quiet crowd and took his hand.

"No, Martin Lord; you must not interfere!"

"Where's Howard?"

"He is a free man; he has a right to choose--"

"I'm going to take him back." He drew one of his guns. She looked at him
steadily, without fear, and she said,

"We made you welcome; we have given you our friendship, and now you--"

He pushed her aside brutally because her gentleness, her lack of anger,
tightened the constriction of his own sense of guilt. Lord fired his weapon
at the trunk of a tree. The wood flamed red for a moment and the sound of
the explosion rocked the air, powdering the grass with black ash.

"This is the kind of power controlled by men," he said. His voice was
harsh, shrill with shame and disgust for the role he had to play. "I shall
use this weapon to destroy your homes--each of them, one by one--unless you
surrender Don Howard to me."

As he turned the pistol slowly toward the closest yellow wall, Niaga
whispered, "Violence is a violation of the law of humanity. We offered Don
Howard sanctuary and peace--as we offer it to all of you. Stay with us,
