tangle-cord with a snicking rasp, and kicked his wheelchair over.

The blaster went off, burning a hole through the Dome roof. The
automatic sealers glued-in instantly. Ledman went sprawling helplessly
out into the middle of the floor, the wheelchair upended next to him,
its wheels slowly revolving in the air. The blaster flew from his hands
at the impact of landing and spun out near me. In one quick motion I
rolled over and covered it with my body.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ledman clawed his way to me with tremendous effort and tried wildly to
pry the blaster out from under me, but without success. I twisted a bit,
reached out with my free leg, and booted him across the floor. He
fetched up against the wall of the Dome and lay there.

Val rolled over to me.

"Now if I could get free of this stuff," I said, "I could get him
covered before he comes to. But how?"

"Teamwork," Val said. She swivelled around on the floor until her head
was near my boot. "Push my oxymask off with your foot, if you can."

I searched for the clamp and tried to flip it. No luck, with my heavy,
clumsy boot. I tried again, and this time it snapped open. I got the tip
of my boot in and pried upward. The oxymask came off, slowly, scraping a
jagged red scratch up the side of Val's neck as it came.

"There," she breathed. "That's that."

I looked uneasily at Ledman. He was groaning and beginning to stir.

Val rolled on the floor and her face lay near my right arm. I saw what
she had in mind. She began to nibble the vile-tasting tangle-cord,
running her teeth up and down it until it started to give. She continued
unfailingly.

Finally one strand snapped. Then another. At last I had enough use of my
hand to reach out and grasp the blaster. Then I pulled myself across the
floor to Ledman, removed the tanglegun, and melted the remaining
tangle-cord off.

My muscles were stiff and bunched, and rising made me wince. I turned
and freed Val. Then I turned and faced Ledman.

"I suppose you'll kill me now," he said.

"No. That's the difference between sane people and insane," I told him.
"I'm not going to kill you at all. I'm going to see to it that you're
sent back to Earth."

"_No!_" he shouted. "No! Anything but back there. I don't want to face
them again--not after what they did to me--"

"Not so loud," I broke in. "They'll help you on Earth. They'll take all
the hatred and sickness out of you, and turn you into a useful member of
society again."

"I hate Earthmen," he spat out. "I hate all of them."

"I know," I said sarcastically. "You're just all full of hate. You hated
us so much that you couldn't bear to hang around on Earth for as much as
a year after the Sadlerville Blast. You had to take right off for Mars
without a moment's delay, didn't you? You hated Earth so much you _had_
to leave."

"Why are you telling all this to me?"

"Because if you'd stayed long enough, you'd have used some of your
pension money to buy yourself a pair of prosthetic legs, and then you
wouldn't need this wheelchair."

Ledman scowled, and then his face went belligerent again. "They told me
I was paralyzed below the waist. That I'd never walk again, even with
prosthetic legs, because I had no muscles to fit them to."

"You left Earth too quickly," Val said.

"It was the only way," he protested. "I had to get off--"

"She's right," I told him. "The atom can take away, but it can give as
well. Soon after you left they developed _atomic-powered_
prosthetics--amazing things, virtually robot legs. All the survivors of
the Sadlerville Blast were given the necessary replacement limbs free of
charge. All except you. You were so sick you had to get away from the
world you despised and come here."

"You're lying," he said. "It's not true!"

"Oh, but it is," Val smiled.

I saw him wilt visibly, and for a moment I almost felt sorry for him, a
pathetic legless figure propped up against the wall of the Dome at
blaster-point. But then I remembered he'd killed twelve Geigs--or
more--and would have added Val to the number had he had the chance.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You're a very sick man, Ledman," I said. "All this time you could have
been happy, useful on Earth, instead of being holed up here nursing your
hatred. You might have been useful, on Earth. But you decided to channel
everything out as revenge."

"I still don't believe it--those legs. I might have walked again.
No--no, it's all a lie. They told me I'd never walk," he said, weakly
but stubbornly still.
