scientific character of his nephew, not only invited him to his house,
but assigned to him for an observatory the part of it which was best
adapted for that purpose. Tycho cheerfully accepted of this liberal
offer. The immediate proximity of Herritzvold to Knudstorp, rendered
this arrangement peculiarly convenient, and in the house of his uncle he
experienced all that kindness and consideration which natural affection
and a love of science combined to cherish. When Steno learned that the
study of chemistry was one of the pursuits of his nephew, he granted him
a spacious house, a few yards distant from the convent, for his
laboratory. Tycho lost no time in fitting up his observatory, and in
providing his furnaces; and regarding gold and silver and the other
metals as the stars of the earth, he used to represent his two opposite
pursuits as forming only one science, namely, celestial and terrestrial
astronomy.

In the hopes of enriching himself by the pursuits of alchemy, Tycho
devoted most of his attention to those satellites of gold and silver
which now constituted his own system, and which disturbed by their
powerful action the hitherto uniform movements of their primary. His
affections were ever turning to Germany, where astronomers of kindred
views, and artists of surpassing talent were to be found in almost every
city. The want of money alone prevented him from realizing his wishes;
and it was in the hope of attaining the means of travelling, that he in
a great measure forsook his sextants for his crucibles. In order,
however, that he might have one good instrument in his observatory, he
constructed a sextant similar to, but somewhat larger than, that which
he had presented to Hainzel. Its limb was made of solid brass, and was
exquisitely divided into single minutes of a degree. Its radii were
strengthened with plates of brass, and the apparatus for opening and
shutting them was made with great accuracy.

The possession of this instrument was peculiarly fortunate for Tycho,
for an event now occurred which roused him from his golden visions, and
directed all his faculties into their earlier and purer current. On the
11th November 1572, when he was returning to supper from his laboratory,
the clearness of the sky inspired him with the desire of completing some
particular observations. On looking up to the starry firmament he was
surprised to see an extraordinary light in the constellation of
Cassiopeia, which was then above his head. He felt confident that he had
never before observed such a star in that constellation, and
distrusting the evidence of his own senses, he called out the servants
and the peasants, and having received their testimony that it was a huge
star such as they had never seen before, he was satisfied of the
correctness of his own vision. Regarding it as a new and unusual
phenomenon, he hastened to his observatory, adjusted his sextant, and
measured its distances from the nearest stars in Cassiopeia. He noted
also its form, its magnitude, its light, and its colour, and he waited
with great anxiety for the next night that he might determine the
important point whether it was a fixed star, or a body within, or near
to, our own system.

For several years Tycho had been in the practice of calculating, at the
beginning of each year, a sort of almanac for his own use, and in this
he inserted all the observations which he had made on the new star, and
the conclusions which he had drawn from them. Having gone to Copenhagen
in the course of the ensuing spring, he shewed this manuscript to John
Pratensis, a Professor, in whose house he was always hospitably
received. Charles Danzeus, the French ambassador, and a person of great
learning, having heard of Tycho's arrival, invited himself to dine with
him at the house of Pratensis. The conversation soon turned upon the new
star, and Tycho found his companion very sceptical about its existence.
Danzeus was particularly jocular on the subject, and attacked the Danes
for their inattention to so important a science as astronomy. Tycho
received this lecture in good temper, and with the anxious expectation
that a clear sky would enable him to give a practical refutation of the
attack which was made upon his country. The night turned out serene, and
the whole party saw with astonishment the new star under the most
favourable circumstances. Pratensis conceived that it was similar to the
one observed by Hipparchus, and urged Tycho to publish the observations
which he had made upon it. Tycho refused to accede to this request, on
the pretext that his work was not sufficiently perfect; but the true
reason, as he afterwards acknowledged, was, that he considered it would
be a disgrace for a nobleman, either to study such subjects, or to
communicate them to the public. This absurd notion was with some
difficulty overcome, and through the earnest entreaties and assistance
of Pratensis, his work on the new star was published in 1573.

This remarkable body presents to us one of the most interesting
phenomena in astronomy. The date of its first appearance has not been
exactly ascertained. Tycho saw it on the 11th November, but Cornelius
Gemma had seen it on the 9th, Paul Hainzel saw it on the 7th of August
at Augsburg, and Wolfgangus Schulerus observed it at Wittenberg on the
6th. Tycho conjectures that it was first seen on the 5th, and Hieronymus
Munosius asserts that at Valentia, in Spain, it was not seen on the 2d,
when he was shewing that part of the heavens to his pupils. This
singular body continued to be seen during 16 months, and did not
disappear till March 1574. In its appearance it was exactly like a star,
having none of the distinctive marks of a comet. It twinkled strongly,
and grew larger than _Lyra_ or _Sirius_, or any other fixed star. It
seemed to be somewhat larger than _Jupiter_, when he is nearest the
earth, and rivalled _Venus_ in her greatest brightness. In the _first_
month of its appearance it was less than Jupiter; in the _second_ it
equalled him; in the _third_ it surpassed him in splendour; in the
_fourth_ it was equal to _Sirius_; in the _fifth_ to _Lyra_; in the
_sixth_ and _seventh_ to stars of the _second_ magnitude; in the
_eighth_, _ninth_, and _tenth_, to stars of the _third_ magnitude; in
the _eleventh_, _twelfth_, and _thirteenth_, to stars of the _fourth_
magnitude; in the _fourteenth_ and _fifteenth_ to stars of the _fifth_
magnitude; and in the _sixteenth_ month to stars of the _sixth_
magnitude. After this it became so small that it at last disappeared.
Its colour changed also with its size. At first it was white and bright;
in the third month it began to become yellowish; in the fifth it became
reddish like Aldebaran; and in the seventh and eighth it became bluish
like Saturn; growing afterwards duller and duller. Its place in the
heavens was invariable. Its longitude was in the 6th degree and 54th
minute of Taurus; and its latitude 53 deg. 45' north. Its right ascension
was 0 deg. 26-2/5' and its declination 61 deg. 46-3/4'. It had no parallax, and
was unquestionably situated in the region of the fixed stars.

After Tycho had published his book, he proposed to travel into Germany
and Italy, but he was seized with a fever, and he had no sooner
recovered from it, than he became involved in a love affair, which
frustrated all his schemes. Although Tycho was afraid of casting a
stain upon his nobility by publishing his observations on the new star,
yet he did not scruple to debase his lineage by marrying a peasant girl
of the village of Knudstorp. This event took place in 1573, and in 1574
his wife gave birth to his daughter Magdalene. Tycho's noble relations
were deeply offended at this imprudent step; and so far did the mutual
animosity of the parties extend, that the King himself was obliged to
effect a reconciliation.

The fame of our author as an astronomer and mathematician was now so
high, that several young Danish nobles requested him to deliver a course
of lectures upon these interesting subjects. This application was
seconded by Pratensis, Danzeus, and all his best friends; but their
solicitations were vain. The King at last made the request in a way
which ensured its being granted, and Tycho delivered a course of
lectures, in which he not only gave a full view of the science of
astronomy, but defended and explained all the reveries of astrology.

Having finished his lectures, and arranged his domestic affairs, he set
out on his projected journey about the beginning of the spring of 1575,
leaving behind him his wife and daughter, till he should fix upon a
place of permanent residence. The first town which he visited was
Hesse-Cassel, the residence of William, Landgrave of Hesse, whose
patronage of astronomy, and whose skill in making celestial
observations, have immortalized his name. Here Tycho spent eight or ten
delightful days, during which the two astronomers were occupied one half
of the day in scientific conversation, and the other half in
astronomical observations; and he would have prolonged a visit which
gave him so much pleasure, had not the death of one of the Landgrave's
daughters interrupted their labours. Passing through Frankfort, Tycho
went into Switzerland; and, after visiting many cities on his way, he
fixed upon Basle as a place of residence, not only from its centrical
position, but from the salubrity of the air, and the cheapness of
living. From Switzerland he went to Venice, and, in returning through
Germany, he came to Ratisbon, at the time of the congress, which had
been called together on the 1st of November, for the coronation of the
Emperor Rudolph. On this occasion he met with several distinguished
individuals, who were not only skilled in astronomy, but who were among
its warmest patrons. From Ratisbon he passed to Saalfeld, and thence to
Wittemburg, where he saw the parallactic instruments and the wooden
quadrant which had been used by John Pratensis in determining the
latitude of the city, and in measuring the altitudes of the new star.

Tycho was now impatient for home, and he lost no time in returning to
Denmark, where events were awaiting him which frustrated all his
schemes, by placing him in the most favourable situation for promoting
his own happiness, and advancing the interests of astronomy.




CHAPTER II.

     _Frederick II. patronises Tycho--And resolves to establish him in
     Denmark--Grants him the Island of Huen for Life--And Builds the
     splendid Observatory of Uraniburg--Description of the Island, and
     of the Observatory--Account of its Astronomical Instruments--Tycho
     begins his Observations--His Pupils--Tycho is made Canon of
     Rothschild, and receives a large Pension--His Hospitality to his
     Visitors--Ingratitude of Witichius--Tycho sends an Assistant to
     take the Latitude of Frauenburg and Konigsberg--Is visited by
     Ulric, Duke of Mecklenburg--Change in Tycho's fortunes._


The patronage which had been extended to astronomers by several of the
reigning princes of Germany, especially by the Landgrave of Hesse, and
Augustus, Elector of Saxony, had begun to excite a love of science in
the minds of other sovereigns. The King of Denmark seems to have felt it
as a stain upon his character, that the only astronomer in his dominions
should carry on his observations in distant kingdoms and adorn by his
discoveries other courts than his own. With this feeling he sent
ambassadors to Hesse-Cassel to inquire after Tycho, and to intimate to
him his wish that he should return to Denmark, and his anxiety to
promote the advancement of astronomy in his own dominions. Tycho had
left Cassel when these messengers arrived, and had heard nothing of the
King's intentions till he was about to quit Knudstorp with his family
for Basle. At this time he was surprised at the arrival of a noble
messenger, who brought a letter requesting him to meet the King as soon
as possible at Copenhagen. Tycho lost no time in obeying the royal
summons. The King received him with the most flattering kindness. He
offered to give him a grant for life of the island of Huen, between
Denmark and Sweden, and to construct and furnish with instruments, at
his own expense, an observatory, as well as a house for the
accommodation of his family, together with a laboratory for carrying on
his chemical inquiries. Tycho, who truly loved his country, was deeply
affected with the munificence of the royal offer. He accepted of it with
that warmth of gratitude which it was calculated to inspire; and he
particularly rejoiced in the thought that if any success should attend
his future labours, the glory of it would belong to his native land.

The island of Huen is about sxix miles from the coast of Zealand, three
from that of Sweden, and fourteen from Copenhagen. It is six miles in
circumference, and rises into the form of a mountain, which, though very
high, terminates in a plain. It is nowhere rocky, and even in the time
of Tycho it produced the best kinds of grain, afforded excellent
pasturage for horses, cattle, and sheep, and possessed deer, hares,
rabbits, and partridges in abundance. It contained at that time only one
village, with about forty inhabitants.

Having surveyed his new territory, Tycho resolved to build a magnificent
tower in the centre of the elevated plain, which he resolved to call
Uraniburg, or _The City of the Heavens_. Having made the necessary
arrangements, he repaired to the island on the 8th of August, and his
friend Charles Danzeus laid the foundation stone of the new observatory,
which consisted of a slab of porphyry, with the following
inscription:--

     REGNANTE IN DANIA FREDERICO II., CAROLUS DANZAEUS AQUITANUS R. G. I.
     D. L.,[37] DOMUI HUIC PHILOSOPHIAE, IMPRIMISQUE ASTRORUM
     CONTEMPLATIONI, REGIS DECRETO A NOBILI VIRO TYCHONE BRAHE DE
     KNUDSTRUP EXTRUCTAE VOTIVUM HUNC LAPIDEM MEMORIAE ET FELICIS AUSPICII
     ERGO P. ANNO CIC.IC.LXXVI.[38] VI ID. AUGUSTI.

     [37] Regis Gallorum in Dania Legatus.

     [38] Transcriber's footnote: The second Cs in CIC and IC are
     printed reversed in the original.

This ceremony was performed early in the morning of a splendid day, in
which the rising sun threw its blessing upon Frederick, and upon the
party of noblemen and philosophers who had assembled to testify their
love of science. An entertainment was provided for the occasion, and
copious libations of a variety of wines were offered for the success of
the undertaking.

The observatory was surrounded by a rampart, each face of which was
three hundred feet long. About the middle of each face the rampart
became a semicircle, the inner diameter of which was ninety feet. The
height of the rampart was twenty-two feet, and its thickness at the base
twenty. Its four angles corresponded exactly with the four cardinal
points, and at the north and south angles were erected turrets, of
which one was a printing-house, and the other the residence of the
servants. Gates were erected at the east and west angles, and above them
were apartments for the reception of strangers. Within the rampart was a
shrubbery with about three hundred varieties of trees; and at the centre
of each semicircular part of the rampart was a bower or summer-house.
This shrubbery surrounded the flower-garden, which was terminated within
by a circular wall about forty-five feet high, which enclosed a more
elevated area, in the centre of which stood the principal building in
the observatory, and from which four paths led to the above-mentioned
angles, with as many doors for entering the garden.

The principal building was about sixty feet square. The doors were
placed on the east and west sides; and to the north and south fronts
were attached two round towers, whose inner diameter was about
thirty-two feet, and which formed the observatories which had windows in
their roof, that could be opened towards any part of the heavens. The
accommodations for the family were numerous and splendid. Under the
observatory, in the south tower, was the museum and library, and below
this again was the laboratory in a subterraneous crypt, containing
sixteen furnaces of various kinds. Beneath this was a well forty feet
deep, from which water was distributed by syphons to every part of the
building.

Besides the principal building there were other two situated without the
rampart, one to the north, containing a workshop for the construction of
astronomical and other instruments, and the other to the south, which
was occupied as a sort of farm-house. These buildings cost the King of
Denmark 100,000 rix-dollars (L20,000), and Tycho is said to have
expended upon them a similar sum.

As the two towers could not accommodate the instruments which Tycho
required for his observations, he found it necessary to erect, on the
hill about sixty paces to the south of Uraniburg, a subterranean
observatory, in which he might place his larger instruments, which
required to be firmly fixed, and to be protected from the wind and the
weather. This observatory, which he called Stiern-berg, or the mountain,
of the stars, consisted of several crypts, separated by solid walls,
and to these there was a subterranean passage from the laboratory in
Uraniburg. The various buildings which Tycho erected were built in a
regular style of architecture, and were highly ornamented, not only with
external decorations, but with the statues and pictures of the most
distinguished astronomers, from Hipparchus and Ptolemy down to
Copernicus, and with inscriptions and poems in honour of astronomers.

While these buildings were erecting, and after their completion, Tycho
was busily occupied in preparing instruments for observation. These were
of the most splendid description, and the reader will form some notion
of their grandeur and their expense from the following list:--

   _In the south and greater Observatory._

     1. A semicircle of solid iron, covered with brass, four cubits
     radius.

     2. A sextant of the same materials and size.

     3. A quadrant of one and a half cubits radius, and an azimuth
     circle of three cubits.

     4. Ptolemy's parallactic rules, covered with brass, four cubits in
     the side.

     5. The sextant already described in page 134.

     6. Another quadrant, like No. 3.

     7. Zodiacal armillaries of melted brass, and turned out of the
     solid, of three cubits in diameter.

     Near this observatory was a large clock, with one wheel two cubits
     in diameter, and two smaller ones, which, like it, indicated hours,
     minutes, and seconds.

   _In the south and lesser Observatory._

     8. An armillary sphere of brass, with a steel meridian, whose
     diameter was about 4 cubits.

   _In the north Observatory._

     9. Brass parallactic rules, which revolved in azimuth above a brass
     horizon, twelve feet in diameter.

     10. A half sextant, of four cubits radius.

     11. A steel sextant.

     12. Another half sextant, with steel limb, four cubits radius.

     13. The parallactic rules of Copernicus.

     14. Equatorial armillaries.

     15. A quadrant of a solid plate of brass, five cubits in radius,
     shewing every ten seconds.

     16. In the museum was the large globe made at Augsburg, see p. 134.

   _In the Stiern-berg Observatory._

     17. In the central part, a large semicircle, with a brass limb, and
     three clocks, shewing hours, minutes, and seconds.

     18. Equatorial armillaries of seven cubits, with semi-armillaries
     of nine cubits.

     19. A sextant of four cubits radius.

     20. A geometrical square of iron, with an intercepted quadrant of
     five cubits, and divided into fifteen seconds.

     21. A quadrant of four cubits radius, shewing ten seconds, with an
     azimuth circle.

     22. Zodiacal armillaries of brass, with steel meridians, three
     cubits in diameter.

     23. A sextant of brass, kept together by screws, and capable of
     being taken to pieces for travelling with. Its radius was four
     cubits.

     24. A moveable armillary sphere, three cubits in diameter.

     25. A quadrant of solid brass, one cubit radius, and divided into
     minutes by Nonian circles.

     26. An astronomical radius of solid brass, three cubits long.

     27. An astronomical ring of brass, a cubit in diameter.

     28. A small brass astrolabe.

In almost all the instruments now enumerated, the limb was subdivided by
diagonal lines, a method which Tycho first brought into use, but which,
in modern times, has been superseded by the inventions of Nonius and
Vernier.

When Tycho had thus furnished his observatory, he devoted himself to the
examination of the stars; and during the twenty-one years which he spent
in this delightful occupation, he made vast additions to astronomical
science. In order to instruct the young in the art of observation, and
educate assistants for his observatory, he had sometimes under his roof
from six to twelve pupils, whom he boarded and educated. Some of these
were named by the King, and educated at his expense. Others were sent
by different academies and cities; and several, who had presented
themselves of their own accord, were liberally admitted by the generous
astronomer.

As Tycho had spent nearly a ton of gold (about 100,000 dollars) in his
outlay at Uraniburg, his own income was reduced to very narrow limits.
To supply this defect, Frederick gave him an annual pension of 2000
dollars, beside an estate in Norway, and made him Canon of the Episcopal
Church of Rothschild, or Prebend of St Laurence,[39] which had an annual
income of 1000 dollars, and which was burdened only with the expense of
keeping up the chapel containing the Mausolea of the Kings of the family
of Oldenburg.

     [39] This office had been usually conferred on the King's
     Chancellor.

It would be an unprofitable task, and one by no means interesting to the
general reader, to give a detailed history of the various astronomical
observations and discoveries which were made by Tycho during the twenty
years that he spent at Uraniburg. Every phenomenon that appeared in the
heavens, he observed with the greatest care; while he at the same time
carried on regular series of observations for determining the places of
the fixed stars, and for improving the tables of the sun, moon, and
planets. Though almost wholly devoted to these noble pursuits, yet he
kept an open house, and received, with unbounded hospitality, the crowds
of philosophers, nobles, and princes who came to be introduced to the
first astronomer of the age, and to admire the splendid temple which the
Danish Sovereign had consecrated to science.

Among the strangers whom he received under his roof, there were some who
returned his kindness with ingratitude. Among these was Paul Witichius,
a mathematician; who, under the pretence of devoting his whole life to
astronomy, insinuated himself into the utmost familiarity with Tycho.
The unsuspecting astronomer explained to his guest all his inventions,
described all his methods, and even made him acquainted with those views
which he had not realised, and with instruments which he had not yet
executed. When Witichius had thus obtained possession of the methods,
and inventions, and views of Tycho, and had enjoyed his hospitality for
three months, he pretended that he was obliged to return to Germany to
receive an inheritance to which he had succeeded. After quitting
Uraniburg, this ungrateful mathematician neither returned to see Tycho,
nor kept up any correspondence with him; and it was not till five years
after his departure that Tycho learned, from the letters of the Prince
of Hesse to Ranzau, that Witichius had passed through Hesse, and had
described, as his own, the various inventions and methods which had been
shewn to him in Huen.

Being unable to reconcile his own observations with those of Copernicus,
and with the Prutenic Tables, Tycho resolved to obtain new
determinations of the latitude of Frauenburg, in Prussia, where
Copernicus made his observations, and of Konigsberg, to the meridian of
which Rheinhold had adapted his Prutenic Tables. For these purposes he
sent one of his assistants, Elias Morsianus, with a proper instrument,
under the protection of Bylovius, Ambassador of the Margrave of Anspach,
to the King of Denmark, who was returning by sea to Germany; and after
receiving the greatest attention and assistance from the noble Canons
of Ermeland, he determined, from nearly a month's observations on the
sun and stars, that the latitude of Frauenburg was 54 deg. 22-1/2', in place of
54 deg. 19-1/2', as given by Copernicus. In like manner he determined that the
latitude of Konigsberg was 54 deg. 43', in place of 54 deg. 17', as adopted by
Rheinhold. When Morsianus returned to Huen in July, he brought with him,
as a present to Tycho, from John Hannovius, one of the Canons of
Ermeland, the Ptolemaic Rules, or the Parallactic Instrument which
Copernicus had used and made with his own hands. It consisted of two
equal wooden rules, five cubits long, and divided into 1414 parts. Tycho
preserved this gift as one peculiarly dear to him, and, on the day of
his receiving it, he composed a set of verses in honour of the great
astronomer to whom it belonged.

Among the distinguished visits which were paid to Tycho, we must
enumerate that of Ulric, Duke of Mecklenburg, in 1586. Although his
daughter, Sophia, Queen of Denmark, had already paid two visits to
Uraniburg in the same year, yet such was her love of astronomy, that she
accompanied her father and his wife Elizabeth on this occasion. Ulric
was not only fond of science in general, but had for many years devoted
himself to chemical pursuits, and he was therefore peculiarly gratified
in examining the splendid laboratory and extensive apparatus which Tycho
possessed. It has been said by some of the biographers of Tycho, that
the Landgrave of Hesse visited Uraniburg about this period; but this
opinion is not correct, as it was only his astronomer and optician,
Rothman, who made a journey to Huen in 1591 for the recovery of his
health. Tycho had long carried on a correspondence with this able
astronomer respecting the observations made at the observatory of
Hesse-Cassel, and, during the few months which they now spent together,
they discussed in the amplest manner all the questions which had
previously been agitated. Rothman was astonished at the wonderful
apparatus which he saw at Uraniburg, and returned to his native country
charmed with the hospitality of the Danish astronomer.

Hitherto we have followed Tycho through a career of almost unexampled
prosperity. When he had scarcely reached his thirtieth year he was
established, by the kindness and liberality of his sovereign, in the
most splendid observatory that had ever been erected in Europe; and a
thriving family, an ample income, and a widely extended reputation were
added to his blessings. Of the value of these gifts he was deeply
sensible, and he enjoyed them the more that he received them with a
grateful heart. Tycho was a christian as well as a philosopher. The
powers of his gifted mind have been amply displayed in his astronomical
labours; but we shall now have occasion to witness his piety and
resignation in submitting to an unexpected and an adverse destiny.




CHAPTER III.


     _Tycho's Labours do honour to his Country--Death of Frederick
     II.--James VI. of Scotland visits Tycho at Uraniburg--Christian IV.
     visits Tycho--The Duke of Brunswick's visit to Tycho--The Danish
     Nobility, jealous of his fame, conspire against him--He is
     compelled to quit Uraniburg--And to abandon his Studies--Cruelty of
     the Minister Walchendorp--Tycho quits Denmark with his Family and
     Instruments--Is hospitably received by Count Rantzau--Who
     introduces him to the Emperor Rudolph--The Emperor invites him to
     Prague--He gives him a Pension of 3000 Crowns--And the Castle of
     Benach as a Residence and an Observatory--Kepler visits Tycho--Who
     obtains for him the Appointment of Mathematician to Rudolph._


The love of astronomy which had been so unequivocally exhibited by
Frederick II. and his Royal Consort, inspired their courtiers with at
least an outward respect for science; and among the ministers and
advisers of the King, Tycho reckoned many ardent friends. It was every
where felt that Denmark had elevated herself among the nations of
Europe by her liberality to Tycho; and the peaceful glory which he had
in return conferred upon his country was not of a kind to dissatisfy
even rival nations. In the conquests of science no widow's or orphan's
tears are shed, no captives are dragged from their homes, and no devoted
victims are yoked to the chariot wheels of the triumphant philosopher.
The newly acquired domains of knowledge belong, in right of conquest, to
all nations, and Denmark had now earned the gratitude of Europe by the
magnitude as well as the success of her contingent.

An event, however, now occurred which threatened with destruction the
interests of Danish science. In the beginning of April 1588, Frederick
II. died in the 54th year of his age, and the 29th of his reign. His
remains were conveyed to Rothschild, and deposited in the chapel under
Tycho's care, where a finely executed bust of him was afterwards placed.
His son and successor, Christian IV., was only in the 11th year of his
age, and though his temper and disposition were good, yet Tycho had
reason to be alarmed at the possibility of his discontinuing the
patronage of astronomy. The taste for science, however, which had
sprung up in the Danish Court had extended itself no wider than the
influence of the reigning sovereign. The parasites of royalty saw
themselves eclipsed in the bright renown which Tycho had acquired, and
every new visit to Uraniburg by a foreign prince supplied fresh fuel to
the rancour which had long been smothering in their breasts. The
accession of a youthful king held out to his enemies an opportunity of
destroying the influence of Tycho; and though no adverse step was taken,
yet he had the sagacity to foresee, in "trifles light as air," the
approaching confirmation of his fears. Hope, however, still cheered him
amid his labours, but that hope was founded chiefly on the learning and
character of Nicolas Caasius, the Chancellor of the Kingdom, from whom
he had experienced the warmest attentions.

Among the princes who visited Uraniburg, there were none who conducted
themselves with more condescension and generosity than our own
sovereign, James VI. In the year 1590, when the Scottish King repaired
to Denmark to celebrate his marriage with the Princess Anne, the King's
sister, he paid a visit to Tycho, attended by his councillors and a
large suite of nobility. During the eight days which he spent at
Uraniburg, James carried on long discussions with Tycho on various
subjects, but chiefly on the motion which Copernicus had ascribed to the
earth. He examined narrowly all the astronomical instruments, and made
himself acquainted with the principles of their construction and the
method of using them. He inspected the busts and pictures in the museum,
and when he perceived the portrait of George Buchanan, his own
preceptor, he could not refrain from the strongest expressions of
delight. Upon quitting the hospitable roof of Tycho, James not only
presented him with a magnificent donation, but afterwards gave him his
royal license to publish his works in England during seventy years. This
license was accompanied with the following high eulogium on his
abilities and learning:--"Nor have I become acquainted with these things
