Matson chuckled. "Do him good to see how the other half lives." He
walked off, bearing drinks for the others. Governor Spanding grabbed one
and came over to the senator. "Jim! Ready to tear up your capitulation
speech now?"

Cannon glanced at his watch. "Almost. The polls closed in Nome just ten
minutes ago. We'll wait for the President's acknowledgment of defeat
before we go downstairs." He glanced at his brother, who was washing
something down with water.

Behind him, he heard Matson's voice saying: "I'm sure glad Horvin isn't
here! I can hear him now: 'Image! Image! That's what won the election!
Image!'" Matson guffawed. "Jim Cannon was winning elections by
landslides before he ever heard of Horvin! Jim Cannon projects his own
image."

"Sure he does," Matt Fisher said, "but what about me?"

"You? Hah! You're tops, Matt. Once a man gets to know you, he can see
that, if he's got any brains."

Fisher chuckled gently. "Ed, you've got what it takes to be a
politician, all right."

"So do you, Mr. Vice President! So do you! Hey!" He turned quickly. "We
got to have a toast! Doc, you're his brother. I think the honor should
be yours."

Dr. Frank Cannon, looking much more chipper since swallowing the pills,
beamed and nodded at his brother. "It will be a pleasure. Gentlemen,
come to attention, if you will." They did, grinning at first, then
forcing solemnity into their expressions.

"Gentlemen," said. Dr. Cannon gravely, "I give you my brother, Senator
James Harrington Cannon, the next President of the United States!"

"To the President!" said Governor Spanding.

"To the President!" chorused the others.

Glasses clinked and men drank solemnly.

Then, before anyone else could say anything, Dr. Cannon said: "I
further propose, gentlemen, that we drink to the man who will spend
the next four years in the White House--God willing--in the hope that
his ability to handle that high office will be equal to the task before
him, and that he will prove worthy of the trust placed in him by those
who had faith in that ability."

"Amen," said Congressman Matson softly.

And they all drank again.

Senator Cannon said: "I thank you, gentlemen. I--"

       *       *       *       *       *

But, at that moment, the ubiquitous clatter of noise from the television
abruptly changed tenor. They all turned to look.

"... And gentlemen," the announcer's voice was saying, "The President of
the United States!"

The Presidential Seal which had been pictured on the screen faded
suddenly, to be replaced by the face of the President. He looked firmly
resigned, but neither haggard, tired, defeated, nor unhappy. To the five
men who stood watching him in that room, it was obvious that the speech
to come was on tape.

The President smiled wanly. "Fellow Americans," he began, "as your
President, I wish both to congratulate you and thank you. As free
citizens of a free country, exercising your franchise of the ballot to
determine the men and women who are to represent and lead you during
their coming terms of office, you have made your decision. You have
considered well the qualifications of those men and women, and you
have considered well the problems that will face our country as a whole
and each individual as a free citizen desiring to remain free, and you
have made your choice accordingly, as is your right and duty. For that,
I congratulate you."

He paused for a dramatic moment.

"The decision, I think, was not an easy one. The citizens of our great
democracy are not sheep, to be led first this way and then that; they
are not dead leaves to be carried by every vagrant breeze that blows;
they are not children, nor are they fools."

He looked searchingly from the screen, as though to see into the minds
of every person watching.

"Do not mistake my meaning," he said levelly. "I do not mean that there
are no fools among us. There are." Again he paused for effect. "Every
man, every woman, who, through laziness or neglect or complacency,
failed to make his desire known at the polls in this election--is a
fool. Every citizen who thinks that his vote doesn't count for much, and
therefore fails to register that vote--is a fool. Every person who
accepts the _privileges_ of American citizenship and considers them as
_rights_, and who neglects the _duties_ of citizenship because they are
tiresome--is a fool."

He waited for half a second.

"Fortunately for us all, the fools are in a minority in our country.
This election shows that. Most of you have done your duty and followed
your conscience as you see fit. And I congratulate you for that."

The smile became less broad--by just the right amount.

"Four years ago, exercising that same privilege and duty, you, the
citizens of the United States, honored me and those who were working
with me by electing us to the highest offices in this nation. You
elected us, I believe, because we made certain promises to you--solemn
promises that were made in our platform four years ago."

He took a deep breath and folded his hands below his chin.

"I am certain that you all know we have endeavored to keep those
promises. I am certain that you know that we have kept faith with the
people of this nation."

He looked down for a moment, then looked up again.

"This year, in our platform, we made more promises. We outlined a
program that we felt would be of the greatest benefit to this nation."
He unclasped his hands and spread them with an open gesture.

"Senator James Cannon and his party have also made promises--promises
which, I am sure, they, too, feel are best for our nation."

Another pause.

"You, the citizens of the United States, have, in the past few months,
carefully weighed these promises against one another--weighing not only
the promises themselves, but the integrity and the ability of the men
who made them.

"And you have made your choice.

"I cannot, and do not, quarrel with that choice. It is the essence of
democratic government that disagreements in the upper echelons of that
government shall be resolved by the action and the will of the governed.
You, the people of the United States, have done just that.

"And--for that, I thank you."

A final hesitation.

"Next January, Senator James Harrington Cannon will be inaugurated as
President of the United States. Let us show him, and the men who are to
work with him, that we, as citizens of this great nation, resolving our
differences, will strive unceasingly under his administration to further
the high resolves and great ideals of our country.

"I believe--I _know_--that you are all with me in this resolution, and,
for that, too,--

"--I thank you."

The face of the President of the United States faded from the screen.

       *       *       *       *       *

After a few seconds, Matson sighed. "Not bad at all, really," he said,
stepping over to shut off the set. "He's been taking lessons from you,
Jim. But he just hasn't quite got it."

Senator Cannon took another swallow of his drink and said nothing.

"Sincerity," said Governor Spanding. "That's what's lacking. He hasn't
got it, and the voters can feel it."

"He managed to be elected President of the United States on it," Senator
Cannon said dryly.

Spanding didn't turn to look at Cannon; he kept looking at the dead TV
screen. "These things always show up by comparison, Jim. In comparison
with some of us--most of us, in fact--he looks pretty good. I've known
him since he was a fresh junior senator, and I was just attorney for the
House Committee for Legislative Oversight." He turned around. "You know
what, Jim? When I first heard him talk, I actually thought about
changing parties. Yeah. Really." He turned around again.

"But," he went on, "he's all hot air and no ability. Just like Matt,
here, is all ability and no hot air. No offense meant, Matt, believe
me," he added, glancing at Fisher.

"I know," Fisher said quietly.

Spanding turned around once more and looked Cannon squarely in the eyes.
"You've got both, Jim. The blarney to put yourself over, and the ability
to back it up. And you know I'm not trying to flatter you when I say
that."

When Cannon nodded wordlessly, Spanding gave himself a short,
embarrassed laugh. "Ah, Hell. I talk too much." And he took a hefty slug
of his drink.

Matthew Fisher took the overcharge out of the sudden outburst of emotion
by saying: "It's more than just ability and sincerity, Harry. There's
determination and honesty, too."

Matson said, "Amen to that."

