we're on the right track. Something an adult gets gives him resistance
or immunity." He shrugged. "Tell you what. You run those bloods out and
I'll go take another look at the data." He reached into his lab coat and
produced a pipe. "I'll give it another try."

"Sometimes I wish you'd read without puffing on that thing," Mary said.

"Your delicate nose will be the death of me yet--" Kramer said.

"It's my lungs I'm worried about," Mary said. "They'll probably look
like two pieces of well-tanned leather if I associate with you for
another year."

"Stop complaining. You've gotten me to wear clean lab coats. Be
satisfied with a limited victory," Kramer said absently, his eyes
staring unseeingly at a row of reagent bottles on the bench. Abruptly he
nodded. "Fantastic," he muttered, "but it's worth a check." He left the
room, slamming the door behind him in his hurry.

       *       *       *       *       *

"That man!" Mary murmured. "He'd drive a saint out of his mind. If I
wasn't so fond of him I'd quit. If anyone told me I'd fall in love
with a pathologist, I'd have said they were crazy. I wish--" Whatever
the wish was, it wasn't uttered. Mary gasped and coughed rackingly.
Carefully she moved back from the bench, opened a drawer and found a
thermometer. She put it in her mouth. Then she drew a drop of blood from
her forefinger and filled a red and white cell pipette, and made a smear
of the remainder.

She was interrupted by another spasm of coughing, but she waited until
the paroxysm passed and went methodically back to her self-appointed
task. She had done this many times before. It was routine procedure to
check on anything that might be Thurston's Disease. A cold, a sore
throat, a slight difficulty in breathing--all demanded the diagnostic
check. It was as much a habit as breathing. This was probably the result
of that cold she'd gotten last week, but there was nothing like being
sure. Now let's see--temperature 99.5 degrees, red cell count 4-1/2
million. White cell count ... oh! 2500 ... leukopenia! The differential
showed a virtual absence of polymorphs, lymphocytes and monocytes. The
whole slide didn't have two hundred. Eosinophils and basophils way
up--twenty and fifteen per cent respectively--a relative rise rather
than an absolute one--leukopenia, no doubt about it.

She shrugged. There wasn't much question. She had Thurston's Disease. It
was the beginning stages, the harsh cough, the slight temperature, the
leukopenia. Pretty soon her white cell count would begin to rise, but
it would rise too late. In fact, it was already too late. It's funny,
she thought. I'm going to die, but it doesn't frighten me. In fact, the
only thing that bothers me is that poor Walter is going to have a
terrible time finding things. But I can't put this place the way it was.
I couldn't hope to.

She shook her head, slid gingerly off the lab stool and went to the hall
door. She'd better check in at the clinic, she thought. There was bed
space in the hospital now. Plenty of it. That hadn't been true a few
months ago but the only ones who were dying now were the newborn and an
occasional adult like herself. The epidemic had died out not because of
lack of virulence but because of lack of victims. The city outside, one
of the first affected, now had less than forty per cent of its people
left alive. It was a hollow shell of its former self. People walked its
streets and went through the motions of life. But they were not really
alive. The vital criteria were as necessary for a race as for an
individual. Growth, reproduction, irritability, metabolism--Mary smiled
wryly. Whoever had authored that hackneyed mnemonic that life was a
"grim" proposition never knew how right he was, particularly when one of
the criteria was missing.

The race couldn't reproduce. That was the true horror of Thurston's
Disease--not how it killed, but who it killed. No children played in the
parks and playgrounds. The schools were empty. No babies were pushed in
carriages or taken on tours through the supermarkets in shopping
carts. No advertisements of motherhood, or children, or children's
things were in the newspapers or magazines. They were forbidden
subjects--too dangerously emotional to touch. Laughter and shrill young
voices had vanished from the earth to be replaced by the drab grayness
of silence and waiting. Death had laid cold hands upon the hearts of
mankind and the survivors were frozen to numbness.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was odd, she thought, how wrong the prophets were. When Thurston's
Disease broke into the news there were frightened predictions of the end
of civilization. But they had not materialized. There were no mass
insurrections, no rioting, no organized violence. Individual excesses,
yes--but nothing of a group nature. What little panic there was at the
beginning disappeared once people realized that there was no place to
go. And a grim passivity had settled upon the survivors. Civilization
did not break down. It endured. The mechanics remained intact. People
had to do something even if it was only routine counterfeit of normal
life--the stiff upper lip in the face of disaster.

It would have been far more odd, Mary decided, if mankind had given way
to panic. Humanity had survived other plagues nearly as terrible as
this--and racial memory is long. The same grim patience of the past was
here in the present. Man would somehow survive, and civilization go
on.

It was inconceivable that mankind would become extinct. The whole vast
resources and pooled intelligence of surviving humanity were focused
upon Thurston's Disease. And the disease would yield. Humanity waited
with childlike confidence for the miracle that would save it. And the
miracle would happen, Mary knew it with a calm certainty as she stood in
the cross corridor at the end of the hall, looking down the thirty yards
of tile that separated her from the elevator that would carry her up to
the clinic and oblivion. It might be too late for her, but not for the
race. Nature had tried unaided to destroy man before--and had failed.
And her unholy alliance with man's genius would also fail.

She wondered as she walked down the corridor if the others who had
sickened and died felt as she did. She speculated with grim amusement
whether Walter Kramer would be as impersonal as he was with the others,
when he performed the post-mortem on her body. She shivered at the
thought of that bare sterile room and the shining table. Death was not a
pretty thing. But she could meet it with resignation if not with
courage. She had already seen too much for it to have any meaning. She
did not falter as she placed a finger on the elevator button.

Poor Walter--she sighed. Sometimes it was harder to be among the living.
It was good that she didn't let him know how she felt. She had sensed a
change in him recently. His friendly impersonality had become merely
friendly. It could, with a little encouragement, have developed into
something else. But it wouldn't now. She sighed again. His hardness had
been a tower of strength. And his bitter gallows humor had furnished a
wry relief to grim reality. It had been nice to work with him. She
wondered if he would miss her. Her lips curled in a faint smile. He
would, if only for the trouble he would have in making chaos out of the
order she had created. Why couldn't that elevator hurry?

