again. "Always some kind of work available although there do seem to be
more Suspendeds all the time. Robot repair--that's good! Always a
shortage there."

So Connor went to work in a large building downtown along with several
hundred other men whose principal duty was overseeing the repair of
robot servitors by other servitors and rectifying any minor errors that
persisted. He was pleased to find that, while some of his fellow workmen
knew much more about the work than he did, there were as many who knew
less. But the most pleasing thing of all was the way they cooperated
with one another. They could not reach directly into each other's minds
but the very denial of this power gave them a sense of common need.

       *       *       *

He visited Newbridge once a week and that, too, proved increasingly
helpful. As time went on, he found he was spending less of it regretting
what he had lost. But once in a while a paraNormal came through the
workshop, eyes moving past the Suspendeds as if they did not exist and
the old resentment would return in all its bitterness. And when he
himself did not feel this way he could still sense it in men around him.

"Perfectly natural way to feel," Rhoda said, "not that it serves any
purpose."

"It's paraNormal lack of reaction," he tried to explain, "that's what
really bothers me. They don't even bother to notice our hatred because
we have the strength of insects next to theirs. They can all draw on
each others' resources and that totals to infinitely more than any of us
have, even if as individuals they're so much less. The perfect form of
security."

But for a moment one day that security seemed to be collapsing. Above
the work floor in Connor's factory there was a gallery of small but
luxurious offices in which the executive staff of paraNormals 'worked.'
None of them came in more than two days a week but use of these offices
was rotated among them so all were ordinarily occupied and workers,
going upstairs to the stock depot, could see paraNormals in various
stages of relaxation. Usually the paraNormal kept his feet on a desk
rest and, eyes closed, contemplated incoming entertainment. On rarer
occasions he would be leaning over a document on the desk as his mind
received the proper decision from Central.

This particular morning Connor was feeling bitterly envious as he went
by the offices. He had already seen seven smugly-similar faces when he
came by Room Eight. Suddenly the face of its occupant contorted in
agony, then the man got up and paced about as if in a trap. Deciding he
had seen more than was good for him, Connor hurried on. But the man in
Nine was acting out the same curious drama. He quickly retraced his
steps, passing one scene of consternation after another, and went back
down to the work floor, wondering what it all meant.

Soon everybody knew something extraordinary was afoot as all the
paraNormals swarmed noisily onto the runway overlooking the floor. They
were shouting wordless sounds at each other, floundering about as they
did so. Then, with equal suddenness, everything was calm again and,
faces more relaxed, they went back into their offices.

That evening Connor heard the same story everywhere--for ten minutes all
paraNormals had gone berserk. On the monorail he noticed that, though
still more relaxed than their unwelcome fellows, they no longer exuded
that grating _absolute_ sense of security. No doubt about it--for a few
minutes something had gone wrong, completely wrong, with the Central
System. "I don't like it," Rhoda said. "Let's see Dr. Newbridge
tomorrow."

"I'll bet it's a good sign."

Newbridge, though, was also worried when they got to see him. "They're
losing some of their self-confidence," he said, "and that means they're
going to start noticing us. Figure it out, Newman, about one-third the
population of Earth--nobody can get exact figures--is outside the
System. The paraNormals will want to reduce our numbers if more
breakdowns take place. I'll have to go into hiding soon."

"But why you of all people?" Connor protested.

"Because I and a few thousand others like me represent not only an
alternative way of life--all Suspendeds do that--but we possess more
intensive knowledge for rehabilitating society after Central's collapse.
That collapse may come much sooner than we've been expecting. When it
does we're going to have enormous hordes of paras milling around,
helplessly waiting to learn how to think for themselves again. Well,
when we finally reach the telepath stage next time we'll have to manage
it better." He took out an envelope. "If anything happens to me, this
contains the names of some people you're to contact."

"Why don't you come to our place now?" asked Rhoda. "We'll still be able
to hold it for a few more months."

"Can't go yet, too many things to clear up. But maybe later." He rose
and extended his hand to them. "Anyway it's a kind--and brave--offer."

"Sounds overly melodramatic to me," Connor said when they were outside.
"Who'd want to harm a psychiatric worker with no knowledge except what's
in his head and his personal library?"

       *       *       *

But he stopped harping on the point when they reached the monorail
station. Three Suspendeds, obviously better educated than most, were
being led away by a large group of paraNormals. The paraNormals had
their smug expressions back but there was a strange gleam of
determination in their eyes. "Sometimes life itself gets overly
melodramatic," Rhoda said nervously.

The possible fate of these arrested men haunted him all the way home as
did the hostile stares of the people in the monorail car. At home,
though, there was the momentary consolation of a pair of letters from
the boys. There was little information in them but they did at least
convey in every line love for their parents.

But even this consolation did not last long. Why, Connor muttered to
himself, did they have to wait for letters when telephone and radio
systems could have eased their loneliness so much more effectively?
Because the paras did not need such systems and their needs were the
only ones that mattered! His fingers itched to achieve something more
substantial than the work, now childishly routine, that he was doing at
the factory. Just from studying Max he knew he could devise such
workable communication systems. But all that was idle daydreaming--it
wouldn't be in his lifetime.

The next morning Rhoda insisted they go back into the city to try once
more to persuade Newbridge to leave. When they arrived at the Harker
