for an hour.

Two weeks later he watched for the carcass of the beast to rise. He felt
now that his problem was to get rid of it so that it would not pollute
the water, but it did not appear.

With fear and trembling Omega observed that the water of the lake was
receding inch by inch. Then by chemical action on the coral beds and on
the rocks, he created a dense cloud and caused it to form over the lake,
thus in a measure protecting it from the sun's rays. But day by day,
despite the sheltering cloud, the water receded. Day after day Omega
moved his gauges hoping against hope that somehow and somewhere nature
would again awaken and bring water upon the earth.

During all these days and months the monster did not raise its head
above the surface of the lake--Omega was certain of this, for had the
water been disturbed ever so little his water seismograph, as well as
his cameras, would have recorded it. The monster was dead at last and
they were profoundly thankful. They were the undisputed masters of the
earth's last water! Now Alpha could play about the shore and swim in the
shallow water in peace and safety. So the dangerous fence was removed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Omega knew that in the beginning the Creator had made man master of his
own destiny. He had endowed him with reason and given the earth into his
keeping. Omega thoroughly understood the Ruling Power of the universe.
He read aright His commands, blazoned across the breasts of billions of
worlds, and by the same token he knew that humanity on earth was doomed.
Yet he was urged on by that unconquerable spirit which had made man king
of all. He set up his rain-making machinery with the smile of a
fatalist. For hundreds of miles its sinuous beams sprang into the sky,
writhed about like great, hungry serpents with their tremendous sucking
and receiving maws, then coiled back to earth bringing not a drop. But
one day the Mirror again showed small, faint clouds upon its surface.
They were scattered over various parts of the world and their presence
made Omega wonder. There appeared to be no reason for them.

"I do not understand those clouds," he said to Thalma as he sat with her
and Alpha in the shade of the coral tree. "Perhaps there are hidden
places of moisture, that have escaped the receiving rays of this
mirror."

"Let us go and see," exclaimed Thalma, her eyes agleam with a new hope.
"Let us make another voyage around the world. Alpha has never been far
from home."

"That is so," he agreed. "We will go at once."

So they entered the silver ship and sailed away over the hot, dry
wastes, on and on over the cities of antiquity. The ruins of New York,
London, Paris and other marts of the ancients were visited in their
melancholy quest for life. But even the sites of these cities were hard
to find. Only the tops of the tallest structures, such as the tip of the
Washington monument and the towers of office buildings stood above the
ashes and sands of centuries. But not even the shadow of a cloud was
seen. Still they sailed on--even skirted the dark wastes of the poles
and stopped in deep valleys to test for water. Twice around the
equatorial regions they voyaged in search of a new and better haven, but
in vain. The insistent cry for water burned in their souls and led them
back to the little lake--the last sop nature had to offer the remnant of
her children.

       *       *       *       *       *

Although the days were still hot and blistering, the nights were cold,
ice often forming on the lake near the shore and lingering until touched
by the advancing sun. Omega understood, and again a cold fear clutched
his heart. Unless by some miracle of the heavens sufficient moisture
should come back to the earth, no human soul could long endure the heat
of the day and the freezing temperature of night.

To still further conserve the precious water of the lake, Omega now
extended the folds of the cloud curtain down to its shores thus
completely enclosing it. And as this further reduced the evaporation to
a remarkable extent the hopes of Omega and Thalma took on new life. Here
they visioned Alpha and his children living and dying in peace, now that
the monster was no more. With the help of additional safeguards Omega
reckoned that the water might be made to last many more years, and,
before it could become wholly exhausted, some whim of nature might again
shower the earth with rain.

Now to pass the time--for there was nothing to do except to direct the
appliances about them--this last trio of mortals loved to leave the
shelter of the cottage, now that they had nothing further to fear from
the sea-monster, when the westering sun was low, and ramble among the
shadows of the cliffs and commune with the past, until the chill of
night drove them indoors. Sometimes sitting there in the dusk Thalma and
Alpha would listen to Omega's rich voice as he recounted an epic story
in the life of long ago. So to-day seated together on a cliff above the
airship, they watched the sun descend. Thalma and Alpha had asked for a
story, but Omega refused. For some time he had sat silent, his great,
brilliant eyes on the flaming sun as it sank toward the rim of the
earth. A great loneliness had suddenly seized him. He recognized it as a
presentiment of disaster. It was beyond the analysis of reason, but for
the first time in his life he longed to hold back that sun. Somehow he
feared the advent of the night. It seemed to him that before the morning
light would again flood the earth a dire calamity would befall them.

"Why so sad?" asked Thalma fearfully, and Alpha, at his father's knees,
looked up in wonder.

"It is nothing," replied Omega with forced composure as he caressed the
boy. "Some foolish thoughts of mine. Now as it is getting chilly I think
we had better go down. Oh, how I dread this awful cold which is creeping
steadily and mercilessly over the world!" he added softly, his eyes
lingering on the sun.

With her usual sweet smile Thalma agreed. So they rose and floated down.
When they reached the floor of the valley they paused and regarded the
cloud that screened the lake.

"It does well," remarked Omega. "It will make the water last into the
years."

"Yes, and all for our boy," said Thalma proudly. Alpha had left them and
was playing along the shore.

"It is now time that a mate for him be on the way," went on Omega
wistfully. "He must have a sister, you know."

"It is true," she agreed with a glad smile.

Omega had spoken truly. Without a mate Alpha could not perpetuate the
race. And so it was arranged that before the rising of the morrow's sun
a new life should begin.

Science had steadily advanced the span of life. When Alpha was born
Omega was two hundred years old, but that was only middle age. Thalma
was twenty-five years his junior. The human birth-rate had decreased
with the passing of the centuries and nature now demanded the most
exacting conditions for the propagation of the human species. Thalma at
her age could not afford to wait longer. Alpha's mate must be provided
forthwith.

"Alpha wants to play a while before going in," Thalma continued
presently. "I will remain with him."

"Very well, dear," said Omega. "I will go on and prepare dinner."

So saying he set his face toward the cottage, but before he had taken a
dozen steps he was startled by a piercing scream from Thalma. He turned
swiftly, then stood paralyzed with terror and amazement. Out of the
cloud curtain surrounding the lake protruded the ugly scale-covered head
and neck of the monster he had believed dead! And the horrible, swaying
head was darting down toward the playing boy! The monster's jaws were
spread wide, its black tongue was leaping out and in like lightning, the
sickening saliva was dripping upon the sand, and its awful eyes were
blazing like coals. And then in a twinkling the huge jaws seized the
child, the head reared back, the jaws closed, stifling the lad's
screams, and it started to draw back into the cloud.

       *       *       *       *       *

But, after the first onrush of horror, life came again to Omega's numbed
senses. He darted forward with a mad cry, and as he swung through the
air rather than ran, he seized a stone and hurled it at the brute's
head. His aim was true and the stone struck the great brute on the bony
hood above the right eye. It did not harm, but it maddened the monster.
Hissing horribly it swung Alpha high in the air and with a fling dashed
him down upon the rocks. Then with a hoarse bellow it turned upon Omega.
With its first forward lunge it seemed about to crush Thalma, who was
between it and its intended victim. But the sight of her mangled child
and the danger to her lord roused all the latent fury and courage in her
soul and made of her a fighting demon. Like Omega she grabbed the first
weapon at hand--a stone the size of a man's fist--and with the hot
breath of the monster in her face she hurled the stone with all her
strength straight into the red, gaping mouth.

With a blood-curdling scream the brute halted, reared backward, then ran
its head back and forth over the rocks. Its loathsome body threshed
about in the lake, throwing water far up on the beach. Then in its
contortions it wallowed up out of the lake as it swung its terrible head
about in agony, all the while hissing its challenge.

Terror-stricken, unable to move, Omega and Thalma watched it and could
not understand its writhings. But as it continued to writhe and groan
they understood at last--the stone had lodged firmly in its throat and
was choking it to death.

Then they sprang to Alpha's side. Omega gathered him up in his arms, but
he saw with one agonized glance that he was dead. His skull was crushed
and it appeared that every bone in his body was broken.

