"Good. I'll give the orders, but I want the money, the fifty million. It
is not much, but part of it will help keep the Big Boys in line. Some of
them won't like the idea very much."

"A little cash will influence them. Now, how about taking you back to
the city?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Winifred Willowby made preparations for entertaining his one hundred
guests. His largest office was transformed into an assembly room. Its
inch-thick carpets, overstuffed chairs and mahogany trimmings gave it an
air of luxuriant comfort. There were special chairs for the Big Boys and
two very special chairs for the Old Man and the Host of the evening. A
large picture frame, hanging on one wall, and carefully covered, gave a
hint as to part of the evening's ceremony.

The Empire Trust belonged to Willowby. He had built it so that he could
have a private office on the top floor, the sixty-third from the ground.
The elevator reached this floor, but there were no steps. Many buildings
surpassed it in height, but none in the view that it gave of the city.
The guests who arrived first commented on the view and expanded their
chests when they realized that they carried that city in their vest
pockets.

At last every chair was occupied. It was a peculiar gathering. It
included judges, politicians, pseudo-business men, several lawyers and
even the Mayor of one of the largest cities in the Mississippi Valley.
Facing them, sat the Old Man and Willowby.

Of the hundred men in the audience not one was at his ease. Most had
come because they were afraid to stay away. Many hoped that they would
not be recognized. The majority doubted the wisdom of such a meeting and
felt that the Old Man was slipping mentally. It was the first time that
many of them had even seen him. He was almost as much of an unknown to
them as the little man sitting next to him. A peculiar silence hung over
the assembly. More than one man fondled the handle of his automatic. No
one seemed to be sure of what was going to happen next. It was a
fortunate thing that the meeting was held at night; with the audience
composed of such men. A daylight gathering would have been impossible.

The Old Man and Willowby held a short whispered conference, and then the
leader of American Racketeers stood up. What had been silence before,
now became the hush of death. The Old Man was going to talk, and
everyone wanted to hear what he had to say. It did not take him long to
start.

"You Big Boys have been running the cities before," he growled, "but
from tonight on we are going to run the country. Congress and the
Supreme Court are going to dance to our music and like it. Our new
friend here has promised to deliver the goods, and he does not want much
in return. I have told him that we will trade, and what I say goes. Now,
you boys listen to Willowby, and remember that I am back of him."

Then he sat down. As far as the records are concerned, that was the
longest speech the Old Man made in his life. The Boys hardly knew what
to do; they felt they should applaud, but not being certain remained
quiet. Then Willowby stood up.

"I do not want very much, gentlemen," he remarked. "I only want to be
the next President of the United States, and I can be, with your help.
Let me show you a picture."

He walked over to the covered picture, pulled a cord and unveiled it and
there, life size, were the Old Man and Willowby shaking hands. Anyone
could tell who they were and what they were doing. That brought the
house down. Everybody felt that it was time for a little noise. Some of
them, who knew the Big Boy well enough, went up and congratulated him on
the new political alliance. In the confusion, Winifred Willowby slipped
out of the room and no one noticed his absence.

But some one did notice the sideboard and started to sample the bottles.
Soon everyone was drinking a little. But the Old Man did not drink. He
just sat there, moodily chewing his cigar and wondering how much of the
fifty million he could keep for his share.

Nobody saw the first rat. It dropped from behind the picture and ran
under a chair. The next rat did the same. Perhaps fifty rats were in the
room before their presence was noticed. By that time they were coming
faster, by the dozen, by the hundred. That was different. One rat in a
large room meant nothing. A hundred, five hundred in the same room could
mean almost anything.

And now they were literally pouring out from back of the picture. A
cursing man pulled it to the floor and there was a large hole in the
wall, two feet in diameter, and out of that hole the rats were pouring,
big brown, hungry rats, dropping to the floor and starting to hunt for
food. The puzzled men jumped up on top the chairs; the rats stood on
their hind legs and looked at the large chunks of food with black beady,
binoculars. The Old Man just sat there, chewing his cigar and cursing.
He knew what it all meant seconds before anyone else.

A number of the most fearful men made a dash for the elevator. They were
driven back by a torrent of rats climbing up the elevator shaft. Then
_fear came--and panic_. With gun and heel, and broken chairs for clubs,
they started in to kill rats, and for every one they killed, a hundred
fastened to them with chisel teeth. To make it worse, the lights went
out, and they were there in the dark, with mutilation as a beginning and
death as an ending, and still the rats poured into the room, up the
elevator shaft and out of the hole in the wall.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Old Man walked across the room, kicking the struggling bodies of his
followers out of his pathway. Rats ran up his legs and tried to bite his
hands, his face; he swept them off him as a tiger would wipe ants off
his fur; at last he came to the window. There was the city of New York
in front of him, the city of a million twinkling lights, the tomb of a
billion dead hopes; the Morgue of a Nation, covered by laughing, painted
faces. He raised the sash and sat on the sill.

"Damn Willowby!" he said. "What a fool I was. But I am going to die
clean. No rat is going to send me to Hell!"

And then he dropped.

In the room the struggle kept on--for an hour and then two. At last the
screaming ceased, and the only sound was the gnawing of the rats, the
crunching of their teeth and their satisfied, little squeaks of
pleasure.

