bellows and would take a plate the same size as that picture of the
church I had seen.

"You see?" Lana said. "It's just a camera." She smiled disarmingly.

       *       *       *       *       *

I went toward it casually, and suddenly I stopped as though another mind
controlled my actions. When I gave up the idea I had had of smashing the
camera, the control vanished.

There was no lens in the lens frame. "Where's the lens?" I said.

"It doesn't use a glass lens," Lana said. "When I take the picture a
lens forms just long enough to focus the elements of your body into a
Mantram fix." She touched my shoulder. "Would you sit down over there,
please?"

"What do you mean by a Mantram fix?" I asked her.

She paused by the camera and smiled at me. "I use your language," she
said. "In some of your legends you have the notion of a Mantram, or what
you consider magical spell. In one aspect the notion is of magical words
that can manipulate natural forces directly. The notion of a devil doll
is a little closer. Only instead of actual substance from the
subject--hair, fingernail parings, and so on--the Mantram matrix takes
the detailed force pattern of the subject, through the lens when it
forms. So, in your concepts, what results is an iconic Mantram. But it
operates both ways. You'll see what I mean by that."

With another placating smile she stepped behind the camera and without
warning light seemed to explode from the very air around me, without any
source. For a brief second I seemed to see--not a glittering lens--but a
black bottomless hole form in the metal circle at the front of the
camera. And--an experience I am familiar with now--I seemed to rush into
the bottomless darkness of that hole and back again, at the rate of
thousands of times a second, arriving at some formless destination and
each time feeling it take on more of form.

"There. That wasn't so bad, was it?" Lana said.

I felt strangely detached, as though I were in two places at the same
time. I told her so.

"You'll get used to it," she assured me. "In fact, you will get to enjoy
it. _I_ do. Especially when I've made several prints."

"Why are you doing this?" I asked. "Who are you? _What_ are you?"

"I'm a photographer!" Lana said. "I'm connected with the natural history
museum of the planet I live on. I go to various places and take
pictures, and they go into exhibits for the people to watch."

She pulled the curtain aside for me to leave.

"You're going to let me leave? Just like that?" I said.

"Of course." She smiled again. "You're free to go wherever you wish, to
your aunt's or back to Chicago. I was glad to get your portrait. In
return, I'll send you one of the prints. And would you like one of your
aunt's? Actually, when she came in to have her picture taken it was for
the purpose of sending it to you. She was my first customer. I've taken
a special liking to her and given her several pictures."

"Yes," I said. "I would like one of Aunt Matilda."

When I emerged from the shop I discovered to my surprise that the train
was just pulling into the depot. An urge to get far away from Sumac
possessed me. I trotted to the cafe to get my bag, and when the train
pulled out I was on it.

       *       *       *       *       *

There's little more to tell. In Chicago once again, I spent a most
exasperating two days trying to inform the F.B.I., the police, or anyone
who would listen to me. My fingers couldn't dial the correct phone
number, and at the crucial moment each time I grew tongue-tied. My last
attempt was a letter to the F.B.I., which I couldn't remember to mail,
and when I finally did remember I couldn't find it.

Then the express package from Sumac came. With fingers that visibly
trembled I took out the two framed pictures, one of Aunt Matilda in the
process of dusting the front room. All of her pictures that she had
hidden from me were back in their places on the walls. While I watched
her move about, she went into the sewing room, and there I saw a picture
on the wall that looked familiar.

It was of me, an opened express package at my feet, a framed picture
held in my hands, and I was staring at it intently.

In the picture I was holding, Aunt Matilda looked in my direction and
waved, smiling in the prim way she smiles when she is contented. I
understood. She had me with her now.

I laid the picture down carefully, and took the second one out of the
box.

It was not a picture at all, it was a mirror!

It couldn't be anything except a mirror. And yet, suddenly, I realized
it wasn't. The uncanny feeling came over me that I had transposed into
the mirror and was looking out at myself. Even as I got that feeling I
shifted and was outside the mirror looking at my image.

I found that I could be in either place by a sort of mental shift,
something like staring at one of the geometrical optical illusions you
can find in any psychology textbook in the chapter on illusions, and
seeing it become something else.

It was strange at first, then it became fun, and now, as I write this,
it is a normal thing. My portrait is where it should be--on the medicine
cabinet in the bathroom, where the mirror used to be.

But I can transpose to any of the copies of my portrait, anywhere. To
Aunt Matilda's sewing room, or to the museum, or to Lana's private
collection. The only thing is, it's almost impossible to tell when I
shift, or where I shift to. It just seems to happen.

The reason for that is that my surroundings, no matter in what direction
I look, are exactly identical with my real surroundings. My physical
surroundings are duplicated exactly in all my portraits, just as Aunt
