Canary Islands, perhaps?" she asked in an awed voice.

"I know the Western Sea," he said. "Trust me."

She came very close. She looked long in his eyes. "I trust you, Martin.
Oh yes, I trust you. Listen, Martin. I'm going. I'm going with you. I
have to go with you."

"But a girl--"

"He is my father. I love him, Martin. He needs me. Martin, don't try to
stop me. I want you to help me aboard, to see that he ... oh, Martin,
you'll have so much to do. Because the rest of our crew--some of them
being hired even now by the three caravel pursers--will be a crew of
cut-throats and ne'er-do-wells embarking into the unknown because they
have utterly nothing to lose. Father needs you because the others won't
care."

"The three caravels will sail west," Danny told her. "Believe me,
they'll sail west. Now, get some sleep."

Her face was still very close. Her eyes filled with tears, but they were
not tears of sadness. She took his cheeks in her hands and kissed him
softly on the lips. She smiled at him, her own lips trembling.

"Martin," she said.

His arms moved. They went around her, drew the softness of her close.
She murmured something, but he did not hear it. His lips found hers a
second time, fiercely. His hands her shoulder, her throat, her ...

"Flat," Columbus mumbled. "Flat. Abs'lutely flat. The Earth is--flat as
a pancake...."

"Oh, Martin!" Nina cried.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was raining in the morning. A hard, driving rain, pelting down on the
seaport of Palos. The three caravels floated side by side in the little
harbor and a large, derisive crowd had gathered. The crowd erupted into
noisy laughter when Columbus and his little party appeared on foot.

"I need a drink," Columbus whispered. "I can't go through with it."

"Father," Nina said. "We're with you. I'm here. Martin is here."

"I can't go--"

"You've got to go through with it! For yourself and for the world. Now,
stand straight, father. They're looking at you. They're all looking at
you."

Columbus, thought Danny. The intrepid voyager who had discovered a new
world! He smiled grimly. Columbus, the history books should have said,
the drunken sot who didn't even have the courage to face his own
convictions.

They walked ahead through the ridiculing crowd. Danny's throat was still
sore. He was not frightened, though. He possibly was the only man in the
crew who was not frightened. The others didn't care what their
destination was, true: but they wanted to reach it alive. Danny knew the
journey would end in success. The end of the journey meant nothing to
him. It was written in history. It was ...

Unless, he suddenly found himself thinking, I came back here to write
it. He grinned at his own bravado. What would they have said in freshman
psych--that was practically paranoid thinking. As if Danny Jones,
Whitney College, Virginia, U.S.A., could have anything to do with the
success or failure of Columbus' journey.

They reached the small skiff that would take them out to the tiny fleet
of caravels. The crowd hooted and jeered.

"... going to drop off the edge of the world, Columbus."

"If the monsters don't get you first."

"Or the storms and whirlpools."

Columbus gripped Nina's hand. Martin-Danny took his other arm firmly and
steered him toward the prow of the skiff. "Easy now, skipper," Danny
said.

"I can't--"

"There's wine on the Santa Maria," Danny whispered. "Much wine--to make
you forget. Come on!"

"And I'm going, father," Nina said. "Whether you go or not."

"You!" Columbus gasped. "A girl. You, going--"

"With Martin Pinzon. If--if my own father can't look after me, then
Martin can."

"But you--" Danny began.

"Be quiet, please," she whispered as Columbus climbed stiffly into the
skiff. "It may be the only way, Martin. He--he loves me. I guess I'm the
only thing he cares about. If he knows I'm going."

"To the Santa Maria!" Columbus told the rowers as Danny and Nina got
into the skiff.

"To the New World!" cried Danny melodramatically.

"What did you say?" Nina asked him.

His face colored. "I mean, to the Indies! To the Indies!"

The skiff bobbed out across the harbor toward the three waiting
caravels. Departure time had arrived.

Two hours later, they were underway.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sea was calm as glass, green as emerald. The three caravels, after a
journey of several days, had reached the Canary Islands where additional
provisions and fresh water were to be had.

"This," said Columbus, waving his arms to take in the chain of islands.
"This is as far as a mere man has a right to go. There is nothing
further, can't you see? Can't you?"

He was sober. Danny had come over in a skiff from the Nina to see that
he remained sober at least for the loading and the departure. It was
as if he, Danny, was going to preserve Columbus' name for
history--single-handed if necessary.

"We will not go on," Columbus said. "We're going back. The only way to
the Indies is around the Cape of Storms, around Africa. I tell you--"

"That's enough, father," Nina said. "We ..."

"I'm in command here," Columbus told them. It surprised Danny. Usually,
the drunken sailor was not so self-assertive. Then it occurred to Danny
that it wasn't merely self-assertiveness: it was fear.

Danny called over the mate, a one-legged man named Juan, who walked with
a jaunty stride despite his peg leg. "You take orders from Columbus?"
Danny said. "Would you take orders from me?"

Juan shook his head, smiling. "You command aboard the Nina only, Martin
Pinzon. I heard what the Captain said. If he wants to go back and give
up this fool scheme, it's all right with me. And you know the rest of
the crew will say the same."

Nina looked at Danny hopelessly. She said, "Then, then it's no use?"

Danny whispered fiercely, "Your father loves you very much?"

"Yes, but--"

"And doesn't want to see anything happen to you?"

