with the housework."

So we put the girl mech right to work making the guests' beds and
helping Min in the kitchen. I guess she was grateful for the job but
when the work was done, and there wasn't anything for her to do, she
just stood in front of a viewport with her slender plastic arms folded
over her waist. Min and I knew she was re-running her memory tapes of
Frank.

A week later the publicity started. Minor Planets must have let the
story leak out somehow because when the mail rocket dropped off the Bay
Area papers there was Frank's picture plastered all over page one with
follow-up stories inside.

I read some of the headlines to Min: "Bare Love Nest in Space ... Mech
Romeo Fired by Minor Planets ... Test Case Opens at Robot Court ...
Electronics Experts Probe Robot Love Urge ..."

The Io wasn't mentioned, but later Minor Planets must have released the
whole thing officially because a bunch of reporters and photographers
rocketed out to interview us and snap a lot of pictures of Elizabeth. We
worried for a while about how the publicity would affect our business
relations with Minor Planets but nothing happened.

Back on Earth Frank Nineteen leaped into the public eye overnight. There
was something about the story that appealed to people. At first it
looked pretty bad for Frank. The State Prosecutor at Robot Court had his
signed confession of theft and--what was worse--robot fraternization.
But then, near the end of the trial, a young scientist named Scott
introduced some new evidence and the case was remanded to the Sacramento
Court of Appeals.

It was Scott's testimony that saved Frank from the junk pile. The big
servo got off with only a light sentence for theft because the judge
ruled that in the light of Scott's new findings robots came under human
law and therefore no infraction of justice had been committed. Working
independently in his own laboratory Scott had proved that the magnetic
flux lines in male and female robot systems, while at first
deteriorating to both, were actually behaving according to the
para-emotional theories of von Bohler. Scott termed the condition
'hysteric puppy-love' which, he claimed, had many of the advantages of
human love if allowed to develop freely. Well, neither Min nor I
pretended we understood all his equations but they sure made a stir
among the scientists.

Frank kept getting more and more publicity. First we heard he was
serving his sentence in the mech correction center at La Jolla, then we
got a report that he'd turned up in Hollywood. Later it came out that
Galact-A-vision Pictures had hired Frank for a film and had gone $10,000
bail for him. Not long after that he was getting billed all over Terra
as _the_ sensational first robot star.

All during the production of _Forbidden Robot Love_ Frank remained lead
copy for the newspapers. Reporters liked to write him up as the
Valentino of the Robots. Frank Nineteen Fan Clubs, usually formed by
lonely female robots against their employers' wishes, sprang up
spontaneously through the East and Middle West. Then somebody found out
Frank could sing and the human teen-agers began to go for him. It got
so everywhere you looked and everything you read, there was Frank
staring you in the face. Frank in tweeds on the golf course. Frank at
Ciro's or the Brown Derby in evening clothes. Frank posing in his sports
jetabout against a blue Pacific background.

Meanwhile everybody forgot about Elizabeth Seven. The movie producers
had talked about hiring her as Frank's leading lady until they found out
about a new line of female robots that had just gone on the market. When
they screen-tested the whole series and picked a lovely Mylar
rationaloid named Diana Twelve, it hit Elizabeth pretty hard. She began
to let herself go after that and Min and I didn't have the heart to say
anything to her. It was pretty obvious she wasn't oiling herself
properly, her hair wasn't brushed and she didn't seem to care when one
of her photons went dead.

When _Forbidden Robot Love_ premiered simultaneously in Hollywood and
New York the critics all gave it rave reviews. There were pictures of
Diana Twelve and Frank making guest appearances all over the country.
Back at the Io we got in the habit of letting Elizabeth watch TV with us
sometimes in the Renting Office and one night there happened to be an
interview with Frank and Diana at the Sands Hotel in Las Vegas. I guess
seeing the pretty robot starlet and her Frank sitting so close together
in the nightclub must have made the girl mech feel pretty bad. Even then
she didn't say a word against the big servo; she just never watched the
set again after that.

When we tabbed up the Io's receipts that year they were so good Min and
I decided to take a month off for an Earthside vacation. Min's retired
brother in Berkeley was nice enough to come out and look after the place
for us while we spent four solid weeks soaking up the sun in Southern
California. When we got back out to the spotel, though, I could see
there was something wrong by the look on Jim's face.

"It's that girl robot of yours, Bill," he said. "She's gone and
deactivated herself."

We went right to 22A and found Elizabeth Seven stretched out on the
floor. There was a screwdriver clutched in her hand and the relay banks
in her side were exposed and horribly blackened.

"Crazy mech shorted out her own DX," Jim said.

Min and I knew why. After Jim left for Earth we dismantled Elizabeth the
best we could and put her back in Frank's old locker. We didn't know
what else to do with her.

Anyway, the slack season came and went and before long we were doing
the spring cleaning again and wondering how heavy the Jovian Moons trade
was going to be. I remember I'd been making some repairs outside and was
just hanging up my spacesuit in the Renting Office when I heard the
radar announcing a ship.

It was the biggest Marvin 990 I'd ever seen that finally suctioned up to
the boom and secured. I couldn't take my eyes off the ship. She was
pretty near the last word in rockets and loaded with accessories. It
took me a minute or two before I noticed all the faces looking out of
the viewports.

"Min!" I whispered. "There's something funny about those faces. They
look like--"

"Robots!" Min answered. "Bill, that 990 is full of mechs!"

