

OPENINGS IN THE CHAMBER.

In order to communicate with the interior of the chamber, maintain a
ventilating air-current, and provide for the passage of the current of
water for the heat-absorber system and the large number of electrical
connections, a number of openings through the walls of the chamber were
necessary. The great importance of maintaining this chamber absolutely
air-tight renders it necessary to minimize the number of these openings,
to reduce their size as much as possible, and to take extra precaution
in securing their closure during an experiment. The largest opening is
obviously the trap-door at the top through which the subject enters,
shown in dotted outline in fig. 7. While somewhat inconvenient to enter
the chamber in this way, the entrance from above possesses many
advantages. It is readily closed and sealed by hot wax and rarely is a
leakage experienced. The trap-door is constructed on precisely the same
plan as the rest of the calorimeter, having its double walls of copper
and zinc, its thermal-junction system, its heating wires and
connections, and its cooling pipes. When closed and sealed, and the
connections made with the cooling pipes and heating wires, it presents
an appearance not differing from any other portion of the calorimeter.

The next largest opening is the food-aperture, which is a large
sheet-copper tube, somewhat flattened, thus giving a slightly oval form,
closed with a port, such as is used on vessels. The door of the port
consists of a heavy brass frame with a heavy glass window and it can be
closed tightly by means of a rubber gasket and two thumbscrews. On the
outside is used a similar port provided with a tube somewhat larger in
diameter than that connected with the inner port. The annular space
between these tubes is filled with a pneumatic gasket which can be
inflated and thus a tight closure may be maintained. When one door is
closed and the other opened, articles can be placed in and taken out of
the chamber without the passage of a material amount of air from the
chamber to the room outside or into the chamber from outside.

The air-pipes passing through the wall of the calorimeter are of
standard 1-inch piping. The insulation from the copper wall is made by a
rubber stopper through which this piping is passed, the stopper being
crowded into a brass ferule which is stoutly soldered to the copper
wall. This is shown in detail in fig. 25, in which N is the brass ferule
and M the rubber stopper through which the air-pipe passes. The closure
is absolutely air-tight and a minimum amount of heat is conducted out of
the chamber, owing to the insulation of the rubber stopper M. The
water-current enters and leaves the chamber through two pipes insulated
in two similar brass ferules soldered to the copper and zinc walls. The
insulation between the water-pipe and the brass ferule has been the
subject of much experimenting and is discussed on page 24. The best
insulation was secured by a vacuum-jacketed glass tube, although the
special hard-rubber tubes surrounding the electric-resistance
thermometers have proven very effective as insulators in the bed
calorimeter.

A series of small brass tubes, from 10 to 15 millimeters in diameter,
are soldered into the copper wall in the vicinity of the water-pipes.
These are used for electrical connections and for connections with the
manometer, stethoscope, and pneumograph. All of these openings are
tested carefully and shown to be absolutely air-tight before being put
in use.

In the dome of the calorimeter, and directly over the head of the
subject, is the opening for the weighing apparatus. This consists of a
hard-rubber tube, threaded at one end and screwed into a brass flange
heavily soldered to the copper wall (fig. 9). When not in use, a solid
rubber stopper on a brass rod is drawn into this opening, thus
producing an air-tight closure. When in actual use during the process of
weighing, a thin rubber diaphragm prevents leakage of air through this
opening. The escape of heat through the weighing-tube is minimized by
having this tube of hard rubber.


VENTILATING AIR-CURRENT.

[Illustration: FIG. 27.--Diagram of ventilation of respiration
calorimeter. The air is taken out at lower right-hand corner and forced
by the blower through the apparatus for absorbing water and carbon
dioxide. It returns to the calorimeter at the top. Oxygen can be
introduced into the chamber itself as need is shown by the tension
equalizer.]

The ventilating air-current is so adjusted that the air which leaves the
chamber is caused to pass through purifiers, where the water-vapor and
the carbon dioxide are removed, and then, after being replenished with
fresh oxygen, it is returned to the chamber ready for use. The general
scheme of the respiration apparatus is shown in fig. 27. The air leaving
the chamber contains carbon dioxide and water-vapor and the original
amount of nitrogen and is somewhat deficient in oxygen. In order to
purify the air it must be passed through absorbents for carbonic acid
and water-vapor and hence some pressure is necessary to force the gas
through these purifying vessels. This pressure is obtained by a small
positive rotary blower, which has been described previously in
detail.[18] The air is thus forced successively through sulphuric acid,
soda or potash-lime, and again sulphuric acid. Finally it is directed
back to the respiration chamber free from carbon dioxide and water and
deficient in oxygen. Pure oxygen is admitted to the chamber to make up
the deficiency, and the air thus regenerated is breathed again by the
subject.


BLOWER.

The rotary blower used in these experiments for maintaining the
ventilating current of air has given the greatest satisfaction. It is a
so-called positive blower and capable of producing at the outlet
considerable pressure and at the inlet a vacuum of several inches of
mercury. At a speed of 230 revolutions per minute it delivers the air at
a pressure of 43 millimeters of mercury, forcing it through the
purifying vessels at the rate of 75 liters per minute. This rate of
ventilation has been established as being satisfactory for all
experiments and is constant. Under the pressure of 43 millimeters of
mercury there are possibilities of leakage of air from the blower
connections and hence, to note this immediately, the blower system is
immersed in a tank filled with heavy lubricating oil. The connections
are so well made, however, that leakage rarely occurs, and, when it
does, a slight tightening of the stuffing-box on the shaft makes the
apparatus tight again.


ABSORBERS FOR WATER-VAPOR.

To absorb 25 to 40 grams of water-vapor in an hour from a current of air
moving at the rate of 75 liters per minute and leaving the air
essentially dry under these conditions has been met by the apparatus
herewith described. The earlier attempts to secure this result involved
the use of enameled-iron soup-stock pots, fitted with special
enameled-iron covers and closed with rubber gaskets. For the preliminary
experimenting and for a few experiments with man these proved
satisfactory, but in spite of their resistance to the action of
sulphuric acid, it was found that they were not as desirable as they
should be for continued experimenting from year to year. Recourse was
then had to a special form of chemical pottery, glazed, and a type that
usually gives excellent satisfaction in manufacturing concerns was used.

This special form of absorbers presented many difficulties in
construction, but the mechanical difficulties were overcome by the
potter's skill and a number of such vessels were furnished by the
Charles Graham Chemical Pottery Works. Here again these vessels served
our purpose for several months, but unfortunately the glaze used did not
suffice to cover them completely and there was a slight, though
persistent, leakage of sulphuric acid through the porous walls. To
overcome this difficulty the interior of the vessels was coated with hot
paraffin after a long-continued washing to remove the acid and after
they had been allowed to dry thoroughly. The paraffin-treated absorbers
continued to give satisfaction, but it was soon seen that for permanent
use something more satisfactory must be had. After innumerable trials
with glazed vessels of different kinds of pottery and glass,
arrangements were made with the Royal Berlin Porcelain Works to mold and
make these absorbers out of their highly resistant porcelain. The result
thus far leaves nothing to be desired as a vessel for this purpose. A
number of such absorbers were made and have been constantly used for a
year and are absolutely without criticism.

Fig. 28 shows the nature of the interior of the apparatus. The air
enters through one opening at the top, passes down through a bent pipe,
and enters a series of roses, consisting of inverted circular saucers
with holes in the rims. The position of the holes is such that when the
vessel is one-fourth to one-third full of sulphuric acid the air must
pass through the acid three times. To prevent spattering, a small
cup-shaped arrangement, provided with holes, is attached to the opening
through which the air passes out of the absorber, and for filling the
vessel with acid a small opening is made near one edge. The
specifications required that the apparatus should be made absolutely
air-tight to pressures of over 1 meter of water, and that there is no
porosity in these vessels under these conditions is shown by the fact
that such a pressure is held indefinitely. The inside and outside are
both heavily glazed. There is no apparent action of sulphuric acid on
the vessels and the slight increase in temperature resulting from the
absorption of water-vapor as the air passes through does not appear to
have any deleterious effect.

[Illustration: FIG. 28.--Cross-section of sulphuric-acid absorber. The
air enters at the top of the right-hand opening, descends to the bottom
of the absorber, and then passes through three concentric rings, which
are covered with acid, and it finally passes out at the left-hand
opening. Beneath the left-hand opening is a cup arrangement for
preventing the acid being carried mechanically out through the opening.
The opening for filling and emptying the absorber is shown midway
between the two large openings.]

The vessels without filling and without rubber elbows weigh 11.5
kilograms; with the special elbows and couplings attached so as to
enable them to be connected with the ventilating air-system, the empty
absorbers weigh 13.4 kilograms; and filled with sulphuric acid they
weigh 19 kilograms. Repeated tests have shown that 5.5 kilograms of
sulphuric acid will remove the water-vapor from a current of air passing
through the absorbers at the rate of 75 liters of air per minute,
without letting any appreciable amount pass by until 500 grams of water
have been absorbed. At this degree of saturation a small persistent
amount of moisture escapes absorption in the acid and consequently a
second absorber will begin to gain in weight. Experiments demonstrate
that the first vessel can gain 1,500 grams of water before the second
gains 5 grams. As a matter of fact, it has been found more advantageous
to use but one absorber and have it refilled as soon as it has gained
400 grams, thus allowing a liberal factor of safety and no danger of
loss of water.


POTASH-LIME CANS.

The problem of absorbing the water-vapor from so rapid a current of air
is second only to that of absorbing the carbon dioxide from such a
current. All experiments with potassium hydroxide in the form of sticks
or in solution failed to give the desired results and the use of
soda-lime has supplemented all other forms of carbon dioxide absorption.
More recently we have been using potash-lime, substituting caustic
potash for caustic soda in the formula, and the results thus obtained
are, if anything, more satisfactory than with the soda-lime.

The potash-lime is made as follows: 1 kilogram of commercial potassium
hydroxide, pulverized, is dissolved in 550 to 650 cubic centimeters of
water and 1 kilogram of pulverized quicklime added slowly. The amount of
water to be used varies with the moisture content of the potash. There
is a variation in the moisture content of different kegs of potash, so
when a keg is opened we determine experimentally the amount of water to
be used. After a batch is made up in this way it should be allowed to
cool before testing whether it has the right amount of water, and this
is determined by feeling of it and noting how it pulverizes in the hand.
It is not advisable to make a great quantity at once, because we have
found that if a large quantity is made and broken into small particles
and stored in a container it has a tendency to cake and thus interfere
with its ready subsequent use.

A record was kept of the gains in weight of a can filled with
potash-lime during a series of experiments where there were three
silver-plated cans used. This can was put at the head of the system and
when it began to lose weight it was removed. The records of gains of
weight when added together amount to 400 grams. From experience with
other cans where the loss of moisture was determined, it is highly
probable that at least 200 grams of water were vaporized from the
reagent and thus the total amount of carbon dioxide absorbed must have
been not far from 600 grams. At present our method is not to allow the
cans to gain a certain weight, but during 4-hour or 5-hour experiments,
in which each can may be used 2 or 3 hours, it is the practice to put a
new can on each side of the absorber system (see page 66) at the
beginning of every experiment. This insures the same power of absorption
on each side of the absorption system so that the residual amount of
carbon dioxide in the chamber from period to period does not undergo
very marked changes. This has been found the best method, because if one
can is left on a day longer than the other there is apt to be
alternately a rise and fall in the amount of residual carbon dioxide in
the apparatus, owing to the unequal efficiency of the absorbers.

These cans are each day taken to the basement, where the first
section[19] only is taken out and replaced with new potash-lime. Thus,
three-quarters of the contents of the can is used over and over, while
the first quarter is freshly renewed every day. Potash-lime has not been
found practicable for the U-tubes because one can not, as in the case of
soda-lime, see the whitening of the reagent where the carbon dioxide is
absorbed.

The importance of having the soda-lime or potash-lime somewhat moist, to
secure the highest efficiency for the absorption of the carbon dioxide,
makes it necessary to absorb the moisture taken up by the dry air in
passing through the potash-lime can. Consequently a second vessel
containing sulphuric acid is placed in the system to receive the air
immediately after it leaves the potash-lime can. Obviously the amount of
water absorbed here is very much less than in the first acid absorber
and hence the same absorber can be used for a greater number of
experiments.


BALANCE FOR WEIGHING ABSORBERS.

The complete removal of water-vapor and carbon dioxide from a current of
air moving at the rate of 75 liters per minute calls for large and
somewhat unwieldy vessels in which is placed the absorbing material.
This is particularly the case with the vessels containing the rather
large amounts of sulphuric acid required to dry the air. In the course
of an hour there is ordinarily removed from the chamber not far from 25
grams of water-vapor and 20 to 30 grams of carbon dioxide. This
necessitates weighing the absorbers to within 0.25 gram if an accuracy
of 1 per cent is desired. The sulphuric-acid absorbers weigh about 18
kilograms when filled with acid. In order to weigh this receptacle so as
to measure accurately the increase in weight due to the absorption of
water to within less than 1 per cent, we use the balance shown in fig.
29. This balance has been employed in a number of other manipulations in
connection with the respiration calorimeter and accessory apparatus and
the general type of balance leaves nothing to be desired as a balance
capable of carrying a heavy load with remarkable sensitiveness.

The balance is rigidly mounted on a frame consisting of four upright
structural-steel angle-irons, fastened at the top to a substantial
wooden bed. Two heavy wooden pieces run the length of the table and
furnish a substantial base to which the standard of the balance is
bolted. The balance is surrounded by a glass case to prevent errors due
to air-currents (see fig. 2). The pan of the balance is not large enough
to permit the weighing of an absorber, hence provision is made for
suspending it on a steel or brass rod from one of the hanger arms. This
rod passes through a hole in the bottom of the balance case, and its
lower end is provided with a piece of pipe having hooks at either end.
Since the increase in weight rather than the absolute weight of the
absorber is used, the greater part of the weight is taken up by lead
counterpoises suspended above the pan on the right-hand arm of the
balance. The remainder of the weight is made up with brass weights
placed in the pan.

[Illustration: FIG. 29.--Balance for weighing absorbers, showing general
type of balance and case surrounding it, with counterpoise and weights
upon right-hand pan. A sulphuric-acid absorber is suspended in position
ready for weighing. Elevator with compressed-air system is shown in
lower part of case.]

In order to suspend this heavy absorber, a small elevator has been
constructed, so that the vessel may be raised by a compressed-air
piston. This piston is placed in an upright position at the right of the
elevator and is connected with the compressed-air service of the
building. The pressure is about 25 pounds per square inch and the
diameter of the cylinder is 2.5 inches, thus giving ample service for
raising and lowering the elevator and its load. By turning a 3-way
valve at the end of the compressed-air supply-pipe, so that the air
rushes into the cylinder above the piston, the piston is pushed to the
base of the cylinder and the elevator thereby raised. The pressure of
the compressed air holds the elevator in this position while the hooks
are being adjusted on the absorber. By turning the 3-way valve so as to
open the exhaust leading to the upper part of the cylinder to the air,
the weight of the elevator expels the air, and it soon settles into the
position shown in the figure. The weighing can then be made as the
absorber is swinging freely in the air. After the weighing has been
made, the elevator is again lifted, the hooks are released, and by
turning the valve the elevator and load are safely lowered.

The size of the openings of the pipes into the cylinder is so adjusted
that the movement of the elevator is regular and moderate whether it is
being raised or lowered, thus avoiding any sudden jars that might cause
an accident to the absorbers. With this system it is possible to weigh
these absorbers to within 0.1 gram and, were it necessary, probably the
error could be diminished so that the weight could be taken to 0.05
gram. On a balance of this type described elsewhere,[20] weighings could
be obtained to within 0.02 gram. For all practical purposes, however, we
do not use the balance for weighing the absorbers closer than to within
0.10 gram. In attempting to secure accuracy no greater than this, it is
unnecessary to lower the glass door to the balance case or, indeed, to
close the two doors to the compartment in which the elevator is closed,
as the slight air-currents do not affect the accuracy of the weighing
when only 0.1 gram sensitiveness is required.


PURIFICATION OF THE AIR-CURRENT WITH SODIUM BICARBONATE.

As is to be expected, the passage of so large a volume of air through
the sulphuric acid in such a relatively small space results in a slight
acid odor in the air-current leaving this absorber. The amount of
material thus leaving the absorber is not weighable, as has been shown
by repeated tests, but nevertheless there is a sufficiently irritating
acid odor to make the air very uncomfortable for subsequent respiration.
It has been found that this odor can be wholly eliminated by passing the
air through a can containing cotton wool and dry sodium bicarbonate.
This can is not weighed, and indeed, after days of use, there is no
appreciable change in its weight.


VALVES.

In order to subdivide experiments into periods as short as 1 or 2 hours,
it is necessary to deflect the air-current at the end of each period
from one set of purifiers to the other, in order to weigh the set used
and to measure the quantity of carbon dioxide and water-vapor absorbed.
The conditions under which these changes from one system to another are
made, and which call for an absolutely gas-tight closure, have been
discussed in detail elsewhere.[21] It is sufficient to state here that
the very large majority of mechanical valves will not serve the purpose,
since it is necessary to have a pressure of some 40 millimeters of
mercury on one side of the valve at the entrance to the absorber system
and on the other side atmospheric pressure. A valve with an internal
diameter of not less than 25 millimeters must be used, and to secure a
tight closure of this large area and permit frequent opening and
shutting is difficult. After experimenting with a large number of
valves, a valve of special construction employing a mechanical seal
ultimately bathed in mercury was used for the earlier apparatus. The
possibility of contamination of the air-current by mercury vapor was
duly considered and pointed out in a description of this apparatus. It
was not until two years later that difficulties began to be experienced
and a number of men were severely poisoned while inside the chamber. A
discussion of this point has been presented elsewhere.[22] At that time
mercury valves were used both at the entrance and exit ends of the
absorber system, although as a matter of fact, when the air leaves the
last absorber and returns to the respiration chamber, the pressure is
but a little above that of the atmosphere. Consequently, mechanical
valves were substituted for mercurial valves at the exit and the toxic
symptoms disappeared. In constructing the new calorimeters it seemed to
be desirable to avoid all use of mercury, if possible. We were fortunate
in finding a mechanical valve which suited this condition perfectly.
These valves, which are very well constructed, have never failed to show
complete tightness under all possible tests and are used at the exit and
entrance end of the absorber system. Their workmanship is of the first
order, and the valve is somewhat higher in price than ordinary
mechanical valves. They have been in use on the apparatus for a year now
and have invariably proved to be absolutely tight. They are easy to
obtain and are much easier to manipulate and much less cumbersome than
the mercury valves formerly used.


COUPLINGS.

Throughout the construction of the respiration apparatus and its various
parts, it was constantly borne in mind that the slightest leak would be
very disastrous for accurate oxygen determinations. At any point where
there is a pressure greater or less than that of the atmosphere, special
precaution must be taken. At no point in the whole apparatus is it
necessary to be more careful than with the couplings which connect the
various absorber systems with each other and with the valves; for these
couplings are opened and closed once every hour or two and hence are
subject to considerable strain at the different points. If they are not
tight the experiment is a failure so far as the determination of oxygen
is concerned. For the various parts of the absorber system we have
relied upon the original type of couplings used in the earlier
apparatus. A rubber gasket is placed between the male and female part of
the coupling and the closure can be made very tight. In fact, after the
absorbers are coupled in place they are invariably subjected to severe
tests to prove tightness.

For connecting the piping between the calorimeter and the absorption
system we use ordinary one-inch hose-couplings, firmly set up by means
of a wrench and disturbed only when necessary to change from one
calorimeter chamber to another.


ABSORBER TABLE.

The purifying apparatus for the air-current is compactly and
conveniently placed on a solidly constructed table which can be moved
about the laboratory at will. The special form of caster on the bottom
of the posts of the table permits its movement about the laboratory at
will and by screwing down the hand screws the table can be firmly fixed
to the floor.

The details of the table are shown in fig. 30. (See also fig. 4, page
4.) The air coming from the calorimeter passes in the direction of the
downward arrow through a 3/4-inch pipe into the blower, which is
immersed in oil in an iron box F. The blower is driven by an electric
motor fastened to a small shelf at the left of the table. The air
leaving the blower ascends in the direction of the arrow to the valve
system H, where it can be directed into one of the two parallel sets of
purifiers; after it passes through these purifiers (sulphuric-acid
vessel 2, potash-lime container K, and sulphuric-acid vessel 1) it goes
through the sodium-bicarbonate can G to a duplicate valve system on top
of the table. From there it passes through a pipe along the top of the
table and rises in the vertical pipe to the hose connection which is
coupled with the calorimeter chamber.

The electric motor is provided with a snap-switch on one of the posts of
the table and a regulating rheostat which permits variations in the
speed of the motor and consequently in the ventilation produced by the
blower. The blower is well oiled, and as oil is gradually carried in
with the air, a small pet-cock at the bottom of the T following the
blower allows any accumulated oil to be drawn away from time to time.
The air entering the valve system at H enters through a cross, two arms
of which connect with two "white star" valves. The upper part of the
cross is connected to a small rubber tubing and to the mercury
manometer D, which also serves as a valve for passing a given amount of
air through a series of U-tubes for analysis of the air from time to
time. It is assumed that the air drawn at the point H is of
substantially the same composition as that inside the chamber, an
assumption that may not be strictly true, but doubtless the sample thus
obtained is constantly proportional to the average composition, which
fluctuates but slowly. Ordinarily the piping leading from the left-hand
arm of the tube D is left open to the air and consequently the
difference in the level of the mercury in the two arms of D indicates
the pressure on the system. This is ordinarily not far from 40 to 50
millimeters of mercury.

[Illustration: FIG. 30.--Diagram of absorber table. 1 and 2 contain
sulphuric acid; K contains potash-lime; G, sodium bicarbonate can; F,
rotary blower for maintaining air-current; H, valves for closing either
side; and D, mercury manometer and valve for diverting air to U-tubes on
table. Air leaves A, passes through the meter, and then through drying
tower B and through C to ingoing air-pipe. At the left is the regulating
rheostat and motor and snap-switch. General direction of ventilation is
indicated by arrows.]

The absorber table, with the U-tubes and meter for residual analyses, is
shown in the foreground in fig. 2. The two white porcelain vessels with
a silver-plated can between them are on the middle shelf. The sodium
bicarbonate can, for removing traces of acid fumes, is connected in an
upright position, while the motor, the controlling rheostat, and the
blower are supported by the legs near the floor. The two rubber pipes
leading from the table can be used to connect the apparatus either with
the bed or chair calorimeter. In fig. 4 the apparatus is shown connected
with the bed calorimeter, but just above the lowest point of the rubber
tubing can be seen in the rear the coupling for one of the pipes leading
from the chair calorimeter. The other is immediately below and to the
left of it.


OXYGEN SUPPLY.

The residual air inside of the chamber amounts to some 1,300 liters and
contains about 250 liters of oxygen. Consequently it can be seen that in
an 8-hour experiment the subject could easily live during the entire
time upon the amount of oxygen already present in the residual air. It
has been repeatedly shown that until the per cent of oxygen falls to
about 11, or about one-half normal, there is no disturbance in the
respiratory exchange and therefore about 125 liters of oxygen would be
available for respiration even if no oxygen were admitted. Inasmuch as
the subject when at rest uses not far from 14 to 15 liters per hour, the
amount originally present in the chamber would easily suffice for an
8-hour experiment. Moreover, the difficulties attending an accurate gas
analysis and particularly the calculation of the total amount of oxygen
are such that satisfactory determinations of oxygen consumption by this
method would be impossible. Furthermore, from our previous experience
with long-continued experiments of from 10 days to 2 weeks, it has been
found that oxygen can be supplied to the system readily and the amount
thus supplied determined accurately. Consequently, even in these short
experiments, we adhere to the original practice of supplying oxygen to
the air and noting the amount thus added.

The oxygen supply was formerly obtained from small steel cylinders of
the highly compressed gas. This gas was made by the calcium-manganate
method and represented a high degree of purity for commercial oxygen.
More recently we have been using oxygen of great purity made from liquid
air. Inasmuch as this oxygen is very pure and much less expensive than
the chemically-prepared oxygen, extensive provisions have been made for
its continued use. Instead of using small cylinders containing 10 cubic
feet and attaching thereto purifying devices in the shape of soda-lime
U-tubes and a sulphuric-acid drying-tube, we now use large cylinders and
we have found that the oxygen from liquid air is practically free from
carbon dioxide and water-vapor, the quantities present being wholly
negligible in experiments such as these. Consequently, no purifying
attachments are considered necessary and the oxygen is delivered
directly from the cylinder. The cylinders, containing 100 cubic feet
(2,830 liters), under a pressure of 120 atmospheres, are provided with
well-closing valves and weigh when fully charged 57 kilograms.

