
An eclipse of the sun which took place on May 30, 1612, is recorded as
having been seen "through a tube." This probably refers to the then
recent invention--the telescope.

The eclipses which we have been describing are chiefly interesting from
an historical point of view. The old mystery and confusion to the
beholders seem to have lingered even into comparatively enlightened
times, for we see how late it is before the corona attracts definite
attention for the sake of itself alone.

It is not a far cry from notice of the corona to that of other
accompaniments of a solar eclipse. Thus the eclipse of 1706, the total
phase of which was visible in Switzerland, is of great interest; for it
was on this occasion that the famous red prominences seem first to have
been noted. A certain Captain Stannyan observed this eclipse from Berne
in Switzerland, and described it in a letter to Flamsteed, the then
Astronomer Royal. He says the sun's "getting out of his eclipse was
preceded by a blood-red streak of light from its left limb, which
continued not longer than six or seven seconds of time; then part of the
Sun's disc appeared all of a sudden, as bright as Venus was ever seen in
the night, nay brighter; and in that very instant gave a Light and
Shadow to things as strong as Moonlight uses to do." How little was then
expected of the sun is, however, shown by Flamsteed's words, when
communicating this information to the Royal Society:--

"The Captain is the first man I ever heard of that took notice of a Red
Streak of Light preceding the Emersion of the Sun's body from a total
Eclipse. And I take notice of it to you because it infers that _the Moon
has an atmosphere_; and its short continuance of only six or seven
seconds of time, tells us that _its height is not more than the five or
six hundredth part of her diameter_."

What a change has since come over the ideas of men! The sun has proved a
veritable mine of discovery, while the moon has yielded up nothing new.

The eclipse of 1715, the first total at London since that of 878, was
observed by the famous astronomer, Edmund Halley, from the rooms of the
Royal Society, then in Crane Court, Fleet Street. On this occasion both
the corona and a red projection were noted. Halley further makes
allusion to that curious phenomenon, which later on became celebrated
under the name of "Baily's beads." It was also on the occasion of this
eclipse that the _earliest recorded drawings of the corona_ were made.
Cambridge happened to be within the track of totality; and a certain
Professor Cotes of that University, who is responsible for one of the
drawings in question, forwarded them to Sir Isaac Newton together with a
letter describing his observations.

In 1724 there occurred an eclipse, the total phase of which was visible
from the south-west of England, but not from London. The weather was
unfavourable, and the eclipse consequently appears to have been seen by
only one person, a certain Dr. Stukeley, who observed it from Haraden
Hill near Salisbury Plain. This is the last eclipse of which the total
phase was seen in any part of England. The next will not be until June
29, 1927, and will be visible along a line across North Wales and
Lancashire. The discs of the sun and moon will just then be almost of
the same apparent size, and so totality will be of extremely short
duration; in fact only a few seconds. London itself will not see a
totality until the year 2151--a circumstance which need hardly distress
any of us personally!

It is only from the early part of the nineteenth century that serious
scientific attention to eclipses of the sun can be dated. An _annular_
eclipse, visible in 1836 in the south of Scotland, drew the careful
notice of Francis Baily of Jedburgh in Roxburghshire to that curious
phenomenon which we have already described, and which has ever since
been known by the name of "Baily's beads." Spurred by his observation,
the leading astronomers of the day determined to pay particular
attention to a total eclipse, which in the year 1842 was to be visible
in the south of France and the north of Italy. The public interest
aroused on this occasion was also very great, for the region across
which the track of totality was to pass was very populous, and inhabited
by races of a high degree of culture.

This eclipse occurred on the morning of the 8th July, and from it may be
dated that great enthusiasm with which total eclipses of the sun have
ever since been received. Airy, our then Astronomer Royal, observed it
from Turin; Arago, the celebrated director of the Paris Observatory,
from Perpignan in the south of France; Francis Baily from Pavia; and Sir
John Herschel from Milan. The corona and three large red prominences
were not only well observed by the astronomers, but drew tremendous
applause from the watching multitudes.

The success of the observations made during this eclipse prompted
astronomers to pay similar attention to that of July 28, 1851, the total
phase of which was to be visible in the south of Norway and Sweden, and
across the east of Prussia. This eclipse was also a success, and it was
now ascertained that the red prominences belonged to the sun and not to
the moon; for the lunar disc, as it moved onward, was seen to cover and
to uncover them in turn. It was also noted that these prominences were
merely uprushes from a layer of glowing gaseous matter, which was seen
closely to envelop the sun.

The total eclipse of July 18, 1860, was observed in Spain, and
photography was for the first time _systematically_ employed in its
observation.[7] In the photographs taken the stationary appearance of
both the corona and prominences with respect to the moving moon,
definitely confirmed the view already put forward that they were actual
appendages of the sun.

The eclipse of August 18, 1868, the total phase of which lasted nearly
six minutes, was visible in India, and drew thither a large concourse of
astronomers. In this eclipse the spectroscope came to the front, and
showed that both the prominences, and the chromospheric layer from which
they rise, are composed of glowing vapours--chief among which is the
vapour of hydrogen. The direct result of the observations made on this
occasion was the spectroscopic method of examining prominences at any
time in full daylight, and without a total eclipse. This method, which
has given such an immense impetus to the study of the sun, was the
outcome of independent and simultaneous investigation on the part of the
French astronomer, the late M. Janssen, and the English astronomer,
Professor (now Sir Norman) Lockyer, a circumstance strangely reminiscent
of the discovery of Neptune. The principles on which the method was
founded seem, however, to have occurred to Dr. (now Sir William) Huggins
some time previously.

The eclipse of December 22, 1870, was total for a little more than two
minutes, and its track passed across the Mediterranean. M. Janssen, of
whom mention has just been made, escaped in a balloon from then besieged
Paris, taking his instruments with him, and made his way to Oran, in
Algeria, in order to observe it; but his expectations were disappointed
by cloudy weather. The expedition sent out from England had the
misfortune to be shipwrecked off the coast of Sicily. But the occasion
was redeemed by a memorable observation made by the American astronomer,
the late Professor Young, which revealed the existence of what is now
known as the "Reversing Layer." This is a shallow layer of gases which
lies immediately beneath the chromosphere. An illustration of the
corona, as it was seen during the above eclipse, will be found on Plate
VII. (A), p. 142.

In the eclipse of December 12, 1871, total across Southern India, the
photographs of the corona obtained by Mr. Davis, assistant to Lord
Lindsay (now the Earl of Crawford), displayed a wealth of detail
hitherto unapproached.

The eclipse of July 29, 1878, total across the western states of North
America, was a remarkable success, and a magnificent view of the corona
was obtained by the well-known American astronomer and physicist, the
late Professor Langley, from the summit of Pike's Peak, Colorado, over
14,000 feet above the level of the sea. The coronal streamers were seen
to extend to a much greater distance at this altitude than at points
less elevated, and the corona itself remained visible during more than
four minutes after the end of totality. It was, however, not entirely a
question of altitude; the coronal streamers were actually very much
longer on this occasion than in most of the eclipses which had
previously been observed.

The eclipse of May 17, 1882, observed in Upper Egypt, is notable from
the fact that, in one of the photographs taken by Dr. Schuster at Sohag,
a bright comet appeared near the outer limit of the corona (see Plate
I., p. 96). The comet in question had not been seen before the eclipse,
and was never seen afterwards. This is the third occasion on which
attention has been drawn to a comet _merely_ by a total eclipse. The
first is mentioned by Seneca; and the second by Philostorgius, in an
account of an eclipse observed at Constantinople in A.D. 418. A fourth
case of the kind occurred in 1893, when faint evidences of one of these
filmy objects were found on photographs of the corona taken by the
American astronomer, Professor Schaeberle, during the total eclipse of
April 16 of that year.

The eclipse of May 6, 1883, had a totality of over five minutes, but
the central track unfortunately passed across the Pacific Ocean, and the
sole point of land available for observing it from was one of the
Marquesas Group, Caroline Island, a coral atoll seven and a half miles
long by one and a half broad. Nevertheless astronomers did not hesitate
to take up their posts upon that little spot, and were rewarded with
good weather.

The next eclipse of importance was that of April 16, 1893. It stretched
from Chili across South America and the Atlantic Ocean to the West Coast
of Africa, and, as the weather was fine, many good results were
obtained. Photographs were taken at both ends of the track, and these
showed that the appearance of the corona remained unchanged during the
interval of time occupied by the passage of the shadow across the earth.
It was on the occasion of this eclipse that Professor Schaeberle found
upon his photographs those traces of the presence of a comet, to which
allusion has already been made.

Extensive preparations were made to observe the eclipse of August 9,
1896. Totality lasted from two to three minutes, and the track stretched
from Norway to Japan. Bad weather disappointed the observers, with the
exception of those taken to Nova Zembla by Sir George Baden Powell in
his yacht _Otaria_.

The eclipse of January 22, 1898, across India _via_ Bombay and Benares,
was favoured with good weather, and is notable for a photograph obtained
by Mrs. E.W. Maunder, which showed a ray of the corona extending to a
most unusual distance.

[Illustration: PLATE I. THE TOTAL ECLIPSE OF THE SUN OF MAY 17TH, 1882

A comet is here shown in the immediate neighbourhood of the corona.

Drawn by Mr. W.H. Wesley from the photographs.

(Page 95)]

Of very great influence in the growth of our knowledge with regard to
the sun, is the remarkable piece of good fortune by which the countries
around the Mediterranean, so easy of access, have been favoured with a
comparatively large number of total eclipses during the past sixty
years. Tracks of totality have, for instance, traversed the Spanish
peninsula on no less than five occasions during that period. Two of
these are among the most notable eclipses of recent years, namely, those
of May 28, 1900, and of August 30, 1905. In the former the track of
totality stretched from the western seaboard of Mexico, through the
Southern States of America, and across the Atlantic Ocean, after which
it passed over Portugal and Spain into North Africa. The total phase
lasted for about a minute and a half, and the eclipse was well observed
from a great many points along the line. A representation of the corona,
as it appeared on this occasion, will be found on Plate VII. (B), p.
142.

The track of the other eclipse to which we have alluded, _i.e._ that of
August 30, 1905, crossed Spain about 200 miles to the northward of that
of 1900. It stretched from Winnipeg in Canada, through Labrador, and
over the Atlantic; then traversing Spain, it passed across the Balearic
Islands, North Africa, and Egypt, and ended in Arabia (see Fig. 6, p.
81). Much was to be expected from a comparison between the photographs
taken in Labrador and Egypt on the question as to whether the corona
would show any alteration in shape during the time that the shadow was
traversing the intervening space--some 6000 miles. The duration of the
total phase in this eclipse was nearly four minutes. Bad weather,
however, interfered a good deal with the observations. It was not
possible, for instance, to do anything at all in Labrador. In Spain the
weather conditions were by no means favourable; though at Burgos, where
an immense number of people had assembled, the total phase was,
fortunately, well seen. On the whole, the best results were obtained at
Guelma in Algeria. The corona on the occasion of this eclipse was a very
fine one, and some magnificent groups of prominences were plainly
visible to the naked eye (see the Frontispiece).

The next total eclipse after that of 1905 was one which occurred on
January 14, 1907. It passed across Central Asia and Siberia, and had a
totality lasting two and a half minutes at most; but it was not observed
as the weather was extremely bad, a circumstance not surprising with
regard to those regions at that time of year.

The eclipse of January 3, 1908, passed across the Pacific Ocean. Only
two small coral islands--Hull Island in the Phoenix Group, and Flint
Island about 400 miles north of Tahiti--lay in the track. Two
expeditions set out to observe it, _i.e._ a combined American party from
the Lick Observatory and the Smithsonian Institution of Washington, and
a private one from England under Mr. F.K. McClean. As Hull Island
afforded few facilities, both parties installed their instruments on
Flint Island, although it was very little better. The duration of the
total phase was fairly long--about four minutes, and the sun very
favourably placed, being nearly overhead. Heavy rain and clouds,
however, marred observation during the first minute of totality, but the
remaining three minutes were successfully utilised, good photographs of
the corona being obtained.

The next few years to come are unfortunately by no means favourable
from the point of view of the eclipse observer. An eclipse will take
place on June 17, 1909, the track stretching from Greenland across the
North Polar regions into Siberia. The geographical situation is,
however, a very awkward one, and totality will be extremely short--only
six seconds in Greenland and twenty-three seconds in Siberia.

The eclipse of May 9, 1910, will be visible in Tasmania. Totality will
last so long as four minutes, but the sun will be at the time much too
low in the sky for good observation.

The eclipse of the following year, April 28, 1911, will also be
confined, roughly speaking, to the same quarter of the earth, the track
passing across the old convict settlement of Norfolk Island, and then
out into the Pacific.

The eclipse of April 17, 1912, will stretch from Portugal, through
France and Belgium into North Germany. It will, however, be of
practically no service to astronomy. Totality, for instance, will last
for only three seconds in Portugal; and, though Paris lies in the
central track, the eclipse, which begins as barely total, will have
changed into an _annular_ one by the time it passes over that city.

The first really favourable eclipse in the near future will be that of
August 21, 1914. Its track will stretch from Greenland across Norway,
Sweden, and Russia. This eclipse is a return, after one saros, of the
eclipse of August 9, 1896.

The last solar eclipse which we will touch upon is that predicted for
June 29, 1927. It has been already alluded to as the first of those in
the future to be _total_ in England. The central line will stretch from
Wales in a north-easterly direction. Stonyhurst Observatory, in
Lancashire, will lie in the track; but totality there will be very
short, only about twenty seconds in duration.


[6] _Knowledge_, vol. xx. p. 9, January 1897.

[7] The _first photographic representation of the corona_ had, however,
been made during the eclipse of 1851. This was a daguerreotype taken by
Dr. Busch at Koenigsberg in Prussia.




CHAPTER IX

FAMOUS ECLIPSES OF THE MOON


The earliest lunar eclipse, of which we have any trustworthy
information, was a total one which took place on the 19th March, 721
B.C., and was observed from Babylon. For our knowledge of this eclipse
we are indebted to Ptolemy, the astronomer, who copied it, along with
two others, from the records of the reign of the Chaldean king,
Merodach-Baladan.

The next eclipse of the moon worth noting was a total one, which took
place some three hundred years later, namely, in 425 B.C. This eclipse
was observed at Athens, and is mentioned by Aristophanes in his play,
_The Clouds_.

Plutarch relates that a total eclipse of the moon, which occurred in 413
B.C., so greatly frightened Nicias, the general of the Athenians, then
warring in Sicily, as to cause a delay in his retreat from Syracuse
which led to the destruction of his whole army.

Seven years later--namely, in 406 B.C., the twenty-sixth year of the
Peloponnesian War--there took place another total lunar eclipse of which
mention is made by Xenophon.

Omitting a number of other eclipses alluded to by ancient writers, we
come to one recorded by Josephus as having occurred a little before the
death of Herod the Great. It is probable that the eclipse in question
was the total lunar one, which calculation shows to have taken place on
the 15th September 5 B.C., and to have been visible in Western Asia.
This is very important, for we are thus enabled to fix that year as the
date of the birth of Christ, for Herod is known to have died in the
early part of the year following the Nativity.

In those accounts of total lunar eclipses, which have come down to us
from the Dark and Middle Ages, the colour of the moon is nearly always
likened to "blood." On the other hand, in an account of the eclipse of
January 23, A.D. 753, our satellite is described as "covered with a
horrid black shield." We thus have examples of the two distinct
appearances alluded to in Chapter VII., _i.e._ when the moon appears of
a coppery-red colour, and when it is entirely darkened.

It appears, indeed, that, in the majority of lunar eclipses on record,
the moon has appeared of a ruddy, or rather of a coppery hue, and the
details on its surface have been thus rendered visible. One of the best
examples of a _bright_ eclipse of this kind is that of the 19th March
1848, when the illumination of our satellite was so great that many
persons could not believe that an eclipse was actually taking place. A
certain Mr. Foster, who observed this eclipse from Bruges, states that
the markings on the lunar disc were almost as visible as on an "ordinary
dull moonlight night." He goes on to say that the British Consul at
Ghent, not knowing that there had been any eclipse, wrote to him for an
explanation of the red colour of the moon on that evening.

Out of the _dark_ eclipses recorded, perhaps the best example is that
of May 18, 1761, observed by Wargentin at Stockholm. On this occasion
the lunar disc is said to have disappeared so completely, that it could
not be discovered even with the telescope. Another such instance is the
eclipse of June 10, 1816, observed from London. The summer of that year
was particularly wet--a point worthy of notice in connection with the
theory that these different appearances are due to the varying state of
our earth's atmosphere.

Sometimes, indeed, it has happened that an eclipse of the moon has
partaken of both appearances, part of the disc being visible and part
invisible. An instance of this occurred in the eclipse of July 12, 1870,
when the late Rev. S.J. Johnson, one of the leading authorities on
eclipses, who observed it, states that he found one-half the moon's
surface quite invisible, both with the naked eye and with the telescope.

In addition to the examples given above, there are three total lunar
eclipses which deserve especial mention.

1. A.D. 755, November 23. During the progress of this eclipse the moon
occulted the star Aldebaran in the constellation of Taurus.

2. A.D. 1493, April 2. This is the celebrated eclipse which is said to
have so well served the purposes of Christopher Columbus. Certain
natives having refused to supply him with provisions when in sore
straits, he announced to them that the moon would be darkened as a sign
of the anger of heaven. When the event duly came to pass, the savages
were so terrified that they brought him provisions as much as he needed.

3. A.D. 1610, July 6. The eclipse in question is notable as having been
seen through the telescope, then a recent invention. It was without
doubt the first so observed, but unfortunately the name of the observer
has not come down to us.




CHAPTER X

THE GROWTH OF OBSERVATION


The earliest astronomical observations must have been made in the Dawn
of Historic Time by the men who tended their flocks upon the great
plains. As they watched the clear night sky they no doubt soon noticed
that, with the exception of the moon and those brilliant wandering
objects known to us as the planets, the individual stars in the heaven
remained apparently fixed with reference to each other. These seemingly
changeless points of light came in time to be regarded as sign-posts to
guide the wanderer across the trackless desert, or the voyager upon the
wide sea.

Just as when looking into the red coals of a fire, or when watching the
clouds, our imagination conjures up strange and grotesque forms, so did
the men of old see in the grouping of the stars the outlines of weird
and curious shapes. Fed with mythological lore, they imagined these to
be rough representations of ancient heroes and fabled beasts, whom they
supposed to have been elevated to the heavens as a reward for great
deeds done upon the earth. We know these groupings of stars to-day under
the name of the Constellations. Looking up at them we find it extremely
difficult to fit in the majority with the figures which the ancients
believed them to represent. Nevertheless, astronomy has accepted the
arrangement, for want of a better method of fixing the leading stars in
the memory.

Our early ancestors lived the greater part of their lives in the open
air, and so came to pay more attention in general to the heavenly orbs
than we do. Their clock and their calendar was, so to speak, in the
celestial vault. They regulated their hours, their days, and their
nights by the changing positions of the sun, the moon, and the stars;
and recognised the periods of seed-time and harvest, of calm and stormy
weather, by the rising or setting of certain well-known constellations.
Students of the classics will recall many allusions to this, especially
in the Odes of Horace.

As time went on and civilisation progressed, men soon devised measuring
instruments, by means of which they could note the positions of the
celestial bodies in the sky with respect to each other; and, from
observations thus made, they constructed charts of the stars. The
earliest complete survey of this kind, of which we have a record, is the
great Catalogue of stars which was made, in the second century B.C., by
the celebrated Greek astronomer, Hipparchus, and in which he is said to
have noted down about 1080 stars.

It is unnecessary to follow in detail the tedious progress of
astronomical discovery prior to the advent of the telescope. Certain it
is that, as time went on, the measuring instruments to which we have
alluded had become greatly improved; but, had they even been perfect,
they would have been utterly inadequate to reveal those minute
displacements, from which we have learned the actual distance of the
nearest of the celestial orbs. From the early times, therefore, until
the mediaeval period of our own era, astronomy grew up upon a faulty
basis, for the earth ever seemed so much the largest body in the
universe, that it continued from century to century to be regarded as
the very centre of things.

To the Arabians is due the credit of having kept alive the study of the
stars during the dark ages of European history. They erected some fine
observatories, notably in Spain and in the neighbourhood of Bagdad.
Following them, some of the Oriental peoples embraced the science in
