Los Angeles calling."

The voice of MacGregor was cool and unhurried as Thurston listened.
"Grab a plane, old man," he was saying, "and come up here on the jump."

The phrase brought a grim smile to Thurston's tired lips. "Hell's
popping!" the Secretary of War had added on that evening those long ages
before. Did MacGregor have something? Was a different kind of hell
preparing to pop? The thoughts flashed through the listener's mind.

"I need a good deputy," MacGregor said. "You may be the whole works--may
have to carry on--but I'll tell you it all later. Meet me at the
Biltmore."

"In less than two hours," Thurston assured him.

       *       *       *       *       *

A plane was at his disposal. Riley's legs were functioning again, after
a fashion. They kept the appointment with minutes to spare.

"Come on," said MacGregor, "I'll talk to you in the car." The automobile
whirled them out of the city to race off upon a winding highway that
climbed into far hills. There was twenty miles of this; MacGregor had
time for his talk.

"They've struck," he told the two men. "They were over Germany
yesterday. The news was kept quiet: I got the last report a half-hour
ago. They pretty well wiped out Berlin. No air-force there. France and
England sent a swarm of planes, from the reports. Poor devils! No need
to tell you what they got. We've seen it first hand. They headed west
over the Atlantic, the four machines. Gave England a burst or two from
high up, paused over New York, then went on. But they're here somewhere,
we think. Now listen:

"How long was it from the time when you saw the first monster until we
heard from them again?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Thurston forced his mind back to those days that seemed so far in the
past. He tried to remember.

"Four days," broke in Riley. "It was the fourth day after we found the
devil feeding."

"Feeding!" interrupted the scientist. "That's the point I am making.
Four days. Remember that!

"And we knew they were down in the Argentine five days ago--that's
another item kept from an hysterical public. They slaughtered some
thousands of cattle; there were scores of them found where the
devils--I'll borrow Riley's word--where the devils had fed. Nothing left
but hide and bones.

"And--mark this--that was four days before they appeared over Berlin.

"Why? Don't ask me. Do they have to lie quiet for that period miles up
there in space? God knows. Perhaps! These things seem outside the
knowledge of a deity. But enough of that! Remember: four days! Let us
assume that there is this four days waiting period. It will help us to
time them. I'll come back to that later.

"Here is what I have been doing. We know that light is a means of
attack. I believe that the detonators we saw on those bombs merely
opened a seal in the shell and forced in a flash of some sort. I believe
that radiant energy is what fires the blast.

"What is it that explodes? Nobody knows. We have opened the shell,
working in the absolute blackness of a room a hundred feet underground.
We found in it a powder--two powders, to be exact.

"They are mixed. One is finely divided, the other rather granular. Their
specific gravity is enormous, beyond anything known to physical science
unless it would be the hypothetical neutron masses we think are in
certain stars. But this is not matter as we know matter; it is something
new.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Our theory is this: the hydrogen atom has been split, resolved into
components, not of electrons and the proton centers, but held at some
halfway point of decomposition. Matter composed only of neutrons would
be heavy beyond belief. This fits the theory in that respect. But the
point is this: When these solids are formed--they are dense--they
represent in a cubic centimeter possibly a cubic mile of hydrogen gas
under normal pressure. That's a guess, but it will give you the idea.

"Not compressed, you understand, but all the elements present in other
than elemental form for the reconstruction of the atom ... for a million
billions of atoms.

"Then the light strikes it. These dense solids become instantly a
gas--miles of it held in that small space.

"There you have it: the gas, the explosion, the entire absence of
heat--which is to say, its terrific cold--when it expands."

Slim Riley was looking bewildered but game. "Sure, I saw it snow," he
affirmed, "so I guess the rest must be O.K. But what are we going to do
about it? You say light kills 'em, and fires their bombs. But how can we
let light into those big steel shells, or the little ones either?"

"Not through those thick walls," said MacGregor. "Not light. One of our
anti-aircraft shells made a direct hit. That might not happen again in a
million shots. But there are other forms of radiant energy that do
penetrate steel...."

       *       *       *       *       *

The car had stopped beside a grove of eucalyptus. A barren, sun-baked
hillside stretched beyond. MacGregor motioned them to alight.

Riley was afire with optimism. "And do you believe it?" he asked
eagerly. "Do you believe that we've got 'em licked?"

Thurston, too, looked into MacGregor's face: Riley was not the only one
who needed encouragement. But the gray eyes were suddenly tired and
hopeless.

"You ask what I believe," said the scientist slowly. "I believe we are
witnessing the end of the world, our world of humans, their struggles,
their grave hopes and happiness and aspirations...."

He was not looking at them. His gaze was far off in space.

"Men will struggle and fight with their puny weapons, but these monsters
will win, and they will have their way with us. Then more of them will
come. The world, I believe, is doomed...."

He straightened his shoulders. "But we can die fighting," he added, and
pointed over the hill.

"Over there," he said, "in the valley beyond, is a charge of their
explosive and a little apparatus of mine. I intend to fire the charge
from a distance of three hundred yards. I expect to be safe, perfectly
safe. But accidents happen.

"In Washington a plane is being prepared. I have given instructions
through hours of phoning. They are working night and day. It will
contain a huge generator for producing my ray. Nothing new! Just the
product of our knowledge of radiant energy up to date. But the man who
flies that plane will die--horribly. No time to experiment with
protection. The rays will destroy him, though he may live a month.

"I am asking you," he told Cyrus Thurston, "to handle that plane. You
may be of service to the world--you may find you are utterly powerless.
You surely will die. But you know the machines and the monsters; your
knowledge may be of value in an attack." He waited. The silence lasted
for only a moment.

"Why, sure," said Cyrus Thurston.

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked at the eucalyptus grove with earnest appraisal. The sun made
lovely shadows among their stripped trunks: the world was a beautiful
place. A lingering death, MacGregor had intimated--and horrible....
"Why, sure," he repeated steadily.

Slim Riley shoved him firmly aside to stand facing MacGregor.

"Sure, hell!" he said. "I'm your man, Mr. MacGregor.

"What do you know about flying?" he asked Cyrus Thurston. "You're
good--for a beginner. But men like you two have got brains, and I'm
thinkin' the world will be needin' them. Now me, all I'm good for is
holdin' a shtick"--his brogue had returned to his speech, and was
evidence of his earnestness.

"And, besides"--the smile faded from his lips, and his voice was
suddenly soft--"them boys we saw take their last flip was just pilots to
you, just a bunch of good fighters. Well, they're buddies of mine. I
fought beside some of them in France.... I belong!"

He grinned happily at Thurston. "Besides," he said, "what do you know
about dog-fights?"

MacGregor gripped him by the hand. "You win," he said. "Report to
Washington. The Secretary of War has all the dope."

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned to Thurston. "Now for you! Get this! The enemy machines almost
attacked New York. One of them came low, then went back, and the four
flashed out of sight toward the west. It is my belief that New York is
next, but the devils are hungry. The beast that attacked us was
ravenous, remember. They need food and lots of it. You will hear of
their feeding, and you can count on four days. Keep Riley
informed--that's your job.

"Now I'm going over the hill. If this experiment works, there's a chance
we can repeat it on a larger scale. No certainty, but a chance! I'll be
back. Full instructions at the hotel in case...." He vanished into the
scrub growth.

"Not exactly encouraging," Thurston pondered, "but he's a good man, Mac,
a good egg! Not as big a brain as the one we saw, but perhaps it's a
better one--cleaner--and it's working!"

They were sheltered under the brow of the hill, but the blast from the
valley beyond rocked them like an earthquake. They rushed to the top of
the knoll. MacGregor was standing in the valley; he waved them a
greeting and shouted something unintelligible.

The gas had mushroomed into a cloud of steamy vapor. From above came
snowflakes to whirl in the churning mass, then fall to the ground. A
wind came howling about them to beat upon the cloud. It swirled slowly
back and down the valley. The figure of MacGregor vanished in its
smothering embrace.

"Exit, MacGregor!" said Cyrus Thurston softly. He held tight to the
struggling figure of Slim Riley.

"He couldn't live a minute in that atmosphere of hydrogen," he
explained. "They can--the devils!--but not a good egg like Mac. It's our
job now--yours and mine."

Slowly the gas retreated, lifted to permit their passage down the slope.

       *       *       *       *       *

MacGregor was a good prophet. Thurston admitted that when, four days
later, he stood on the roof of the Equitable Building in lower New York.

The monsters had fed as predicted. Out in Wyoming a desolate area marked
the place of their meal, where a great herd of cattle lay smothered and
frozen. There were ranch houses, too, in the circle of destruction,
their occupants frozen stiff as the carcasses that dotted the plains.
The country had stood tense for the following blow. Only Thurston had
lived in certainty of a few days reprieve. And now had come the fourth
day.

In Washington was Riley. Thurston had been in touch with him frequently.

"Sure, it's a crazy machine," the pilot had told him, "and 'tis not much
I think of it at all. Neither bullets nor guns, just this big glass
contraption and speed. She's fast, man, she's fast ... but it's little
hope I have." And Thurston, remembering the scientist's words, was
heartless and sick with dreadful certainty.

There were aircraft ready near New York; it was generally felt that here
was the next objective. The enemy had looked it over carefully. And
Washington, too, was guarded. The nation's capital must receive what
little help the aircraft could afford.

There were other cities waiting for destruction. If not this
time--later! The horror hung over them all.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fourth day! And Thurston was suddenly certain of the fate of New
York. He hurried to a telephone. Of the Secretary of War he implored
assistance.

"Send your planes," he begged. "Here's where we will get it next. Send
Riley. Let's make a last stand--win or lose."

"I'll give you a squadron," was the concession. "What difference whether
they die there or here...?" The voice was that of a weary man, weary
and sleepless and hopeless.

"Good-by Cy, old man!" The click of the receiver sounded in Thurston's
ear. He returned to the roof for his vigil.

To wait, to stride nervously back and forth in impotent expectancy. He
could leave, go out into open country, but what were a few days or
months--or a year--with this horror upon them? It was the end. MacGregor
was right. "Good old Mac!"

There were airplanes roaring overhead. It meant.... Thurston abruptly
was cold; a chill gripped at his heart.

The paroxysm passed. He was doubled with laughter--or was it he who was
laughing? He was suddenly buoyantly carefree. Who was he that it
mattered? Cyrus Thurston--an ant! And their ant-hill was about to be
snuffed out....

He walked over to a waiting group and clapped one man on the shoulder.
"Well, how does it feel to be an ant?" he inquired and laughed loudly at
the jest. "You and your millions of dollars, your acres of factories,
your steamships, railroads!"

The man looked at him strangely and edged cautiously away. His eyes,
like those of the others, had a dazed, stricken look. A woman was
sobbing softly as she clung to her husband. From the streets far below
came a quavering shrillness of sound.

The planes gathered in climbing circles. Far on the horizon were four
tiny glinting specks....

       *       *       *       *       *

Thurston stared until his eyes were stinging. He was walking in a waking
sleep as he made his way to the stone coping beyond which was the street
far below. He was dead--dead!--right this minute. What were a few
minutes more or less? He could climb over the coping; none of the
huddled, fear-gripped group would stop him. He could step out into space
and fool them, the devils. They could never kill him....

What was it MacGregor had said? Good egg, MacGregor! "But we can die
fighting...." Yes, that was it--die fighting. But he couldn't fight; he
could only wait. Well, what were the others doing, down there in the
streets--in their homes? He could wait with them, die with them....

He straightened slowly and drew one long breath. He looked steadily and
unafraid at the advancing specks. They were larger now. He could see
their round forms. The planes were less noisy: they were far up in the
heights--climbing--climbing.

The bulbs came slantingly down. They were separating. Thurston wondered
vaguely.

What had they done in Berlin? Yes, he remembered. Placed themselves at
the four corners of a great square and wiped out the whole city in one
explosion. Four bombs dropped at the same instant while they shot up to
safety in the thin air. How did they communicate? Thought transference,
most likely. Telepathy between those great brains, one to another. A
plane was falling. It curved and swooped in a trail of flame, then fell
straight toward the earth. They were fighting....

       *       *       *       *       *

Thurston stared above. There were clusters of planes diving down from on
high. Machine-guns stuttered faintly. "Machine-guns--toys! Brave, that
was it! 'We can die fighting.'" His thoughts were far off; it was like
listening to another's mind.

The air was filled with swelling clouds. He saw them before the blast
struck where he stood. The great building shuddered at the impact. There
were things falling from the clouds, wrecks of planes, blazing and
shattered. Still came others; he saw them faintly through the clouds.
They came in from the West; they had gone far to gain altitude. They
drove down from the heights--the enemy had drifted--they were over the
bay.

More clouds, and another blast thundering at the city. There were
specks, Thurston saw, falling into the water.

Again the invaders came down from the heights where they had escaped
their own shattering attack. There was the faint roar of motors behind,
from the south. The squadron from Washington passed overhead.

They surely had seen the fate that awaited. And they drove on to the
attack, to strike at an enemy that shot instantly into the sky leaving
crashing destruction about the torn dead.

"Now!" said Cyrus Thurston aloud.

       *       *       *       *       *

The big bulbs were back. They floated easily in the air, a plume of
vapor billowing beneath. They were ranging to the four corners of a
great square.

One plane only was left, coming in from the south, a lone straggler,
late for the fray. One plane! Thurston's shoulders sagged heavily. All
they had left! It went swiftly overhead.... It was fast--fast. Thurston
suddenly knew. It was Riley in that plane.

"Go back, you fool!"--he was screaming at the top of his
voice--"Back--back--you poor, damned, decent Irishman!"

Tears were streaming down his face. "His buddies," Riley had said. And
this was Riley, driving swiftly in, alone, to avenge them....

He saw dimly as the swift plane sped over the first bulb, on and over
the second. The soft roar of gas from the machines drowned the sound of
his engine. The plane passed them in silence to bank sharply toward the
third corner of the forming square.

He was looking them over, Thurston thought. And the damn beasts
disregarded so contemptible an opponent. He could still leave. "For
God's sake, Riley, beat it--escape!"

Thurston's mind was solely on the fate of the lone voyager--until the
impossible was borne in upon him.

The square was disrupted. Three great bulbs were now drifting. The wind
was carrying them out toward the bay. They were coming down in a long,
smooth descent. The plane shot like a winged rocket at the fourth great,
shining ball. To the watcher, aghast with sudden hope, it seemed barely
to crawl.

"The ray! The ray...." Thurston saw as if straining eyes had pierced
through the distance to see the invisible. He saw from below the swift
plane, the streaming, intangible ray. That was why Riley had flown
closely past and above them--the ray poured from below. His throat was
choking him, strangling....

       *       *       *       *       *

The last enemy took alarm. Had it seen the slow sinking of its
companions, failed to hear them in reply to his mental call? The shining
pear shape shot violently upward; the attacking plane rolled to a
vertical bank as it missed the threatening clouds of exhaust. "What do
you know about dog-fights?" And Riley had grinned ... Riley belonged!

The bulb swelled before Thurston's eyes in its swift descent. It canted
to one side to head off the struggling plane that could never escape,
did not try to escape. The steady wings held true upon their straight
course. From above came the silver meteor; it seemed striking at the
very plane itself. It was almost upon it before it belched forth the
cushioning blast of gas.

Through the forming clouds a plane bored in swiftly. It rolled slowly,
was flying upside down. It was under the enemy! Its ray.... Thurston was
thrown a score of feet away to crash helpless into the stone coping by
the thunderous crash of the explosion.

There were fragments falling from a dense cloud--fragments of curved and
silvery metal ... the wing of a plane danced and fluttered in the
air....

"He fired its bombs," whispered Thurston in a shaking voice. "He killed
the other devils where they lay--he destroyed this with its own
explosive. He flew upside down to shoot up with the ray, to set off its
shells...."

His mind was fumbling with the miracle of it. "Clever pilot, Riley, in a
dog-fight...." And then he realized.

Cyrus Thurston, millionaire sportsman, sank slowly, numbly to the roof
of the Equitable Building that still stood. And New York was still there
... and the whole world....

He sobbed weakly, brokenly. Through his dazed brain flashed a sudden,
mind-saving thought. He laughed foolishly through his sobs.

"And you said he'd die horribly, Mac, a horrible death." His head
