I could get it.

It was a good thing Uncle John didn't come bustling back after
something he'd forgotten that afternoon.

I didn't get around to quitting my job that afternoon. Later on that
evening, I took her home. She wanted me to come in and meet her
parents, yet! But I begged off that--and then she came up with a
snapper. "But we will be married, Johnny darling. Won't we? Real soon!"

"Uh," I said, making a quick mental plane reservation for Rio, "sure,
Doll. Sure we will." I broke away right quick after that. There was a
problem I wanted to get a little advice on.

What I did get, actually, was a nasty shock.

Back in my apartment--my big, new, plush apartment--I sat down to go
over the thing with the Department of the Interior. The enthusiastic
response I got surprised me. "Magnificent," was the word. "Superb.
Great!"

Well, I thought myself that I had turned in a pretty outstanding
performance, but I hadn't expected such applause. "It is a first step,
a splendid beginning! A fully equipped, well-armed expedition will have
the place settled, under cultivation and reasonably civilized inside of
a day or two, your time. It will be simple for them. So much more so
than in your case--since we now know precisely what to expect."


I was truly shocked. I felt guilty. "No!" I said. "Oh, no! What a thing
to do. You _can't_!"

"Now, now. Gently," they said. "What, after all, oh Fatherland, might
be the perfectly natural consequences of your own act?"

"What? You mean under other--that is----"

"Exactly. You could very well have implanted a new life in her, which
is all that we have done. Why should our doing so disturb you?"

Well, it did disturb me. But then, as they pointed out, they could have
developed less pleasant methods of spreading colonies. They had merely
decided that this approach would be the surest and simplest.

"Well, maybe," I told them, "but it still seems kind of sneaky to me.
Besides, if you'd left it to me, I'd certainly never have picked a
great big ox like Helga. And now she says she's going to marry me,
too!"

"You do not wish this? We understand. Do not be concerned. We
will--ah--send instructions to our people the next time. She will
change her feelings about this."

She dropped the marriage bit completely.

We had what you might call an idyllic association, in spite of her
being such a big, husky model--a fact which never bothered me when I
was with her. "She is happy," I was assured, "very happy." She seemed
pleased and contented enough, even if she developed, I thought, a sort
of an inward look about her. She and I never discussed our--uh--people.
We had a fast whirl for a couple of weeks. And then I'd quit my job
with Uncle John, and we sort of drifted apart.

Next thing I heard of her, she married Uncle John.

Well. I have my doubts about how faithful a wife she was to him, but
certainly she seemed to make him happy. And my government assured me
Uncle John was not colonized. "Too late," they said. "He is too old to
be worth the risk of settling." But they respected my scruples about my
uncle's wife and direct communication with Helgaland was broken off.

But there were others.


IV

For the next nine years--things came easy for me. I suppose the
restrictions, the lack of freedom should have made me a lot more
dissatisfied than I was. I know, though they didn't say so, that my
people did a little manipulating of my moods by jiggering the glands
and hormones or something. It must have been that with the women.

I know that after Helga I felt guilty about the whole thing. I wouldn't
do it again. But then one afternoon I was painting that big amazon of a
model and--Wow!

I couldn't help it. So, actually, I don't feel I should be blamed too
much if, after the first couple of times, I quit trying to desert, so
to speak.

And time went by, although you wouldn't have guessed it to look at me.
I didn't age. My health was perfect. Well, there were a couple of very
light headaches and a touch of fever, but that was only politics.

There were a couple of pretty tight elections which, of course, I
followed fairly closely. After all, I had my vote, along with everyone
else and I didn't want to waste it--even though, really, the political
parties were pretty much the same and the elections were more questions
of personality than anything else.

Then one afternoon I went to my broker's office to shift around a few
investments according to plans worked out the night before. I gave my
instructions. Old man Henry Schnable checked over the notes he had
made.

"Now that's a funny thing," he said.

"You think I'm making a mistake?"

"Oh, no. You never have yet, so I don't suppose you are now. The funny
thing is that your moves here are almost exactly the same as those
another very unusual customer of mine gave me over the phone not an
hour ago."

"Oh?" There was nothing very interesting about that. But, oddly enough,
I was very interested.

"Yes. Miss Julia Reede. Only a child really, 21, but a brilliant girl.
Possibly a genius. She comes from some little town up in the mountains.
She has been in town here for just the past six months and her
investments--well! Now I come to think about it, I believe they have
very closely paralleled yours all along the line. Fabulously
successful. You advising her?"

"Never heard of the girl."

"Well, you really should meet her, Mr. Barth. You two have so much in
common, and such lovely investments. Why don't you wait around? Miss
Reede is coming in to sign some papers this afternoon. You two should
know each other."


He was right. We _should_ know each other. I could feel it.

"Well, Henry," I said, "perhaps I will wait. I've got nothing else to
do this afternoon."

That was a lie. I had plenty of things to do, including a date with the
captain of a visiting women's track team from Finland. Strangely, my
people and I were in full agreement on standing up the chesty Finn, let
the javelins fall where they may.

Henry was surprised too. "You are going to wait for her? Uh. Well now,
Mr. Barth, your reputation--ah--that is, she's only a child, you know,
from the country."

The buzzer on his desk sounded. His secretary spoke up on the intercom.
"Miss Reede is here."

Miss Reede came right on in the door without waiting for a further
invitation.

We stood there gaping at each other. She was small, about 5'2" maybe,
with short, black, curly hair, surface-cool green eyes with fire
