seventy yards in circumference. In the clear space left between the
horde and the edge of the pit was a smaller group, among them the
old king himself.

Powell's heart leaped as he noted that the Silver Belts were still
draped over the mangy old monarch's shoulders. If only he and Joan
could get their hands on those precious Belts before Benjamin
Marlowe broadcast the recall wave that would forever snatch them out
of their reach!

       *       *       *       *       *

The captives were hurried through the main horde and taken in charge
by a score of picked guards who herded them on to join a small group
of four rat-men near the pit's edge. These four rodents were
apparently also prisoners, for their arms were firmly bound behind
them.

The rat-king, accompanied only by the metal-collared leader, around
whose shoulders the gun-belt was still draped, stood near the pit's
edge some ten yards distant from the guards and captives. Between
the prisoners and the rodent monarch the edge of the pit jutted out
in a narrow tongue of rock that extended outward for about twenty
feet over the pit.

Joan and Powell had barely taken their place with the other captives
when an abrupt and familiar sound drew their attention to the floor
of the pit some thirty feet beneath them. Its smooth sandy bottom
was clearly visible from where they stood. And there on that sandy
floor were six great gleaming shapes of menace which brought
involuntary gasps of horrified amazement to the captives' lips.

The faint musical tinkling sound as the things moved in occasional
ponderous restlessness was unmistakable. Joan and Powell realized
that the amazing organisms responsible for the mysterious Tinkling
Death were at last before them.

The things were giant _living_ crystals--great silvery
semi-transparent shapes nearly ten feet in height, their faceted
sides pulsing in sinister and incredible life as they gleamed in
unearthly beauty beneath the blazing rays of the red moon!

Near the center of each of the giant crystals there was visible
through the semi-transparent wall a large inner nucleus of sullen
opalescence that ceaselessly swirled and eddied.

Their powers of movement were apparently limited to a slow,
ponderous, half-rocking, half-rolling progress on their heavy
rounded bases. They were now grouped in a rough semicircle just
under the edge of the rocky projection that extended out over the
pit. The opalescent nucleus in every silvery faceted form seemed to
be "watching" with frightening intensity the figures on the pit's
edge above them.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no mistaking the meaning of the scene. The giant
carnivorous crystals had obviously been lured from their normal
habitat in Arret's red vegetation, and established there in the big
pit by the rat-men to act as principals in their primitive religious
ceremonies.

Those Devil Crystals waiting down there on the pit's floor were
waiting to be fed--and the small group of captives, rat-men and
human beings, were to be the feast!

Utterly sick at heart, Powell wondered if they would at least be
given the boon of a merciful death before being hurled over the
brink to those lurking shapes. He was not left long in doubt.

At a shrill command from the rat-king the guards closed in upon the
captives and herded two of the bound rat-men from among them. A
guard placed to the lips of each of the captive brutes a small cup
containing a faintly cloudy white liquid. Apparently resigned to
their fate, the creatures docilely drained the cups.

The drugged drinks acted with startling rapidity. Scarcely a minute
passed before the rodents' eyes clouded dully, their jaws dropped
slackly open, and their bodies stiffened in almost complete
rigidity.

The bonds were quickly stripped from the two stupefied creatures.
The ceremonial rites apparently required that the victims go to
their doom unbound and of their own volition. The guards maneuvered
the two over to the rocky projection that jutted out over the pit.

Moving with the stiffly wooden steps of automatons, the two victims
started out along the narrow projection, leaving the guards behind.
On they marched, straight for the end of the rocky strip--and then,
without a second's hesitation, they plunged on and over.

Their bodies crashed to the pit's floor squarely among the group of
waiting crystals. One of the rat-men lay motionless. The other
dazedly tried to struggle to his feet--but was too late.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the side of the nearest Devil Crystal, some fifteen feet away
from the dazed rat-man, a cone-shaped projection budded with
startling swiftness.

A fraction of a second more and the projection had lengthened into a
long slender arm of crystalline silver that streaked across the
intervening space with the swiftness of a spear.

There was a crashing, tinkling sound as the point of the arm struck
the furry body of the rat-man. Then the arm's point sprayed into a
web of shining filaments that laced the rodent's body inexorably in
their web.

The arm immediately contracted, jerking the victim irresistibly
toward the waiting crystal. A second later the rat-man was pinned
against the faceted crystalline side just under the opalescent
nucleus.

The moment the furry body made contact with the crystal's side a
terrifying phenomenon occurred. Crystals grew and spread all over
its form with the lightning growth of water-glass. Faster and faster
clustered the crystalline shroud, until the furry body was lanced
through and through--and all the time the air was filled with
eldritch music as of a thousand sheets of thinnest glass crashing,
tinkling and shattering.

The crystal growths over the imprisoned body rounded their contours
and merged together until they were in the form of a great
crystalline egg. The outlines of the rodent's body blurred and
vanished, melting swiftly until only a diamond-encrusted skeleton
was left. The color of the great Devil Crystal began to gleam pink
as the victim's flesh and blood were absorbed.

The egg-like excrescence under the nucleus turned in hue to pale
translucent amber in whose depths the diamond skeleton gleamed with
weird brilliance. Then there came a sudden twang, as of a violently
plucked string on a bass viol, and the amber egg dropped from the
faceted side. The Crystal's feast was over.

One of the most terrifying aspects of the whole thing had been its
incredible speed. The entire tragedy had occurred in but little over
two minutes from the time the lance-arm had first struck the
rat-man.

In the meantime the body of the second rodent had been drawn in and
devoured by another of the carnivorous crystalline monsters. There
came a second twang now, as its skeleton in its amber shroud was
discarded.

       *       *       *       *       *

Powell's brain reeled as he saw the other crystals move sluggishly
nearer the foot of the rocky projection in anticipation of the next
victims.
