long-continued close interbreeding. Those who have compiled works on
agriculture, and have associated much with breeders, such as the sagacious
Youatt, Low, etc., have strongly declared their opinion to the same effect.
Prosper Lucas, trusting largely to French authorities, has come to a similar
conclusion. The distinguished German agriculturist Hermann von Nathusius, who
has written the most able treatise on this subject which I have met with,
concurs; and as I shall have to quote from this treatise, I may state that
Nathusius is not only intimately acquainted with works on agriculture in all
languages, and knows the pedigrees of our British breeds better than most
Englishmen, but has imported many of our improved animals, and is himself an
experienced breeder.

Evidence of the evil effects of close interbreeding can most readily be
acquired in the case of animals, such as fowls, pigeons, etc., which propagate
quickly, and, from being kept in the same place, are exposed to the same
conditions. Now I have inquired of very many breeders of these birds, and I
have hitherto not met with a single man who was not thoroughly convinced that
an occasional cross with another strain of the same sub-variety was absolutely
necessary. Most breeders of highly improved or fancy birds value their own
strain, and are most unwilling, at the risk, in their opinion, of
deterioration, to make a cross. The purchase of a first-rate bird of another
strain is expensive, and exchanges are troublesome; yet all breeders, as far
as I can hear, excepting those who keep large stocks at different places for
the sake of crossing, are driven after a time to take this step.

Another general consideration which has had great influence on my mind is,
that with all hermaphrodite animals and plants, which it might have been
thought would have perpetually fertilised themselves and been thus subjected
for long ages to the closest interbreeding, there is not a single species, as
far as I can discover, in which the structure ensures self-fertilisation. On
the contrary, there are in a multitude of cases, as briefly stated in the
fifteenth chapter, manifest adaptations which favour or inevitably lead to an
occasional cross between one hermaphrodite and another of the same species;
and these adaptive structures are utterly purposeless, as far as we can see,
for any other end.

[With CATTLE there can be no doubt that extremely close interbreeding may be
long carried on advantageously with respect to external characters, and with
no manifest evil as far as constitution is concerned. The case of Bakewell's
Longhorns, which were closely interbred for a long period, has often been
quoted; yet Youatt says (17/4. 'Cattle' page 199.) the breed "had acquired a
delicacy of constitution inconsistent with common management," and "the
propagation of the species was not always certain." But the Shorthorns offer
the most striking case of close interbreeding; for instance, the famous bull
Favourite (who was himself the offspring of a half-brother and sister from
Foljambe) was matched with his own daughter, granddaughter, and great-
granddaughter; so that the produce of this last union, or the great-great-
granddaughter, had 15-16ths, or 93.75 per cent of the blood of Favourite in
her veins. This cow was matched with the bull Wellington, having 62.5 per cent
of Favourite blood in his veins, and produced Clarissa; Clarissa was matched
with the bull Lancaster, having 68.75 of the same blood, and she yielded
valuable offspring. (17/5. I give this on the authority of Nathusius 'Ueber
Shorthorn Rindvieh' 1857 s. 71, see also 'Gardeners Chronicle' 1860 page 270.
But Mr. J. Storer, a large breeder of cattle, informs me that the parentage of
Clarissa is not well authenticated. In the first volume of the 'Herd Book' she
was entered as having six descents from Favourite, "which was a palpable
mistake," and in all subsequent editions she was spoken of as having only four
descents. Mr. Storer doubts even about the four, as no names of the dams are
given. Moreover, Clarissa bore "only two bulls and one heifer, and in the next
generation her progeny became extinct." Analogous cases of close interbreeding
are given in a pamphlet published by Mr. C. Macknight and Dr. H. Madden 'On
the True Principles of Breeding' Melbourne Australia 1865.) Nevertheless
Collings, who reared these animals, and was a strong advocate for close
breeding, once crossed his stock with a Galloway, and the cows from this cross
realised the highest prices. Bates's herd was esteemed the most celebrated in
the world. For thirteen years he bred most closely in and in; but during the
next seventeen years, though he had the most exalted notion of the value of
his own stock, he thrice infused fresh blood into his herd: it is said that he
did this, not to improve the form of his animals, but on account of their
lessened fertility. Mr. Bates's own view, as given by a celebrated breeder
(17/6. Mr. Willoughby Wood in 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1855 page 411; and 1860
page 270. See the very clear tables and pedigrees given in Nathusius
'Rindvieh' s. 72-77.), was, that "to breed in-and-in from a bad stock was ruin
and devastation; yet that the practice may be safely followed within certain
limits when the parents so related are descended from first-rate animals." We
thus see that there has been much close interbreeding with Shorthorns; but
Nathusius, after the most careful study of their pedigrees, says that he can
find no instance of a breeder who has strictly followed this practice during
his whole life. From this study and his own experience, he concludes that
close interbreeding is necessary to ennoble the stock; but that in effecting
this the greatest care is necessary, on account of the tendency to infertility
and weakness. It may be added, that another high authority (17/7. Mr. Wright
'Journal of Royal Agricult. Soc.' volume 7 1846 page 204. Mr. J. Downing (a
successful breeder of Shorthorns in Ireland) informs me that the raisers of
the great families of Shorthorns carefully conceal their sterility and want of
constitution. He adds that Mr. Bates, after he had bred his herd in-and-in for
some years, "lost in one season twenty-eight calves solely from want of
constitution.") asserts that many more calves are born cripples from
Shorthorns than from other and less closely interbred races of cattle.

Although by carefully selecting the best animals (as Nature effectually does
by the law of battle) close interbreeding may be long carried on with cattle,
yet the good effects of a cross between almost any two breeds is at once shown
by the greater size and vigour of the offspring; as Mr. Spooner writes to me,
"crossing distinct breeds certainly improves cattle for the butcher." Such
crossed animals are of course of no value to the breeder; but they have been
raised during many years in several parts of England to be slaughtered (17/8.
'Youatt on Cattle' page 202.); and their merit is now so fully recognised,
that at fat-cattle shows a separate class has been formed for their reception.
The best fat ox at the great show at Islington in 1862 was a crossed animal.

The half-wild cattle, which have been kept in British parks probably for 400
or 500 years, or even for a longer period, have been advanced by Culley and
others as a case of long-continued interbreeding within the limits of the same
herd without any consequent injury. With respect to the cattle at Chillingham,
the late Lord Tankerville owned that they were bad breeders. (17/9. 'Report
British Assoc. Zoolog. Sect.' 1838.) The agent, Mr. Hardy, estimates (in a
letter to me, dated May, 1861) that in the herd of about fifty the average
number annually slaughtered, killed by fighting, and dying, is about ten, or
one in five. As the herd is kept up to nearly the same average number, the
annual rate of increase must be likewise about one in five. The bulls, I may
add, engage in furious battles, of which battles the present Lord Tankerville
has given me a graphic description, so that there will always be rigorous
selection of the most vigorous males. I procured in 1855 from Mr. D. Gardner,
agent to the Duke of Hamilton, the following account of the wild cattle kept
in the Duke's park in Lanarkshire, which is about 200 acres in extent. The
number of cattle varies from sixty-five to eighty; and the number annually
killed (I presume by all causes) is from eight to ten; so that the annual rate
of increase can hardly be more than one in six. Now in South America, where
the herds are half-wild, and therefore offer a nearly fair standard of
comparison, according to Azara the natural increase of the cattle on an
estancia is from one-third to one-fourth of the total number, or one in
between three and four and this, no doubt, applies exclusively to adult
animals fit for consumption. Hence the half-wild British cattle which have
long interbred within the limits of the same herd are relatively far less
fertile. Although in an unenclosed country like Paraguay there must be some
crossing between the different herds, yet even there the inhabitants believe
that the occasional introduction of animals from distant localities is
necessary to prevent "degeneration in size and diminution of fertility."
(17/10. Azara 'Quadrupedes du Paraguay' tome 2 pages 354, 368.) The decrease
in size from ancient times in the Chillingham and Hamilton cattle must have
been prodigious, for Professor Rutimeyer has shown that they are almost
certainly the descendants of the gigantic Bos primigenius. No doubt this
decrease in size may be largely attributed to less favourable conditions of
life; yet animals roaming over large parks, and fed during severe winters, can
hardly be considered as placed under very unfavourable conditions.

With SHEEP there has often been long-continued interbreeding within the limits
of the same flock; but whether the nearest relations have been matched so
frequently as in the case of Shorthorn cattle, I do not know. The Messrs.
Brown during fifty years have never infused fresh blood into their excellent
flock of Leicesters. Since 1810 Mr. Barford has acted on the same principle
with the Foscote flock. He asserts that half a century of experience has
convinced him that when two nearly related animals are quite sound in
constitution, in-and-in breeding does not induce degeneracy; but he adds that
he "does not pride himself on breeding from the nearest affinities." In France
the Naz flock has been bred for sixty years without the introduction of a
single strange ram. (17/11. For the case of the Messrs. Brown see 'Gardener's
Chronicle' 1855 page 26. For the Foscote flock 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1860
page 416. For the Naz flock 'Bull. de la Soc. d'Acclimat.' 1860 page 477.)
Nevertheless, most great breeders of sheep have protested against close
interbreeding prolonged for too great a length of time. (17/12. Nathusius
'Rindvieh' s. 65; 'Youatt on Sheep' page 495.) The most celebrated of recent
breeders, Jonas Webb, kept five separate families to work on, thus "retaining
the requisite distance of relationship between the sexes" (17/13. 'Gardener's
Chronicle' 1861 page 631.); and what is probably of greater importance, the
separate flocks will have been exposed to somewhat different conditions.

Although by the aid of careful selection the near interbreeding of sheep may
be long continued without any manifest evil, yet it has often been the
practice with farmers to cross distinct breeds to obtain animals for the
butcher, which plainly shows that good of some kind is derived from this
practice. We have excellent evidence on this head from Mr. S. Druce (17/14.
'Journal R. Agricult. Soc.' volume 14 1853 page 212.), who gives in detail the
comparative numbers of four pure breeds and of a cross-breed which can be
supported on the same ground, and he gives their produce in fleece and
carcase. A high authority, Mr. Pusey, sums up the result in money value during
an equal length of time, namely (neglecting shillings), for Cotswolds 248
pounds, for Leicesters 223 pounds, for Southdowns 204 pounds, for Hampshire
Downs 264 pounds, and for the crossbred 293 pounds. A former celebrated
breeder, Lord Somerville, states that his half-breeds from Ryelands and
Spanish sheep were larger animals than either the pure Ryelands or pure
Spanish sheep. Mr. Spooner concludes his excellent Essay on Crossing by
asserting that there is a pecuniary advantage in judicious cross-breeding,
especially when the male is larger than the female. (17/15. Lord Somerville
'Facts on Sheep and Husbandry' page 6. Mr. Spooner in 'Journal of Royal
Agricult. Soc. of England' volume 20 part 2. See also an excellent paper on
the same subject in 'Gardener's Chronicle' 1860 page 321 by Mr. Charles
Howard.)

As some of our British parks are ancient, it occurred to me that there must
have been long-continued close interbreeding with the fallow-deer (Cervus
dama) kept in them; but on inquiry I find that it is a common practice to
infuse new blood by procuring bucks from other parks. Mr. Shirley (17/16.
'Some Account of English Deer Parks' by Evelyn P. Shirley 1867.), who has
carefully studied the management of deer, admits that in some parks there has
been no admixture of foreign blood from a time beyond the memory of man. But
he concludes "that in the end the constant breeding in-and-in is sure to tell
to the disadvantage of the whole herd, though it may take a very long time to
prove it; moreover, when we find, as is very constantly the case, that the
introduction of fresh blood has been of the very greatest use to deer, both by
improving their size and appearance, and particularly by being of service in
removing the taint of 'rickback,' if not of other diseases, to which deer are
sometimes subject when the blood has not been changed, there can, I think, be
no doubt but that a judicious cross with a good stock is of the greatest
consequence, and is indeed essential, sooner or later, to the prosperity of
every well-ordered park."

Mr. Meynell's famous foxhounds have been adduced, as showing that no ill
effects follow from close interbreeding; and Sir J. Sebright ascertained from
him that he frequently bred from father and daughter, mother and son, and
sometimes even from brothers and sisters. With greyhounds also there has been
much close interbreeding, but the best breeders agree that it may be carried
too far. (17/17. Stonehenge 'The Dog' 1867 pages 175-188.) But Sir J. Sebright
declares (17/18. 'The Art of Improving the Breed' etc. page 13. With respect
to Scotch deerhounds see Scrope 'Art of Deer Stalking' pages 350-353.), that
by breeding in-and-in, by which he means matching brothers and sisters, he has
actually seen the offspring of strong spaniels degenerate into weak and
diminutive lapdogs. The Rev. W.D. Fox has communicated to me the case of a
small lot of bloodhounds, long kept in the same family, which had become very
bad breeders, and nearly all had a bony enlargement in the tail. A single
cross with a distinct strain of bloodhounds restored their fertility, and
drove away the tendency to malformation in the tail. I have heard the
particulars of another case with bloodhounds, in which the female had to be
held to the male. Considering how rapid is the natural increase of the dog, it
is difficult to understand the large price of all highly improved breeds,
which almost implies long-continued close interbreeding, except on the belief
that this process lessens fertility and increases liability to distemper and
other diseases. A high authority, Mr. Scrope, attributes the rarity and
deterioration in size of the Scotch deerhound (the few individuals formerly
existing throughout the country being all related) in large part to close
interbreeding.

With all highly-bred animals there is more or less difficulty in getting them
to procreate quickly, and all suffer much from delicacy of constitution. A
great judge of rabbits (17/19. 'Cottage Gardener' 1861 page 327.) says, "the
long-eared does are often too highly bred or forced in their youth to be of
much value as breeders, often turning out barren or bad mothers." They often
desert their young, so that it is necessary to have nurse-rabbits, but I do
not pretend to attribute all these evil results to close interbreeding.
(17/20. Mr. Huth gives ('The Marriage of Near Kin' 1875 page 302) from the
'Bulletin de l'Acad. R. de Med. de Belgique' (volume 9 1866 pages 287, 305),
several statements made by a M. Legrain with respect to crossing brother and
sister rabbits for five or six successive generations with no consequent evil
results. I was so much surprised at this account, and at M. Legrain's
invariable success in his experiments, that I wrote to a distinguished
naturalist in Belgium to inquire whether M. Legrain was a trustworthy
observer. In answer, I have heard that, as doubts were expressed about the
authenticity of these experiments, a commission of inquiry was appointed, and
that at a succeeding meeting of the Society ('Bull. de l'Acad. R. de Med. de
Belgique' 1867 3rd series tome 1 no. 1 to 5), Dr. Crocq reported "qu'il etait
materiellement impossible que M. Legrain ait fait les experiences qu'il
annonce." To this public accusation no satisfactory answer was made.)

With respect to PIGS there is more unanimity amongst breeders on the evil
effects of close interbreeding than, perhaps, with any other large animal. Mr.
Druce, a great and successful breeder of the Improved Oxfordshires (a crossed
race), writes, "without a change of boars of a different tribe, but of the
same breed, constitution cannot be preserved." Mr. Fisher Hobbs, the raiser of
the celebrated Improved Essex breed, divided his stock into three separate
families, by which means he maintained the breed for more than twenty years,
"by judicious selection from the THREE DISTINCT FAMILIES." (17/21. Sidney's
edition of 'Youatt on the Pig' 1860 page 30; page 33 quotation from Mr. Druce;
page 29 on Lord Western's case.) Lord Western was the first importer of a
Neapolitan boar and sow. "From this pair he bred in-and-in, until the breed
was in danger of becoming extinct, a sure result (as Mr. Sidney remarks) of
in-and-in breeding." Lord Western then crossed his Neapolitan pigs with the
old Essex, and made the first great step towards the Improved Essex breed.
Here is a more interesting case. Mr. J. Wright, well known as a breeder,
crossed (17/22. 'Journal of Royal Agricult. Soc. of England' 1846 volume 7
page 205.) the same boar with the daughter, granddaughter, and great-
granddaughter, and so on for seven generations. The result was, that in many
instances the offspring failed to breed; in others they produced few that
lived; and of the latter many were idiotic, without sense, even to suck, and
when attempting to move could not walk straight. Now it deserves especial
notice, that the two last sows produced by this long course of interbreeding
were sent to other boars, and they bore several litters of healthy pigs. The
best sow in external appearance produced during the whole seven generations
was one in the last stage of descent; but the litter consisted of this one
sow. She would not breed to her sire, yet bred at the first trial to a
stranger in blood. So that, in Mr. Wright's case, long-continued and extremely
close interbreeding did not affect the external form or merit of the young;
but with many of them the general constitution and mental powers, and
especially the reproductive functions, were seriously affected.

Nathusius gives (17/23. 'Ueber Rindvieh' etc. s. 78. Col. Le Couteur, who has
done so much for the agriculture of Jersey, writes to me that from possessing
a fine breed of pigs he bred them very closely, twice pairing brothers and
sisters, but nearly all the young had fits and died suddenly.) an analogous
and even more striking case: he imported from England a pregnant sow of the
large Yorkshire breed, and bred the product closely in-and-in for three
generations: the result was unfavourable, as the young were weak in
constitution, with impaired fertility. One of the latest sows, which he
esteemed a good animal, produced, when paired with her own uncle (who was
known to be productive with sows of other breeds), a litter of six, and a
second time a litter of only five weak young pigs. He then paired this sow
with a boar of a small black breed, which he had likewise imported from
England; this boar, when matched with sows of his own breed, produced from
seven to nine young. Now, the sow of the large breed, which was so
unproductive when paired with her own uncle, yielded to the small black boar,
in the first litter twenty-one, and in the second litter eighteen young pigs;
so that in one year she produced thirty-nine fine young animals!

As in the case of several other animals already mentioned, even when no injury
is perceptible from moderately close interbreeding, yet, to quote the words of
Mr. Coate (who five times won the annual gold medal of the Smithfield Club
Show for the best pen of pigs), "Crosses answer well for profit to the farmer,
as you get more constitution and quicker growth; but for me, who sell a great
number of pigs for breeding purposes, I find it will not do, as it requires
many years to get anything like purity of blood again." (17/24. Sidney on the
'Pig' page 36. See also note page 34. Also Richardson on the 'Pig' 1847 page
26.)]

Almost all the animals as yet mentioned are gregarious, and the males must
frequently pair with their own daughters, for they expel the young males as
well as all intruders, until forced by old age and loss of strength to yield
to some stronger male. It is therefore not improbable that gregarious animals
may have been rendered less susceptible than non-social species to the evil
consequences of close interbreeding, so that they may be enabled to live in
herds without injury to their offspring. Unfortunately we do not know whether
an animal like the cat, which is not gregarious, would suffer from close
interbreeding in a greater degree than our other domesticated animals. But the
pig is not, as far as I can discover, strictly gregarious, and we have seen
that it appears eminently liable to the evil effects of close interbreeding.
Mr. Huth, in the case of the pig, attributes (page 285) these effects to their
having been "cultivated most for their fat," or to the selected individuals
having had a weak constitution; but we must remember that it is great breeders
who have brought forward the above cases, and who are far more familiar than
ordinary men can be, with the causes which are likely to interfere with the
fertility of their animals.

The effects of close interbreeding in the case of man is a difficult subject,
on which I will say but little. It has been discussed by various authors under
many points of view. (17/25. Dr. Dally has published an excellent article
(translated in the 'Anthropolog. Review' May 1864 page 65), criticising all
writers who have maintained that evil follows from consanguineous marriages.
No doubt on this side of the question many advocates have injured their cause
by inaccuracies: thus it has been stated (Devay 'Du Danger des Mariages' etc.
1862 page 141) that the marriages of cousins have been prohibited by the
legislature of Ohio; but I have been assured, in answer to inquiries made in
the United States, that this statement is a mere fable.) Mr. Tylor (17/26. See
his interesting work on the 'Early History of Man' 1865 chapter 10.) has shown
that with widely different races in the most distant quarters of the world,
marriages between relations--even between distant relations--have been
strictly prohibited. There are, however, many exceptions to the rule, which
are fully given by Mr. Huth (17/27. 'The Marriage of Near Kin' 1875. The
evidence given by Mr. Huth would, I think, have been even more valuable than
it is on this and some other points, if he had referred solely to the works of
men who had long resided in each country referred to, and who showed that they
possessed judgment and caution. See also Mr. W. Adam 'On Consanguinity in
Marriage' in the 'Fortnightly Review' 1865 page 710. Also Hofacker 'Ueber die
Eigenschaften' etc. 1828.) It is a curious problem how these prohibitions
arose during early and barbarous times. Mr. Tylor is inclined to attribute
them to the evil effects of consanguineous marriages having been observed; and
he ingeniously attempts to explain some apparent anomalies in the prohibition
not extending equally to the relations on the male and female side. He admits,
however, that other causes, such as the extension of friendly alliances, may
have come into play. Mr. W. Adam, on the other hand, concludes that related
marriages are prohibited and viewed with repugnance, from the confusion which
would thus arise in the descent of property, and from other still more
recondite reasons. But I cannot accept these views, seeing that incest is held
in abhorrence by savages such as those of Australia and South America (17/28.
Sir G. Grey 'Journal of Expeditions into Australia' volume 2 page 243; and
Dobrizhoffer 'On the Abipones of South America.'), who have no property to
bequeath, or fine moral feelings to confuse, and who are not likely to reflect
on distant evils to their progeny. According to Mr. Huth the feeling is the
indirect result of exogamy, inasmuch as when this practice ceased in any tribe
and it became endogamous, so that marriages were strictly confined to the same
tribe, it is not unlikely that a vestige of the former practice would still be
retained, so that closely-related marriages would be prohibited. With respect
to exogamy itself Mr. MacLennan believes that it arose from a scarcity of
women, owing to female infanticide, aided perhaps by other causes.

It has been clearly shown by Mr. Huth that there is no instinctive feeling in
man against incest any more than in gregarious animals. We know also how
readily any prejudice or feeling may rise to abhorrence, as shown by Hindus in
regard to objects causing defilement. Although there seems to be no strong
inherited feeling in mankind against incest, it seems possible that men during
primeval times may have been more excited by strange females than by those
with whom they habitually lived; in the same manner as according to Mr.
Cupples (17/29. 'Descent of Man' 2nd. edit page 524.), male deerhounds are
inclined towards strange females, while the females prefer dogs with whom they
have associated. If any such feeling formerly existed in man, this would have
led to a preference for marriages beyond the nearest kin, and might have been
strengthened by the offspring of such marriages surviving in greater numbers,
as analogy would lead us to believe would have occurred.

Whether consanguineous marriages, such as are permitted in civilised nations,
and which would not be considered as close interbreeding in the case of our
domesticated animals, cause any injury will never be known with certainty
until a census is taken with this object in view. My son, George Darwin, has
done what is possible at present by a statistical investigation (17/30.
'Journal of Statistical Soc.' June 1875 page 153; and 'Fortnightly Review'
June 1875.), and he has come to the conclusion, from his own researches and
those of Dr. Mitchell, that the evidence as to any evil thus caused is
conflicting, but on the whole points to the evil being very small.

[BIRDS.

In the case of the FOWL a whole array of authorities could be given against
too close interbreeding. Sir J. Sebright positively asserts that he made many
trials, and that his fowls, when thus treated, became long in the legs, small
in the body, and bad breeders. (17/31. 'The Art of Improving the Breed' page
13.) He produced the famous Sebright Bantams by complicated crosses, and by
breeding in-and-in; and since his time there has been much close interbreeding
with these animals; and they are now notoriously bad breeders. I have seen
Silver Bantams, directly descended from his stock, which had become almost as
barren as hybrids; for not a single chicken had been that year hatched from
two full nests of eggs. Mr. Hewitt says that with these Bantams the sterility
of the male stands, with rare exceptions, in the closest relation with their
loss of certain secondary male characters: he adds, "I have noticed, as a
general rule, that even the slightest deviation from feminine character in the
tail of the male Sebright--say the elongation by only half an inch of the two
principal tail feathers--brings with it improved probability of increased
fertility." (17/32. 'The Poultry Book' by W.B. Tegetmeier 1866 page 245.)

Mr. Wright states (17/33. 'Journal Royal Agricult. Soc.' 1846 volume 7 page
205; see also Ferguson on the Fowl pages 83, 317; see also 'The Poultry Book'
by Tegetmeier 1866 page 135 with respect to the extent to which cock-fighters
found that they could venture to breed in-and-in, viz., occasionally a hen
with her own son; "but they were cautious not to repeat the in-and-in
breeding.") that Mr. Clark, "whose fighting-cocks were so notorious, continued
to breed from his own kind till they lost their disposition to fight, but
stood to be cut up without making any resistance, and were so reduced in size
as to be under those weights required for the best prizes; but on obtaining a
cross from Mr. Leighton, they again resumed their former courage and weight."
It should be borne in mind that game-cocks before they fought were always
weighed, so that nothing was left to the imagination about any reduction or
increase of weight. Mr. Clark does not seem to have bred from brothers and
sisters, which is the most injurious kind of union; and he found, after
repeated trials, that there was a greater reduction in weight in the young
from a father paired with his daughter, than from a mother with her son. I may
add that Mr. Eyton of Eyton, the well-known ornithologist, who is a large
breeder of Grey Dorkings, informs me that they certainly diminish in size, and
become less prolific, unless a cross with another strain is occasionally
obtained. So it is with Malays, according to Mr. Hewitt, as far as size is
concerned. (17/34. 'The Poultry Book' by W.B. Tegetmeier 1866 page 79.)

An experienced writer (17/35. 'The Poultry Chronicle' 1854 volume 1 page 43.)
remarks that the same amateur, as is well known, seldom long maintains the
superiority of his birds; and this, he adds, undoubtedly is due to all his
stock "being of the same blood;" hence it is indispensable that he should
occasionally procure a bird of another strain. But this is not necessary with
those who keep a stock of fowls at different stations. Thus, Mr. Ballance, who
has bred Malays for thirty years, and has won more prizes with these birds
than any other fancier in England, says that breeding in-and-in does not
necessarily cause deterioration; "but all depends upon how this is managed. My
plan has been to keep about five or six distinct runs, and to rear about two
hundred or three hundred chickens each year, and select the best birds from
each run for crossing. I thus secure sufficient crossing to prevent
deterioration." (17/36. 'The Poultry Book' by W.B. Tegetmeier 1866 page 79.)

We thus see that there is almost complete unanimity with poultry-breeders
that, when fowls are kept at the same place, evil quickly follows from
interbreeding carried on to an extent which would be disregarded in the case
of most quadrupeds. Moreover, it is a generally received opinion that cross-
bred chickens are the hardiest and most easily reared. (17/37. 'The Poultry
Chronicle' volume 1 page 89.) Mr. Tegetmeier, who has carefully attended to
poultry of all breeds, says (17/38. 'The Poultry Book' 1866 page 210.) that
Dorking hens, allowed to run with Houdan or Creve-coeur cocks, "produce in the
early spring chickens that for size, hardihood, early maturity, and fitness
for the market, surpass those of any pure breed that we have ever raised." Mr.
Hewitt gives it as a general rule with fowls, that crossing the breed
increases their size. He makes this remark after stating that hybrids from the
pheasant and fowl are considerably larger than either progenitor: so again,
hybrids from the male golden pheasant and female common pheasant "are of far
larger size than either parent-bird." (17/39. Ibid 1866 page 167; and 'Poultry
Chronicle' volume 3 1855 page 15.) To this subject of the increased size of
hybrids I shall presently return.

With PIGEONS, breeders are unanimous, as previously stated, that it is
absolutely indispensable, notwithstanding the trouble and expense thus caused,
occasionally to cross their much-prized birds with individuals of another
strain, but belonging, of course, to the same variety. It deserves notice
that, when size is one of the desired characters, as with pouters (17/40. 'A
Treatise on Fancy Pigeons' by J.M. Eaton page 56.) the evil effects of close
interbreeding are much sooner perceived than when small birds, such as short-
faced tumblers, are valued. The extreme delicacy of the high fancy breeds,
such as these tumblers and improved English carriers, is remarkable; they are
liable to many diseases, and often die in the egg or during the first moult;
and their eggs have generally to be hatched under foster-mothers. Although
these highly-prized birds have invariably been subjected to much close
interbreeding, yet their extreme delicacy of constitution cannot perhaps be
thus fully explained. Mr. Yarrell informed me that Sir J. Sebright continued
closely interbreeding some owl-pigeons, until from their extreme sterility he
as nearly as possible lost the whole family. Mr. Brent (17/41. 'The Pigeon
Book' page 46.) tried to raise a breed of trumpeters, by crossing a common
pigeon, and recrossing the daughter, granddaughter, great-granddaughter, and
great-great-granddaughter, with the same male trumpeter, until he obtained a
bird with 15/16 of trumpeter's blood; but then the experiment failed, for
"breeding so close stopped reproduction." The experienced Neumeister (17/42.
'Das Ganze der Taubenzucht' 1837 s. 18.) also asserts that the offspring from
dovecotes and various other breeds are "generally very fertile and hardy
birds:" so again MM. Boitard and Corbie (17/43. 'Les Pigeons' 1824 page 35.),
after forty-five years' experience, recommend persons to cross their breeds
for amusement; for, if they fail to make interesting birds, they will succeed
under an economical point of view, "as it is found that mongrels are more
fertile than pigeons of pure race."

I will refer only to one other animal, namely, the Hive-bee, because a
distinguished entomologist has advanced this as a case of inevitable close
interbreeding. As the hive is tenanted by a single female, it might have been
thought that her male and female offspring would always have bred together,
more especially as bees of different hives are hostile to each other; a
strange worker being almost always attacked when trying to enter another hive.
But Mr. Tegetmeier has shown (17/44. 'Proc. Entomolog. Soc.' August 6, 1860
page 126.) that this instinct does not apply to drones, which are permitted to
enter any hive; so that there is no a priori improbability of a queen
receiving a foreign drone. The fact of the union invariably and necessarily
taking place on the wing, during the queen's nuptial flight, seems to be a
special provision against continued interbreeding. However this may be,
experience has shown, since the introduction of the yellow-banded Ligurian
race into Germany and England, that bees freely cross: Mr. Woodbury, who
introduced Ligurian bees into Devonshire, found during a single season that
three stocks, at distances of from one to two miles from his hives, were
crossed by his drones. In one case the Ligurian drones must have flown over
the city of Exeter, and over several intermediate hives. On another occasion
several common black queens were crossed by Ligurian drones at a distance of
from one to three and a half miles. (17/45. 'Journal of Horticulture' 1861
pages 39, 77, 158; and 1864 page 206.)

PLANTS.

When a single plant of a new species is introduced into any country, if
propagated by seed, many individuals will soon be raised, so that if the
proper insects be present there will be crossing. With newly-introduced trees
or other plants not propagated by seed we are not here concerned. With old-
established plants it is an almost universal practice occasionally to make
exchanges of seed, by which means individuals which have been exposed to
different conditions of life,--and this, as we have seen with animals,
diminishes the evil from close interbreeding,--will occasionally be introduced
into each district.

With respect to individuals belonging to the same sub-variety, Gartner, whose
accuracy and experience exceeded that of all other observers, states (17/46.
'Beitrage zur Kenntniss der Befruchtung' 1844 s. 366.) that he has many times
observed good effects from this step, especially with exotic genera, of which
the fertility is somewhat impaired, such as Passiflora, Lobelia, Fuchsia.
Herbert also says (17/47. 'Amaryllidaceae' page 371.), "I am inclined to think
that I have derived advantage from impregnating the flower from which I wished
to obtain seed with pollen from another individual of the same variety, or at
least from another flower, rather than with its own." Again, Professor Lecoq
ascertained that crossed offspring are more vigorous and robust than their
parents. (17/48. 'De la Fecondation' 2nd edition 1862 page 79.)

General statements of this kind, however, can seldom be fully trusted: I
therefore began a long series of experiments, continued for about ten years,
which will I think conclusively show the good effects of crossing two distinct
plants of the same variety, and the evil effects of long-continued self-
fertilisation. A clear light will thus be thrown on such questions, as why
flowers are almost invariably constructed so as to permit, or favour, or
necessitate the union of two individuals. We shall clearly understand why
monoecious and dioecious,--why dichogamous, dimorphic and trimorphic plants
exist, and many other such cases. I intend soon to publish an account of these
experiments, and I can here give only a few cases in illustration. The plan
which I followed was to grow plants in the same pot, or in pots of the same
size, or close together in the open ground; carefully to exclude insects; and
then to fertilise some of the flowers with pollen from the same flower, and
others on the same plant with pollen from a distinct but adjoining plant. In
many of these experiments, the crossed plants yielded much more seed than the
self-fertilised plants; and I have never seen the reversed case. The self-
fertilised and crossed seeds thus obtained were allowed to germinate in the
same glass vessel on damp sand; and as the seeds germinated, they were planted
in pairs on opposite sides of the same pot, with a superficial partition
between them, and were placed so as to be equally exposed to the light. In
other cases the self-fertilised and crossed seeds were simply sown on opposite
sides of the same small pot. I have, in short, followed different plans, but
in every case have taken all the precautions which I could think of, so that
the two lots should be equally favoured. The growth of the plants raised from
the crossed and self-fertilised seed, were carefully observed from their
germination to maturity, in species belonging to fifty-two genera; and the
difference in their growth, and in withstanding unfavourable conditions, was
in most cases manifest and strongly marked. It is of importance that the two
lots of seed should be sown or planted on opposite sides of the same pot, so
that the seedlings may struggle against each other; for if sown separately in
ample and good soil, there is often but little difference in their growth.

I will briefly describe two of the first cases observed by me. Six crossed and
six self-fertilised seeds of Ipomoea purpurea, from plants treated in the
manner above described, were planted as soon as they had germinated, in pairs
on opposite sides of two pots, and rods of equal thickness were given them to
twine up. Five of the crossed plants grew from the first more quickly than the
opposed self-fertilised plants; the sixth, however, was weakly and was for a
time beaten, but at last its sounder constitution prevailed and it shot ahead
of its antagonist. As soon as each crossed plant reached the top of its seven-
foot rod its fellow was measured, and the result was that, when the crossed
plants were seven feet high the self-fertilised had attained the average
height of only five feet four and a half inches. The crossed plants flowered a
little before, and more profusely than the self-fertilised plants. On opposite
sides of another SMALL pot a large number of crossed and self-fertilised seeds
were sown, so that they had to struggle for bare existence; a single rod was
given to each lot: here again the crossed plants showed from the first their
advantage; they never quite reached the summit of the seven-foot rod, but
relatively to the self-fertilised plants their average height was as seven
feet to five feet two inches. The experiment was repeated during several
succeeding generations, treated in exactly the same manner, and with nearly
the same result. In the second generation, the crossed plants, which were
again crossed, produced 121 seed-capsules, whilst the self-fertilised, again
self-fertilised, produced only 84 capsules.

Some flowers of the Mimulus luteus were fertilised with their own pollen, and
others were crossed with pollen from distinct plants growing in the same pot.
The seeds were thickly sown on opposite sides of a pot. The seedlings were at
first equal in height; but when the young crossed plants were half an inch,
the self-fertilised plants were only a quarter of an inch high. But this
degree of inequality did not last, for, when the crossed plants were four and
a half inches high, the self-fertilised were three inches, and they retained
the same relative difference till their growth was complete. The crossed
plants looked far more vigorous than the uncrossed, and flowered before them;
they produced also a far greater number of capsules. As in the former case,
the experiment was repeated during several succeeding generations. Had I not
watched these plants of Mimulus and Ipomoea during their whole growth, I could
not have believed it possible, that a difference apparently so slight as that
of the pollen being taken from the same flower, or from a distinct plant
growing in the same pot, could have made so wonderful a difference in the
growth and vigour of the plants thus produced. This, under a physiological
point of view, is a most remarkable phenomenon.

With respect to the benefit derived from crossing distinct varieties, plenty
of evidence has been published. Sageret (17/49. 'Memoire sur les
Cucurbitacees' pages 36, 28, 30.) repeatedly speaks in strong terms of the
vigour of melons raised by crossing different varieties, and adds that they
are more easily fertilised than common melons, and produce numerous good seed.
Here follows the evidence of an English gardener (17/50. Loudon's 'Gardener's
Mag.' volume 8 1832 page 52.): "I have this summer met with better success in
my cultivation of melons, in an unprotected state, from the seeds of hybrids
(i.e. mongrels) obtained by cross impregnation, than with old varieties. The
offspring of three different hybridisations (one more especially, of which the
parents were the two most dissimilar varieties I could select) each yielded
more ample and finer produce than any one of between twenty and thirty
established varieties."

Andrew Knight (17/51. 'Transact. Hort. Soc.' volume 1 page 25.) believed that
his seedlings from crossed varieties of the apple exhibited increased vigour
and luxuriance; and M. Chevreul (17/52. 'Annal. des Sc. Nat.' 3rd series, Bot.
tome 6 page 189.) alludes to the extreme vigour of some of the crossed fruit-
trees raised by Sageret.

By crossing reciprocally the tallest and shortest peas, Knight (17/53.
'Philosophical Transactions' 1799 page 200.) says: "I had in this experiment a
striking instance of the stimulative effects of crossing the breeds; for the
smallest variety, whose height rarely exceeded two feet, was increased to six
feet: whilst the height of the large and luxuriant kind was very little
diminished." Mr. Laxton gave me seed-peas produced from crosses between four
distinct kinds; and the plants thus raised were extraordinarily vigorous,
being in each case from one to two or three feet taller than the parent-forms
growing close alongside them.

Wiegmann (17/54. 'Ueber die Bastarderzeugung' 1828 s. 32, 33. For Mr.
Chaundy's case see Loudon's 'Gardener's Mag.' volume 7 1831 page 696.) made
many crosses between several varieties of cabbage; and he speaks with
astonishment of the vigour and height of the mongrels, which excited the
amazement of all the gardeners who beheld them. Mr. Chaundy raised a great
number of mongrels by planting together six distinct varieties of cabbage.
These mongrels displayed an infinite diversity of character; "But the most
remarkable circumstance was, that, while all the other cabbages and borecoles
in the nursery were destroyed by a severe winter, these hybrids were little
injured, and supplied the kitchen when there was no other cabbage to be had."

Mr. Maund exhibited before the Royal Agricultural Society (17/55. 'Gardener's
Chronicle' 1846 page 601.) specimens of crossed wheat, together with their
parent varieties; and the editor states that they were intermediate in
character, "united with that greater vigour of growth, which it appears, in
the vegetable as in the animal world, is the result of a first cross." Knight
also crossed several varieties of wheat (17/56. 'Philosoph. Transact.' 1799
page 201.), and he says "that in the years 1795 and 1796, when almost the
whole crop of corn in the island was blighted, the varieties thus obtained,
and these only, escaped in this neighbourhood, though sown in several
different soils and situations."

Here is a remarkable case: M. Clotzsch (17/57. Quoted in 'Bull. Bot. Soc.
France' volume 2 1855 page 327.) crossed Pinus sylvestris and nigricans,
Quercus robur and pedunculata, Alnus glutinosa and incana, Ulmus campestris
and effusa; and the cross-fertilised seeds, as well as seeds of the pure
parent-trees, were all sown at the same time and in the same place. The result
was, that after an interval of eight years, the hybrids were one-third taller
than the pure trees!

The facts above given refer to undoubted varieties, excepting the trees
crossed by Clotzsch, which are ranked by various botanists as strongly-marked
races, sub-species, or species. That true hybrids raised from entirely
distinct species, though they lose in fertility, often gain in size and
constitutional vigour, is certain. It would be superfluous to quote any facts;
for all experimenters, Kolreuter, Gartner, Herbert, Sageret, Lecoq, and
Naudin, have been struck with the wonderful vigour, height, size, tenacity of
life, precocity, and hardiness of their hybrid productions. Gartner (17/58.
Gartner 'Bastarderzeugung' s. 259, 518, 526 et seq.) sums up his conviction on
this head in the strongest terms. Kolreuter (17/59. 'Fortsetzung' 1763 s. 29;
'Dritte Fortsetzung' s. 44, 96; 'Act. Acad. St. Petersburg' 1782 part 2 page
251; 'Nova Acta' 1793 pages 391, 394; 'Nova Acta' 1795 pages 316, 323.) gives
numerous precise measurements of the weight and height of his hybrids in his
comparison with measurements of both parent-forms; and speaks with
astonishment of their "statura portentosa," their "ambitus vastissimus ac
altitudo valde conspicua." Some exceptions to the rule in the case of very
sterile hybrids have, however, been noticed by Gartner and Herbert; but the
most striking exceptions are given by Max Wichura (17/60. 'Die
Bastardbefruchtung' etc. 1865 s. 31, 41, 42.) who found that hybrid willows
were generally tender in constitution, dwarf, and short-lived.

Kolreuter explains the vast increase in the size of the roots, stems, etc., of
his hybrids, as the result of a sort of compensation due to their sterility,
in the same way as many emasculated animals are larger than the perfect males.
This view seems at first sight extremely probable, and has been accepted by
various authors (17/61. Max Wichura fully accepts this view
('Bastardbefruchtung' s. 43), as does the Rev. M.J. Berkeley in 'Journal of
Hort. Soc.' January 1866 page 70.); but Gartner (17/62. 'Bastarderzeugung' s.
394, 526, 528.) has well remarked that there is much difficulty in fully
admitting it; for with many hybrids there is no parallelism between the degree
of their sterility and their increased size and vigour. The most striking
instances of luxuriant growth have been observed with hybrids which were not
sterile in any extreme degree. In the genus Mirabilis, certain hybrids are
unusually fertile, and their extraordinary luxuriance of growth, together with
their enormous roots (17/63. Kolreuter 'Nova Acta' 1795 page 316.) have been
transmitted to their progeny. The result in all cases is probably in part due
to the saving of nutriment and vital force through the sexual organs acting
imperfectly or not at all, but more especially to the general law of good
being derived from a cross. For it deserves especial attention that mongrel
animals and plants, which are so far from being sterile that their fertility
is often actually augmented, have, as previously shown, their size, hardiness,
and constitutional vigour generally increased. It is not a little remarkable
that an accession of vigour and size should thus arise under the opposite
contingencies of increased and diminished fertility.

It is a perfectly well ascertained fact (17/64. Gartner 'Bastarderzeugung' s.
430.) that hybrids invariably breed with either pure parent, and not rarely
with a distinct species, more readily than with one another. Herbert is
inclined to explain even this fact by the advantage derived from a cross; but
Gartner more justly accounts for it by the pollen of the hybrid, and probably
its ovules, being in some degree vitiated, whereas the pollen and ovules of
both pure parents and of any third species are sound. Nevertheless, there are
some well-ascertained and remarkable facts, which, as we shall presently see,
show that a cross by itself undoubtedly tends to increase or re-establish the
fertility of hybrids.

The same law, namely, that the crossed offspring both of varieties and species
are larger than the parent-forms, holds good in the most striking manner with
hybrid animals as well as with mongrels. Mr. Bartlett, who has had such large
experience says, "Among all hybrids of vertebrated animals there is a marked
increase of size." He then enumerates many cases with mammals, including
monkeys, and with various families of birds. (17/65. Quoted by Dr. Murie in
'Proc. Zoolog. Soc.' 1870 page 40.)]

ON CERTAIN HERMAPHRODITE PLANTS WHICH, EITHER NORMALLY OR ABNORMALLY, REQUIRE
TO BE FERTILISED BY POLLEN FROM A DISTINCT INDIVIDUAL OR SPECIES.

The facts now to be given differ from the foregoing, as self-sterility is not
here the result of long-continued close interbreeding. These facts are,
however, connected with our present subject, because a cross with a distinct
individual is shown to be either necessary or advantageous. Dimorphic and
trimorphic plants, though they are hermaphrodites, must be reciprocally
crossed, one set of forms by the other, in order to be fully fertile, and in
some cases to be fertile in any degree. But I should not have noticed these
plants, had it not been for the following cases given by Dr. Hildebrand
(17/66. 'Botanische Zeitung' January 1864 s. 3.):--

[Primula sinensis is a reciprocally dimorphic species: Dr. Hildebrand
fertilised twenty-eight flowers of both forms, each by pollen of the other
form, and obtained the full number of capsules containing on an average 42.7
seed per capsule; here we have complete and normal fertility. He then
fertilised forty-two flowers of both forms with pollen of the same form, but
taken from a distinct plant, and all produced capsules containing on an
average only 19.6 seed. Lastly, and here we come to our more immediate point,
he fertilised forty-eight flowers of both forms with pollen of the same form
and taken from the same flower, and now he obtained only thirty-two capsules,
and these contained on an average 18.6 seed, or one less per capsule than in
the former case. So that, with these illegitimate unions, the act of
impregnation is less assured, and the fertility slightly less, when the pollen
and ovules belong to the same flower, than when belonging to two distinct
individuals of the same form. Dr. Hildebrand has recently made analogous
experiments on the long-styled form of Oxalis rosea, with the same result.
(17/67. 'Monatsbericht Akad. Wissen.' Berlin 1866 s. 372.)]

It has recently been discovered that certain plants, whilst growing in their
native country under natural conditions, cannot be fertilised with pollen from
the same plant. They are sometimes so utterly self-impotent, that, though they
can readily be fertilised by the pollen of a distinct species or even distinct
genus, yet, wonderful as is the fact, they never produce a single seed by
their own pollen. In some cases, moreover, the plant's own pollen and stigma
mutually act on each other in a deleterious manner. Most of the facts to be
given relate to orchids, but I will commence with a plant belonging to a
widely different family.

[Sixty-three flowers of Corydalis cava, borne on distinct plants, were
fertilised by Dr. Hildebrand (17/68. International Hort. Congress, London
1866.) with pollen from other plants of the same species; and fifty-eight
capsules were obtained, including on an average 4.5 seed in each. He then
fertilised sixteen flowers produced by the same raceme, one with another, but
obtained only three capsules, one of which alone contained any good seeds,
namely, two in number. Lastly, he fertilised twenty-seven flowers, each with
its own pollen; he left also fifty-seven flowers to be spontaneously
fertilised, and this would certainly have ensued if it had been possible, for
the anthers not only touch the stigma, but the pollen-tubes were seen by Dr.
Hildebrand to penetrate it; nevertheless these eighty-four flowers did not
produce a single seed-capsule! This whole case is highly instructive, as it
shows how widely different the action of the same pollen is, according as it
is placed on the stigma of the same flower, or on that of another flower on
