almost a mile in," he told them, gripping their hands. "We'd better work
back out, taking a different section of the pack as we do."

Kent nodded. "It may change our luck," he said.

It did; for when they had gone not more than a half-mile back, they
glimpsed one of their men waving excitedly from the top of a Pluto
liner.

They hastened at once toward him, the other men gathering also; and when
Kent grasped the man's hand he heard his excited voice.

"Fuel-tanks here are more than half-full, sir!"

      *      *      *      *      *

They descended quickly into the liner, finding that though its whole
stern had been sheared away by a meteor, its tanks had remained
miraculously unstrained.

"Enough fuel here to take the _Pallas_ to Neptune!" Kent exclaimed.

"How will you get it over to your ship?" Krell asked. Kent pointed to
great reels of flexible metal tubing hanging near the tanks.

"We'll pump it over. The _Pallas_ has tubing like this ship's, for
taking on fuel in space, and, by joining its tubing to this, we'll have
a tube-line between the two ships. It's hardly more than a
quarter-mile."

"Let's get back and let them know about it," Liggett urged, and they
climbed back out of the liner.

They worked their way out of the wreck-pack with much greater speed than
that with which they had entered, needing only an occasional brace
against a ship's side to send them floating over the wrecks. They came
to the wreck-pack's edge at a little distance from the _Pallas_, and
hastened toward it.

They found the outer door of the _Pallas'_ airlock open, and entered,
Krell remaining with them. As the outer door closed and air hissed into
the lock, Kent and the rest removed their helmets. The inner door slid
open as they were doing this, and from inside almost a score of men
leapt upon them!

Kent, stunned for a moment, saw Jandron among their attackers, bellowing
orders to them, and even as he struck out furiously he comprehended.
Jandron and the men of the _Martian Queen_ had somehow captured the
_Pallas_ from Crain and had been awaiting their return!

      *      *      *      *      *

The struggle was almost instantly over, for, outnumbered and hampered as
they were by their heavy space-suits, Kent and Liggett and their
followers had no chance. Their hands, still in the suits, were bound
quickly behind them at Jandron's orders.

Kent heard an exclamation, and saw Marta starting toward him from
behind Jandron's men. But a sweep of Jandron's arm brushed her rudely
back. Kent strained madly at his bonds. Krell's face had a triumphant
look.

"Did it all work as I told you it would, Jandron?" he asked.

"It worked," Jandron answered impassively. "When they saw fifteen of us
coming from the wreck-pack in space-suits, they opened right up to us."

Kent understood, and cursed Krell's cunning. Crain, seeing the fifteen
figures approaching from the wreck-pack, had naturally thought they were
Kent's party, and had let them enter to overwhelm his half-dozen men.

"We put Crain and his men over in the _Martian Queen_," Jandron
continued, "and took all their helmets so they can't escape. The girl we
brought over here. Did you find a wreck with fuel?"

Krell nodded. "A Pluto liner a quarter-mile back, and we can pump the
fuel over here by connecting tube-lines. What the devil--"

Jandron had made a signal at which three of his men had leapt forward on
Krell, securing his hands like those of the others.

"Have you gone crazy, Jandron?" cried Krell, his face red with anger and
surprise.

"No," Jandron replied impassively; "but the men are as tired as I am of
your bossing ways, and have chosen me as their sole leader."

"You dirty double-crosser!" Krell raged. "Are you men going to let him
get away with this?"

The men paid no attention, and Jandron motioned to the airlock. "Take
them over to the _Martian Queen_ too," he ordered, "and make sure
there's no space-helmet left there. Then get back at once, for we've got
to get the fuel into this ship and make a getaway."

      *      *      *      *      *

The helmets of Kent and Krell and the other helpless prisoners were put
upon them, and, with hands still bound, they were herded into the
airlock by eight of Jandron's men attired in space-suits also. The
prisoners were then joined one to another by a strand of metal cable.

Kent, glancing back into the ship as the airlock's inner door closed,
saw Jandron giving rapid orders to his followers, and noticed Marta held
back from the airlock by one of them. Krell's eyes glittered venomously
through his helmet. The outer door opened, and their guards jerked them
forth into space by the connecting cable.

They were towed helplessly along the wreck-pack's rim toward the
_Martian Queen_. Once inside its airlock, Jandron's men removed the
prisoners' space-helmets and then used the duplicate-control inside the
airlock itself to open the inner door. Through this opening they thrust
the captives, those inside the ship not daring to enter the airlock.
Jandron's men then closed the inner door, re-opened the outer one, and
started back toward the _Pallas_ with the helmets of Kent and his
companions.

Kent and the others soon found Crain and his half-dozen men who rapidly
undid their bonds. Crain's men still wore their space-suits, but, like
Kent's companions, were without space-helmets.

"Kent, I was afraid they'd get you and your men too!" Crain exclaimed.
"It's all my fault, for when I saw Jandron and his men coming from the
wreck-pack I never doubted but that it was you."

"It's no one's fault," Kent told him. "It's just something that we
couldn't foresee."

      *      *      *      *      *

Crain's eyes fell on Krell. "But what's he doing here?" he exclaimed.
Kent briefly explained Jandron's treachery toward Krell, and Crain's
brows drew ominously together.

"So Jandron put you here with us! Krell, I am a commissioned captain of
a space-ship, and as such can legally try you and sentence you to death
here without further formalities."

Krell did not answer, but Kent intervened. "There's hardly time for that
now, sir," he said. "I'm as anxious to settle with Krell as anyone, but
right now our main enemy is Jandron, and Krell hates Jandron worse than
we do, if I'm not mistaken."

"You're not," said Krell grimly. "All I want right now is to get within
reach of Jandron."

"There's small chance of any of us doing that," Crain told them.
"There's not a single space-helmet on the _Martian Queen_."

"You've searched?" Liggett asked.

"Every cubic inch of the ship," Crain told him. "No, Jandron's men made
sure there were no helmets left here, and without helmets this ship is
an inescapable prison."

"Damn it, there must be some way out!" Kent exclaimed. "Why, Jandron and
his men must be starting to pump that fuel into the _Pallas_ by now!
They'll be sailing off as soon as they do it!"

