hand on him. She eased herself closer until they were pressed together
side by side, and she slid her arm around his shoulders and held him
tightly.

At first she felt no answering movement. He seemed only half alive. She
wondered if he knew she was here. Then his head dropped to her shoulder.
She felt the weight of his body yielding to her.

She put her other arm around him. She held him as if he were her child.
In spite of his sorrow and her own, it was a great happiness to hold him
like this.

He sighed and wiped his face with his hand. She stroked his cheek,
brushing away the tears.

She wanted to talk to him, but waited for him to speak first.

"There is nothing I can do," he said. "I must go with Star Arrow, my
father."

She studied his face as he stared off into the forest. She could see now
the features of his father in him. There had always been something odd
about his eyes, but she had never been quite able to decide what it was.
Now she saw that they were rounder than most people's. They were shaped
like his father's. His nose was thin and bony, with a high arch, and
sharp at the end, like the beak of a bird. His eyebrows were thick,
black and straight across. His chin was pointed. She loved the
strangeness of his face.

She said, "When it gets dark we could go back to the village and fill
our canoes with food and blankets and tools and weapons. There will be
feasting tonight for Star Arrow. Everyone will sleep soundly after that.
We could cross the Great River tonight, and tomorrow we could be far
away."

He stared at her. "But I do not _want_ to leave my people."

She had not thought that far ahead, about what it would be like to be
away from Owl Carver, Iron Knife, Sun Woman, her sisters, her mother,
all the others. Yes, it would be a great loss. But she could stand the
pain, she thought, if she were beside White Bear.

"But we would have each other. Would it not hurt you less if you had me
with you?"

He did not answer at once, and that made her feel as if a rough hand had
squeezed her heart. But then he smiled at her, and she felt better.

"Yes, if I could share my life with you, the pain of leaving Saukenuk
would be less." Then his face darkened. "But we could not live on our
own. A man or a woman cut off from their tribe can no more be happy than
a flower after it is picked can continue to grow. And I would have
dishonored the promise I made with the sacred tobacco. The spirits would
turn their backs on me. My mother and Owl Carver say that if I go with
Star Arrow, I may learn things that would help our people."

She was thunderstruck to realize that he actually wanted to go with Star
Arrow. Then what was all this weeping for?

He did not care for her as much as she did for him. That made her angry.
She pushed herself a little apart from him.

"I see that I have been a fool to chase after you, just as my mother
said. It means more to you to go and live with the pale eyes than it
does to have Redbird as your woman."

His eyes widened. "We have never before today spoken of this, you and
I."

"Did we have to speak?" She felt herself getting angrier and angrier.
"Why do you think I went looking for you when you went on your vision
quest? Why do you think I followed you from the village today? And why
did I say I would go with you across the Great River? Yes, I did want to
be your woman. But you do not want me. You want to go away with this
pale eyes father of yours, and maybe you want to take a pale eyes woman
for yourself."

His mouth as well as his eyes opened up in amazement. "I have never even
seen a pale eyes woman. How could I want one? I do want Redbird to be my
woman. And I weep at leaving Saukenuk because I must leave you."

Again she reached out to him, putting her hands on his arms. "I would
rather be cast out of our tribe than lose you."

He shook his head. "We do not have to lose our people or each other. It
was part of the promise sealed with sacred tobacco that I am to come
back. If we ran away now, Earthmaker would be angry with us."

She moved closer to him. She had seen Earthmaker in dreams. He was
taller than the tallest tree, and he carried a great war club with a
ball-shaped rock at the end of it and looked much like Black Hawk, with
a long black lock of hair coiling down from the top of a shaved head.

"I wish I could meet and talk with the spirits, as you have," she said.
"Sometimes I think I do meet them, in dreams."

"It can be dangerous to meet with the spirits," he said. His eyes seemed
to be looking into the distance. He had seen so many things she had not.
It was unfair, she thought sadly.

She had gone out to him in the bitter cold when the world was an endless
white waste. She might have frozen to death. She might have been
punished by drowning in the icy river. She had risked almost as much as
he had.

"I do not say that I am as strong as White Bear, or as worthy to speak
with the spirits," she said. "I only wish I had a chance to."

He took her hands in his and looked deep into her eyes.

"The real danger of a shaman's vision is not to the body."

"What is the real danger?"

"I did not want to come back."

She felt a cold wind blowing across her neck, as if spirits had quietly
entered this grove with them and were standing about them, listening to
them, judging them.

"It is so wondrous," he said in a voice so low she had to strain to hear
it over the wind whispering in the tree branches. "You are there with
them. The White Bear, the Turtle. You see them, talk to them. You see
the Tree of Life, the crystal lodge of the Turtle and the spirits of all
living things. Why would anyone want to return?"

Redbird shivered. But she still envied him.

"Your hands are cold," White Bear said, and he put his arm around her
and drew her close to nestle on his chest. She slid her hands under the
leather vest he wore and felt the smooth warmth of his skin and the
firmness of his muscles. How powerful his arms were around her. She
thanked Earthmaker that White Bear had found the inner strength to
return from that other land.

A new thought occurred to her. "What if you find that the land of the
pale eyes holds you fast? Then you will never come back to me, and to
the Sauk you will be dead."

He smiled gently and patted her shoulder. She pulled herself closer to
him.

"Can the land of the pale eyes, altogether without spirits, hold me,
when the spirits themselves could not?"

"I do not think so."

"Can the land of the pale eyes hold me, when Redbird is not in it? _I_
do not think so."

Her body seemed to be melting. She wanted to flow together with White
Bear as the Rock River flowed into the Great River.

His arms tightened around her. Then he raised his hand to brush the
fringe of hair that fell over her forehead.

She moved against him until her cheek touched his. Slowly she slid one
side of her face against his, then the other side. A hunger filled her.
It was almost as if she wanted to devour White Bear, but all she could
do was touch his smooth cheek with her fingertips.

His nostrils flared and his lips parted and she could hear his
breathing. His hands were roaming over her body, awakening powerful
feelings wherever he touched her, making her want more.

How did they come to be lying down? They must have moved without
realizing it. She could see, feel and think only of White Bear. Her head
was pillowed on his arm and her face was pressed against his. With his
free hand he caressed her, seeking her flesh under her jacket and skirt.
His hand became bolder, plucking at the laces that held her clothing
together, baring places that only a husband should look at as he was
looking now. And touching those places, sending ripples of delight all
through her.

And she wanted him to do that. She felt no shame or fear, only
happiness. She let him do whatever he wanted. She helped him. She moved
her hands also, to touch more of him. Her hand found the oak branch that
he had been holding just before she sat down with him. She put the
branch aside and let her fingers feel the hardness pushing against his
loincloth; he was ready to come into her in the way that Sun Woman had
explained.

She could still stop him if she wanted to. She knew him and trusted that
he would not do anything she did not want.

But she wanted this. She wanted his hand to go on skillfully preparing
the way for him. She wanted this golden glow inside her to fill her more
and more. This was happiness, and she was climbing toward a greater and
greater happiness. She felt him move, and all at once her hand was not
on his loincloth, but on his hot flesh. She wanted to open herself up to
the part of him she held so tightly.

Then he was upon her, and she felt a sudden stabbing pain. She cried
out. Almost at once his cry of pleasure followed on hers and his hips
thrust forward violently and she felt him filling her. He let out a long
sigh and relaxed, lying on top of her, resting all of his weight on her.

I am like the Turtle holding up the earth, she thought.

There had been mounting pleasure until her moment of pain. Now there was
an ache and a faint memory of the good feelings. She wanted more
pleasure. Sun Woman had told her it would hurt only the first time. And
that from then on it would be better and better.

Slowly he withdrew from her and they lay on their sides looking at each
other. His eyes were huge right before her face.

"For a moment," he said softly, "I felt as I did when I walked on the
bridge of stars."

She thought of asking him whether it made him so happy that he would
stay with her now instead of going to the country of the pale eyes with
his father. But she knew what his answer would be, and that his saying
it would only hurt him and her.

She said, "It was Sun Woman, your mother, who told me about this--about
what men and women do together."

He laughed. "It was also she who told me." His face reddened. "I feel as
if my mother were here watching us."

It was Redbird's turn to laugh. "What would she see that she did not
know about already?"

He shook his head. "I would not want anybody to see us doing that."

"The spirits watch us."

"That is not the same. They watch everything, so it is not special to
them."

"Is it special to you?" she asked.

"Oh, yes. Something has passed between us. I have given a part of myself
to you. And I have a part of you too. Now, even if I must leave you, we
will still be with each other."

She did not want to hear him speak of leaving. She wanted to stay here
with him in this grove of ancient trees forever. When she had spoken to
him of going off and being alone together, this was what she imagined it
would be like. But then a dark thought crossed her mind.

"White Bear, they might send people looking for us. They might catch us
together like this." Anxiously she started to pull her clothing
together.

He sat up beside her and put his hand over hers. "I do not think anyone
is coming." He sounded so sure that she thought he must be speaking as a
shaman.

"They know I will come back to the village," he added. "They saw me
smoke the calumet. And in a few days I will leave with Star Arrow."

He said it with such finality that the sun seemed to go out.

"And so there is time," he said, "If you want ..." and guided her hand
to touch him. To her joy she felt him strong in his readiness to be
within her again. This time, she was sure, it would not hurt. She would
know the full delight that Sun Woman had told her of. The afternoon
sunlight slanting through the budding branches was warm again, bathing
her and making her feel joyful and free.

Their flowing together lasted longer this time, and gave her all the
happiness she had hoped for.

And it came to her, as they lay peacefully side by side afterward, that
this might have happened someday, but it would not have happened today
if Star Arrow had not come to claim his son.




7

Raoul's Mark


On the morning of the fourth day of their journey north from Saukenuk
along the Great River, when the sun was halfway up the sky, White Bear
and Star Arrow emerged from a forest into a prairie. To their right were
gentle hills covered with new green buffalo grass and prairie flowers of
every color. To their left the hills stood taller, then dropped suddenly
to the Great River. White Bear saw a large boat with great white wings
above it to carry it along.

Star Arrow brought his tall black stallion to a sudden halt and climbed
down, gesturing to White Bear to dismount from his brown and white pony.

"Look at this stone," Star Arrow said, pointing to a large gray rock
that stood upright on the edge of a bluff overlooking the river.

White Bear saw carving on the rock and, remembering Pere Isaac's
lessons, recognized it as the pale eyes' letter M.

"M for de Marion," said Star Arrow. "We are now on land belonging to the
de Marion family. You see no fences here because we could not cut enough
wood to fence off all our land. There is so much of it."

He reached out and rested his hand on White Bear's shoulder, his fingers
squeezing through the buckskin shirt. "But before we come to the place
where I live, and where you will live, we must speak of names. Among the
pale eyes I am called Pierre de Marion. My full name is Pierre Louis
Auguste de Marion."

He made White Bear say "Pierre de Marion" after him.

"According to our custom you should call me Father," Star Arrow said,
saying the word in English. White Bear already knew it.

"Now I will tell you what your name will be among the pale eyes."

White Bear pulled free of Star Arrow's hand and took a step backward.

"I already have a name. I was born Gray Cloud because I am neither white
nor red." He could hear reproach in his voice, though he had not meant
to sound that way. "But now I am White Bear. That is the name given me
by the shaman Owl Carver after my spirit journey. I must keep that
name."

"And you will keep that name, son. You will always be White Bear. But,
just as I am happy to have the British Band call me Star Arrow, so you
can have a pale eyes' name. One that tells pale eyes when you go among
them who you are--that you are a member of the de Marion family--that
you are my son."

_He is proud that I am his son._ White Bear's anger faded and he felt a
warmth toward this man who wanted to give him a name. He decided that if
Star Arrow could have two names, so could he.

"What is my pale eyes' name to be, Father?"

Star Arrow put his hand on White Bear's shoulder. "I wish you to be
called Auguste de Marion. Auguste is a very old name. It means
'consecrated,' a sacred person, and that is a good name for one who has
seen a vision and wishes to be a shaman. Say it after me. Auguste."

"O-goose."

As they rode on through the de Marion lands, people called out from
cabins. Mounted men, who saluted Pierre with a wave of their hands, rode
among herds of cattle and horses.

_Dozens of horses!_ Auguste thought, realizing he was seeing wealth that
would amaze any man of the British Band.

Farther along they passed fields fenced off with logs split in two and
piled one on top of the other. Sheep roamed over low hills and cropped
the prairie grass to its very roots. Inside a smaller plot huge gray and
pink pigs rolled in mud beside a pond.

They passed fields planted with crops. The whole village of Saukenuk
with all the farmland around it would fit into one of those fields. He
recognized one crop, corn. Corn as far as he could see. How much corn
could the de Marions eat? They must be a huge tribe.

As they rode along, Pierre said, "One more thing for you to know,
Auguste. You will meet the rest of your family today--your grandfather
and your aunt, my sister." He stopped his horse. Auguste reined up his
pony and waited. Unhappiness dragged down the lines in Pierre's face.

"I must tell you that I also have a brother, your uncle, who--" He
hesitated. "Who may not be friendly to you."

"Why?" Auguste asked.

"Thirteen summers ago another sister of mine and he were captured by the
Potawatomi during the war between the British and the Americans. My
sister was murdered by them. Raoul, my brother, suffered greatly until
we found him and ransomed him. He hates not just the Potawatomi, but all
red men. He did not wish me to bring you back here to our home."

"I do not understand," said Auguste. How could a man hate all tribes
because of what the men of one tribe had done to him? Again he realized
what a mystery the pale eyes were, and he felt fear.

Pierre said, "He probably will not be there when we arrive. I had to
tell you about Raoul, but I do not want you to be afraid of him."

But he _was_ afraid, he told himself as they rode on. His belly felt
hollow, and his heart beat faster than his pony's trotting hooves. He
was afraid of the pale eyes and their strange ways. He felt more fear
now than he had when he walked on the bridge of stars with the White
Bear.

"There!" Pierre suddenly held out his hand. Auguste's eyes followed the
gesture, and his mouth dropped open.

What at first he thought he saw was a forest of trees covered with snow.
In their midst something rose like a great gray hill. Snow in the Moon
of Buds? Perhaps the pale eyes did have a magic of their own.

As they rode closer, the snow on the trees turned into flowers. He had
seen wild apple trees in bloom and knew that many trees flowered around
this time. But these trees were all planted in straight rows, and each
one was a mass of white blossoms.

What he had thought was a gray hill was the biggest lodge he had ever
seen. He jerked the reins of his horse to stop, so that he could sit and
wonder at what he was seeing. He felt Pierre stop beside him.

The great lodge seemed to be made of three or four lodges all joined
together with one central building higher than all the rest. Its high
peaked roof was of logs split in half with the flat sides turned
outward. The lower part of the lodge was made of stones, the upper part
of logs.

Dread filled him, seeing that these people could do so much. They could
hold so much land that a rider needed half a day to cross from edge to
center. They could make the land obey their wishes, fence it, fill it
with animals, plant huge fields with crops, enjoy a forest of flowering
trees. And in the very center of all this they could make a lodge
gigantic enough to hold a hundred families.

The pale eyes could do anything. They were magicians so mighty as to
make a shaman like Owl Carver look childish. How could he ever hope to
know all that they knew?

Despair crushed him. He wanted to see no more.

Pierre patted Auguste's pony on the neck, and the little horse started
forward again. Numbly, Auguste felt himself being led toward the great
lodge, his pony's hooves falling softly on white petals.

Pierre pointed proudly. "We call our house Victoire."

Closer and closer they came until the house blocked out part of the sky.
It was gray, the logs it was built of having weathered. Auguste saw that
there were many smaller buildings scattered around the giant
lodge--smaller only compared to the huge one in the center. Some of the
smaller houses were connected to the great one by sheltered walkways.
The smallest was much bigger than the biggest lodge in Saukenuk.

In a moment they would emerge from among the flowering trees. Auguste
saw a log fence ahead. The fence surrounded a low hill covered with
close-cropped grass, leading up to the house. One large old maple tree
shaded the south side. He checked his pony. He could go no farther.

"What is it?" Pierre asked him.

"I cannot," Auguste said. "I cannot go there." He felt a quaver in his
voice and his lips trembling, and he held himself rigid.

"Why not, Auguste?" Pierre said softly.

"I do not know what to do here. I have never seen such a place as this.
I will do foolish things. All those people will laugh at me. You will
not want me for a son."

"Let us wait," said Pierre. "Get down from your horse."

Biting his lip, Auguste dismounted.

"We shall sit here," said Pierre. They sat, facing each other. Auguste
saw people approaching through the straight rows of trees. Pierre saw
them, too, and waved them away.

They sat for a long time in silence while their horses grazed nearby.
Auguste held his misery in until he felt calmer.

He looked at Pierre and nodded to say that he was in control of himself.
Pierre nodded back. Auguste looked at the petal-covered ground, feeling
crushed.

"All this is strange to you," Pierre said.

"Yes," said Auguste.

"And it is not foolish to fear. There are some people here who will hate
you just because you are a red man. There are people who will be afraid
of you. But there are dangers in the life you come from--fire and flood,
sickness, bears and wolves, the Sioux and Osage, enemies of your people.
You fear those things, but you have been taught how to live with those
dangers. There are other people here, people like myself, who will care
for you and protect you and teach you how to live with the dangers of
the pale eyes' world. You must come to know these people who will help
you. I want you to be glad you came from Saukenuk to Victoire."

Auguste did not answer. They sat in silence for a while. Then Pierre
spoke again.

"The pale eyes are here, Auguste, and you must learn to live with us."

Auguste sighed and settled down again. He listened to the buzzing of
locusts rise and fall.

_If my vision of this man meant something, then come to me now, White
Bear, and tell me what I must do._

He carried a handful of bits of magic mushroom in a saddlebag, but
several times since his spirit journey the White Bear had spoken to him
without the help of the mushroom and without his mind leaving his body.
All he needed to do, sometimes, was sit quietly and listen. He waited
now, sometimes looking at Pierre, sometimes looking at the twigs and
moss and grass on the ground.

_Perhaps no spirit can reach me here in the land of the pale eyes._

He was about to give up and get to his feet. He would beg Pierre to let
him go back to the Sauk.

Then a voice spoke deep and clear in his mind, and it was not his
voice.

_Go and meet your grandfather._

A warmth spread from the center of his body to hands and feet that a
moment ago had been icy with fear. Knowing that he had not left his
spirit helper behind when he left Saukenuk gave him new confidence.

He held out his hands, palms up. "Let us go to meet my grandfather."

The smile on Pierre's long face mirrored the glow Auguste felt inside
himself.

They remounted and rode around to a gateway in the west side of the
fence surrounding the house. Auguste, with his newfound strength,
endured the curious stares of the men and women gathered at the gate to
greet Pierre.

"Look, your grandfather is waiting for you," said Pierre, his voice
ringing with joy.

Before a doorway sheltered by its own wooden roof, an old man, a very
stout young woman and a plump young man awaited them.

The old man's eyes were blue like Pierre's but they seemed to glitter
and to see deeply into Auguste. He was tall and thin and slightly
stooped with age. His clothes were simple--a black jacket over a white
shirt, and black trousers that tightened below his knees and ended in
straps that ran under shiny black shoes. He leaned on a black stick with
a silver head.

His heart fluttering with excitement, Auguste got down from his horse
and took a tentative step forward. The old man approached him, his
expression as fierce as a hawk's. He looked hard into Auguste's face.

The old man spoke to him in a language of the pale eyes, so rapidly that
Auguste could not hope to understand him.

Pierre said, "Your grandfather says he sees at once that you are a
member of our family. He sees it in the shape of your eyes. He sees it
in your nose, in your chin. He sees that like all de Marion men you are
very tall."

"What is my grandfather's name?" Auguste asked.

"He is the Chevalier Elysee de Marion."

"El-izay," Auguste said, and his grandfather clapped his hands and
grinned.

"But you should call him Grandpapa," Pierre concluded.

"Grandpapa." That was another word Pere Isaac had taught him.

Grandpapa gave a cackling old man's laugh, threw his arms wide and
hugged Auguste. Auguste hugged him back, rather gingerly, fearing his
bones might crack. A thought came to Auguste, and he let go of his
grandfather. He hurried back to his horse and took out of the saddlebag
the tobacco pouch he had packed along with his small medicine bundle.

He went back to Elysee and held the pouch out with both hands.

In his best English he said, "Please, I give Grandpapa tobacco."

Elysee took the pouch and opened it, sniffed and grinned appreciatively.
He and Pierre exchanged words.

Pierre said, "I have told him that among the Sauk, tobacco is offered to
honored friends, to men of high rank and to great spirits. This pleases
him."

"Thank you, Auguste," Grandpapa said. "I will smoke it in my pipe after
we eat together." This time he spoke slowly enough for Auguste to
understand him.

Grandpapa now took the stout woman by the arm and pulled her forward.

"This is your aunt, my sister, Nicole Hopkins," said Pierre.

Never among the Sauk had he seen a woman with such broad hips and such a
vast bosom. She stepped forward and placed her lips, to Auguste's
surprise, on his cheek, making a little smacking sound. Not sure what to
do, Auguste put his arms around the woman as he had around his
grandfather. She felt soft and comfortable and not at all fragile, and
he hugged her hard. He felt powerful muscles under her ample flesh. His
aunt returned the embrace with strong arms. She smelled of flowers.

All at once, Auguste sensed that there was a baby growing inside the
woman holding him. Not because she was so big; it had nothing to do with
the way she looked. It was a sensing, and he was pleased to know that,
along with the White Bear, he had not left his powers behind at
Saukenuk.

Pierre said, "Now meet Frank Hopkins, your uncle by marriage."

At Pierre's gesture the sandy-haired man approached Auguste. Auguste
opened his arms to hug him, but the man stuck his right hand out. The
man's fingers were black. That was odd; he had never seen painted
fingers before. Was this another pale eyes custom? Auguste decided he
was expected to hold out his own right hand. Frank seized his hand in a
strong grip and shook it up and down.

"Frank makes the talking papers from which people may read and learn
things," said Pierre. "He also builds things of wood. He built some of
the newer buildings here on our land. Frank and Nicole and their
children live over by the river in a town called Victor. He built many
of the houses there, too."

The people had been so friendly that Auguste had gotten over much of his
fear, but when he saw Pierre wave him toward the door, which yawned
above him like an enormous cave mouth, he felt cold once again.

But he followed Pierre through the door, and his breath left his body in
amazement.

It was like being in a forest clearing where the trees towered over you
and their branches met high up, blocking out the sky. In a Sauk lodge he
could reach up and touch the roof without straightening his arm. Here
the ceiling was hidden in shadows, and huge square-cut timbers crossed
the open space above his head.

Hung by ropes from those timbers were big circles of wood that Pere
Isaac had said were called wheels. These wheels were turned on their
sides, and set on them were dozens of the little white sticks of wax
that pale eyes used to make light. A few of the more prosperous Sauk
families sometimes used such wax sticks to light their lodges.

Auguste looked around in wonder. The huge room was full of objects whose
purpose he could not guess. Doorways led to other parts of this house or
to attached houses. Cooking smells of many kinds of good food filled the
air.

Pale eyes men and women stood about in the hall and watched Auguste and
his father and grandfather enter.

Two small boys and a girl running through the hall stopped to stare at
him. Frank Hopkins called to them and they approached slowly.

"These are Thomas, Benjamin and Abigail, Nicole and Frank's children,"
said Pierre.

_Their other children_, thought Auguste, wondering whether Nicole
herself knew what he knew about her.

Abigail stood close to her father, her mouth and eyes wide open.

Thomas, the biggest of the three, said, "Gosh almighty, I got a real
Injun for a cousin!"

Benjamin walked slowly over to Auguste, suddenly reached out and gripped
the deerhorn handle of the knife at his belt. Auguste tensed.

But Benjamin grinned up at Auguste and let go of the knife without
trying to pull it out of its scabbard. Then he ran back to his father.

Grandpapa Elysee beckoned, and as Auguste walked toward him he noticed
that the soles of his moccasins were striking a hard surface. He looked
down to see that the floor of the lodge was covered with flat stones.
Auguste and the others followed Grandpapa across the length of the floor
to a stone hearth so big a man could stand inside it.

They passed three long, cloth-covered platforms raised as high above the
floor as the sleeping platforms in Sauk and Fox summer lodges.

"Those are tables," Pierre said. Auguste remembered the word from a book
of words and pictures Pere Isaac had shown him. On the tables lay a
confusion of shiny objects.

A man standing by the hearth, who appeared as old as Elysee, stepped
forward and bowed. He had a round, bright red nose and white whiskers
that stood out on either side of his face.

"This is Guichard, our majordomo," said Pierre.

"Ma-ja domo," repeated Auguste.

"Guichard came over from France with us thirty years ago."

Guichard said, "I greet you, Auguste." Auguste was amazed to hear him
speak in the Sauk language. He spoke with a lisp, though, and Auguste
noticed when he opened his mouth that he had no front teeth.

Pierre clapped Guichard on the shoulder. "I do not know how he does
these things, but he always surprises us with what he has learned. And
by his care for us in so many ways."

Guichard stepped back with another bow, and Pierre turned to a short man
and a plump woman also standing before the hearth. The woman's full lips
curved in a smile of greeting for Pierre; then she plucked at her
skirts, lifting them a bit, and bent her knees and ducked her head.

"This is Marchette Perrault," Pierre said, and Auguste noticed that his
normally pale face was flushed. "She reigns over our kitchen." Auguste
did not need to rely on his special sense to see that there was a loving
secret between Marchette and his father.

The man standing beside Marchette, short and powerful-looking, with a
bristling brown beard, was staring at Pierre with hatred in his face,
his eyes narrowed. His mouth was invisible in his beard, but Auguste
knew that his lips were pressed together, his teeth clenched. He also
knew that this short man was as strong as a bull buffalo.

The look the brown-bearded man gave Pierre frightened Auguste, and he
wondered if he was the only one who could see it.

"Armand Perrault, here, is the overseer of our estate," Pierre said,
apparently oblivious of the man's expression. "He makes the crops
flourish, the trees bear fruit and the cattle grow fat. He and Marchette
come from French families who settled here many generations ago."

Armand bowed, a quick jerk of his head and shoulders, to Pierre.
Somewhat to Auguste's relief, the angry man did not even look at him.
Abruptly he turned his back and strode across the hall to a side door.

Pierre said, "Most of those who live and work here at Victoire are
Illinois people of French descent. The town, Victor, grew up after we
built our home here. Most of the people there are Americans from
Missouri, Kentucky or back East. Everyone you meet in America is from
somewhere else."

_Not my people_, Auguste thought.

Marchette made another bow to Pierre and left, too, to go into another
connected house in which Auguste saw a fire burning under a huge metal
pot in another hearth. There was much smoke and steam in that lodge, and
he could not see everything, but the good smells were coming from there,
and he remembered that he had eaten nothing today but a little dried
venison.

Pierre took Auguste by the arm and led him to a place at the table near
Grandpapa. Guichard pushed a wooden seat made of sticks toward him. A
"chair," Auguste remembered, from Pere Isaac's picture book.

_Why do they sit up high and raise their food up so high?_ Auguste
wondered. Perhaps pale eyes did not keep their floors clean enough to
sit on and eat from. But these appeared very clean.

"This is a special meal in your honor," said Pierre. "Most of the people
who work on our land will be eating here with us." Men and women were
seating themselves at the other tables.

_A feast!_ thought Auguste. Perhaps there would be dancing afterward.

"How many people live on your land, Father?" he asked in Sauk.

"About a hundred men, women and children live and work here," Pierre
answered. "Beyond the hills to the west, by the river, is the settlement
called Victor, where another hundred people live. Many of them work for
us too. Nicole and Frank live in Victor."

Two hundred, thought Auguste. That was not so many, after all. There
were nearly two thousand people in the British Band.

Nicole sat beside him, Pierre across the table from him. Nicole went
through the names of the objects on the table--"plate," "glass,"
"knife," "fork," "spoon." Guichard was going around the table behind the
people sitting there, filling each glass with a red liquid from a
pitcher.

Auguste had seen beads and other small objects made of glass at
Saukenuk, but here glass was everywhere. What was glass, and how did the
pale eyes make things from it?

Even as he was wondering about glass he saw his father take out of his
coat pocket an oval silver case hanging from a purple cord around his
neck. Pierre opened the case and took out yet two more small, round
pieces of glass in a metal frame. To Auguste's bewilderment, he put
these over his eyes, like a transparent mask. He smiled when he saw
Auguste staring.

"Spectacles. I have trouble seeing things that are near to me, and these
help. I like to see what I'm eating."

Last night, as Auguste lay beside the sleeping Star Arrow in the tall
prairie grass, he had thought of quietly climbing on his pony and
fleeing back to Saukenuk, in spite of the tobacco-sealed promise. Now
he was glad he had not run away. The people all looked kindly at him,
except for that man Armand, and there were so many wonders to see. He
could feel his heart beating hard and his hands trembling with
excitement.

When Guichard filled his glass with the red liquid, Auguste drank from
it. The liquid was cool and burned at the same time. It was bitter and
puckered his lips, but was sweet in his throat. He was thirsty, so he
drank more of it.

"Wine," said Pierre. "You've had it before?"

_This must be like that burning water the pale eyes call whiskey that I
tasted at the council last Moon of Falling Leaves on the other side of
the Great River._ The chiefs and braves and warriors had drunk much of
the burning water from a barrel, he remembered, and they had grown
merrier and merrier. The women and boys were each allowed one small sip
and the young girls none at all.

"I have tasted it," he said. Pierre frowned and seemed about to speak,
but he said nothing when Auguste held his empty glass out for more wine
to Guichard, who was going around again with the pitcher.

Men and women brought food to the table on big plates and in bowls.
There was turkey, duck, fresh venison, flat bread and round bread, dark
bread, white bread and yellow corn bread, cooked fruit and raw fruit,
loaves of maple sugar, fruit baked inside crusts, heaps of mashed-up
vegetables. There were slices of fish burned almost black and piles of
boiled crawfish. The food, Auguste saw, was coming from the connected
lodge Marchette had gone into, where the big pot was with all the smoke
and steam.

Auguste watched the way the people at the table with him were eating. He
tried to use his knife and fork as they did and saw Pierre smile
approvingly. The sight and smell of the food made water fill his mouth
and his stomach growl. But when he put a slice of meat in his mouth it
was unexpectedly very hot to the taste. Not just hot from being cooked,
but hot because of something cooked into it.

_Peppers_, he thought. His mother kept some, traded up from the south,
in her collection of medicine plants, and he had tasted their fire.

Pierre himself, Auguste noticed, put very small portions of food on his
plate and ate little of what was there. Auguste was saddened. If only
there was something he could do for his father. He had consulted Owl
Carver before leaving Saukenuk, but the old shaman had only said
gloomily that in his experience such an evil spirit in the belly was
usually fatal.

The hot food made Auguste thirsty, and he drank more wine. Each time he
held his glass out, Guichard, smiling toothlessly, seemed to be there
with the pitcher.

Still hungry, he grew impatient with knife and fork and began picking
the food up with his hands. He tried to take small pieces with his
fingers and eat quickly so that people would not notice, but then he
caught the two boys and the girl, at the other end of the table,
watching him and giggling and whispering to each other. His face went
hot.

Nicole, sitting on his right, asked him short, simple questions about
how the Sauk and Fox lived, and he answered with the little English he
had. She smiled and nodded at him many times as he told her the Sauk
