"I can perhaps answer your question better when I have analyzed this
specimen of gas," he said at length, holding up a test-tube in which
swirled a quantity of that luminous, milky orange vapor. "But if you
wish to quote me for publication, you may say that when I have learned
the nature of it, I shall devote all my energies to combating the
menace it constitutes."

And that was the message Jim took back with him, but it was the
pictures that interested the practical Overton most.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before many days, however, Overton, with the rest of the world, was
turning anxiously to Professor Wentworth, watching his every move,
awaiting his every word. For before many days terrible reports started
coming in, not only from the Arizona desert but from the assembly
grounds of the Fire Ants everywhere.

Those deadly termites were on the move! They were spreading from their
central citadels in ominous, expanding circles--circles that engulfed
villages, towns and cities in a swift, relentless ring of annihilation
that was fairly stupefying.

In North America, the cities of Phoenix, Tucson and Prescott, with all
that lay between, were already gone, their frantic populaces fleeing
to the four points of the compass before that fateful orange tide. In
South America, Rosario and Cordoba were within the flaming ring and
Buenos Aires was threatened. In Europe, Moscow and its vast tributary
plain had fallen before the invaders. In Asia, a veritable inland
empire was theirs, reaching from Urga to the Khingan Mountains. In
Africa, Southern Algeria and French Sudan, with their innumerable
small villages and oases, were overrun. In Australia, Coolgardie had
succumbed and Perth was in a panic.

But fearful though the destruction was on the continents, it was the
islands of the world that suffered most. First the smallest, those
picturesque green gems of the South Seas, crisped and perished. Then
came reports of the doom of the Hawaiian group, the Philippines, the
East and West Indies, New Zealand, Tasmania and a score of others,
their populations perishing by the thousands, as shipping proved
unavailable to transport them to safety.

By far the most tragic fate, however, was that suffered by the British
Isles. What happened there stunned the world, and brought realization
to humanity that unless some miracle intervened, it was but a mirror
of the doom that awaited all. For England, Ireland and Scotland were
habitable no more. London, Dublin, Glasgow--all their proud cities,
all their peaceful hamlets, centuries old, were flaming ruins.

Out of a population, of some sixty millions, it was estimated that at
least eight millions must have perished. The rest, by prodigious feats
of transportation, managed to reach the mainland, where they spread as
refugees throughout an apprehensive, demoralized Europe.

       *       *       *       *       *

As for the armies and navies of the world, they were powerless before
this fiendish invader. Hammered with high explosives, drenched with
chemicals, sprayed with machine-gun ballets, the fiery termites surged
on unchecked, in ever-widening circles of death.

Lead and steel passed through them harmlessly. Gas wafted off them
like air. Despite the frantic efforts of scientists and military men,
nothing could be devised to stem that all-devouring orange tide.

It was quite obvious by now, even to the most conservative minds, that
the end of human life on earth was not far off. It could only be a few
more weeks before the last stronghold fell. Daily, hourly, those
deadly Fire Ants were everywhere expanding their fields of operations.
Presently all humanity would be driven to the seacoasts, there to
perish by fire or water, as they chose.

There were some optimists, of course, who believed that the miracle
would happen--that Professor Wentworth or some other scientist would
devise some means of repelling the invader before it was too late.

Young Jim Carter of _The York Press_ was not among them, however,
though he would have gambled it would be Professor Wentworth if
anyone. For what hope was there that any mere man could figure out a
weapon that would be effective against such a deadly, such a
superhuman foe?

Very little, it seemed, and he grew less and less sanguine, as he
continued his frenzied, sleepless work of reporting the unending
catastrophes for his paper.

He often thought bitterly of that ten thousand dollars. A lot of good
that would do him now!

As for Joan, she faced her fate with fortitude--fortitude and a
supreme faith that her father would succeed in analyzing that sinister
orange vapor and find the weapon the world waited for.

But agonizing days passed and he did not find it.

Then at last, on the night of August 14th, when Los Angeles and San
Francisco were smoldering infernos, along with Reno, Denver, Omaha, El
Paso and a score of other great American cities; when Buenos Aires and
Santiago were gone, Berlin and Peking and Cairo; when Australia was
all one fiery hell--then it was that Professor Wentworth summoned Jim
Carter to Hartford.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hoping against hope, he hurried over.

Once again, Joan ushered him into the house. She was very pale and did
not speak.

At her side stood her father. It was he who spoke.

"Good evening, Jim. You have come promptly."

His voice was strained, his face grave. He had aged greatly in the
past few weeks.

"Well I'll admit I clipped along. You've--found something?"

Professor Wentworth smiled wanly.

"Suppose you step into my study and see what I have found."

He led the way toward the little makeshift laboratory that for many
days and nights had been the scene of his efforts.

It was littered with strange devices now, strangest of all perhaps a
huge glass tube like a cannon, mounted on some sort of swivel base.

Ignoring this for the moment, he turned to a smaller tube set upright
on a table at the far end of the room. In it, glowed a sinister orange
lump that made the whole tube fluorescent.

"Behold one of your monsters in captivity!" said the professor, again
with a wan smile. "In miniature, of course. What I have done is to
condense some of that vapor into a solid."

The process, he explained, was similar to that employed by Madame
Curie in obtaining metallic radium--electrolyzing a radium chloride
solution with mercury as a cathode, then driving off the mercury by
heat in a current of hydrogen--only he had used the new element
instead of radium.

"Incidentally, I have learned that this new element is far more
radioactive than radium and possesses many curious properties. Among
them, it decomposes violently in water--particularly salt
water--producing harmless hydrogen and chloride compounds. So we have
nothing to fear from those seeds that fell in our oceans, lakes and
rivers."

"Well, that's something, anyway," said Jim. "But have you found any
way to combat the ones that have already hatched?"

"Before I answer that question," Professor Wentworth replied, "I shall
let you witness a little demonstration."

He advanced to the cannon-like device at the other end of the room,
swung it on its swivel till it was pointing directly at that
fluorescent orange tube on the table.

"Watch closely!" he said, throwing a switch.

There was a sudden, whining hum in the air and the nib of the big tube
glowed a soft, velvety green. Jim gazed at the scene with rapt
attention.

"Don't look at that one!" whispered Joan. "Look at the other!"

Jim did so, and saw that its fluorescence was waning.

A moment more the professor held the current on, while the tube grew
white. Then he threw off the switch.

