"These must be glimpses of other 'spaces' besides our own space. If we
could see in four dimensions we could see them all spread out before
us. But we can only perceive in three dimensions; therefore, as we
walk through hyperspace, past the different 'spaces' which are ranged
about in it, we get a glimpse into such of them as are parallel with
our own space. Can you understand that?"

"Oh, yes," groaned Phil. "It sounds just about like it looks. But,
don't mind me. Go on, have your fun."

"I've been thinking about those wooden spheres," continued Ione. "I'm
sure they must be sections of trees that are cut crosswise by our
'space;' they grow in three dimensions, but only two of them are our
dimensions and a third is strange to us. We see only three-dimensional
sections of them, which are spheres. There is more of them, that we
cannot see, in another dimension."

"Yes, yes. Just as plain as the Jabberwock!"

"Look! There's a real Jabberwock!" exclaimed Ione.

On ahead of them they saw a number of creatures that seemed to be made
of painted wooden balls in different colors, joined together.

"Tinkertoys!" exclaimed Phil. "Live ones! Big ones!"

The animals, though they looked for all the world as though they were
made of painted wood, moved with jerky motions and clattered and
snarled.

"There is probably more to _them_ in another dimension," Ione said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly one of the beasts approached them with a leap. There were two
big eyes and two rows of teeth that came together with a snap, right
on Phil's trouser-leg. He jerked himself away, sacrificing some square
inches of trouser-leg, and, whirling around, kicked at the thing with
all his force. It almost paralyzed his foot, for the animal seemed to
be made of wood or bone. But it disappeared, and, as it did, both of
them felt a queer, nauseating jolt. A few more minutes' walk brought
them back to the safe without seeing any more spaces; and the sight of
its black iron bulk filled them with a home-like relief, which in a
moment they recognized as a mockery.

"Are we on a sphere of some sort?" Phil asked.

"Probably on an irregular mass of matter," Ione replied, "part of
which is Tony's concrete floor, and part of which comes out of some
other dimension. This mass of matter is at one end of a long, bar-like
portion of space, the middle of which is pivoted in our world,
somewhere in Chicago, and both ends of which are free in hyperspace."

"Then," suggested Phil, "why can't we walk down to the axle on which
it is balanced, and step out into Chicago?"

"Because there isn't any _matter_ for us to walk on. We are not able
to move about in space, in three dimensions, you know. We can only get
around in two dimensions, on the surface of _matter_."

"Well, let's try another exploration trip at right angles to our first
one. After all, these 'spaces' are an interesting show, and I want to
see some more."

They started out in the selected direction, and after a short walk got
a glimpse of a vast space dotted with stars and nebulae, with two
bright moons sailing overhead. A few steps farther on was a wall of
solid granite, near enough to touch with their hands. Again, there was
an intensely active mass of weaving bright stripes and loops and
circles, seeming to consist of light only, and making them dizzy in a
few seconds. Ione wondered if it might not be something like an
organic molecule on a large scale. Again, odd, queer, indescribable
shapes and outlines would appear and disappear, obviously
three-dimensional sections of multi-dimensional things, cut by space.
Once they passed a place of intense cold and terrific noise and
escaped destruction or lunacy only because it took them the merest
instant to get past.

They arrived back at the safe, very much fatigued from the strain,
their minds woefully confused. Hunger and thirst were beginning to
thrust up their little reminders; and for the first time the terrors
of their position, flung out into hyperspace on a small, barren piece
of matter, began to seem real.

       *       *       *       *       *

After a rest they started out again. As Phil had touched, in kicking
it, a creature from another "space," perhaps they might find water and
even food somewhere. They retraced their first steps to the spot where
they had at first seen water. They found it again and were able to dip
their hands into it. It was warm, and too salty to drink. They came to
the place with the creepers or vines, and Phil reached out and seized
one of them. It was heavy, rubbery, and elastic, stretching readily as
he pulled it.

"These little lurches that we feel must be the snapping back of the
space-puckers as expressed by tensors," Ione remarked. "Every time
matter goes in or out of space, the nature of space is altered."

"Well," observed Phil, releasing the vine, "I'd better be careful. If
one of these things hauls me off here, our last bond with home is
gone. I don't want to get lost in some other space."

As he released the vines they snapped back to their places, and the
forest of them dimmed a little and reappeared.

They made the round again, dodging cautiously past the point where
they had previously found the "Tinkertoy" animals, and succeeded in
getting past their snapping teeth. But no promise of food or water did
they find anywhere.

"Looks like we're sunk," observed Phil, as they dropped down on the
concrete to rest, leaning their backs against the safe.

How time counted in hyperspace, neither Phil nor Ione could tell; Phil
knew that his watch was running. He knew that it was ages and ages
that he sat with his back against the safe, reviewing all the events
of his put life, and thinking of this ignominious end to a lively
career! He swore half aloud; then suddenly looked at Ione, ready to
apologize. He found her weeping silently.

"I should never have let you come into the building with me," he
stammered in confusion at her tears.

"Oh, what do I care what becomes of _me_!" she exclaimed angrily. "But
who will take care of poor daddy? He doesn't even know when it's time
to eat." And she burst into a fresh fit of weeping.

Phil bent his head in the dumbness of profound despair.


PART V

_The Reversible Equation_

Despair, however, is a luxury. Necessity is a stimulus. With the
parchings of thirst and the gnawings of hunger, the two young people
ceased swearing and weeping. Phil got up and paced about and sat down
again. Ione's tears stopped and dried, and she sat and thought.

In the back of her mind there had been forming a vague sort of an
idea, which had signalled ahead of itself that there was hope. She sat
there and desperately drove her reason to its utmost efforts, to find
that idea and bring it to the surface of consciousness. Hand to hand
fights with wild animals, battles between ships of the line, vicious
duels between ace-aviators in the clouds are tense fights; but they
cannot compare in anxious difficulty with the struggle to bring up an
unformed idea out of the subconscious mind--especially when one knows
that the idea is there, and that it must be found to save one's life.

"Ione!" exclaimed Phil. It was the first time he had used the name.
