She gazed up at him. She was smiling. "Is it? To me it seems quite
close." She gestured. "Just up there. It seemed far to you, I
suppose--that was because you were so small, for so long, coming here."

Like a man the size of an ant, trying to walk ten miles. Of course, it
would be a monstrous trip. But if that man were steadily to grow larger,
as he progressed he would cover the distance very quickly.

"Well," Lee said, "I suppose I can understand that. You were born here,
Aura?"

"Yes. Of course."

"Your world here--what is it like?"

She gazed up at him as though surprised. "You have seen it. It is just a
simple little place. We have not so many people here in the village, and
about that many more--those who live in the hills close around here."

"You mean that's all? Just this village? Just a few thousand people?"

"Oh there are others, of course. Other groups--like ours, I guess--out
in the forests--everywhere in all the forests, maybe." Her gesture
toward the distant, glowing, wooded horizons was vague. "We have never
tried to find out. Why should we? Wherever they are, they have all that
they need or want. So have we."

The thing was so utterly simple. He pondered it. "And you--you're very
happy here?"

Her wide eyes were childlike. "Why yes. Of course. Why not? Why should
not everyone be happy?"

"Well," he said, "there are things--"

"Yes. I have heard of them. Things on your Earth--which the humans
create for themselves--but that is very silly. We do not have them
here."

Surely he could think of no retort to such childlike faith. Her faith.
How horribly criminal it would be to destroy it. A priceless
thing--human happiness to be created out of the faith that it was the
normal thing. He realized that his heart was pounding, as though now
things which had been dormant within him all his life were coming
out--clamoring now for recognition.

And then, out of another silence he murmured, "Aura--you're taking me to
my grandfather, aren't you? He came here from Earth--and then he sent
back there to get me?"

"Yes," she admitted. "So you know it? But I was instructed to--"

"All right. We won't talk of it. And he's told you about me?"

"Yes," she agreed shyly. She caught her breath as she added, "I have
been--waiting for you--a long time." Shyly she gazed up at him. The
night-breeze had blown her hair partly over her face. Her hand brushed
it away so that her gaze met his. "I hoped you would be, well, like you
are," she added.

"Oh," he said awkwardly. "Well--thanks."

"And you," she murmured out of another little silence, "you--I hope I
haven't disappointed you. I am the way you want--like you wished--"

What a weird thing to say! He smiled. "Not ever having heard of you,
Aura, I can't exactly say that I--"

       *       *       *       *       *

He checked himself. Was she what he had wished? Why yes--surely he had
been thinking of her--in his dreams, all his life vaguely picturing
something like this for Lee Anthony....

"I guess I have been thinking of you," he agreed. "No, you haven't
disappointed me, Aura. You--you are--"

He could find no words to say it. "We are almost there," she said. "He
will be very happy to have you come. He is a very good man, Lee. The
one, we think, of the most goodness--and wiseness, to guide us all--"

The path had led them up a rocky defile, with gnarled little trees
growing between the crags. Ahead, the hillside rose up in a broken,
rocky cliff. There was a door, like a small tunnel entrance. A woman in
a long white robe was by the door.

"He is here," Aura said. "Young Anthony."

"You go in."

Silently they passed her. The tunnel entrance glowed with the pastel
radiance from the rocks. The radiance was a soft blob of color ahead of
them.

"You will find that he cannot move now," Aura whispered. "You will sit
by his bed. And talk softly."

"You mean--he's ill?"

"Well--what you would call paralysis. He cannot move. Only his lips--his
eyes. He will be gone from us soon, so that then he can only be unseen.
A Visitor--"

Her whisper trailed off. Lee's heart was pounding, seeming to thump in
his throat as Aura led him silently forward. It was a draped, cave-like
little room. Breathless, Lee stared at a couch--a thin old figure lying
there--a frail man with white hair that framed his wrinkled face. It was
a face that was smiling, its sunken, burning eyes glowing with a new
intensity. The lips moved; a faint old voice murmured:

"And you--you are Lee?"

"Yes--grandfather--"

He went slowly forward and sat on the bedside.




CHAPTER IV

_Mad Giant_


To Lee, after a moment, his grandfather seemed not awe-inspiring, but
just a frail old man, paralyzed into almost complete immobility, lying
here almost pathetically happy to have his grandson at last with him. An
old man, with nothing of the mystic about him--an old man who had
been--unknown to the savants of his Earth--perhaps the greatest
scientist among them. Quietly, with pride welling in him, Lee held the
wasted, numbed hand of his grandfather and listened....

Phineas Anthony, the scientist. After many years of research,
spending his own private fortune, he had evolved the secret of
size-change--solved the intricate problems of anti-gravitational
spaceflight; and combining the two, had produced that little vehicle.

A man of science; and perhaps more than that. As old Anna Green had
said, perhaps he was a man inspired--a man, following his dreams, his
convictions, convinced that somewhere in God's great creation of things
that are, there must be an existence freed of those things by which Man
himself so often makes human life a tortured hell.

"And Something led me here, Lee," the gentle old voice was saying.
"Perhaps not such a coincidence. On this great Inner Surface of gentle
light and gentle warmth--with Nature offering nothing against which one
must strive--there must be many groups of simple people like these. They
have no thought of evil--there is nothing--no one, to teach it to them.
If I had not landed here, I think I would have found much the same thing
almost anywhere else on the Inner Surface."

"The Inner Surface? I don't understand, grandfather."

A conception--a reality here--that was numbing in its vastness. This was
the concave, inner surface, doubtless deep within the atom of some
material substance. A little empty Space here, surrounded by solidity.

"And that--" Lee murmured, "then that little space is our Inter-Stellar
abyss?"

"Yes. Of course. The stars, as we call them--from here you could call
them tiny particles--like electrons whirling. All of them in this little
void. With good eyesight, you can sometimes see them there--"

"I did."

And to this viewpoint which Lee had now--so gigantic, compared to
Earth--all the Inter-Stellar universe was a void here of what old
Anthony considered would be perhaps eight or ten thousand miles. A void,
to Lee now, was itself of no greater volume than the Earth had been to
him before!

Silently he pondered it. This Inner Surface--not much bigger, to him
now, than the surface of the Earth is to its humans.... Suddenly
he felt small--infinitely tiny. Out here beyond the stars, he was
only within the atom of something larger, a human, partly on his
way--emerging--outward--

       *       *       *       *       *

It gave him a new vague conception. As though now, because he was partly
emerged, the all-wise Creator was giving him a new insight. Surely in
this simple form of existence humans were totally unaware of what evil
could be. Was not this a higher form of life than down there on his tiny
Earth?

The conception numbed him with awe....

"You see, Lee, I have been looking forward to having you become a
man--to having you here," old Anthony was saying. As he lay, so utterly
motionless, only his voice, his face, his eyes, seemed alive. It was an
amazingly expressive old face, radiant, transfigured. "I shall not be
here long. You see? And when I have--gone on--when I can only come back
here as a Visitor--like Anna Green, you have been aware of her, Lee?"

"Yes, grandfather. Yes, I think I have."

"The awareness is more acute, here, than it was back on Earth. A very
comforting thing, Lee. I was saying--I want you here. These people, so
simple--you might almost think them childlike--they need someone to
guide them. The one who did that--just as I came, was dying.
Maybe--maybe that is what led me here. So now I need you."

