Abruptly the Pygmy Planet, which had seemed to be _beside_ him,
appeared to swing about, so that it was _beneath_ him. He knew that it
was a change merely in his sensations. He was feeling the gravitation
of the new world. It was pulling him toward it!

He cut the throttle, and settled the plane into a long glide, a glide
that was to end upon the surface of a new planet!

In what seemed half an hour more, Larry had made a safe landing upon
the Pygmy Planet. He had come down upon a stretch of fairly smooth,
red, sandy desert, which seemed to stretch illimitably toward the
rising sun, which direction Larry instinctively termed "east."

To the "west" was a line of dull green--evidently the vegetation along
a stream. The ocher desert was scattered with sparse clumps of
reddish, spiky scrub. Larry taxied the plane into one of those
thickets. Finding canvas and rope in the cabin, he staked down the
machine, and muffled the motor.

Then, selecting a rifle and a heavy automatic from the weapons in the
cabin, and filling his pockets with extra ammunition, he left the
plane and set out with brisk steps toward the green line of
vegetation.

"I'll follow along the river," he reasoned. "It may lead me somewhere
and it will show the way back to the plane. I may come across
something in the way of a clue. Can't go exploring by air, or I'll
burn up all the gas and be stranded here!"

       *       *       *       *       *

To his surprise, the water course proved to be an ancient canal,
walled with crumbling masonry. Its channel was choked with mud and
thorny, thick-leaved desert shrubs of unfamiliar variety; but a feeble
current still flowed along it.

After some reflection, Larry set out along the banks of the canal.

He followed it for two days.

Curious straight bars of light were visible across the sky--a band of
violet in the morning; one of crimson at evening. Their apparent
motion was in the same direction as that of the sun. The bars of
light puzzled him considerably before it occurred to him that they
must be the red and violet rays.

"So you wait till evening, and then fly up into the red ray, to go
home," he muttered. "But I may not need that information," he added
grimly. "Seems to be a pretty big job to search a planet on foot, for
one person. And I'm not going back without Agnes!"

In the afternoon of the second day, he came within view of a city. He
could discern vast, imposing walls and towers of dark stone. It stood
in the barren red desert, far back from the green line of the old
canal. Larry left the canal and started wearily across toward it. He
had covered several miles of the distance before he saw that the lofty
towers were falling, the magnificent walls crumbling. The city was
ruined, dead, deserted!

The realization brought him a great flood of despair. He had hoped to
find people--friends, from whom he might get food, and information
about this unfamiliar planet. But the city was dead.

Larry was standing there, in the midst of the vast red plain between
ruined city and ruined canal. Tired, hungry, lonely and hopeless. He
was looking up at the white "sun," trying to comfort himself with the
thought that the brilliant luminary was merely a queer blue lamp, that
he was upon a tiny experimental world in a laboratory. But the thought
brought him no relief; only confusion and a sense of incredulity.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then he saw the machine-monster.

A glittering, winged thing of crystal and green metal, identical with
the one he had encountered in the laboratory. It must already have
seen him, for it was dropping swiftly toward him.

Larry started to run, took a few staggering steps. Then he recalled
the heavy rifle slung over his shoulder. Moving with desperate haste,
he got it into his hands and raised it just as the monster dropped to
the red sand a dozen yards away from him.

Steadily he covered the crystal cylinder within which the thing's
brain floated in luminous violet liquid. His finger tightened on the
trigger, ready to send a heavy bullet crashing into it. Then he
paused, swore softly, lowered the gun.

"If I kill it," he murmured, "I may never find Agnes. And if I let it
carry me off, it may take me where she is."

He walked toward the monster, across the red sand.

It stood uncertainly upon green metal legs, seeming to stare at him
strangely with eye-like lenses. Its wings of thin green metal plates,
were folded; its four green tentacles were twitching oddly.

Abruptly, it sprang upon him.

A green tentacle seized the rifle and snatched it from his hands. He
felt the automatic pistol and the ammunition being removed from his
pockets.

Then, firmly held in the flexible arms of green metal, he was lifted
against the cylinder of violet liquid. The monster spread its broad
emerald wings, and Larry was swiftly borne into the air.

In a few moments the wide ruins of the ancient city were spread below,
with the green line of the choked canal cutting the infinite red waste
of the desert beyond it.

The monster flew westward.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a considerable time, nothing save barren, ocherous desert was in
view. Then Larry's weird captor flew near a strange city. A city of
green metal. The buildings were most fantastic--pyramids of green,
crowned with enormous, glistening spheres of emerald metal. An
impassable wall surrounding the city.

Larry had expected the monster to drop into the city. But it carried
him on, and finally settled to the ground several miles beyond. The
green tentacles released him, as the thing landed, and he sprawled
beside it, dizzy after his strange flight.

As Larry staggered uncertainly to his feet, he saw that the monster
had released him in an open pen. It was a square area, nearly fifty
yards on each side, and fenced with thin posts or rods of green metal,
perhaps twenty feet high. Set very close together, and sharply pointed
at the top, they formed a barrier apparently insurmountable.

In the center of the pen was a huge and strange machine, built of
green metal. It looked very worn and ancient; it was covered with
patches of bluish rust or corrosion. At first it looked quite strange
to Larry; then he was struck by a vaguely familiar quality about it.
Looking closer, he realized that it was a colossal steam hammer!

Its design, of course, was unfamiliar. But in the vast, corroded frame
he quickly picked out a steam chest, cylinder, and the great hammer,
weighing many tons.

He gasped when his eyes went to the anvil.

A man was chained across it.

A man in torn, grimy clothing, fastened with fetters of green metal
upon wrists and ankles, so that his body was stretched beneath the
massive hammer. He seemed to be unconscious; upon his head, which was
turned toward Larry, was a red and swollen bruise.

The monster which had dropped Larry within the pen rose again into the
air. And Larry started forward, trying to remember just what Agnes had
told him of a machine to which the monsters sacrificed.

This must be the machine--this ancient steam hammer!

As he moved forward, Agnes came into view.

       *       *       *       *       *

She walked around the massive base of the great machine, carrying a
bowl filled with a fragrant brown liquid. She stopped at sight of
Larry, and uttered a little cry. The bowl fell from her hands, and the
fragrant liquid splashed out on the ground. Her brown eyes went wide
