
"The universes, as you may know, are set off from each other by totally
black and empty abysms, expanses so vast that light-rays have not yet
crossed many of them. How did we accomplish the feat of traversing such
a gulf? By the simplest of means: acceleration. Why? Because to remain
in our universe meant inevitable death. We gambled on the greatest
adventure in all the cosmos.

       *       *       *       *       *

"To begin with, we circled our universe to the remotest point opposite
where we wanted to leave it. We then turned our attraction powers on
part way so that the millions of stars before us drew us ahead, then we
gradually stepped up the power to its full strength, thus ever
increasing our speed. At the same time, as stars passed to our rear in
our flight, we turned our repulsion-rays against them, stepping that
power up also.

"Our initial speed was twenty-four miles per second. Midway in our
universe we had reached the speed of your light--186,000 miles per
second. By the time we left our universe, we were hurtling at a speed
which we estimated to be 1,600,000,000 miles per second. Yet even at
that tremendous speed, it took us years to cross from our universe to
yours. If we had encountered even a planetoid at that enormous rate, we
would probably have been annihilated in white-hot death. But we had
planned well, and there are no superiors to our stellar mechanics, our
astronomers, our scientists.

"When we finally hurtled from the black void into your universe, we
found what we had only dared hope for: a young universe, with many
planets and cooling worlds rich in radium ores, the only element in your
scale that can help to replenish our vanishing energy. Half your
universe we have already deprived of its ores. Your Earth has more that
we want. Then we shall continue on our way, to loot the rest of the
worlds, before passing on to another universe. We are a planet without a
universe. We will wander and pillage until we find a universe like the
one we come from, or until Xlarbti itself disintegrates and we perish.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We could easily wipe out all the dwellers on Earth and mine the ores
ourselves. But that would be a needless waste of our powers, for since
you can not defy us, and since the desire for life burns as high in you
as in us and as it does in all sensate things in all universes, your
people will save themselves from death and save us from wasting energy
by mining the ores for us. What happens afterwards, we do not care.

"The seven new suns that you saw were dead worlds that we used as
buffers to slow down Xlarbti. The full strength of our repulsion-force
directed against any single world necessarily turns it into a liquid or
gaseous state depending on various factors. Your planet Neptune was
pulled out of the solar system by the attraction of Xlarbti's mass. The
flame-paths, as you call them, are directed streams of energy for
different purposes: the one to the sun supplies us, for instance, with
heat, light, and electricity, which in turn are stored up for eventual
use.

"The orange-ray that you felt is one of our achievements. It is similar
to the double-action pumps used in some of your sulphur mines, whereby a
pipe is inclosed in a larger pipe, and hot water forced down through
the larger tubing returns sulphur-laden through the central pipe. The
orange-ray instantaneously dissolves any portable object up to a certain
size, propels it back to Xlarbti through its center which is the reverse
ray, and here reforms the object, just as you were recreated on the disk
that you stood on when you regained consciousness.

"But I have not enough time to explain everything on Xlarbti to you; nor
would you comprehend it all if I did. Your stay is almost up.

"In that one control-panel lies all the power that we have mastered,"
boasted Garboreggg with supreme egotism. "It connects with the
individual controls throughout Xlarbti."

"What is the purpose of some of the levers?" asked Phobar, with a
desperate hope in his thoughts.

       *       *       *       *       *

A filament of metal whipped to the panel from the lord of Xlarbti. "This
first section duplicates the control-panel that you saw in the
laboratory where you opened your eyes. Do not think that you can make
use of this information--in ten minutes you will be back on your Earth
to deliver our command. Between now and that moment you will be so
closely watched that you can do nothing and will have no opportunity to
try.

"This first lever controls the attraction rays, the second the repulsion
force. The third dial regulates the orange-ray by which you will be
returned to Earth. The fourth switch directs the electrical bolt that
destroyed New York City. Next it is a device that we have never had
occasion to use. It releases the Krangor-wave throughout Xlarbti. Its
effect is to make each atom of Xlarbti, the Sthalreh metal and
everything on it, become compact, to do away with the empty spaces that
exist in every atom. Theoretically, it would reduce Xlarbti to a
fraction of its present size, diminish its mass while its weight and
gravity remained as before.

"The next lever controls matter to be transported between here and the
first laboratory. Somewhat like the orange-ray, it disintegrates the
object and reassembles it here."

       *       *       *       *       *

So that was what Phobar's captor had been trying to do with him back
there in the laboratory! "Why was I not brought here by that means?"
burst out Phobar.

"Because you belong to a different universe," answered Garboreggg.
"Without experimentation, we cannot tell what natural laws of ours you
would not be subject to, but this is one of them." A gesture of
irritation seemed to come from him. "Some laws hold good in all the
universes we have thus far investigated. The orange-ray, for instance,
picked you up as it would have plucked one of us from the surface of
Kygpton. But on Xlarbti, which is composed entirely of Sthalreh, your
atomic nature and physical constitution are so different from ours that
they were unaffected by the energy that ordinarily transports objects
here."

Thus the metal nightmare went rapidly over the control-panel. At length
Phobar's captor, or another thing like him, reentered when Garboreggg
flicked a strange-looking protuberance on the panel.

"You will now be returned to your world," came the thought of
Garboreggg. "We shall watch you through our cosmotel to see that you
deliver our instructions. Unless the nations of Earth obey us, they will
be obliterated at the end of seven days."

A wild impulse to smash that impassive, metallic monster passed from
Phobar as quickly as it came. He was helpless. Sick and despairing, he
felt the cold, baffling-colored metal close around him again; once more
he was borne aloft for the journey to the laboratory, from there to be
propelled back to Earth.

