began to move! Slowly, the water swirling about her, she backed away
from her anchor, tightening the curve of the anchor chain! Water
quivered about the point of the chain's contact with the waves!

Quickly the eyes of the Secret Agents swept along the street of ships.
The same backward motion, of dragging against their anchor chains, was
visible at the bow of each warship!

With not a soul aboard them, the ships were waking into strange and
awesome life, dragging at their anchors, like hounds pulling at leashes
to be free and away!

"How are they doing it?" It was almost a whisper from the President.

"Some electro-magnetic force, sir!" stated Prester Kleig. "Professor
Blaine, that is your province! Please note what is happening, and advise
us at once if you see how they are doing it!"

A grunt of affirmation from surly, obese Professor Blaine.

       *       *       *       *       *

All eyes turned back again to the miracle of the moving ships. One by
one, with crashes which echoed and re-echoed through the Secret Room,
the anchor chains of the dreadnoughts parted. The ends of them swung
from the prows of the warships, while the severed portions splashed into
the Roads, and the waters hid them from view.

The great dreadnought in the foreground swung slowly about until her
prow was pointed in the direction of the open sea, and though no sea was
running, no smoke rose from her funnels, she got slowly, ponderously
under way, and started out the Roads. Behind her, in formation, the
other ships swung into line.

In a matter of seconds, faster than any of these vessels had ever
traveled before, they were racing in column for the open Atlantic. And
from the sound apparatus came wails and shrieks of terror, the
lamentations of men and women frightened as they had never been
frightened before.

The shores behind the moving column of ships was moment by moment
growing blacker with people--a black sea of people, whose faces were
white as chalk with terror.

But on, out to sea, moved the column of brave ships.

A new note entered into the picture, as from all sides airplanes of many
makes swooped in, and swept back and forth over the moving ships, while
hooded heads looked out of pits, and faces of pilots were aghast at
what they saw.

       *       *       *       *       *

A ghost column of ships, moving out to sea, speed increasing moment by
moment unbelievably. Even now, five minutes after the first dreadnought
had started seaward, the wake of each ship spread away on either hand in
the two sides of a watery triangle whose walls were a dozen feet
high--racing for the shores with all the sullen majesty of tidal waves.

The crowds gave back, and their screams rose into the air in a
frightened roar of appalling sound.

Even now, so rapidly did the warships travel, many of the planes could
throttle down, so that they flew directly above the heaving decks of the
runaway warships.

"Get word to them!" cried Prester Kleig suddenly. "Get word to them that
if they follow the ships out to sea not a pilot will escape alive!"

One of the Secret Agents rose and hurried from the Secret Room,
traveling at top speed for the first of the many doors enroute to the
broadcasting tower from which all the planes could be reached at once.
Prester Kleig turned back to the magic screen of Maniel.

The warships, water thrown aside by the lifting thrust of their forefeet
in mountains that raced landward with ever-increasing fury, were
clearing the Roads and swinging south by east, heading into the wastes
of the Atlantic. As they cleared the land, and open water for unnumbered
miles lay ahead, the speed of the mighty ships increased to a point
where they rode as high on the water as racing launches, and the
creaking and groaning of their rusty bolts and spars were a continual
paean of protest in the sound apparatus accompanying the showing of the
miracle on the screen.

"They're heading straight for the spot where that super-submarine lies!"
said the President, and no one answered him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Prester Kleig, watching, was racing over in his mind what he could
recall of his country's armament. Warships were useless, as was being
proved here before his eyes. But there still remained airplanes, in
countless numbers, which could be diverted from ocean travel and from
routine business, to battle this menace of Moyen.

But....

He shuddered as he pictured in his mind's eye the meeting of his
country's flower of flying manhood with the monsters of Moyen.

His eyes, as he thought, were watching the racing of those ocean
greyhounds, out to sea. They were now out of sight of land, and still
some of the planes followed them.

A half hour passed, and then....

The American pilots, in obedience to the radio signals, turning back
from this strange phenomenon of the ghost column of capital ships.

Simultaneously, out of the sky dead ahead, dropped the first flight of
Moyen's aero-subs.

At the same moment the mysterious power which had dragged the ships to
sea was withdrawn, and the warships, with no hands to guide them, swung
whither they willed, and floated in as many directions as there were
ships, under their forward momentum. There were a score of collisions,
and some of the ships were in sinking condition even before the
aero-subs began their labors.

       *       *       *       *       *

The remaining ships floated high out of the water, because they carried
no ballast, and from all sides the aero-subs of Moyen settled to the
task of destruction--destruction which was simply a warning of what was
to come: Moyen's manner of proving to the Americas the fact that he was
all-powerful.

"God, what fools!" cried Prester Kleig.

The rearmost of the American aviators had looked back, had seen the
first of the aero-subs drop down among the doomed ships. Instantly he
turned out to sea again, signalling as he did so to the nearest other
planes. And in spite of the radio warning a hundred planes answered that
signal and swept back to investigate this new mystery.

"They're going to death!" groaned the President.

"Yes," said Kleig, softly, "but it saves us ordering others to death.
Perhaps we may learn something of value as we watch them die!"




CHAPTER VII

_Golden Oblivion_


"This," said Prester Kleig, as coldly precise as a judge pronouncing
sentence of death, "will precipitate the major engagement with Moyen's
forces. The fools, to rush in like this, when they have been warned! But
even so, they are magnificent!"

The pilots of the aero-subs must instantly have noticed the return of
the American pilots, for some of the aero-subs which had dropped to the
ocean's surface rose again almost instantly, and swept into battle
formation above the drifting hulks of the warships.

The Americans were wary. They drew together like frightened chickens
when a hawk hovers above them, and watched the activities of the
aero-subs, every move of each one being at the same time visible and
audible to the Secret Agents in the Capitol's Secret Room.

The aero-subs which had submerged singled out their particular prey
among the floating ships, and the Secret Agents, trying to see how each
separate act of destruction was accomplished, watched the aero-sub in
the foreground, which happened to be concentrating on the dreadnought
which had led the ghost-march of the warships out to sea.

       *       *       *       *       *

The aero-sub circled the swaying dreadnought as a shark circles a wreck,
and through the walls of the aero-sub the watchers in the Secret Room
could see the four-man crew of the thing. Grim faced men, men of the
Orient they plainly were, coldly concentrating on the work in hand.
Their faces were those of men who are merciless, even brutal, with
neither heart nor compassion of any kind for weaker ones. One man
maneuvered the aero-sub, while the other three concentrated on the
apparatus in the nose of the hybrid vessel.

"See," spoke Prester Kleig again, "if you can tell what manner of ray
they use, and how it is projected. That's your province, General
Munson!"

From the particular Secret Agent named, who was expert for war in the
membership of the Secret Room, came a short grunt of affirmation. A few
murmured words.

"I'll be able to tell more about it when I see how they operate when
they are flying. That black streak under water ... well, I must see it
out of the water, and then...."

But here General Munson ended, for the aero-sub which they were
especially watching had got into action against the dreadnought.

The aero-sub was motionless and submerged just off the port bow of the
dreadnought. The three men inside the aero-sub were working swiftly and
efficiently with the complicated but minute machinery in the nose of
their transport.

"It can be controlled, then, this ray," said Munson, interrupting
himself. "Watch!"

       *       *       *       *       *

From the nose of the aero-sub leaped, like a streak of black lightning,
that ebon agency of death. It struck the prow of the battleship--and the
prow, as far aft as the well-deck, simply vanished from sight,
disintegrated! It was as though it had never been, and for a second, so
swiftly had it happened, the water of the ocean held the impression that
portion of the warship had made--as an explosive leaves a crater in the
soil of earth!

Then a drumming roar as the sea rushed in to claim its own. The roaring,
as of a Niagara, as the waters claimed the ship, rushing down
passageways into the hold, possessing the warship with all the
invincible, speedy might of the sea.

Mingled with this roaring was the shivering, vibratory sound which
Prester Kleig had experienced in his half-dream. The sound was so
intense that it fairly rocked the Secret Room to its furthermost cranny.

For a second the dreadnought, wounded to death, seemed to shudder, to
hesitate, then to move backward as though wincing from her death blow.
It was the pound of the inrushing waters which did it. Then up came the
stern of the mighty ship, as she started her last long plunge into the
depths.

But attention had swung to another warship, on the starboard beam of
which another aero-sub had taken up position. Again the ebon streak of
death from her blunt nose, smashing in and through the warship, directly
amidships, cutting her in twain as though the black streak had been a
pair of shears, the warship a strip of tissue paper.

Up went the prow and the stern of this one, and together, the water
separating the two parts as it rushed into the gap, the broken warship
went down to its final resting place.

       *       *       *       *       *

Abruptly Professor Maniel swung back to the American planes which had
come back to investigate the activities of the aero-subs, and on the
screen, in the midst of the battle formation into which the pilots had
swept to hurriedly, the Secret Agents could see the faces of those
pilots....

White as chalk with fear, mouths open in gasping unbelief. One man, a
pale-faced youth, was the first to recover. He stared around at his
compatriots, and plainly through the sound apparatus in the Secret Room
came his swift radio signals.

"Attack! Who will follow me against these people?"

His signals were very plain. So, too, were the answers of the other
pilots, and the heart of Prester Kleig swelled with pride as he listened
to the answering signals--and counted them, discovered that every last
pilot there present elected to stay with this youngster, to avenge their
country for this contemptuous insult which had been put upon her by the
rape of Hampton Roads.

Into swift formation they swept, and with these planes--all planes in
use were required by franchise of operating companies to be equipped for
the emergencies of war--swung into an echelon formation, the youthful
pilot leading by mutual consent.

They swept at full speed toward the warships, four of which had by this
time been sent to destruction--one of which had appeared to vanish
utterly in the space of a single heartbeat, so quickly that for a second
or two the shape of its bilge, the bulge of its keel, was visible in the
face of the deep--and openly challenged the aero-subs.

       *       *       *       *       *

Muzzles of compressed air guns projected from the wing-tips of the
planes. Buttons were pressed which elevated the muzzles of guns arranged
to fire upward from either side the fighting pits, twin guns that were
fired downward from the same central magazine--the only guns in use in
the Americas which fired in opposite directions at the same time.

But for a few moments the aero-subs refused combat. Their speed was
terrific, dazzling. They eluded the thrusts, the dives and plunges of
the American ships as easily as a swallow eludes the dive of a buzzard.

It came to Prester Kleig, however, that the aero-subs were merely
playing with the Americans; that when they elected to move, the planes
would be blasted from the sky as easily as the warships were being
erased from the surface of the Atlantic.

One by one, as methodically as machines, the aero-sub pilots blasted the
warships into nothingness. They had their orders, and they went about
their performance with a rigidity of discipline which astounded the
Secret Agents. They had been ordered to destroy the warships, and they
were doing that first--would go on to completion of this task, no matter
how many American planes buzzed about their ears.

But one by one as the warships sank, the aero-subs which had either sunk
or erased them made the surface and leaped into space with a snapping
back of wings that was horribly businesslike as to sound, and climbed up
to take part in the fight against the American planes, which must
inevitably come.

       *       *       *       *       *

The last warship, cut squarely in two from stem to stern along her
center, as though split thus by a bolt of lightning, fell apart like
pieces of cake, and splashed down, sinking away while the spume of her
disintegration rolled back from her fallen sides in white-crested waves.

"It exemplifies the policies of Moyen," said Prester Kleig, "for his
conquest of the world is a conquest of destruction."

The last aero-sub took to the sky, and the Americans rushed into battle
with fine disregard for what they knew must be certain death. They were
not fools, exactly, and they had seen, but not understood, the manner in
which those gallant old hounds of the sea had been erased from
existence.

But in they went, plunging squarely into the heart of the aero-subs'
leading formation, which formation consisted of three aero-subs, flying
a wing and wing formation.

The young American signaled with upraised hand, and the American pilots
made their first move. Every plane started rolling, at dazzling speed,
on the axis of its fuselage, while bullets spewed from the guns that
fired through the propellers.

Bullets smashed into the leading aero-subs, with no apparent effect,
though for a second it seemed that the central aero-sub of the leading
formation hesitated for a moment in flight.

Then, swift as had that black streak flashed from the nose of aero-subs
submerged, a streak darted from the nose of the central aero-sub, and
glistened in the sun like molten gold!

       *       *       *       *       *

It touched the youngster who had called for volunteers for his attack
against this strange enemy. It touched his plane--and the plane vanished
