notice. There was no indication where this might lead, but the only
thing to do was to get out of here and make that phone call. And quick.
Druce was bringing in more people, junk-brokers, whatever they were. Any
action that he took would have to be done before they returned.

Even as Jon followed this train of logic his fingers were busy. Palming
a wrench, he was swiftly loosening the main retaining nut on his hip
joint. It dropped free in his hand, only the pivot pin remained now to
hold his leg on. He climbed slowly to his feet and moved towards
Coleman's desk.

"Mr. Coleman, sir, it's time to go down to the ship now, should I leave
now, sir?"

Jon spoke the words slowly as he walked forward, apparently going to the
door, but angling at the same time towards the plump man's desk.

"You got thirty minutes yet, go sit--_say_...!"

The words were cut off. Fast as a human reflex is, it is the barest
crawl compared to the lightning action of electronic reflex. At the
instant Coleman was first aware of Jon's motion, the robot had finished
his leap and lay sprawled across the desk, his leg off at the hip and
clutched in his hand.

"YOU'LL KILL YOURSELF IF YOU TOUCH THE BUTTON!"

The words were part of the calculated plan. Jon bellowed them in the
startled man's ear as he stuffed the dismembered leg down the front of
the man's baggy slacks. It had the desired effect, Coleman's finger
stabbed at the button but stopped before it made contact. He stared down
with bulging eyes at the little black box of death peeping out of his
waistband.

Jon hadn't waited for the reaction. He pushed backward from the desk and
stopped to grab the stolen pinch bar off the floor. A mighty one-legged
leap brought him to the locked closet; he stabbed the bar into the space
between the door and frame and heaved.

Coleman was just starting to struggle the bomb out of his pants when the
action was over. The closet open, Jon seized the heavy strap holding the
second bomb on the rummy's chest and snapped it like a thread. He threw
the bomb into Coleman's corner, giving the man one more thing to worry
about. It had cost him a leg, but Jon had escaped the bomb threat
without injuring a human. Now he had to get to a phone and make that
call.

Coleman stopped tugging at the bomb and plunged his hand into the desk
drawer for a gun. The returning men would block the door soon, the only
other exit from the room was a frosted-glass window that opened onto the
mammoth bay of the warehouse.

Jon Venex plunged through the window in a welter of flying glass. The
heavy thud of a recoilless .75 came from the room behind him and a
foot-long section of metal window frame leaped outward. Another slug
screamed by the robot's head as he scrambled toward the rear door of the
warehouse.

He was a bare thirty feet away from the back entrance when the giant
door hissed shut on silent rollers. All the doors would have closed at
the same time, the thud of running feet indicated that they would be
guarded as well. Jon hopped a section of packing cases and crouched out
of sight.

He looked up over his head, there stretched a webbing of steel supports,
crossing and recrossing until they joined the flat expanse of the roof.
To human eyes the shadows there deepened into obscurity, but the
infra-red from a network of steam pipes gave Jon all the illumination he
needed.

The men would be quartering the floor of the warehouse soon, his only
chance to escape recapture or death would be over their heads. Besides
this, he was hampered by the loss of his leg. In the rafters he could
use his arms for faster and easier travel.

Jon was just pulling himself up to one of the topmost cross beams when
a hoarse shout from below was followed by a stream of bullets. They tore
through the thin roof, one slug clanged off the steel beam under his
body. Waiting until three of the newcomers had started up a nearby
ladder, Jon began to quietly work his way towards the back of the
building.

Safe for the moment, he took stock of his position. The men were spread
out through the building, it could only be a matter of time before they
found him. The doors were all locked and--he had made a complete circuit
of the building to be sure--there were no windows that he could
force--the windows were bolted as well. If he could call the emergency
operator the unknown friends of Venex 17 might come to his aid. This,
however, was out of the question. The only phone in the building was on
Coleman's desk. He had traced the leads to make sure.

His eyes went automatically to the cables above his head. Plastic
gaskets were set in the wall of the building, through them came the
power and phone lines. The phone line! That was all he needed to make a
call.

With smooth, fast motions he reached up and scratched a section of wire
bare. He laughed to himself as he slipped the little microphone out of
his left ear. Now he was half deaf as well as half lame--he was
literally giving himself to this cause. He would have to remember the
pun to tell Alec Diger later, if there was a later. Alec had a profound
weakness for puns.

Jon attached jumpers to the mike and connected them to the bare wire. A
touch of the ammeter showed that no one was on the line. He waited a few
moments to be sure he had a dial tone then sent the eleven carefully
spaced pulses that would connect him with the local operator. He placed
the mike close to his mouth.

"Hello, operator. Hello, operator. I cannot hear you so do not answer.
Call the emergency operator--signal 14, I repeat--signal 14."

Jon kept repeating the message until the searching men began to approach
his position. He left the mike connected--the men wouldn't notice it in
the dark but the open line would give the unknown powers his exact
location. Using his fingertips he did a careful traverse on an I-beam to
an alcove in the farthest corner of the room. Escape was impossible, all
he could do was stall for time.

"Mr. Coleman, I'm sorry I ran away." With the volume on full his voice
rolled like thunder from the echoing walls.

He could see the men below twisting their heads vainly to find the
source.

"If you let me come back and don't kill me I will do your work. I was
afraid of the bomb, but now I am afraid of the guns." It sounded a
little infantile, but he was pretty sure none of those present had any
