
He glanced uneasily down the room, and saw that Jeff Arnold was much too
occupied to have noticed the newcomers. He gestured to Mandleco, who
finally took the hint and escorted the visitors into the privacy of the
office.

There Mandleco offered drinks, but the young man named Victor refused
his, preferring to maintain his air of injured dignity. Mandleco sighed
and gave an accusing look at Beardsley. "I know this is unusual," he
apologized to Sheila, "but I--uh--I _am_ rather hopeful that you may
find it entertaining!" He gave a slight sardonic emphasis to the last
word. "If you'll just bear with me until our other guest arrives."

Victor had been awaiting his chance. "Another? _Really!_ We're guests,
Sheila, do you hear that?" He looked at Mandleco with immense disdain,
gave a pert tilt of his head and surveyed the room with a grimace of
distaste. "And just how long are we to be detained in this--this--"

Beardsley's fist itched to splatter those handsome features around a
little. Instead he strode forward, said bluntly: "That'll do it, sonny!
Who the hell are you anyway?"

The handsome face sneered at him. "I am Victor d'Arlan! I am a good
friend of Sheila's--of the family," he corrected. "We were on our way to
the Concert when those--those _impertinent_ men detained us. To think we
must forego Perro's Fifth Color-Concerto for Sub-Chromatics in favor of
_this_!"

Sheila's eyes danced with tolerant amusement. "Victor, please. This
promises to be much more exciting; I'm sure Mr. Mandleco knows what he
is about, and...." Wide and curious, her gaze went to Beardsley and
lingered there.

Belatedly, Mandleco made introductions. "Perhaps I should explain," he
gave an improvident laugh, "that Mr. Beardsley's role at the moment
is--ah--a little beyond the ordinary! That is, I--" He paused
miserably, and then was saved for the moment as all eyes turned toward
the door.

Brook Pederson had arrived and the attention of everyone was drawn to
him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The effect was startling. The tele-columnist was a tall, dour and
bushy-browed man who took a perverse sort of pride in the impression he
gave of shabbiness. He slouched wordlessly into the room, hands thrust
deep in the pockets of a makeshift jacket. But there was nothing shabby
about the man's perceptive and analytic mind, Beardsley remembered;
true, Pederson had fallen from the heights since the ECAIAC debacle, but
his retirement from the limelight was more studied than sullen and could
only have been his own choosing. Lately he had emerged again, and with
all of his old news-sense and political acumen he was making his
presence felt ... he was a man of considered but lightning mood who,
when asked for an opinion invariably gave an argument.

Beardsley observed him shrewdly. From the depths of his mind came a
warning, a restless unease that took root and blossomed into turbulence.
_This man will bear special watching...._

Pederson came on into the room, nodded dourly at Mandleco (no love lost
there!) and remained alertly silent; for the merest instant he met
Beardsley's gaze, and there was a definite challenge and something of
mockery. _Damn him_, thought Beardsley, _he knows why he's here ... but
how could he know? He's aware that he's on the tapes, too--even one of
the Primes--and he doesn't give a damn!_

Mandleco finished the introductions quickly and took over. It was plain
that he wanted to get through with this, but at the same time Beardsley
sensed that he was no longer _quite_ so sure of Jeff Arnold and ECAIAC ...
above all things, Mandleco had to avoid any hint of trouble with ECAIAC.

And he managed that with an adroitness that bordered on the cunning.
After some glowing comments on Beardsley's past esteemed record--with
pointed emphasis on the pre-ECAIAC era--he ended with a truly
inspirational touch:

"Let us just say, then, that you have been invited here in the interests
of an experiment which Crime-Central has been contemplating for some
time. An inquiry into--ah--certain facets of past investigatory methods.
Crude as it may seem to you, certain factors may be forthcoming
here--psychologic and derivational--which may later be refined, analyzed
and integrated into the operational function of ECAIAC...."

Beardsley stared at Mandleco. It was altogether a neat side-step, and he
almost admired him for it.

"Please understand, this is a necessary adjunct to the true development
of ECAIAC. We shall have here two divergent lines of approach within
parallel fields. Actually, each of you will be an important co-aide in
this experiment! I would like you to cooperate fully with Mr.
Beardsley's line of approach. Uh--vintage '60," he added for their
amusement.

The reaction was immediate and varied. Victor d'Arlan examined his
fingernails and registered aristocratic boredom. Pederson slouched up
against the desk, seeming amused at Mandleco's pitch ... but he wasn't
watching Mandleco. The gaze he fastened on Beardsley said plainer than
words that he was quite aware of the situation.

Only Sheila Carmack seemed fascinated, as she sat a bit straighter in
her chair and peered brightly across her drink. It was obvious that she,
for one, was taken in.

"Why, I wouldn't have missed it for the world!" she sparkled. "Just
like, you know, in those--what did they call them--_whodunits_? It's
actually thrilling!"

"It's archaic!" d'Arlan sneered.

"It's heroic," said Pederson, his gaze still on the little Cooerdinator.
"Beardsley, I hope you pull it off. I actually do. Always did think you
were twice the man ECAIAC is!"

Beardsley moved forward, not smiling. "Thanks," he said. "In that case
you won't mind if I begin with you."

"With _me_?" Pederson stared, then laughed suddenly and without mirth.
"Skip it, Beardsley! I know your methods, and I can tell you right now
it won't get you any--"

Beardsley stopped him. "Pederson," he said, "as of now we agree on just
one thing. I also think I'm twice the man. The only difference is that
I'm man enough to _really_ believe it." He paused and watched him absorb
that. "It's going to be ECAIAC or vintage '60, Pederson. Your choice!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was at once a rebuff and a challenge. Pederson then straightened up
slowly, a muscle in his face flinched and then he smiled--with all but
his eyes. "All right," he snapped, "we'll begin with me. I'll fill you
in plenty! You want to know if I saw Carmack the day of the murder? I
did! The louse put through a vis call to me. _Insisted_ I come out and
see him--"

"Whoa, now just a minute! You wouldn't say this was a friendly visit?"

"I'll get to that!" Pederson's words came fast and clipped. "You know
how I fought the ECAIAC lobby. I fought it long and hard, and when I
lost it finished me with the public. But I wasn't through! I began
digging up every fact I could about Carmack. Took me a few years, but
worth it. Most of it smelled! Ask Professor Losch, he'll tell you--"

"I've already spoken with Losch," Beardsley said quietly. "He managed to
convey his sentiments pretty thoroughly."

"Good. Then try talking to _him_," Pederson nodded venomously at
_Mandleco_. "Ask Mandleco how the great Carmack managed to get those
patents through.... I can tell you he didn't do it alone! Oh, I've dug
plenty!"

"Why, you--" Mandleco gave a snort of anger and started forward, but
Beardsley managed to forestall him. He gazed sternly at the
tele-columnist.

"I think we're all aware of your considerable talent for digging,
Pederson. ECAIAC, too," he added pointedly, "for we already have it on
the tapes."

Pederson bristled. "Sure. Sure, you have it! My past connection, my
opposition to the lobby, even my digging maybe. But you don't have it
all! How do you equate _hate_, Beardsley? Is _that_ on your tapes?"

Beardsley could have told him that it was, indeed, on the tapes. But he
only shook his head. "No," he said slowly, "we don't have it all. Not
ECAIAC nor I nor any of us, and that's the eternal pity of it. But I'd
like to try! The sum and the substance, Pederson ... don't you
understand me? Just once before I'm through--"

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the voice, some secret and subtle thing in the voice that reached
out and gripped Pederson and bore meaning with it. He stood quite
motionless, staring at Beardsley; for a split second his eyes widened,
then disbelief gave way to something of comprehension, admiration.

"Beardsley," he said softly. "You fool. You utter damned fool!"

Oblivious of the others, then, he turned and began to pace. "All right.
Here it is. Carmack called me out to see him. He had gotten wind of what
I was up to, and offered to buy me off." Pederson laughed bitterly.
"Wasn't even subtle about it! Said he liked my stuff, and would like to
see me at the top again where I belonged. Said he could arrange for me
to step into a top job at Central Telecast. Providing, of course, I
could manage to--ah--'forget' certain little items I'd uncovered."

       *       *       *       *       *

Pederson was doing all right. Beardsley gave him his lead.

"He actually thought it would be that simple! I refused him outright,
and of course, he couldn't believe it. A man like that--We dropped all
pretense, there were some bitter words--"

Beardsley said quickly, "Could you elaborate?"

"Oh, I don't remember exactly. He went venomous! I suppose there were
threats. I told him he hadn't enough money _or_ influence to buy what I
knew, and that when I had it properly documented I intended to make a
national scandal of it." Pederson halted abruptly. "You know, it
occurred to me later that was a foolhardy thing to say!"

"Ah? Why is that?"

"Well, I had heard of that safeguard of his--the 'neuro-vibe'--and I
suppose there were other things, too. He was a cautious man, a dangerous
man. But," Pederson shrugged, "he let me into his home readily enough."

Beardsley lifted a finger. "Because he was confident he was going to buy
you--wouldn't you say?"

"I suppose that's it. Maybe I was lucky to get out of there so easily!
Anyway I did." Pederson stopped pacing, and his gaze bored into
Beardsley's. "So now to the big question. Yes, he was alive when I left
him. No, I never saw Carmack again. I went straight to my office and
worked until well past midnight; by the way, I have ample proof of
that--"

"Yes, I'm sure you do! What were your feelings at this point?"

"My feelings? I knew my life was in danger now! Carmack would be out to
stop me. I don't mind admitting I was ... well, rather relieved, when I
heard the news."

"Ah-h! And when did you hear it?"

Pederson glared, but his answer was quick. "Late the next afternoon, of
course! By habit I work late hours and I sleep long." With an air of
finality he threw a challenging look around. "I want to congratulate
whoever did it, and I don't much care whether the answer comes from you
or ECAIAC!"

Beardsley surveyed him solemnly. Pederson had little more than brushed
the surface, but it was enough, it served to set the pattern; he could
have sworn Pederson was aware of that. He said drily, "Thanks, Pederson.
Your story is--very pat."

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned to the others. Mandleco rather surprised him, seeming not so
much disturbed as he was engrossed deep in thought; as for Mrs. Carmack,
Beardsley saw that the comedy had gone out of it for her, but she tried
to keep up the veneer.

"This is all most interesting!" she sparkled, placing her glass down
carefully and turning to face him. "Am I to be next, Mr. Beardsley?
Shall I give both the questions and the answers as Mr. Pederson did?"

"No, Mrs. Carmack. I'll do that! I took note a moment ago that you
mentioned the _whodunits_. You must be familiar with them? Say as a
hobby?"

It wasn't at all what she expected. She stood wide-eyed and startled.

"This is so thrilling, remember. Vintage '60! As the _whodunits_ will
tell you, one of the prime requisites is an accounting and proof of your
whereabouts at the time of the deed! Well?"

Beardsley's voice was just edged enough to throw her into confusion.
"Why, I--" she faltered. "You mean that night? I--I--"

"What, no alibi? You don't even remember? According to vintage '60 that
could mean either complete innocence or extreme cunning; beware the
suspect who is clever enough to be ready with no alibi!"

Beardsley saw her stiffen; there was a change across her face, a
struggle beneath the eyes. "But then," he shrugged, "it has always been
my conviction that _motive_ rather than opportunity is the real
requisite. On that basis it's plain you couldn't have killed your
husband. You loved him! He was only fifty-eight, he only left you a
dozen million dollars, but you loved him and you were faithful! Anyone
can see that after seven weeks you're still all broken up over it!"

The veneer was gone now; Sheila Carmack's eyes were vicious pools of
hate, her mouth a grimace. "Why, you--you ridiculous little monster!"
Victor d'Arlan stepped forward belligerently. "Say, now look here! This
is all very--" Beardsley placed a hand on d'Arlan's chest and shoved,
and the latter stumbled back with mouth agape. Pederson was gazing at
Beardsley with delight and admiration, seeming to visualize this little
man as material for his next tele-column. Mandleco stood transfixed, a
monument of agony, twisting a fist into his palm. "Beardsley, stop it!
This ridiculous farce has gone far enough! I warned you about these
tactics--"

Beardsley said, "Shut up!" and Mandleco stood there with mouth opening
and closing soundlessly.

"Well, Mrs. Carmack? Answer me! You loved your husband, didn't you? For
the past ten minutes you've heard him maligned; I should think you'd
want to protect his very good name!"

"Sheila, I must advise you against making _any_ statement of whatever
nature!" Mandleco strode for the tele-stat, then turned back and pointed
a trembling finger at Beardsley. "This man," he choked--"this man is no
longer acting in any official capacity for Crime-Central!"

With a quick step Pederson got himself between Mandleco and the
