done before. I should make a planetary health inspection and make
recommendations for the improvement of the state of things. I'll be glad
if you'll arrange for me to talk to your health officials. Things look
bad, and something should be done."

Someone laughed without mirth.

"What will you recommend for long-continued undernourishment?" he asked
derisively. "That's our health problem!"

"I recommend food," said Calhoun.

"Where'll you fill the prescription?"

"I've the answer to that, too," said Calhoun curtly. "I'll want to talk
to any space-pilots you've got. Get your astrogators together and I
think they'll approve my idea."

The silence was totally skeptical.

"Orede ..."

"Not Orede," said Calhoun. "Weald will be hunting that planet over for
Darians. If they find any, they'll drop bombs here."

"Our only space-pilots," said a tall man, presently, "are on Orede now.
If you've told the truth, they'll probably head back because of your
warning. They should bring meat."

His mouth worked peculiarly, and Calhoun knew that it was at the thought
of food.

"Which," said another man sharply, "goes to the hospitals! I haven't
tasted meat in two years!"

"Nobody has," growled another man still. "But here's this man Calhoun.
I'm not convinced he can work magic, but we can find out if he lies. Put
a guard on his ship. Otherwise let our health men give him his head.
They'll find out if he's from this Medical Service he tells of! And this
Maril--"

"I--can be identified," said Maril. "I was sent to gather information
and sent it in secret writing to one of us on Trent. I have a family
here. They'll know me! And I--there was someone who was working on
foods, and I believe he--made it possible to use--all sorts of
vegetation for food. He will identify me."

Someone laughed harshly.

"Oh, yes!" said a man with a blue forehead. "He's a valuable man! Within
the year he's come up with a way to make his weeds taste like any food
one chooses. If we decide to cut our population, we'll simply give the
people to be eliminated all they want to eat of his products. They'll
not be hungry. They'll be quite happy. But they'll die for lack of
nourishment. He's volunteered to prove it painless by going through it
himself!"

Maril swallowed.

"I'd like to see him," she repeated. "And my family."

Some of the blue-splotched men turned away. A broad-shouldered man said
bluntly;

"Don't look for them to be glad to see you. And you'd better not show
yourself in public. You've been well fed. You'll be hated for that."

Maril began to cry. Murgatroyd said bewilderedly;

"_Chee! Chee!_"

Calhoun held him close. There was confusion. And Calhoun found the
Minister of Health at hand--he looked most harried of all the officials
gathered to question Calhoun--and proposed that he get a look at the
hospital situation right away.

       *       *       *       *       *

It wasn't practical. With all the population on half rations or less,
when night came people needed to sleep. Most people, indeed, slept as
many hours out of the traditional twenty-four as they could manage. It
was much more pleasant to sleep than to be awake and constantly nagged
at by continued hunger. And there was the matter of simple decency.
Continuous gnawing hunger had an embittering effect upon everyone.
Quarrelsomeness was a common experience. And people who would normally
be the leaders of opinion felt shame because they were obsessed by
thoughts of food. It was best when people slept.

Still, Calhoun was in the hospitals by daybreak. What he found moved him
to savage anger. There were too many sick children. In every case
undernourishment contributed to their sickness. And there was not enough
food to make them well. Doctors and nurses denied themselves food to
spare it for their patients.

Calhoun brought out hormones and enzymes and medicaments from the Med
Ship while the guard in the ship looked on. He demonstrated the
processes of synthesis and autocatalysis that enabled such small samples
to be multiplied indefinitely. He was annoyed by a clamorous appetite.
There were some doctors who ignored the irony of medical techniques
being taught to cure non-nutritional disease, when everybody was
half-fed, or less. They approved of Calhoun. They even approved of
Murgatroyd when Calhoun explained his function.

He was, of course, a Med Service _tormal_, and _tormals_ were creatures
of talent. They'd originally been found on a planet in the Deneb area,
and they were engaging and friendly small animals, but the remarkable
fact about them was that they couldn't contract any disease. Not any.
They had a built-in, explosive reaction to bacterial and viral toxins,
and there hadn't yet been any pathogenic organism discovered to which a
_tormal_ could not more or less immediately develop antibody-resistance.
So that in interstellar medicine _tormals_ were priceless. Let
Murgatroyd be infected with however localized, however specialized an
inimical organism, and presently some highly valuable defensive
substance could be isolated from his blood and he'd remain in his usual
exuberant good health. When the antibody was analyzed by those
techniques of microanalysis the Service had developed,--why--that was
that. The antibody could be synthesized and one could attack any
epidemic with confidence.

The tragedy for Dara was, of course, that no Med Ship had come there,
three generations ago, when the Dara plague raged. Worse, after the
plague Weald was able to exert pressure which only a criminally
incompetent Med Service director would have permitted. But criminal
incompetence and its consequences was what Calhoun had been loaned to
Sector Twelve to help remedy.

He was not at ease, though. No ship arrived from Orede to bear out his
account of an attempt to get that lonely world evacuated before Weald
discovered it had blueskins on it. Maril had vanished, to visit or
return to her family, or perhaps to consult with the mysterious Korvan
who'd arranged for her to leave Dara to be a spy, and had advised her
simply to make a new life somewhere else, abandoning a famine-ridden,
despised, and outcast world. Calhoun had learned of two achievements
the same Korvan had made for his world. Neither was remarkably
constructive. He'd offered to prove the value of the second by dying of
it. Which might make him a very admirable character, or he could have a
passion for martyrdom,--which is much more common than most people
think. In two days Calhoun was irritable enough from unaccustomed hunger
to suspect the worst of him.

And there was Weald to worry about. Weald was hysterically resolved to
end what it considered the blueskin menace for once and for all. There
were parallels to such unreasoning frenzy even in the ancient history of
Earth. A word still remained in the dictionaries referring to it.
Genocide.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile Calhoun worked doggedly; in the hospitals while the patients
were awake and in the Med Ship--under guard--afterward. He had hunger
cramps now, but he tested a plastic cube with a thriving biological
culture in it. He worked at increasing his store of it. He'd snipped
samples of pigmented skin from dead patients in the hospitals, and
examined the pigmented areas, and very, very painstakingly verified a
theory. It took an electron microscope to do it, but he found a virus in
the blue patches which matched the type discovered on Tralee. The Tralee
viruses had effects which were passed on from mother to child, and
heredity had been charged with the observed results of quasi-living
viral particles. And then Calhoun very, very carefully introduced into a
virus culture the material he had been growing in a plastic cube. He
watched what happened.

He was satisfied, so much so that immediately afterward he barely
managed to stagger off to bed.

That night the ship from Orede came in, packed with frozen bloody
carcasses of cattle. Calhoun knew nothing of it. But next morning Maril
came back. There were shadows under her eyes and her expression was of
someone who has lost everything that had meaning in her life.

"I'm all right," she insisted, when Calhoun commented. "I've been
visiting my family. I've seen--Korvan. I'm quite all right."

"You haven't eaten any better than I have," Calhoun observed.

"I--couldn't!" admitted Maril. "My sisters--my little sisters--so
thin.... There's rationing for everybody and it's all efficiently
arranged. They even had rations for me. But I couldn't eat! I--gave most
of my food to my sisters and they--squabbled over it!"

Calhoun said nothing. There was nothing to say. Then she said in a no
less desolate tone;

"Korvan said I was foolish to come back."

"He could be right," said Calhoun.

"But I had to!" protested Maril. "Because I--I've been eating all I
wanted to, on Weald and in the ship, and I'm ashamed because they're
half-starved and I'm not. And when you see what hunger does to them ...
It's terrible to be half-starved and not able to think of anything but
food!"

"I hope," said Calhoun, "to do something about that. If I can get hold
of an astrogator or two."

"The--ship that was on Orede came in during the night," Maril told him
shakily. "It was loaded with frozen meat, but one ship-load's not enough
to make a difference on a whole planet! And if Weald hunts for us on
Orede, we daren't go back for more meat."

She said abruptly;

"There are some prisoners. They were miners. They were crowded out of
the ship. The Darians who'd stampeded the cattle took them prisoners.
They had to!"

"True," said Calhoun. "It wouldn't have been wise to leave Wealdians
around on Orede with their throats cut. Or living, either, to tell about
a rumor of blueskins. Even if their throats will be cut now. Is that the
program?"

Maril shivered.

"No ... They'll be put on short rations like everybody else. And people
will watch them. The Wealdians expect to die of plague any minute
because they've been with Darians. So people look at them and laugh.
But it's not funny."

"It's natural," said Calhoun, "but perhaps lacking in charity. Look
here! How about those astrogators? I need them for a job I have in
mind."

Maril wrung her hands.

"C--come here," she said in a low tone.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was an armed guard in the control-room of the ship. He'd watched
Calhoun a good part of the previous day as Calhoun performed his
mysterious work. He'd been off-duty and now was on duty again. He was
bored. So long as Calhoun did not touch the control-board, though, he
was uninterested. He didn't even turn his head when Maril led the way
into the other cabin and slid the door shut.

"The astrogators are coming," she said swiftly. "They'll bring some
boxes with them. They'll ask you to instruct them so they can handle our
ship better. They lost themselves coming back from Orede, no, they
didn't lose themselves, but they lost time--enough time almost to make
an extra trip for meat. They need to be experts. I'm to come along, so
they can be sure that what you teach them is what you've been doing
right along."

Calhoun said;

"Well?"

"They're crazy!" said Maril vehemently. "They knew Weald would do
something monstrous sooner or later. But they're going to try to stop it
by more monstrousness sooner! Not everybody agrees, but there are
enough. So they want to use your ship--it's faster in overdrive and so
on. And they'll go to Weald--in this ship--and--they say they'll give
Weald something to keep it busy without bothering us!"

Calhoun said drily;

"This pays me off for being too sympathetic with blueskins! But if I'd
been hungry for a couple of years, and was despised to boot by the
people who kept me hungry, I suppose I might react the same way. No," he
said curtly as she opened her lips to speak again. "Don't tell me the
trick. Considering everything, there's only one trick it could be. But I
doubt profoundly that it would work. All right."

He slid the door back and returned to the control-room. Maril followed
him. He said detachedly;

"I've been working on a problem outside of the food one. It isn't the
time to talk about it right now, but I think I've solved it."

Maril turned her head, listening. There were footsteps on the tarmac
outside the ship. Both doors of the airlock were open. Four men came in.
They were young men who did not look quite as hungry as most Darians,
but there was a reason for that. Their leader introduced himself and the
others. They were the astrogators of the ship Dara had built to try to
bring food from Orede. They were not good enough, said their
self-appointed leader. They overshot their destination. They came out of
overdrive too far off line. They needed instructions.

Calhoun nodded, and observed that he'd been asking for them.

"We've got orders," said their leader, steadily, "to come on board and
learn from you how to handle this ship. It's better than the one we've
got."

"I asked for you," repeated Calhoun. "I've an idea I'll explain as we go
along. Those boxes?"

Someone was passing in iron boxes through the airlock. One of the four
very carefully brought them inside.

"They're rations," said a second young man. "We don't go anywhere
without rations--except Orede."

"Orede, yes. I think we were shooting at each other there," said Calhoun
pleasantly. "Weren't we?"

"Yes," said the young man.

He was neither cordial nor antagonistic. He was impassive. Calhoun
shrugged.

"Then we can take off immediately. Here's the communicator and there's
the button. You might call the grid and arrange for us to be lifted."

The young man seated himself at the control-board. Very professionally,
he went through the routine of preparing to lift by landing-grid, which
routine has not changed in two hundred years. He went briskly ahead
until the order to lift. Then Calhoun stopped him.

"Hold it!"

He pointed to the airlock. Both doors were open. The young man at the
control-board flushed vividly. One of the others closed and dogged the
doors.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ship lifted. Calhoun watched with seeming negligence. But he found
occasion for a dozen corrections of procedure. This was presumably a
training voyage of his own suggestion. Therefore when the blueskin pilot
would have flung the Med Ship into undirected overdrive, Calhoun grew
stern. He insisted on a destination. He suggested Weald. The young men
glanced at each other and accepted the suggestion. He made the acting
pilot look up the intrinsic business of its sun and measure its apparent
brightness from just off Dara. He made him estimate the change in
brightness to be expected after so many hours in overdrive, if one broke
out to measure.

The first blueskin student pilot ended a Calhoun-determined tour of duty
with rather more of respect for Calhoun than he'd had at the beginning.
The second was anxious to show up better than the first. Calhoun drilled
him in the use of brightness-charts, by which the changes in apparent
brightness of stars between overdrive hops could be correlated with
angular changes to give a three-dimensional picture of the nearer
heavens. It was a highly necessary art which had not been worked out on
Dara, and the prospective astrogators became absorbed in this and other
fine points of space-piloting. They'd done enough, in a few trips to
Orede, to realize that they needed to know more. Calhoun showed them.

Calhoun did not try to make things easy for them. He was hungry and
easily annoyed. It was sound training tactics to be severe, and to
phrase all suggestions as commands. He put the four young men in command
of the ship in turn, under his direction. He continued to use Weald as a
destination, but he set up problems in which the Med Ship came out of
overdrive pointing in an unknown direction and with a precessory motion.
He made the third of his students identify Weald in the celestial globe
containing hundreds of millions of stars, and get on course in overdrive
toward it. The fourth was suddenly required to compute the distance to
Weald from such data as he could get from observation, without reference
to any records.

By this time the first man was chafing to take a second turn. Calhoun
gave each of them a second gruelling lesson. He gave them, in fact, a
highly condensed but very sound course in the art of travel in space.
His young students took command in four-hour watches, with at least one
breakout from overdrive in each watch. He built up enthusiasm in them.
They ignored the discomfort of being hungry, though there had been no
reason for them to stint on food in Orede--in growing pride in what they
came to know.

When Weald was a first-magnitude star, the four were not highly
qualified astrogators, to be sure, but they were vastly better spacemen
than at the beginning. Inevitably, their attitude toward Calhoun was
respectful. He'd been irritable and right. To the young, the combination
is impressive.

Maril had served as passenger only. In theory she was to compare
Calhoun's lessons with his practise when alone. But he did nothing on
this journey which--teaching considered--was different from the two
interstellar journeys Maril had made with him. She occupied the
sleeping-cabin during two of the six watches of each ship-day. She
operated the food-readier, which was almost completely emptied of its
original store of food;--confiscated by the government of Dara. That
amount of food would make no difference to the planet, but it was wise
for everyone on Dara to be equally ill-fed.

On the sixth day out from Dara, the sun of Weald had a magnitude of
minus five-tenths.[A] The electron telescope could detect its larger
planets, especially a gas-giant fifth-orbit world of high albedo.
Calhoun had his four students estimate its distance again, pointing out
the difference that could be made in breakout position if the Med Ship
were mis-aimed by as much as one second of arc.

  [A] Earth's sun, from Earth, is of magnitude roughly minus thirty-six.

"That does it," Calhoun announced cheerfully. "That's the last order
I'll give you. You're graduate pilots from here on! Relax and have some
coffee."

       *       *       *       *       *

"And now," said Calhoun, "I suppose you'll tell me the truth about those
boxes you brought on board. You said they were rations, but they haven't
been opened in six days. I have an idea what they mean, but you tell
me."

The four looked uncomfortable. There was a long pause.

"They could be," said Calhoun detachedly, "cultures to be dumped on
Weald. Weald is making plans to wipe out Dara. So some fool has decided
to get Weald too busy fighting a plague of its own to bother with you.
Is that right?"

The young men stirred uneasily. "Well--l--l, sir," said one of them,
unhappily, "that's what we were ordered to do."

"I object," said Calhoun. "It wouldn't work. I just left Weald a little
while back, remember. They've been telling themselves that some day Dara
would try that. They've made preparations to fight any imaginable
contagion you could drop on them. Every so often somebody claims it's
happening. It wouldn't work."

"But--"

"In fact," said Calhoun, "I will not permit you to do anything of the
kind."

One of the young men, staring at Calhoun, nodded suddenly. His eyes
closed. He jerked his head erect and looked bewildered. A second sank
heavily into a chair. He said remotely, "Thish sfunny!" and abruptly
went to sleep. The third found his knees giving away. He paid elaborate
attention to them, stiffening them. But they yielded like rubber and he
went slowly down to the floor. The fourth said thickly with difficulty,
yet reproachfully;

"'Thought y'were our frien'!"

He collapsed.

Calhoun very soberly tied them hand and foot and laid them out
comfortably on the floor. Maril watched, white-faced, her hand to her
throat. "What have you done to them? Are they dead?"

"No," said Calhoun, "just drugged. They'll wake up presently."

Maril said in a tense and desperate whisper;

"You're--betraying us! You're going to take us to Weald."

"No," said Calhoun. "We'll only orbit around it. First, though, I want
to get rid of those damned packed-up cultures. They're dead, by the way.
I killed them with supersonics a couple of days ago, while a fine
argument was going on about distance-measurements by variable Cepheids
of known period."

He put the four boxes carefully in the waste-disposal unit. He operated
it. The boxes and their contents streamed out to space in the form of
metallic and other vapors. Calhoun sat at the control-desk.

"I'm a Med Service man," he said detachedly. "I couldn't cooperate in
the spread of plague, anyhow, though a useful epidemic might be another
matter. But the important thing right now is not keeping Weald busy with
troubles to increase their hatred of Dara. It's getting some food for
Dara. And driblets won't help. What's needed is in thousands of
tons,--or tens of thousands." Then he said; "Overdrive coming,
Murgatroyd! Hold fast!"

The universe vanished. The customary unpleasant sensations accompanied
the change. Murgatroyd burped.




CHAPTER 6


A large part of the firmament was blotted out by the blindingly bright
half-disk of Weald, as it shone in the sunshine. It had ice-caps at its
poles, and there were seas, and the mottled look of land which had that
carefully maintained balance of woodland and cultivated areas which was
so effective in climate control. The Med Ship floated free, and Calhoun
fretfully monitored all the beacon frequencies known to man.

There was relative silence inside the ship. Maril watched Calhoun in a
sort of despairing indecision. The four young blueskins still slept,
still bound hand and foot upon the control-room floor. Murgatroyd
regarded them, and Maril, and Calhoun in turn, and his small and furry
forehead wrinkled helplessly.

