
And I woke up, you know. And there was Dr. Santly over me with a
hypodermic needle that he'd just taken out of my arm, and four male
nurses in fatigues holding me down. And I was drenched with sweat.

For a minute, I didn't know where I was. It was a horrible queasy
falling sensation, as though the bar and the fight and the world were
all dissolving into smoke around me.

Then I knew where I was.

It was almost worse.

I stopped yelling and just lay there, looking up at them.

Dr. Santly said, trying to keep his face friendly and noncommittal,
"You're doing much better, Byron, boy. _Much_ better."

I didn't say anything.

He said, "You worked through the whole thing in two hours and eight
minutes. Remember the first time? You were sixteen hours killing him.
Captain Van Wyck it was that time, remember? Who was it this time?"

"Chowderhead." I looked at the male nurses. Doubtfully, they let go of
my arms and legs.

"Chowderhead," said Dr. Santly. "Oh--Roebuck. That boy," he said
mournfully, his expression saddened, "he's not coming along nearly as
well as you. _Nearly._ He can't run through a cycle in less than five
hours. And, that's peculiar, it's usually you he-- Well, I better not
say that, shall I? No sense setting up a counter-impression when your
pores are all open, so to speak?" He smiled at me, but he was a little
worried in back of the smile.

I sat up. "Anybody got a cigarette?"

"Give him a cigarette, Johnson," the doctor ordered the male nurse
standing alongside my right foot.

Johnson did. I fired up.

"You're coming along _splendidly_," Dr. Santly said. He was one of these
psych guys that thinks if you say it's so, it makes it so. You know that
kind? "We'll have you down under an hour before the end of the week.
That's _marvelous_ progress. Then we can work on the conscious level!
You're doing extremely well, whether you know it or not. Why, in six
months--say in eight months, because I like to be conservative--" he
twinkled at me--"we'll have you out of here! You'll be the first of your
crew to be discharged, you know that?"

"That's nice," I said. "The others aren't doing so well?"

"No. Not at all well, most of them. Particularly Dr. Gilvey. The
run-throughs leave him in terrible shape. I don't mind admitting I'm
worried about him."

"That's nice," I said, and this time I meant it.

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked at me thoughtfully, but all he did was say to the male nurses,
"He's all right now. Help him off the table."

It was hard standing up. I had to hold onto the rail around the table
for a minute. I said my set little speech: "Dr. Santly, I want to tell
you again how grateful I am for this. I was reconciled to living the
rest of my life confined to one part of the country, the way the other
crews always did. But this is much better. I appreciate it. I'm sure the
others do, too."

"Of course, boy. Of course." He took out a fountain pen and made a note
on my chart; I couldn't see what it was, but he looked gratified. "It's
no more than you have coming to you, Byron," he said. "I'm grateful that
I could be the one to make it come to pass."

He glanced conspiratorially at the male nurses. "You know how important
this is to me. It's the triumph of a whole new approach to psychic
rehabilitation. I mean to say our heroes of space travel are entitled to
freedom when they come back home to Earth, aren't they?"

"Definitely," I said, scrubbing some of the sweat off my face onto my
sleeve.

"So we've got to end this system of designated areas. We can't avoid the
tensions that accompany space travel, no. But if we can help you
eliminate harmful tensions with a few run-throughs, why, it's not too
high a price to pay, is it?"

"Not a bit."

"I mean to say," he said, warming up, "you can look forward to the time
when you'll be able to mingle with your old friends from the rocket,
free and easy, without any need for restraint. That's a lot to look
forward to, isn't it?"
