glass out of his pocket and focused it on one of the miniature
bas-reliefs midway toward the top of the stone. Unfastening his geologic
hammer from his belt, he managed, with a sharp, swinging blow, to break
off a small protruding piece.

He drew in his breath sharply, and I saw his face go pale. I stared at
him in alarm.

"What's wrong?" I asked.

He motioned that I follow and led the way silently past the others
toward the stair shaft. Climbing to the top level was a heart-pounding
task, but Mason almost ran up those steps. At the surface he leaned
against a pillar, his lips quivering spasmodically.

"Tell me I'm sane, Bagley," he said huskily. "Or rather, don't say
anything until we've seen Norris. Come on. We've got to see Norris."

       *       *       *       *       *

All the way back to the _Marie Galante_, I sought to soothe him, but he
was a man possessed. He rushed up the ship's gangway, burst into central
quarters and drew up before Navigator Norris like a runner stopping at
the tape.

"You damned lying hypocrite!" he yelled.

Norris looked at him in his quiet way. "Take it easy, Mason," he said.
"Sit down and explain yourself."

But Mason didn't sit down. He thrust his hand in his pocket, pulled out
the piece of black stone he had chipped off the image in the cavern and
handed it to Norris.

"Take a look at that!" he demanded.

Norris took the stone, glanced at it and laid it down on his desk. His
face was emotionless. "I expected this sooner or later," he said. "Yes,
it's _Indurate_ all right. Is that what you want me to say?"

There was a dangerous fanatical glint in Mason's eyes now. With a sudden
quick motion he pulled out his heat pistol.

"So you tricked us!" he snarled. "Why? I want to know why."

I stepped forward and seized Mason's gun hand. "Don't be a fool," I
said. "It can't be that important."

Mason threw back his head and burst into an hysterical peal of laughter.
"Important!" he cried. "Tell him how important it is, Norris. _Tell
him._"

Quietly the Navigator filled and lighted his pipe. "I'm afraid Mason is
right," he said. "I did trick you. Not purposely, however. And in the
beginning I had no intention of telling anything but the truth. Actually
we're here because of a dead man's vengeance."

Norris took his pipe from his lips and stared at it absently.

"You'll remember that Ganeth-Klae, the Martian, and I worked together to
invent _Indurate_. But whereas I was interested in the commercial
aspects of that product, Klae was absorbed only in the experimental
angle of it. He had some crazy idea that it should not be given to the
general public at once, but rather should be allocated for the first few
years to a select group of scientific organizations. You see, _Indurate_
was such a departure from all known materials that Ganeth-Klae feared it
would be utilized for military purposes.

"I took him for a dreamer and a fool. Actually he was neither. How was I
to know that his keen penetrating brain had seen through my motive to
get control of all commercial marketing of _Indurate_? I had laid my
plans carefully, and I had expected to reap a nice harvest. Klae must
have been aware of my innermost thoughts, but Martian-like he said
nothing."

Norris paused to wet his lips and lean against the desk. "I didn't kill
Ganeth-Klae," he continued, "though I suppose in a court of law I would
be judged responsible for his death. The manufacture of _Indurate_
required some ticklish work. As you know, we produced our halves of the
formula separately. Physical contact with my half over a long period of
time would prove fatal, I knew, and I simply neglected to so inform
Ganeth-Klae.

"But his ultimate death was a boomerang. With Klae gone, I could find no
trace of his half of the formula. I was almost beside myself for a time.
Then I thought of something. Klae had once said that the secret of his
half of the formula lay in himself. A vague statement, to say the least.
But I took the words at their face value and gambled that he meant them
literally; that is, that his body itself contained the formula.

"I tried everything: X-ray, chemical analysis of the skin. I even
removed the cranial cap and examined the brain microscopically. All
without result. Meanwhile the police were beginning to direct their
suspicions toward me in the matter of Klae's disappearance.

"You know the rest. It was necessary that I leave Earth at once and go
beyond our system, beyond the jurisdiction of the planetary police. So I
arranged this voyage with a sufficient complement of passengers to
lessen the danger and hardship of a new life on a new world. I was still
positive, however, that Klae's secret lay in his dead body. I took that
body along, encased in the Martian preservative, solidifex.

"It was my idea that I could continue my examination once we were safe
on a strange planet But I had reckoned without Ganeth-Klae."

"What do you mean?" I said slowly.

"I said Klae was no fool. But I didn't know that with Martian stoicism
he suspected the worst and took his own ironic means of combating it. He
used the last lot of _Indurate_ to make that booster, a device which he
said would increase our take-off speed. He mounted it on the _Marie
Galante_.

