two more hours from now, when he would be at his closest, would be too
late. He would be too near the end of his air to use it to make sure
of the last few feet.

He looked at the pole in his grip. It was an eight-foot section of
aluminum from the cargo racks.

"Maybe ..." he muttered.

Whirling the pole around by the end, he managed after considerable
trial and error, to slow his wild spin enough to keep the ship in
view.

The only question then was whether he dared to take the chance; and he
really had but one choice. The full orbit would be too long a period.

He estimated as well as he could the direction of his progress,
allowed a few degrees which he fondly hoped would curve him in to a
closer approach at the meeting point, and hurled the pole into space
with all his strength.

After that, there was nothing to do but wait and hope that he had cut
his speed enough to bring him to the ship ahead of schedule by a
shorter orbit.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tremont finally gave up looking at his watch when he found himself
peeping every three minutes, on the average. The immensity of space
was by now instilling in him a psychological chill, and he drew both
arms in from their sleeves to hug an illusion of warmth to him. The
air pressure in the sleeves gradually overpowered the springs of the
joints, and extended them to make a cross.

As far as he could tell from the gauges lined in a miniature row
along the neckpiece of the suit, his heating system was functioning as
designed. The batteries had an excellent chance of lasting longer than
he would.

He began to dwell upon thoughts of squeezing Peters in the steel grip
of his gauntlets until the pilot's fat face turned purple and his eyes
popped. Another promising activity would be to bang Braigh's head
against a bulkhead with one hand and Dorothy's with the other.

_Wonder if they found the gun in my locker?_ he mused.

Finally, only a lifetime or two after he hoped to see it, he sighted
the ship again. His watch claimed the trip had lasted less than ninety
minutes.

He encountered unexpected trouble approaching the hull. Realizing that
he was lucky to come close at all by such a guess, he tried to steer
himself with brief jets from his air tank, and wound up on the verge
of bashing directly into a fin. He avoided that, but had to use more
air to spin back for a more gentle contact.

The metal felt like solid Earth to him as he seized the edge of a fin
and planted the magnets of his boots firmly on the hull.

It was perhaps twenty minutes later, when Tremont was beginning to
worry again about his air supply, that the hatch of the air lock began
to open.

Crystals of frost puffed out as the water vapor left the air. Braigh's
helmet appeared, then the whole spacesuited figure floated up before
the spot where Tremont was watching. The highjacker dropped the
magnet of his life line against the hull and started to turn around.

Tremont grabbed the edge of the hatch with one hand, yanked the magnet
loose with the other, and kicked Braigh in the right area.

The spacesuited figure shot off, tumbling end over end, into the void.
A startled squawk sounded over Tremont's receiver.

"See how _you_ like it!" he snarled.

He ignored the begging of the suddenly frightened voice, and dived
into the air lock. In seconds, he had the outer hatch shut and was
nervously watching the air pressure building up on the gauge.

_If they notice at all, they'll think it's Braigh coming back!_ he
exulted.

He made it into the central shaft without meeting anyone. Pulling
himself forward in the bulky suit was an awkward task, but well worth
it for the expression on Peters' face when Tremont burst through the
control-room hatch.

After dealing with the pilot in about two minutes, most of it spent in
catching him, Tremont went back along the shaft and found Dorothy in
her bunk. Before she could release the netting, he folded the bunk
upon her and secured it to the hook. Only then did he allow himself
the time to remove his helmet and make free of the ship's air.

"What are you going to do?" demanded the girl, rather shrilly.

Tremont realized that she must have seen the unconscious Peters
floating outside in the shaft.

"You won't like it!" he promised.

"Tremont! I didn't know they'd do anything to you. Can't ... you and I ...
make some kind of ... deal?"

Tremont stared at her levelly.

"But I'd have to really sleep sometime," he pointed out gently. "How
