fulminated over a sneak sabotage attack and moved in its destroyers.
Battle was joined.

Ensign Thomas Grayson took over the command of his destroyer when its
captain was killed on his bridge. An electrified crew saw the strange,
brooding youngster perform prodigies of skill and courage, and responded
to them. In one week of desultory action the battered destroyer had
accounted for seven Soviet destroyers and a cruiser.

As soon as this penetrated to the flagship, Grayson was decorated and
given a flotilla. His weird magnetism extended to every officer and man
aboard the seven craft. They struck like phantoms, cutting out cruisers
and battlewagons in wild unorthodox actions that couldn't have succeeded
but did--every time. Grayson was badly wounded twice, but his driving
nervous energy carried him through.

He was decorated again and given the battlewagon of an ailing
four-striper.

Without orders he touched down on the Soviet side of Io, led out a
landing party of marines and bluejackets, cut through two regiments of
Soviet infantry, and returned to his battlewagon with prisoners: the top
civil and military administrators of Soviet Io.

They discussed him nervously aboard the flagship.

"He has a mystical quality, Admiral. His men would follow him into an
atomic furnace. And--and I almost believe he could bring them through
safely if he wanted to." The laugh was nervous.

"He doesn't look like much. But when he turns on the charm--watch out!"

"He's--he's a _winner_. Now I wonder what I mean by that?"

"I know what you mean. They turn up every so often. People who can't be
stopped. People who have everything. Napoleons. Alexanders. Stalins. Up
from nowhere."

"Suleiman. Hitler. Folsom I. Jenghis Khan."

"Well, let's get it over with."

They tugged at their gold-braided jackets and signalled the honor guard.

Grayson was piped aboard, received another decoration and another
speech. This time he made a speech in return.

       *       *       *       *       *

President Folsom XXV, not knowing what else to do, had summoned his
cabinet. "Well?" he rasped at the Secretary of Defense.

Steiner said with a faint shrug: "Mr. President, there is nothing to be
done. He has the fleet, he has the broadcasting facilities, he has the
people."

"People!" snarled the President. His finger stabbed at a button and the
wall panels snapped down to show the Secret Servicemen standing in their
niches. The finger shot tremulously out at Steiner. "Kill that traitor!"
he raved.

The chief of the detail said uneasily: "Mr. President, we were listening
to Grayson before we came on duty. He says he's de facto President
now--"

"Kill him! Kill him!"

The chief went doggedly on: "--and we liked what he had to say about the
Republic and he said citizens of the Republic shouldn't take orders from
you and he'd relieve you--"

The President fell back.

Grayson walked in, wearing his plain ensign's uniform and smiling
faintly. Admirals and four-stripers flanked him.

The chief of the detail said: "Mr. Grayson! Are you taking over?"

The man in the ensign's uniform said gravely: "Yes. And just call me
'Grayson,' please. The titles come later. You can go now."

The chief gave a pleased grin and collected his detail. The rather
slight, youngish man who had something wrong with one arm was in
charge--_complete_ charge.

Grayson said: "Mr. Folsom, you are relieved of the presidency. Captain,
take him out and--" He finished with a whimsical shrug. A portly
four-striper took Folsom by one arm. Like a drugged man the deposed
president let himself be led out.

Grayson looked around the table. "Who are you gentlemen?"

They felt his magnetism, like the hum when you pass a power station.

Steiner was the spokesman. "Grayson," he said soberly, "We were Folsom's
Cabinet. However, there is more that we have to tell you. Alone, if you
will allow it."

"Very well, gentlemen." Admirals and captains backed out, looking
concerned.

       *       *       *       *       *

Steiner said: "Grayson, the story goes back many years. My predecessor,
William Malvern, determined to overthrow the regime, holding that it was
an affront to the human spirit. There have been many such attempts.
