him with genuine kindness. It gave him a strange feeling, a lonely
sense of something rising up out of the past to mock him, and he
changed the subject:

"Are the Azure Mountains the edge of your frontier?"

She nodded. "Beyond is the Emerald Plain, a great, wide plain, and
beyond it are mountain ranges that have never been named or explored.
I'm going into them some day and--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Time passed with astonishing speed as he talked with the girl and it
was late in the afternoon when he continued on to Brenn's cottage. He
put the thoughts of her from his mind and told Brenn of the too-warm
association between the girls and the Vogarians.

"But it is only friendship," Brenn said soothingly. "You can assure
your commander that nothing immoral is being done."

"If he knew what was going on, it would be my neck. It has to be
stopped. Write an edict--do anything that will stop it at once."

Brenn stroked his white beard thoughtfully. "I'm sorry this unforeseen
situation has occurred, sir. Will you have strict orders to the same
effect given your men?"

"There's a severe penalty for unauthorized fraternization. I'll see
that they're well reminded of it."

"I'll write another edict, at once, forbidding the girls to speak to
your men, sir."

       *       *       *       *       *

Y'Nor was pacing the floor when Kane went to the ship, his face black
and ugly with anger.

"Have you been blind?" he demanded.

Kane tried to swallow a sinking feeling, wondering just how much Y'Nor
had seen, and said, "Sir?"

"My guards--my so-called guards--how long have they been strolling
back from the plant in company with the native women?"

"Oh," he said, feeling a great relief that Y'Nor had not seen the true
situation, "it's only that some of the out-going shifts coincide, sir,
and--"

"You know, don't you, that military men march to and from duty in
military formation?"

"Yes, sir."

"You are aware of the importance of discipline?"

"Yes, sir."

"You are further aware of the fact that you, Dalon, and Graver, will
be guilty of treason if this lack of discipline imperils my plans in
any way?"

"Yes, sir."

"You have heard of the punishment for treason?"

"Yes, sir."

       *       *       *       *       *

He went below when the unpleasant business with Y'Nor was finally
over. It was the beginning of the eight-hour sleep period for Dalon
and Graver but they were still up, sitting on their bunks and staring
dreamily into space. It was only belatedly, almost fuzzily, that they
became aware of his glowering presence in the doorway.

"I bring you glad tidings," he said, "from the commander's own lips.
The multiple-gallows at State prison is still in perfect working
order, especially the first three trapdoors--"

The last day dawned, bright and sunny, and he went to see Brenn.

"I had the new edict posted immediately," Brenn said. "I hope it will
undo the damage."

"Let's see it," Kane requested and Brenn handed him the handwritten
original. It was:

_Despite our affection for the Vogarians among us, we must not
endanger them by any longer talking to them. A Vogarian military rule
is now being enforced which forbids Vogarians to speak to Sanctuary
girls except in the line of duty. There is a severe penalty for those
who disobey this rule._

_It must also be pointed out, sternly to the Sanctuary girls and
respectfully to the Vogarians, that flight into the uninhabited
Sanctuary mountains would result in execution for the fleeing couples
if Commander Y'Nor should ever find them._

"What's this?" Kane demanded, pointing to the last paragraph.

"Why--a warning, sir."

"Warning ... it's a suggestion!"

"A suggestion?" Brenn lifted his hands in shocked protest. "But, sir,
how could anyone think--"

"I, personally, wouldn't give a damn if the entire crew was too
love-sick to eat. But the commander does and my future welfare,
including the privilege of breathing, depends upon my retaining what
passes for his good will."

"Good heavens--I shall have this edict removed from the bulletin
boards at once!"

"A great idea. It should fix up everything to lock the stable door
now that the horse is stolen."

       *       *       *       *       *

He went to the plant and felt the air of resentment as soon as he
stepped inside. Dalon was patrolling among his men, his haggard face
becoming more haggard each time the red-haired personnel supervisor
went by with her hips swinging and her head held high in hurt, aloof
silence. The guards were pacing their beats in wordless quiet,
Graver's technicians were speaking only in the line of duty. The girls
were not talking even to one another but in the soft, melting glances
they gave the Vogarians they said _We understand_ in a manner more
eloquent than any words.

In fact, far too eloquent. He considered the plan of having Brenn
forbid the girls to look at the guards, discarded that as impractical,
for a moment wildly considered ordering the guards not to look at the
girls, discarded that as even more impractical, and went, muttering,
to Larue's office.

Larue was at his desk, his face lined with fatigue.

"It's been a difficult job," he said, "but we'll meet the deadline."

"Good," Kane answered. "Did Brenn phone you about having that edict
removed?"

"Ah--which one?"

"Which one? You mean...."

He turned and ran from the office.

A girl was removing the offending edict from the nearest bulletin
board. Another, later, one proclaimed:

_We must abandon as hopeless the suggestion of some that if there must
be an Occupation force, we would like for it to be these men whom we
have come to respect, and many of us to love. This can never be. Only
Commander Y'Nor will leave the ship at Vogar, there to select his own
