disapproval with what was being done here--

Her fingers quickly flicked in the index tape, and the stir of feeling
about her subsided, their attention captured again for the moment. Her
thoughts became to some degree detached, ready to dissect another
problem in the familiar ways and present the answers to it. Not a very
involved problem essentially, but this time it wasn't a school
exercise. Her company waited, withdrawn, silent, aloof once more,
while the index blurred, checked, blurred and checked. Within a minute
and a half, she had noted a dozen reference symbols. She tapped in
another of the pinhead tapes, glanced over a few paragraphs, licked
salty sweat from her lip, and said in her thoughts, emphasizing the
meaning of each detail of the sentence so that there would be no
misunderstanding, "This is the Federation law that applies to the
situation which existed originally on this planet...."

There were no interruptions, no commenting thoughts, no intrusions of
any kind, as she went step by step through the section, turned to
another one, and another. In perhaps twelve minutes she came to the
end of the last one, and stopped. Instantly, argument exploded about
her.

Telzey was not involved in the argument; in fact, she could grasp only
scraps of it. Either they were excluding her deliberately, or the
exchange was too swift, practiced and varied to allow her to keep up.
But their vehemence was not encouraging. And was it reasonable to
assume that the Federation's laws would have any meaning for minds
like these? Telzey snapped the library shut with fingers that had
begun to tremble, and placed it on the ground. Then she stiffened. In
the sensations washing about her, a special excitement rose suddenly,
a surge of almost gleeful wildness that choked away her breath.
Awareness followed of a pair of malignant crimson eyes fastened on
her, moving steadily closer. A kind of nightmare paralysis seized
Telzey--they'd turned her over to that red-eyed horror! She sat still,
feeling mouse-sized.

Something came out with a crash from a thicket behind her. Her muscles
went tight. But it was TT who rubbed a hard head against her shoulder,
took another three stiff-legged steps forward and stopped between
Telzey and the bushes on their right, back rigid, neck fur erect, tail
twisting.

Expectant silence closed in about them. The circle was waiting. In the
greenery on the right something made a slow, heavy stir.

TT's lips peeled back from her teeth. Her head swung towards the
motion, ears flattening, transformed to a split, snarling demon-mask.
A long shriek ripped from her lungs, raw with fury, blood lust and
challenge.

The sound died away. For some seconds the tension about them held;
then came a sense of gradual relaxation mingled with a partly amused
approval. Telzey was shaking violently. It had been, she was telling
herself, a deliberate test ... not of herself, of course, but of TT.
And Tick-Tock had passed with honors. That _her_ nerves had been half
ruined in the process would seem a matter of no consequence to this
rugged crew....

She realized next that someone here was addressing her personally.

It took a few moments to steady her jittering thoughts enough to gain
a more definite impression than that. This speaker, she discovered
then, was a member of the circle of whom she hadn't been aware before.
The thought-impressions came hard and cold as iron--a personage who
was very evidently in the habit of making major decisions and seeing
them carried out. The circle, its moment of sport over, was listening
with more than a suggestion of deference. Tick-Tock, far from
conciliated, green eyes still blazing, nevertheless was settling down
to listen, too.

Telzey began to understand.

Her suggestions, Iron Thoughts informed her, might appear without
value to a number of foolish minds here, but _he_ intended to see they
were given a fair trial. Did he perhaps hear, he inquired next of the
circle, throwing in a casual but horridly vivid impression of snapping
spines and slashed shaggy throats spouting blood, any objection to
that?

Dead stillness all around. There was, definitely, no objection.
Tick-Tock began to grin like a pleased kitten.

That point having been settled in an orderly manner now, Iron Thoughts
went on coldly to Telzey, what specifically did she propose they
should do?

       *       *       *       *       *

Halet's long, pearl-gray sportscar showed up above the park trees
twenty minutes later. Telzey, face turned down towards the open law
library in her lap, watched the car from the corner of her eyes. She
was in plain view, sitting beside the lake, apparently absorbed in
legal research. Tick-Tock, camouflaged among the bushes thirty feet
higher up the bank, had spotted the car an instant before she did and
announced the fact with a three-second break in her purring. Neither
of them made any other move.

The car was approaching the lake but still a good distance off. Its
canopy was down, and Telzey could just make out the heads of three
people inside. Delquos, Halet's chauffeur, would be flying the
vehicle, while Halet and Dr. Droon looked around for her from the
sides. Three hundred yards away, the aircar began a turn to the right.
Delquos didn't like his employer much; at a guess, he had just spotted
Telzey and was trying to warn her off.

Telzey closed the library and put it down, picked up a handful of
pebbles and began flicking them idly, one at a time, into the water.
The aircar vanished to her left.

Three minutes later, she watched its shadow glide across the surface
of the lake towards her. Her heart began to thump almost audibly, but
she didn't look up. Tick-Tock's purring continued, on its regular,
unhurried note. The car came to a stop almost directly overhead. After
a couple of seconds, there was a clicking noise. The purring ended
abruptly.

Telzey climbed to her feet as Delquos brought the car down to the bank
of the lake. The chauffeur grinned ruefully at her. A side door had
been opened, and Halet and Dr. Droon stood behind it. Halet watched
Telzey with a small smile while the naturalist put the heavy
life-detector-and-stungun device carefully down on the floorboards.

"If you're looking for Tick-Tock," Telzey said, "she isn't here."

Halet just shook her head sorrowfully.

"There's no use lying to us, dear. Dr Droon just stunned her."

       *       *       *       *       *

They found TT collapsed on her side among the shrubs, wearing her
natural color. Her eyes were shut, her chest rose and fell in a slow
breathing motion. Dr. Droon, looking rather apologetic, pointed out to
Telzey that her pet was in no pain, that the stungun had simply put
her comfortably to sleep. He also explained the use of the two sets of
webbed paralysis belts which he fastened about TT's legs. The effect
of the stun charge would wear off in a few minutes, and contact with
the inner surfaces of the energized belts would then keep TT
anesthetized and unable to move until the belts were removed. She
would, he repeated, be suffering no pain throughout the process.

Telzey didn't comment. She watched Delquos raise TT's limp body above
the level of the bushes with a gravity hoist belonging to Dr. Droon,
and maneuver her back to the car, the others following. Delquos
climbed into the car first, opened the big trunk compartment in the
rear. TT was slid inside and the trunk compartment locked.

"Where are you taking her?" Telzey asked sullenly as Delquos lifted
the car into the air.

"To the spaceport, dear," Halet said. "Dr. Droon and I both felt it
would be better to spare your feelings by not prolonging the matter
unnecessarily."

Telzey wrinkled her nose disdainfully, and walked up the aircar to
stand behind Delquos' seat. She leaned against the back of the seat
for an instant. Her legs felt shaky.

The chauffeur gave her a sober wink from the side.

"That's a dirty trick she's played on you, Miss Telzey!" he murmured.
"I tried to warn you."

"I know." Telzey took a deep breath. "Look, Delquos, in just a minute
something's going to happen! It'll look dangerous, but it won't be.
Don't let it get you nervous ... right?"

"Huh?" Delquos appeared startled, but kept his voice low. "Just
_what's_ going to happen?"

"No time to tell you. Remember what I said."

       *       *       *       *       *

Telzey moved back a few steps from the driver's seat, turned around,
said unsteadily, "Halet ... Dr. Droon--"

Halet had been speaking quietly to Dr. Droon; they both looked up.

"If you don't move, and don't do anything stupid," Telzey said
rapidly, "you won't get hurt. If you do ... well, I don't know! You
see, there's another crest cat in the car...." In her mind she added,
"Now!"

It was impossible to tell in just what section of the car Iron
Thoughts had been lurking. The carpeting near the rear passenger seats
seemed to blur for an instant. Then he was there, camouflage dropped,
sitting on the floorboards five feet from the naturalist and Halet.

Halet's mouth opened wide; she tried to scream but fainted instead.
Dr. Droon's right hand started out quickly towards the big stungun
device beside his seat. Then he checked himself and sat still,
ashen-faced.

Telzey didn't blame him for changing his mind. She felt he must be a
remarkably brave man to have moved at all. Iron Thoughts, twice as
broad across the back as Tick-Tock, twice as massively muscled, looked
like a devil-beast even to her. His dark-green marbled hide was
criss-crossed with old scar patterns; half his tossing crimson crest
appeared to have been ripped away. He reached out now in a fluid,
silent motion, hooked a paw under the stungun and flicked upwards. The
big instrument rose in an incredibly swift, steep arc eighty feet
into the air, various parts flying away from it, before it started
curving down towards the treetops below the car. Iron Thoughts lazily
