gas. Thus, we name water combined to saturation with caloric, so as to
form an elastic fluid, _aqueous gas_; ether, combined in the same
manner, _etherial gas_; the combination of alkohol with caloric, becomes
_alkoholic gas_; and, following the same principles, we have _muriatic
acid gas_, _ammoniacal gas_, and so on of every substance susceptible of
being combined with caloric, in such a manner as to assume the gasseous
or elastic aeriform state.

We have already seen, that the atmospheric air is composed of two
gasses, or aeriform fluids, one of which is capable, by respiration, of
contributing to animal life, and in which metals are calcinable, and
combustible bodies may burn; the other, on the contrary, is endowed with
directly opposite qualities; it cannot be breathed by animals, neither
will it admit of the combustion of inflammable bodies, nor of the
calcination of metals. We have given to the base of the former, or
respirable portion of the air, the name of _oxygen_, from [Greek: oxys]
_acidum_, and [Greek: geinomas], _gignor_; because, in reality, one of
the most general properties of this base is to form acids, by combining
with many different substances. The union of this base with caloric we
term _oxygen gas_, which is the same with what was formerly called
_pure_, or _vital air_. The weight of this gas, at the temperature of
10 deg. (54.50), and under a pressure equal to 28 inches of the barometer,
is half a grain for each cubical inch, or one ounce and a half to each
cubical foot.

The chemical properties of the noxious portion of atmospheric air being
hitherto but little known, we have been satisfied to derive the name of
its base from its known quality of killing such animals as are forced to
breathe it, giving it the name of _azote_, from the Greek privitive
particle [Greek: a] and [Greek: xae], vita; hence the name of the
noxious part of atmospheric air is _azotic gas_; the weight of which, in
the same temperature, and under the same pressure, is 1 oz. 2 gros
and 48 grs. to the cubical foot, or 0.4444 of a grain to the cubical
inch. We cannot deny that this name appears somewhat extraordinary; but
this must be the case with all new terms, which cannot be expected to
become familiar until they have been some time in use. We long
endeavoured to find a more proper designation without success; it was at
first proposed to call it _alkaligen gas_, as, from the experiments of
Mr Berthollet, it appears to enter into the composition of ammoniac, or
volatile alkali; but then, we have as yet no proof of its making one of
the constituent elements of the other alkalies; beside, it is proved to
compose a part of the nitric acid, which gives as good reason to have
called it _nitrigen_. For these reasons, finding it necessary to reject
any name upon systematic principles, we have considered that we run no
risk of mistake in adopting the terms of _azote_, and _azotic gas_,
which only express a matter of fact, or that property which it
possesses, of depriving such animals as breathe it of their lives.

I should anticipate subjects more properly reserved for the subsequent
chapters, were I in this place to enter upon the nomenclature of the
several species of gasses: It is sufficient, in this part of the work,
to establish the principles upon which their denominations are founded.
The principal merit of the nomenclature we have adopted is, that, when
once the simple elementary substance is distinguished by an appropriate
term, the names of all its compounds derive readily, and necessarily,
from this first denomination.

FOOTNOTES:

[10] In English, the word _steam_ is exclusively appropriated to water
in the state of vapour. E.




CHAP. V.

_Of the Decomposition of Oxygen Gas by Sulphur, Phosphorus, and
Charcoal--and of the Formation of Acids in general._


In performing experiments, it is a necessary principle, which ought
never to be deviated from, that they be simplified as much as possible,
and that every circumstance capable of rendering their results
complicated be carefully removed. Wherefore, in the experiments which
form the object of this chapter, we have never employed atmospheric air,
which is not a simple substance. It is true, that the azotic gas, which
forms a part of its mixture, appears to be merely passive during
combustion and calcination; but, besides that it retards these
operations very considerably, we are not certain but it may even alter
their results in some circumstances; for which reason, I have thought it
necessary to remove even this possible cause of doubt, by only making
use of pure oxygen gas in the following experiments, which show the
effects produced by combustion in that gas; and I shall advert to such
differences as take place in the results of these, when the oxygen gas,
or pure vital air, is mixed, in different proportions, with azotic gas.

Having filled a bell-glass (A. Pl. iv. fig. 3), of between five and six
pints measure, with oxygen gas, I removed it from the water trough,
where it was filled, into the quicksilver bath, by means of a shallow
glass dish slipped underneath, and having dried the mercury, I
introduced 61-1/4 grains of Kunkel's phosphorus in two little China
cups, like that represented at D, fig. 3. under the glass A; and that I
might set fire to each of the portions of phosphorus separately, and to
prevent the one from catching fire from the other, one of the dishes was
covered with a piece of flat glass. I next raised the quicksilver in the
bell-glass up to E F, by sucking out a sufficient portion of the gas by
means of the syphon G H I. After this, by means of the crooked iron wire
(fig. 16.), made red hot, I set fire to the two portions of phosphorus
successively, first burning that portion which was not covered with the
piece of glass. The combustion was extremely rapid, attended with a very
brilliant flame, and considerable disengagement of light and heat. In
consequence of the great heat induced, the gas was at first much
dilated, but soon after the mercury returned to its level, and a
considerable absorption of gas took place; at the same time, the whole
inside of the glass became covered with white light flakes of concrete
phosphoric acid.

At the beginning of the experiment, the quantity of oxygen gas, reduced,
as above directed, to a common standard, amounted to 162 cubical inches;
and, after the combustion was finished, only 23-1/4 cubical inches,
likewise reduced to the standard, remained; so that the quantity of
oxygen gas absorbed during the combustion was 138-3/4 cubical inches,
equal to 69.375 grains.

A part of the phosphorus remained unconsumed in the bottom of the cups,
which being washed on purpose to separate the acid, weighed about 16-1/4
grains; so that about 45 grains of phosphorus had been burned: But, as
it is hardly possible to avoid an error of one or two grains, I leave
the quantity so far qualified. Hence, as nearly 45 grains of phosphorus
had, in this experiment, united with 69.375 grains of oxygen, and as no
gravitating matter could have escaped through the glass, we have a right
to conclude, that the weight of the substance resulting from the
combustion in form of white flakes, must equal that of the phosphorus
and oxygen employed, which amounts to 114.375 grains. And we shall
presently find, that these flakes consisted entirely of a solid or
concrete acid. When we reduce these weights to hundredth parts, it will
be found, that 100 parts of phosphorus require 154 parts of oxygen for
saturation, and that this combination will produce 254 parts of concrete
phosphoric acid, in form of white fleecy flakes.

This experiment proves, in the most convincing manner, that, at a
certain degree of temperature, oxygen possesses a stronger elective
attraction, or affinity, for phosphorus than for caloric; that, in
consequence of this, the phosphorus attracts the base of oxygen gas from
the caloric, which, being set free, spreads itself over the surrounding
bodies. But, though this experiment be so far perfectly conclusive, it
is not sufficiently rigorous, as, in the apparatus described, it is
impossible to ascertain the weight of the flakes of concrete acid which
are formed; we can therefore only determine this by calculating the
weights of oxygen and phosphorus employed; but as, in physics, and in
chemistry, it is not allowable to suppose what is capable of being
ascertained by direct experiment, I thought it necessary to rep at this
experiment, as follows, upon a larger scale, and by means of a different
apparatus.

I took a large glass baloon (A. Pl. iv. fig. 4.) with an opening three
inches diameter, to which was fitted a crystal stopper ground with
emery, and pierced with two holes for the tubes yyy, xxx. Before
shutting the baloon with its stopper, I introduced the support BC,
surmounted by the china cup D, containing 150 grs. of phosphorus; the
stopper was then fitted to the opening of the baloon, luted with fat
lute, and covered with slips of linen spread with quick-lime and white
of eggs: When the lute was perfectly dry, the weight of the whole
apparatus was determined to within a grain, or a grain and a half. I
next exhausted the baloon, by means of an air pump applied to the tube
XXX, and then introduced oxygen gas by means of the tube yyy, having a
stop cock adapted to it. This kind of experiment is most readily and
most exactly performed by means of the hydro-pneumatic machine described
by Mr Meusnier and me in the Memoirs of the Academy for 1782, pag. 466.
and explained in the latter part of this work, with several important
additions and corrections since made to it by Mr Meusnier. With this
instrument we can readily ascertain, in the most exact manner, both the
quantity of oxygen gas introduced into the baloon, and the quantity
consumed during the course of the experiment.

When all things were properly disposed, I set fire to the phosphorus
with a burning glass. The combustion was extremely rapid, accompanied
with a bright flame, and much heat; as the operation went on, large
quantities of white flakes attached themselves to the inner surface of
the baloon, so that at last it was rendered quite opake. The quantity
of these flakes at last became so abundant, that, although fresh oxygen
gas was continually supplied, which ought to have supported the
combustion, yet the phosphorus was soon extinguished. Having allowed the
apparatus to cool completely, I first ascertained the quantity of oxygen
gas employed, and weighed the baloon accurately, before it was opened. I
next washed, dried, and weighed the small quantity of phosphorus
remaining in the cup, on purpose to determine the whole quantity of
phosphorus consumed in the experiment; this residuum of the phosphorus
was of a yellow ochrey colour. It is evident, that by these several
precautions, I could easily determine, 1st, the weight of the phosphorus
consumed; 2d, the weight of the flakes produced by the combustion; and,
3d, the weight of the oxygen which had combined with the phosphorus.
This experiment gave very nearly the same results with the former, as it
proved that the phosphorus, during its combustion, had absorbed a little
more than one and a half its weight of oxygen; and I learned with more
certainty, that the weight of the new substance, produced in the
experiment, exactly equalled the sum of the weights of the phosphorus
consumed, and oxygen absorbed, which indeed was easily determinable _a
priori_. If the oxygen gas employed be pure, the residuum after
combustion is as pure as the gas employed; this proves that nothing
escapes from the phosphorus, capable of altering the purity of the
oxygen gas, and that the only action of the phosphorus is to separate
the oxygen from the caloric, with which it was before united.

I mentioned above, that when any combustible body is burnt in a hollow
sphere of ice, or in an apparatus properly constructed upon that
principle, the quantity of ice melted during the combustion is an exact
measure of the quantity of caloric disengaged. Upon this head, the
memoir given by M. de la Place and me, A(masculine ordinal). 1780, p. 355,
may be consulted. Having submitted the combustion of phosphorus to this
trial, we found that one pound of phosphorus melted a little more than
100 pounds of ice during its combustion.

The combustion of phosphorus succeeds equally well in atmospheric air as
in oxygen gas, with this difference, that the combustion is vastly
slower, being retarded by the large proportion of azotic gas mixed with
the oxygen gas, and that only about one-fifth part of the air employed
is absorbed, because as the oxygen gas only is absorbed, the proportion
of the azotic gas becomes so great toward the close of the experiment,
as to put an end to the combustion.

I have already shown, that phosphorus is changed by combustion into an
extremely light, white, flakey matter; and its properties are entirely
altered by this transformation: From being insoluble in water, it
becomes not only soluble, but so greedy of moisture, as to attract the
humidity of the air with astonishing rapidity; by this means it is
converted into a liquid, considerably more dense, and of more specific
gravity than water. In the state of phosphorus before combustion, it had
scarcely any sensible taste, by its union with oxygen it acquires an
extremely sharp and sour taste: in a word, from one of the class of
combustible bodies, it is changed into an incombustible substance, and
becomes one of those bodies called acids.

This property of a combustible substance to be converted into an acid,
by the addition of oxygen, we shall presently find belongs to a great
number of bodies: Wherefore, strict logic requires that we should adopt
a common term for indicating all these operations which produce
analogous results; this is the true way to simplify the study of
science, as it would be quite impossible to bear all its specifical
details in the memory, if they were not classically arranged. For this
reason, we shall distinguish this conversion of phosphorus into an acid,
by its union with oxygen, and in general every combination of oxygen
with a combustible substance, by the term of _oxygenation_: from which
I shall adopt the verb to _oxygenate_, and of consequence shall say,
that in _oxygenating_ phosphorus we convert it into an acid.

Sulphur is likewise a combustible body, or, in other words, it is a body
which possesses the power of decomposing oxygen gas, by attracting the
oxygen from the caloric with which it was combined. This can very easily
be proved, by means of experiments quite similar to those we have given
with phosphorus; but it is necessary to premise, that in these
operations with sulphur, the same accuracy of result is not to be
expected as with phosphorus; because the acid which is formed by the
combustion of sulphur is difficultly condensible, and because sulphur
burns with more difficulty, and is soluble in the different gasses. But
I can safely assert, from my own experiments, that sulphur in burning
absorbs oxygen gas; that the resulting acid is considerably heavier than
the sulphur burnt; that its weight is equal to the sum of the weights of
the sulphur which has been burnt, and of the oxygen absorbed; and,
lastly that this acid is weighty, incombustible, and miscible with water
in all proportions: The only uncertainty remaining upon this head, is
with regard to the proportions of sulphur and of oxygen which enter into
the composition of the acid.

Charcoal, which, from all our present knowledge regarding it, must be
considered as a simple combustible body, has likewise the property of
decomposing oxygen gas, by absorbing its base from the caloric: But the
acid resulting from this combustion does not condense in the common
temperature; under the pressure of our atmosphere, it remains in the
state of gas, and requires a large proportion of water to combine with
or be dissolved in. This acid has, however, all the known properties of
other acids, though in a weaker degree, and combines, like them, with
all the bases which are susceptible of forming neutral salts.

The combustion of charcoal in oxygen gas, may be effected like that of
phosphorus in the bell-glass, (A. Pl. IV. fig. 3.) placed over mercury:
but, as the heat of red hot iron is not sufficient to set fire to the
charcoal, we must add a small morsel of tinder, with a minute particle
of phosphorus, in the same manner as directed in the experiment for the
combustion of iron. A detailed account of this experiment will be found
in the memoirs of the academy for 1781, p. 448. By that experiment it
appears, that 28 parts by weight of charcoal require 72 parts of oxygen
for saturation, and that the aeriform acid produced is precisely equal
in weight to the sum of the weights of the charcoal and oxygen gas
employed. This aeriform acid was called fixed or fixable air by the
chemists who first discovered it; they did not then know whether it was
air resembling that of the atmosphere, or some other elastic fluid,
vitiated and corrupted by combustion; but since it is now ascertained to
be an acid, formed like all others by the oxygenation of its peculiar
base, it is obvious that the name of fixed air is quite ineligible[11].

By burning charcoal in the apparatus mentioned p. 60, Mr de la Place and
I found that one lib. of charcoal melted 96 libs. 6 oz. of ice;
that, during the combustion, 2 libs. 9 oz. 1 gros. 10 grs. of
oxygen were absorbed, and that 3 libs. 9 oz. 1 gros. 10 grs. of
acid gas were formed. This gas weighs 0.695 parts of a grain for each
cubical inch, in the common standard temperature and pressure mentioned
above, so that 34,242 cubical inches of acid gas are produced by the
combustion of one pound of charcoal.

I might multiply these experiments, and show by a numerous succession of
facts, that all acids are formed by the combustion of certain
substances; but I am prevented from doing so in place, by the plan
which I have laid down, of proceeding only from facts already
ascertained, to such as are unknown, and of drawing my examples only
from circumstances already explained. In the mean time, however, the
three examples above cited may suffice for giving a clear and accurate
conception of the manner in which acids are formed. By these it may be
clearly seen, that oxygen is an element common to them all, which
constitutes their acidity; and that they differ from each other,
according to the nature of the oxygenated or acidified substance. We
must therefore, in every acid, carefully distinguish between the
acidifiable, base, which Mr de Morveau calls the radical, and the
acidifiing principle or oxygen.

FOOTNOTES:

[11] It may be proper to remark, though here omitted by the author,
that, in conformity with the general principles of the new nomenclature,
this acid is by Mr Lavoisier and his coleagues called the carbonic acid,
and when in the aeriform state carbonic acid gas. E.




CHAP. VI.

_Of the Nomenclature of Acids in general, and particularly of those
drawn from Nitre and Sea-Salt._


It becomes extremely easy, from the principles laid down in the
preceding chapter, to establish a systematic nomenclature for the acids:
The word _acid_, being used as a generic term, each acid falls to be
distinguished in language, as in nature, by the name of its base or
radical. Thus, we give the generic name of acids to the products of the
combustion or oxygenation of phosphorus, of sulphur, and of charcoal;
and these products are respectively named, the _phosphoric acid_, the
_sulphuric acid_, and the _carbonic acid_.

There is however, a remarkable circumstance in the oxygenation of
combustible bodies, and of a part of such bodies as are convertible into
acids, that they are susceptible of different degrees of saturation with
oxygen, and that the resulting acids, though formed by the union of the
same elements, are possessed of different properties, depending upon
that difference of proportion. Of this, the phosphoric acid, and more
especially the sulphuric, furnishes us with examples. When sulphur is
combined with a small proportion of oxygen, it forms, in this first or
lower degree of oxygenation, a volatile acid, having a penetrating
odour, and possessed of very particular qualities. By a larger
proportion of oxygen, it is changed into a fixed, heavy acid, without
any odour, and which, by combination with other bodies, gives products
quite different from those furnished by the former. In this instance,
the principles of our nomenclature seem to fail; and it seems difficult
to derive such terms from the name of the acidifiable base, as shall
distinctly express these two degrees of saturation, or oxygenation,
without circumlocution. By reflection, however, upon the subject, or
perhaps rather from the necessity of the case, we have thought it
allowable to express these varieties in the oxygenation of the acids, by
simply varying the termination of their specific names. The volatile
acid produced from sulphur was anciently known to Stahl under the name
of _sulphurous_ acid[12]. We have preserved that term for this acid
from sulphur under-saturated with oxygen; and distinguish the other, or
completely saturated or oxygenated acid, by the name of _sulphuric_
acid. We shall therefore say, in this new chemical language, that
sulphur, in combining with oxygen, is susceptible of two degrees of
saturation; that the first, or lesser degree, constitutes sulphurous
acid, which is volatile and penetrating; whilst the second, or higher
degree of saturation, produces sulphuric acid, which is fixed and
inodorous. We shall adopt this difference of termination for all the
acids which assume several degrees of saturation. Hence we have a
phosphorous and a phosphoric acid, an acetous and an acetic acid; and so
on, for others in similar circumstances.

This part of chemical science would have been extremely simple, and the
nomenclature of the acids would not have been at all perplexed, as it is
now in the old nomenclature, if the base or radical of each acid had
been known when the acid itself was discovered. Thus, for instance,
phosphorus being a known substance before the discovery of its acid,
this latter was rightly distinguished by a term drawn from the name of
its acidifiable base. But when, on the contrary, an acid happened to be
discovered before its base, or rather, when the acidifiable base from
which it was formed remained unknown, names were adopted for the two,
which have not the smallest connection; and thus, not only the memory
became burthened with useless appellations, but even the minds of
students, nay even of experienced chemists, became filled with false
ideas, which time and reflection alone is capable of eradicating. We may
give an instance of this confusion with respect to the acid sulphur: The
former chemists having procured this acid from the vitriol of iron, gave
it the name of the vitriolic acid from the name of the substance which
produced it; and they were then ignorant that the acid procured from
sulphur by combustion was exactly the same.

The same thing happened with the aeriform acid formerly called _fixed
air_; it not being known that this acid was the result of combining
charcoal with oxygen, a variety of denominations have been given to it,
not one of which conveys just ideas of its nature or origin. We have
found it extremely easy to correct and modify the ancient language with
respect to these acids proceeding from known bases, having converted the
name of _vitriolic acid_ into that of _sulphuric_, and the name of
_fixed air_ into that of _carbonic acid_; but it is impossible to follow
this plan with the acids whose bases are still unknown; with these we
have been obliged to use a contrary plan, and, instead of forming the
name of the acid from that of its base, have been forced to denominate
the unknown base from the name of the known acid, as happens in the case
of the acid which is procured from sea salt.

To disengage this acid from the alkaline base with which it is combined,
we have only to pour sulphuric acid upon sea-salt, immediately a brisk
effervescence takes place, white vapours arise, of a very penetrating
odour, and, by only gently heating the mixture, all the acid is driven
off. As, in the common temperature and pressure of our atmosphere, this
acid is naturally in the state of gas, we must use particular
precautions for retaining it in proper vessels. For small experiments,
the most simple and most commodious apparatus consists of a small retort
G, (Pl. V. Fig. 5.), into which the sea-salt is introduced, well
dried[13], we then pour on some concentrated sulphuric acid, and
immediately introduce the beak of the retort under little jars or
bell-glasses A, (same Plate and Fig.), previously filled with
quicksilver. In proportion as the acid gas is disengaged, it passes into
the jar, and gets to the top of the quicksilver, which it displaces.
When the disengagement of the gas slackens, a gentle heat is applied to
the retort, and gradually increased till nothing more passes over. This
acid gas has a very strong affinity with water, which absorbs an
enormous quantity of it, as is proved by introducing a very thin layer
of water into the glass which contains the gas; for, in an instant, the
whole acid gas disappears, and combines with the water.

This latter circumstance is taken advantage of in laboratories and
manufactures, on purpose to obtain the acid of sea-salt in a liquid
form; and for this purpose the apparatus (Pl. IV. Fig. 1.) is employed.
It consists, 1st, of a tubulated retort A, into which the sea-salt, and
after it the sulphuric acid, are introduced through the opening H; 2d,
of the baloon or recipient c, b, intended for containing the small
quantity of liquid which passes over during the process; and, 3d, of a
set of bottles, with two mouths, L, L, L, L, half filled with water,
intended for absorbing the gas disengaged by the distillation. This
apparatus will be more amply described in the latter part of this work.

Although we have not yet been able, either to compose or to decompound
this acid of sea-salt, we cannot have the smallest doubt that it, like
all other acids, is composed by the union of oxygen with an acidifiable
base. We have therefore called this unknown substance the _muriatic
base_, or _muriatic radical_, deriving this name, after the example of
Mr Bergman and Mr de Morveau, from the Latin word _muria_, which was
anciently used to signify sea-salt. Thus, without being able exactly to
determine the component parts of _muriatic acid_, we design, by that
term, a volatile acid, which retains the form of gas in the common
temperature and pressure of our atmosphere, which combines with great
facility, and in great quantity, with water, and whose acidifiable base
adheres so very intimately with oxygen, that no method has hitherto been
devised for separating them. If ever this acidifiable base of the
muriatic acid is discovered to be a known substance, though now unknown
in that capacity, it will be requisite to change its present
denomination for one analogous with that of its base.

In common with sulphuric acid, and several other acids, the muriatic is
capable of different degrees of oxygenation; but the excess of oxygen
produces quite contrary effects upon it from what the same circumstance
produces upon the acid of sulphur. The lower degree of oxygenation
