
"We've got to pin point this thing," I said as we went back to her
living room. "Do you think you are ready to do some serious
diagnosis?"

"Of the Grand Master?" she asked me.

"Sure. I can get you into his office without too much trouble. What I
want you to do is feel around inside his heart. The sawbones from the
clinic can't find anything out of line, and I think you can. Can you
PC that?"

She smiled at me. "Of course," she said. "You'll take me there in the
morning."

I did, of course.

Maragon gave us an appointment when I assured him that I wanted to
show him some aspects of Pheola's healing powers and that PC wasn't
going to enter into the discussion. His spooky clairvoyant let us in
with a knowing smile and we found the old goat pouring over some
papers in front of him on the big slab of walnut.

He was really quite nice to Pheola. "Well, well, young woman," he
said, "Lefty tells me that you are coming along."

"I hope so, Mr. Maragon," she said.

"Well, Lefty," he said, after he had shown us both into the handsome
chairs he had drawn up in front of his desk, "you were going to have
Pheola give me some kind of a demonstration."

"Sure," I said. "First off I want you to know that she can qualify as
a TK. Her healing powers are a subtle form of that. But as proof,
she'll give a demonstration with weights."

I drew the carrying case from my pocket and laid four pith balls on
his desk, as well as a ten-gram standard TK weight.

"Ten grams?" he said, interested.

"Maybe," I grinned. "We haven't tried this outside our own company.
Pretty big emotional quotient here, you know."

He shook his head. "It has to be reproducible, Lefty," he said, but in
a kindly tone. "Let me see it, Pheola."

She was really pretty good, and the pith balls behaved quite well. The
first time around, the ten-gram weight stopped her cold, but by laying
it on my palm, she got a good grip and thereafter was able to make it
perform.

"Very nicely done," the old goat grumbled. He hadn't expected anything
of the kind. But I was only half through with him.

"Now," I said. "The more important part of the demonstration. Do you
object to a little minor pain?"

"I certainly do," he growled, bringing his bushy brows down.

"Well, the only way you can tell that Pheola is able to employ her TK
within you is to give you a little sensation. It will only be some
twinges," I said.

He wanted to argue about it, and I dragged the conversation out until
I felt a little tug on my ear. Pheola had completed her scan of
Maragon's heart.

"Oof!" he said as she hit him lightly in the diaphragm. Then she made
his hands jump, first one and then the other. None of it felt real
good, I could see, from the flinching and lip biting that was going on
across the desk.

"That's enough!" he exclaimed as she went to work on his throat. His
hand flew up to massage his larynx. "Quite convincing, young woman.
But what is it good for?"

I laughed at him. "What are most Psi powers good for?" I asked him.
"All that we require for membership is that a person be able to
display them under standardized conditions."

"Yes," he agreed. "Yes, I guess that's so. Well, I gather you'll be
ready to go into your act at the next Chapter Meeting, then?"

Pheola nodded. "I hope so," she said.

"I do, too," the old goat agreed, getting in the last word. "It would
be nice if you could figure out what to do with your ability to snap
my nerve-strings!"

       *       *       *       *       *

We were silent in the ride down the elevator to our apartments. I took
the chance that Pete wasn't having us peeped, and spoke as soon as we
were in my study.

"What did you find out, Pheola?" I asked her.

"I could feel something, Lefty," she said. "When you had the heart
model over at the hospital, you showed me the coronary artery, you
remember?"

"Yes."

"There are two little bumps in his artery, one about three times as
large as the other."

"Bumps?" I said, frowning. "I'm not sure I know what that means,
Pheola."

"Well, remember how I told you that your own arteries were nice and
clear?"

I nodded.

"His coronary artery isn't like that. It's sort of caked and crusty.
And I think some of that coating has broken away in a couple spots,
and they are like scabs on the sores, only they aren't hard."

This was as close to a classic description of coronary clotting as I
figured I would get in nontechnical terms. What her words mean to me
was that Maragon's coronary artery, as in many men his age, was
somewhat choked with deposits of cholesterol. In a couple places the
deposit had broken away, exposing the raw surface of the artery. But
instead of scar tissue forming to heal the open spot, clotting had
taken place. And if either of those clots broke loose, and plugged one
of the minor arteries in the heart, we'd see a coronary attack as that
part of the muscle was starved for blood and died.

The information was useless, in a medical sense. There is no surgery
for the condition. There was, however, something untried that could
possibly be done.

"Where is it going to happen?" I asked her. "The heart attack?"

"In the hospital," she said.

"And what will I have you do?"

She frowned for a moment. "You want me to cure it," she said. "I'm not
sure I understand how."

"I do," I said. "That's enough. From here on I just want to work a
two-horse parlay. The old goat can't help but be convinced by the
demonstration you are going to give him. The thing that I want is for
him to agree that your PC powers exist at the same time. We'll whipsaw
him good."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the morning, after the first surgery was over, I went downstairs to
the heart clinic. Doc Swartz was in his office. He's the best heart
man at Memorial, and I figured that Maragon would have gone to him.

"What's up, Lefty?" he asked as I came in to his office and shut the
door against some of the smells of the hospital. "How is your scalpel
work coming?"

"I'll be doing my own cutting any day now," I said. "I came on another
errand."

"So?"

"Did you give Maragon's heart a checkup in the last couple of weeks?"
I asked.

"None of your business," he smiled. "You know I can't talk about my
patients."

"This is Lodge business, Doc," I protested. "I know you aren't a Psi,
and thus aren't subject to our discipline, but I think it's time we
exchanged some information."

"Exchanged?"

I nodded. "You know--or do you know--that I've been working with a
girl, giving her some training."

"No," he said. "I don't hear much about the Lodge. You folks are
pretty tight-mouthed around Normals."

"Sure," I said, not wanting to appear uncomfortable about it. Doc was
all right--he never showed any resentment that he didn't have Psi
powers. Quite sensibly, he was satisfied with his own normal skills.
"Well, this girl is a very delicate telekinetic," I told him. "She is
the one who brought my right arm back to life. She's good."

"She must be," he agreed. "I know that stumped every neurologist over
here."

"Right," I said, "She has been exploring the insides of Maragon's
heart."

"What!"

"Sense of perception--light TK touch--anything you want to call it. I
can get her to demonstrate, if you insist. But you can take my word
for it. She can feel her way around inside your body the way you can
feel your way around the outside."

