Leoh shook his head, smiling wryly. "Undoubtedly the approach closest
to their hearts--but highly improbable in the present situation. They
have been making most efficient and effective use of the dueling
machine to gain their ends."

Odal picked this moment to open the door.

"Dr. Leoh ... Lt. Hector ... you asked to see me?"

"Thank you, Major Odal; I hope you will be able to help me," Leoh
said. "You are the only man living who may be able to give us some
clues to the failure of the Dueling Machine."

Odal's answering smile reminded Leoh of the best efforts of the
robot-puppet designers to make a machine that smiled like a man. "I
am afraid I can be of no assistance, Dr. Leoh. My experiences in the
machine are ... private."

"Perhaps you don't fully understand the situation," Leoh said. "In the
past week, we have tested the dueling machine here on Acquatainia
exhaustively. We have learned that its performance can be greatly
influenced by a man's personality, and by training. You have fought
many duels in the machines. Your background of experience, both as a
professional soldier and in the machines, gives you a decided
advantage over your opponents.

"However, even with all this considered, I am convinced that you
cannot kill a man in the machine--under normal circumstances. We have
demonstrated that fact in our tests. An unsabotaged machine cannot
cause actual physical harm.

"Yet you have already killed one man and incapacitated another. Where
will it stop?"

Odal's face remained calm, except for the faintest glitter of fire
deep in his eyes. His voice was quiet, but had the edge of a
well-honed blade to it: "I cannot be blamed for my background and
experience. And I have not tampered with your machines."

The door to the room opened, and a short, thick-set, bullet-headed man
entered. He was dressed in a dark street suit, so that it was
impossible to guess his station at the Embassy.

"Would the gentlemen care for refreshments?" he asked in a low-pitched
voice.

"No, thank you," Leoh said.

"Some Kerak wine, perhaps?"

"Well--"

"I don't, uh, think we'd better, sir," Hector said. "Thanks all the
same."

The man shrugged and sat at a chair next to the door.

Odal turned back to Leoh. "Sir, I have my duty. Massan and I duel
tomorrow. There is no possibility of postponing it."

"Very well," Leoh said. "Will you at least allow us to place some
special instrumentation into the booth with you, so that we can
monitor the duel more fully? We can do the same with Massan. I know
the duels are normally private and you would be within your legal
rights to refuse the request. But, morally--"

The smile returned to Odal's face. "You wish to monitor my thoughts.
To record them and see how I perform during the duel. Interesting.
Very interesting--"

The man at the door rose and said, "If you have no desire for
refreshments, gentlemen--"

Odal turned to him. "Thank you for your attention."

Their eyes met and locked for an instant. The man give a barely
perceptible shake of his head, then left.

Odal returned his attention to Leoh, "I am sorry, professor, but I
cannot allow you to monitor my thoughts during the duel."

"But--"

"I regret having to refuse you. But, as you yourself pointed out,
there is no legal requirement for such a course of action. I must
refuse. I hope you understand."

Leoh rose from the couch, and Hector popped up beside him. "I'm afraid
I do understand. And I, too, regret your decision."

Odal escorted them out to their car. They drove away, and the Kerak
major walked slowly back into the Embassy building. He was met in the
hallway by the dark-suited man who had sat in on the conversation.

"I could have let them monitor my thoughts and still crush Massan,"
Odal said. "It would have been a good joke on them."

The man grunted. "I have just spoken to the Chancellor on the tri-di,
and obtained permission to make a slight adjustment in our plans."

"An adjustment, Minister Kor?"

"After your duel tomorrow, your next opponent will be the eminent Dr.
Leoh," Kor said.


X

The mists swirled deep and impenetrable about Fernd Massan. He stared
blindly through the useless viewplate in his helmet, then reached up
slowly and carefully to place the infrared detector before his eyes.

_I never realized an hallucination could seem so real_, Massan
thought.

Since the challenge by Odal, he realized, the actual world had seemed
quite unreal. For a week, he had gone through the motions of life, but
felt as though he were standing aside, a spectator mind watching its
own body from a distance. The gathering of his friends and associates
last night, the night before the duel--that silent, funereal group of
people--it had seemed completely unreal to him.

[Illustration]

But now, in this manufactured dream, he seemed vibrantly alive. Every
sensation was solid, stimulating. He could feel his pulse throbbing
through him. Somewhere out in those mists, he knew, was Odal. And the
thought of coming to grips with the assassin filled him with a strange
satisfaction.

Massan had spent a good many years serving his government on the rich
but inhospitable high-gravity planets of the Acquataine Cluster. This
was the environment he had chosen: crushing gravity; killing
pressures; atmosphere of ammonia and hydrogen, laced with free
radicals of sulphur and other valuable but deadly chemicals; oceans of
liquid methane and ammonia; "solid ground" consisting of quickly
crumbling, eroding ice; howling superpowerful winds that could pick up
a mountain of ice and hurl it halfway around the planet; darkness;
danger; death.

He was encased in a one-man protective outfit that was half armored
suit, half vehicle. There was an internal grav field to keep him
comfortable in 3.7 gees, but still the suit was cumbersome, and a man
could move only very slowly in it, even with the aid of servomotors.

The weapon he had chosen was simplicity itself--a hand-sized capsule
of oxygen. But in a hydrogen/ammonia atmosphere, oxygen could be a
deadly explosive. Massan carried several of these "bombs"; so did
Odal. _But the trick_, Massan thought to himself, _is to know how to
throw them under these conditions; the proper range, the proper
trajectory. Not an easy thing to learn, without years of experience._

The terms of the duel were simple: Massan and Odal were situated on a
rough-topped iceberg that was being swirled along one of the
methane/ammonia ocean's vicious currents. The ice was rapidly
crumbling; the duel would end when the iceberg was completely broken
up.

Massan edged along the ragged terrain. His suit's grippers and rollers
automatically adjusted to the roughness of the topography. He
concentrated his attention on the infrared detector that hung before
his viewplate.

A chunk of ice the size of a man's head sailed through the murky
atmosphere in a steep glide peculiar to heavy gravity and banged into
the shoulder of Massan's suit. The force was enough to rock him
slightly off-balance before the servos readjusted. Massan withdrew his
arm from the sleeve and felt the inside of the shoulder seam. _Dented,
but not penetrated._ A leak would have been disastrous, possibly
fatal. Then he remembered: _Of course--I cannot be killed except by
direct action of my antagonist. That is one of the rules of the game._

Still, he carefully fingered the dented shoulder to make certain it
was not leaking. The dueling machine and its rules seemed so very
remote and unsubstantial, compared to this freezing, howling inferno.

He diligently set about combing the iceberg, determined to find Odal
and kill him before their floating island disintegrated. He thoroughly
explored every projection, every crevice, every slope, working his way
slowly from one end of the 'berg toward the other. Back and forth,
cross and re-cross, with the infrared sensors scanning three hundreds
sixty-degrees around him.

It was time-consuming. Even with the suit's servomotors and propulsion
units, motion across the ice, against the buffeting wind, was a
cumbersome business. But Massan continued to work his way across the
iceberg, fighting down a gnawing, growing fear that Odal was not there
at all.

And then he caught just the barest flicker of a shadow on his
detector. Something, or someone, had darted behind a jutting rise of
the ice, off by the edge of the iceberg.

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly and carefully, Massan made his way toward the base of the rise.
He picked one of the oxy-bombs from his belt and held it in his
right-hand claw.

Massan edged around the base of the ice cliff, and stood on a narrow
ledge between the cliff and the churning sea. He saw no one. He
extended the detector's range to maximum, and worked the scanners up
the sheer face of the cliff toward the top.

There he was! The shadowy outline of a man etched itself on the
detector screen. And at the same time, Massan heard a muffled roar,
then a rumbling, crashing noise, growing quickly louder and more
menacing.

He looked up the face of the ice cliff and saw a small avalanche of
ice tumbling, sliding, growling toward him. _That devil set off a bomb
at the top of the cliff!_

Massan tried to back out of the way, but it was too late. The first
chunk of ice bounced harmlessly off his helmet, but the others knocked
him off-balance so repeatedly that the servos had no chance to
recover. He staggered blindly for a few moments, as more and more ice
cascaded down on him, and then toppled off the ledge into the boiling
sea.

Relax! he ordered himself. _Do not panic! The suit will float you. The
servos will keep you right-side-up. You cannot be killed accidentally;
Odal must perform the coup-de-grace himself._

Then he remembered the emergency rocket units in the back of his suit.
If he could orient himself properly, a touch of a control stud on his
belt would set them off, and he would be boosted back onto the
iceberg. He turned slightly inside the suit and tried to judge the
iceberg's distance through the infrared detector. It was difficult,
especially since he was bobbing madly in the churning currents.

Finally he decided to fire the rocket and make final adjustments of
distance and landing site after he was safely out of the sea.

But he could not move his hand.

He tried, but his entire right arm was locked fast. He could not budge
it an inch. And the same for the left. Something, or someone, was
clamping his arms tight. He could not even pull them out of their
sleeves.

Massan thrashed about, trying to shake off whatever it was. No use.

Then his detector screen was lifted slowly from the viewplate. He
felt something vibrating on his helmet. The oxygen tubes! They were
being disconnected.

He screamed and tried to fight free. No use. With a hiss, the oxygen
tubes pulled free of his helmet. Massan could feel the blood pounding
through his veins as he fought desperately to free himself.

Now he was being pushed down into the sea. He screamed again and tried
to wrench his body away. The frothing sea filled his viewplate. He was
under. He was being held under. And now ... now the viewplate itself
was being loosened.

_No! Don't!_ The scalding cold methane ammonia sea seeped in through
the opening viewplate.

"It's only a dream!" Massan shouted to himself. "Only a dream. A
dream. A--"


XI

Dr. Leoh stared at the dinner table without really seeing it. Coming
to the restaurant had been Hector's idea. Three hours earlier, Massan
had been removed from the dueling machine--dead.

Leoh sat stolidly, hands in lap, his mind racing in many different
directions at once. Hector was off at the phone, getting the latest
information from the meditechs. Odal had expressed his regrets
perfunctorily, and then left for the Kerak Embassy, under a heavy
escort of his own plainclothes guards. The government of the
Acquataine Cluster was quite literally falling apart, with no man
willing to assume responsibility ... and thereby expose himself. One
hour after the duel, Kanus' troops had landed on all the major planets
of the Szarno Confederacy; the annexation was a _fait accompli_.

_And what have I done since I arrived on Acquatainia?_ Leoh demanded
of himself. _Nothing. Absolutely nothing. I have sat back like a
doddering old professor and played academic games with the machine,
while younger, more vigorous men have USED the machine to suit their
purposes._

Used the machine. There was a fragment of an idea in that phrase.
Something nebulous, that must be approached carefully or it will fade
away. Used the machine, ... used it ... Leoh toyed with the phrase for
a few moments then gave it up with a sigh of resignation. _Lord, I'm
too tired even to think._

Leoh focused his attention on his surroundings and scanned the busy
dining room. It was a beautiful place, really; decorated with crystal
and genuine woods and fabric draperies. Not a synthetic in sight. The
waiters and cooks and busboys were humans, not the autocookers and
servers that most restaurants employed. Leoh suddenly felt touched at
Hector's attempt to restore his spirits--even if it was being done at
Star Watch expense.

He saw the young Watchman approaching the table, coming back from the
phone. Hector bumped two waiters and stumbled over a chair before
reaching the relative safety of his own seat.

"What's the verdict?" Leoh asked.

Hector's lean face was bleak. "Couldn't revive him. Cerebral
hemorrhage, the meditechs said--induced by shock."

"Shock?"

"That's what they said. Something must've, uh, overloaded his nervous
system ... I guess."

Leoh shook his head. "I just don't understand any of this. I might as
well admit it. I'm no closer to an answer now than I was when I
arrived here. Perhaps I should have retired years ago, before the
dueling machine was invented."

"Nonsense."

"No, I mean it." Leoh said. "This is the first real intellectual
puzzle I've had to contend with in years. Tinkering with machinery ...
that's easy. You know what you want, all you need is to make the
machinery perform properly. But this ... I'm afraid I'm too old to
handle a real problem like this."

Hector scratched his nose thoughtfully, then answered, "If you can't
handle the problem, sir, then we're going to have a war on our hands
in a matter of weeks. I mean, Kanus won't be satisfied with swallowing
the Szarno group ... the Acquataine Cluster is next ... and he'll have
to fight to get it."

"Then the Star Watch can step in," Leoh said, resignedly.

"Maybe ... but it'll take time to mobilize the Star Watch ... Kanus
can move a lot faster than we can. Sure, we could throw in a task
force ... a token group, that is. But Kanus' gang will chew them up
pretty quick. I ... I'm no politician, sir, but I think I can see what
will happen. Kerak will gobble up the Acquataine Cluster ... a Star
Watch task force will be wiped out in the battle ... and we'll end up
with Kerak at war with the Terran Commonwealth. And it'll be a real
war ... a big one."

Leoh began to answer, then stopped. His eyes were fixed on the far
entrance of the dining room. Suddenly every murmur in the busy room
stopped dead. Waiters stood still between tables. Eating, drinking,
conversation hung suspended.

Hector turned in his chair and saw at the far entrance the slim,
stiff, blue-uniformed figure of Odal.
