
[Illustration]

"My name, as you know," he told the advanced students, "is Wallace
Cavender. What you haven't known so far is that I am a police
detective, rank of lieutenant, currently attached to the police force
of this city and in temporary charge of its bunco squad."

He shifted his gaze towards the front of the room. Ormond's eyes met
his for a moment, then dropped.

"Dr. Ormond," Cavender said, "you're under arrest. The immediate
charge, let's say, is practicing medicine without a license. Don't
worry about whether we can make it stick or not. We'll have three or
four others worked up by the time we get you downtown."

For a moment, there was a shocked, frozen stillness in the lecture
room. Dr. Ormond's hand began to move out quietly towards the checks
lying on the table before him. Reuben Jeffries' big hand got there
first.

"I'll take care of these for now, Dr. Al," Jeffries said with a
friendly smile. "The lieutenant thinks he wants them."

       *       *       *       *       *

Not much more than thirty minutes later, Cavender unlocked the door to
Dr. Ormond's private office, went inside, leaving the door open behind
him, and sat down at Ormond's desk. He rubbed his aching eyes, yawned,
lit a cigarette, looked about in vain for an ashtray, finally emptied
a small dish of paper clips on the desk and placed the dish
conveniently close to him.

There had been an indignant uproar about Dr. Al's arrest for a while,
but it ended abruptly when uniformed policemen appeared in the two
exit doors and the sobering thought struck the students that any
publicity given the matter could make them look personally ridiculous
and do damage to their business and social standing.

Cavender had calmed their fears. It was conceivable, he said, that the
district attorney's office would wish to confer with some of them
privately, in connection with charges to be brought against William
Fitzgerald Grady--which, so far as the police had been able to
establish, was Dr. Ormond's real name. However, their association with
the Institute of Insight would not be made public, and any proceedings
would be carried out with the discretion that could be fully expected
by blameless citizens of their status in the community.

They were fortunate, Cavender went on, in another respect. Probably
none of them had been aware of just how much Grady had milked from the
group chiefly through quiet private contributions and donations during
the two years he was running the Institute. The sum came to better
than two hundred thousand dollars. Grady naturally had wasted none of
this in "research" and he was not a spendthrift in other ways.
Cavender was, therefore, happy to say that around two thirds of this
money was known to be still intact in various bank accounts, and that
it would be restored eventually to the generous but misled donors.

Dr. Al's ex-students were beginning to look both chastened and very
much relieved. Cavender briefly covered a few more points to eliminate
remaining doubts. He touched on Grady's early record as a confidence
man and blackmailer, mentioned the two terms he had spent in prison
and the fact that for the last eighteen years he had confined himself
to operations like the Institute of Insight where risks were less. The
profits, if anything, had been higher because Grady had learned that
it paid off, in the long run, to deal exclusively with wealthy
citizens and he was endowed with the kind of personality needed to
overcome the caution natural to that class. As for the unusual
experiences about which some of them might be now thinking, these,
Cavender concluded, should be considered in the light of the fact that
Grady had made his living at one time as a stage magician and
hypnotist, working effectively both with and without trained
accomplices.

The lecture had gone over very well, as he'd known it would. The
ex-students left for their homes, a subdued and shaken group, grateful
for having been rescued from an evil man's toils. Even Mrs. Folsom,
who had announced at one point that she believed she had a heart
attack coming on, recovered sufficiently to thank Cavender and assure
him that in future she would take her problems only to a reliable
physician.

       *       *       *       *       *

Footsteps were coming down the short hall from the back of the
building. Then Reuben Jeffries' voice said, "Go into the office. The
lieutenant's waiting for you there."

Cavender stubbed out his cigarette as Dexter Jones, Perrie Rochelle
and Mavis Greenfield filed into the office. Jeffries closed the door
behind them from the hall and went off.

"Sit down," Cavender said, lighting a fresh cigarette.

They selected chairs and settled down stiffly, facing him. All three
looked anxious and pale; and Perrie's face was tear-stained.

Cavender said, "I suppose you've been wondering why I had Sergeant
Jeffries tell you three to stay behind."

Perrie began, her eyes and voice rather wild, "Mr. Cavender ...
Lieutenant Cavender...."

"Either will do," Cavender said.

"Mr. Cavender, I swear you're wrong! We didn't have anything to do
with Dr. Al's ... Mr. Grady's cheating those people! At least, I
didn't. I swear it!"

"I didn't say you had anything to do with it, Perrie," Cavender
remarked. "Personally I think none of you had anything to do with it.
Not voluntarily, at any rate."

He could almost feel them go limp with relief. He waited. After a
second or two, Perrie's eyes got the wild look back. "But...."

"Yes?" Cavender asked.

Perrie glanced at Dexter Jones, at Mavis.

"But then what _did_ happen?" she asked bewilderedly, of the other two
as much as of Cavender. "Mr. Cavender, I saw something appear on that
plate! I know it did. It was a sandwich. It looked perfectly natural.
I don't think it could have possibly been something Mr. Grady did with
mirrors. And how could it have had the paper napkin Mavis had just
been thinking about wrapped around it, unless...."

"Unless it actually was a materialization of a mental image you'd
created between you?" Cavender said. "Now settle back and relax,
Perrie. There's a more reasonable explanation for what happened
tonight than that."

He waited a moment, went on. "Grady's one real interest is money and
since none of you have any to speak of, his interest in you was that
you could help him get it. Perrie and Dexter showed some genuine
talent to start with, in the line of guessing what card somebody was
thinking about and the like. It's not too unusual an ability, and in
itself it wasn't too useful to Grady.

"But he worked on your interest in the subject. All the other
students, the paying students, had to lose was a sizable amount of
cash ... with the exception of Mrs. Folsom who's been the next thing
to a flip for years anyway. She was in danger. And you three stood a
good chance of letting Grady wreck your lives. I said he's a competent
hypnotist. He is. Also a completely ruthless one."

He looked at Mavis. "As far as I know, Mavis, you haven't ever
demonstrated that you have any interesting extrasensory talents like
