"O.K., Joey. Come on up, and I'll call a squad car to take you home."

He gave me a bitter grin. "And have 'em coming after me again and
again until they catch me? No, thanks, Inspector. In one minute, I'm
going to walk across and ask 'em what they're following me for."

"You can't do that, Joey!"

He looked hurt. "Inspector, since when it is against the law to ask a
couple of guys how come they're following you? I just thought I oughta
tell ya, that's all. So long."

I knew there was no point in arguing with Joey Partridge. I turned and
said: "Want some action, Your Grace?"

But he was already on his feet, holding that walking stick of his.
"Anything you say."

"Come on, then. We'll take the fire escape; the elevator is too slow.
The fire escape will let us out in the alley, and we won't by outlined
by the light in the foyer."

I already had the bedroom door open. I ran over to the window, opened
it, and started down the steel stairway. The Duke was right behind me.
It was only three floors down.

"That Joey is too smart for his own good," I said, "but he's right.
This is the only way to work it. Otherwise, they'd have him in the
hospital eventually--or maybe dead."

"He looked like a man who could take care of himself," the Duke said.

"That's just it. He can't. Come on."

       *       *       *       *       *

The ladder to the street slid down smoothly and silently, and I
thanked God for modern fire prevention laws. When we reached the
street, I wondered where they could have gone to so quickly. Then the
Duke said: "There! In that darkened area-way next to the little shop!"
And he started running. His legs were longer than mine, and he
reached the area-way a good five yards ahead of me.

Joey had managed to evade them for a short while, but they had
cornered him, and one of them knocked him down just as the Duke came
on the scene. The other had swung at his ribs with a blackjack as he
dropped, and the first aimed a kick at Joey's midriff, but Joey rolled
away from it.

Then the two thugs heard our footsteps and turned to meet us. If we'd
been in uniform, they might have run; as it was, they stood their
ground.

But not for long.

The Duke didn't use that stick as though it were a club, swinging it
like a baseball bat. That would be as silly as using an overhand stab
with a dagger. He used it the way a fencer would use a foil, and the
hard, blunt end of it sank into the first thug's solar plexus with all
the drive of the Duke's right arm and shoulder behind it. The thug
gave a hoarse scream as all the air was driven from his lungs, and he
dropped to the pavement.

The second man came in with his blackjack swinging. His hand stopped
suddenly as his wrist met the deadly stick, but the blackjack kept on
going, bouncing harmlessly off the nearby wall as it flew from
nerveless fingers.

That stick never stopped moving. On the backswing, it thwacked
resoundingly against the thug's ribcage. He grunted in pain and tried
to charge forward to grapple with the Englishman. But His Grace was
grace itself as he leaped backwards and then thrust forward with that
wooden snake-tongue. The thug practically impaled himself on it. He
stopped and twisted and was suddenly sick all over the pavement.
Almost gently, the Duke tapped him across the side of his head, and he
fell into his own mess.

It was all over before I'd even had a chance to mix in. I stood there,
holding an eleven millimeter Magnum revolver in my hand and feeling
vaguely foolish.

I reholstered the thing and walked over to where Joey Partridge was
propping himself up to a sitting position. His right eye was bruised,
and there was a trickle of blood running from the corner of his mouth,
but he was grinning all the way across his battered face. And he
wasn't looking at me; he was looking at the Duke.

"You hurt, Joey?" I asked. I knew he wasn't hurt badly; he'd taken
worse punishment than that in his life.

He looked at me still grinning. "Hurt? You're right I'm hurt,
Inspector! Them goons tried to kill me. Let's see--assault and
battery, assault with a deadly weapon, assault with intent to kill,
assault with intent to maim, attempted murder, and--" He paused. "What
else we got, Inspector?"

"We'll think on plenty," I said. "Can you stand up?"

"Sure I can stand up. I want to shake the hand of your buddy, there.
Geez! I ain't seen anything like that since I used to watch Bat
Masterson on TV, when I was a little kid!"

"Joey, this is Chief Inspector the Duke Acrington, of Scotland Yard.
Inspector, this is Joey Partridge, the greatest amateur boxer this
country has ever produced."

Amazingly enough, Joey extended his hand. "Pleased t'meetcha,
Inspector! Uh--watch the hand. Sorta tender. That was great! Duke, did
you say?" He looked at me. "You mean he's a real English Duke?" He
looked back at Acrington. "I never met a Duke before!" But by that
time he had taken his hand away from the Duke's grasp.

"It's a pleasure to meet you, Joey," the Duke said warmly. "I liked
the way you cleaned up on that Russian during the '72 Olympics."

Joey said to me, "He remembers me! How d'ya like that?"

One of the downed thugs began to groan, and I said, "We'd better get
the paddy wagon around to pick these boys up. You'll prefer charges,
Joey?"

"Damn right I will! I didn't let myself get slugged for nothing!"

It was nearly forty-five minutes later that the Duke and I found
ourselves in my apartment again. The ice in our drinks had melted, so
I dumped them and prepared fresh ones. The Duke took his, drained half
of it in three fast swallows, and said: "Ahhhhhh! I needed that."

We heard a key in the door, and His Grace looked at me.

"That's my son," I said. "Back from his date."

Steve came in looking happy. "You still awake, Dad? A cop ought to get
his sleep. Good morning, Your Grace. Both of you look sleepy."

Stevie didn't. He'd danced with Mary Ellen until four, and he still
looked as though he could walk five miles without tiring. Me, I felt
about as full of snap as a soda cracker in a Turkish bath. The three
of us talked for maybe ten minutes, and then we hit the hay.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three and a half hours of sleep isn't enough for anybody, but it was
all we could afford to take. By eight-thirty, the Duke and I were in
my office, sloshing down black coffee, and, half an hour after that,
we were cruising up Amsterdam Avenue on the second day of our hunt for
Mr. Lawrence Nestor.

Since we were now reasonably sure that our man was in the area, I
ordered the next phase of the search into operation. There were squads
of men making a house-to-house canvass of every hotel, apartment
house, and rooming house in the area--and there are thousands of them.
A flying squad took care of the hotels first; they were the most
likely. Since we knew exactly what day Nestor had arrived, we narrowed
our search down to the records for that day. Nestor might not use his
own name; of course, but the photograph and description ought to help.
And, since Nestor didn't have a job, his irregular schedule and his
drinking habits might make him stand out, though there were plenty of
places where those traits would simply make him one of the boys. It
still looked like a long, hard search.

And then we got our break.

At 9:17 am, Lieutenant Holmquist's voice snapped over my car phone:
"Inspector Royall; Holmquist here. Child missing in Riverside Park.
Officer Ramirez just called in from 111th and Riverside."

"Got it!"

I cut left and gunned the car eastward. I hit a green light at
Broadway, so I didn't need to use the siren. Within two minutes, we
had pulled up beside the curb where an officer was standing with a
woman in tears. The Duke and I got out of the car.

We walked over to her calmly, although neither one of us felt very
calm. There's no point in disturbing an already excited mother--or
aunt or whatever she was.

The officer threw me a salute. I returned it and said to the sobbing
woman, "Now, just be calm, ma'am. Tell us what happened."

It all came out in a torrent. She'd been sitting on one of the
benches, reading a newspaper, and she'd looked around and little
Shirley was gone. Yes, Shirley was her daughter. How old? Seven and a
half. How long ago was this? Fifteen minutes, maybe. She hadn't been
worried at first; she'd walked up and down, calling the girl's name,
but hadn't gotten any answer. Then she saw the policeman, and ...
and--

And she broke down into tears again.

It was the same thing that had happened a few days before. I had
already ordered extra men put on the Riverside and Central Park
details, but a cop can't be everywhere at once.

"I've got the rest of the boys beating the brush between here and the
river," Officer Ramirez said. "She might have gone down one of the
paths on the other side of the wall."

"She wouldn't go too near the river," the woman sobbed. "I just know
she wouldn't." She sounded as though she were trying to convince
herself and failing miserably.

Nobody said anything about Nestor; the poor woman was bad enough off
without adding more horror to the pictures she was conjuring up in her
mind.

"We'll find her," I said soothingly, "don't you worry about that.
You're pretty upset. We'll have the police doctor look you over and
maybe give you a tranquilizer or something to make you feel better."
No point in telling her that the doctor might be needed for a more
serious case. "Keep an eye on her till the doctor comes, Ramirez.
Meanwhile, we'll look around for the little girl."

       *       *       *       *       *

I walked over to the wall and looked down. I could see uniformed
police walking around, covering the ground carefully.

Riverside Park runs along the eastern edge of Manhattan Island,
between Riverside Drive and the Hudson River, from 72nd Street on the
south to 129th Street on the north. In the area where we were, there
is a flat, level, grassy area about a block wide, where there are
walks and benches to sit on. The eastern boundary of this area is
marked by a retaining wall that runs parallel with the river. Beyond
the wall, the ground slopes down sharply to the Hudson River, going
under the elevated East Side Highway which carries express traffic up
and down the island. The retaining wall is cut through at intervals,
and winding steps go down the steep slope. There are bushes and trees
all over down there.

I thought for a minute, then said, "Suppose it was Nestor. How did he
get her away? It's a cinch he didn't just scoop her up in broad
daylight and go trotting off with her under his arm."

"Precisely what I was thinking," the Duke agreed. "There was no scream
or disturbance of that kind. Could he have lured her away, do you
think?"

"Possible, but not likely. Little girls in New York are warned about
that sort of thing from the time they're in diapers. If she were five
years old, it might be more probable, but little girls who are
approaching eight are pretty wise little girls."

"It follows, then, that she went somewhere of her own accord and he
followed her. D'you agree?"

"That sounds most reasonable," I said. "The next question is: Where?"

"Yes. And why didn't she tell her mother where she was going?"

I gave him a sour grin. "Elementary, my dear Duke. Because her mother
