
       *       *       *       *       *

They came for him, eventually, as McLeod had known they would.

But they came long before he had expected. He had given them six
months at the least. They came for him at the end of the third month.

It was Jackson, of course. It would have to be Jackson. He walked into
the cheap little room McLeod had rented, followed by his squad of men.

He tossed a peculiar envelope on the bed next to McLeod.

"Letter came for you, humorist. Open it."

McLeod sat on the edge of the bed and read the letter. The envelope
had already been opened, which surprised him none.

It looked very much like an ordinary business letter--except that
whatever they used for paper was whiter and tougher than the paper he
used.

He was reminded of the time he had seen a reproduction of a Thirteenth
Century manuscript alongside the original. The copy had been set up
in a specially-designed type and printed on fine paper. The original
had been handwritten on vellum.

McLeod had the feeling that if he used a microscope on this letter the
lines and edges would be just as precise and clear as they appeared to
the naked eye, instead of the fuzziness that ordinary print would
show.

The way you tell a synthetic ruby from a natural ruby is to look for
flaws. The synthetic doesn't have any.

This letter was a Galactic imitation of a Terran business letter.

It said:

     Dear Mac,

     I am happy to report that your book, "Interstellar Ark," is
     a smash hit. It looks as though it is on its way to becoming
     a best seller. As you already know by your royalty
     statement, over a billion copies were sold the first year.
     That indicates even better sales over the years to come as
     the reputation of the book spreads. Naturally, our
     advertising campaign will remain behind it all the way.
     Congratulations.

     Speaking of royalty checks, there seems to be some sort of
     irregularity about yours. I am sorry, but according to
     regulations the check must be validated in the presence of
     your Galactic Resident before it can be cashed. Your
     signature across the back of it doesn't mean anything to our
     bankers.

     Just go to your Galactic Resident, and he'll be happy to
     take care of the matter for you. That's what he's there for.
     The next check should come through very shortly.

                                   All the best,

                                            Clem.

[Illustration]

_Better and better_, McLeod thought. He hadn't expected to be able to
do anything until his next royalty check arrived. But now--

He looked up at Jackson. "All right. What's next?"

"Come with us. We're flying to Hawaii. Get your hat and coat."

McLeod obeyed silently. At the moment, there was nothing else he could
do. As a matter of fact, there was nothing he wanted to do more.

It was no trouble at all for Professor McLeod to get an audience with
the Galactic Resident, but when he was escorted in by Jackson and his
squad, the whole group was halted inside the front door.

The Resident, a tall, lean being with a leathery, gray face that
somehow managed to look crocodilian in spite of the fact that his head
was definitely humanoid in shape, peered at them from beneath
pronounced supraorbital ridges. "Is this man under arrest?" he asked
in a gravelly baritone.

"Er ... no," said Jackson. "No. He is merely in protective custody."

"He has not been convicted of any crime?"

"No sir," Jackson said. His voice sounded as though he were unsure of
himself.

"That is well," said the Resident. "A convicted criminal cannot, of
course, use the credits of society until he has become rehabilitated."
He paused. "But why protective custody?"

"There are those," said Jackson, choosing his words with care, "who feel
that Professor McLeod has brought disgrace upon the human race ... er ...
the Terrestrial race. There is reason to believe that his life may be in
danger."

McLeod smiled wryly. What Jackson said was true, but it was carefully
calculated to mislead.

"I see," said the Resident. "It would appear to me that it would be
simpler to inform the people that he has done no such thing; that,
indeed, his work has conferred immense benefits upon your race. But
that is your own affair. At any rate, he is in no danger here."

He didn't need to say anything else. Jackson knew the hint was an
order and that he wouldn't get any farther with his squad.

McLeod spoke up. "Subject to your permission, sir, I would like to
have Mr. Jackson with me."

The Galactic Resident smiled. "Of course, professor. Come in, both of
you." He turned and led the way through the inner door.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nobody bothered to search either of them, not even though they must
know that Jackson was carrying a gun. McLeod was fairly certain that
the gun would be useless to Jackson if he tried to assert his
authority with it. If Clem had been able to render the U.B.I.'s
eavesdropping apparatus inoperable, it was highly probable that the
Galactic Resident would have some means of taking care of weapons.

"There are only a few formalities to go through," the Resident said
pleasantly, indicating chairs with a gesture. The room he had led them
to didn't look much different from that which would be expected in any
tastefully furnished apartment in New York or Honolulu.

McLeod and Jackson sat down in a couple of comfortable easy-chairs
while the Resident went around a large desk and sat down in a swivel
chair behind it. He smiled a little and looked at McLeod. "Hm-m-m. Ah,
yes. Very good." It was as though he had received information of some
kind on an unknown subject through an unknown channel, McLeod thought.
Evidently that was true, for his next words were: "You are not under
the influence of drugs nor hypnotic compulsion, I see. Excellent,
professor. Is it your desire that this check be converted to cash?" He
made a small gesture. "You have only to express it, you see. It would
be difficult to explain it to you, but rest assured that such an
expression of will--while you are sitting in that chair--is impressed
upon the structure of the check itself and is the equivalent of a
signature. Except, of course, that it is unforgeable."

"May I ask a few questions first?" McLeod said.

"Certainly, professor. I am here to answer your questions."
