
"Oh, sort of, I suppose. For a little while. Once you got used to the
whole place without one single machine that could think or do even the
simplest little thing by itself. So, well, almost like being savages. Do
you think it would be safe for Bennie? We can't watch him all the time,
you know."

"People used to manage in the old days. And remember those people, the
Burleys, who were staying up there?"

"That queer, crazy bunch who went there for a vacation when the Camp was
first opened and then just stayed? Honestly, Ben! Surely you're not
thinking of--"

"Oh, nothing like that. Just a vacation. Only--"

Only those queer, peculiar people, the Burleys had seemed so relaxed and
cheerful. Grandma and Ma Burley cleaning, washing, cooking on the
ancient electric stove; little Donnie, being a nuisance, poking at the
keys on his father's crude, manual typewriter, a museum piece; Donnie
and his brothers wasting away childhood digging and piling sand on the
beach, paddling a boat and actually building a play house. It was mad.
People playing robots. And yet, they seemed to have a wonderful time
while they were doing it.

"But how do you keep staying here?" he had asked Buck Burley, "Why don't
they put you out?"

"Who?" asked Buck. "How? Nobody can sell me on leaving. We like it here.
No robot can force us out. Here we are. Here we stay."

       *       *       *       *       *

They pulled into the Guest-ville ramp. Bennie was fussy; the nursery
Nana was strange to him. On impulse, Betty took him in to sleep in their
room, ignoring the disapproving stares of both the Nana and the Roboy
with their things.

They were tired, let down. They went to bed quietly.

In the morning Betty was already up when Ben stumbled out of bed. "Hi,"
she said, nervously cheerful. "The house Nanas all had overload this
morning and I won't stand for any of those utility components with
Bennie. So I'm taking care of him myself."

Bennie chortled and drooled vita-meal at his high-chair, unreprimanded.
Ben mustered a faint smile and turned to go dial a shave, cool shower
and dress at Robather.

That done, he had a bite of breakfast. He felt less than top-sale, but
better. Last night _had_ gone well. The Old Man would give them a
pre-paid vacation clearance to any resort in the world or out. Why
gloom?

He rubbed Bennie's unruly hair, kissed Betty and conveyed over from
Guest-ville to office.

Message-sec, in tone respect-admiration A, told him the Old Man was
waiting for him. Susan, the human receptionist in the outer office,
favored him with a dazzling smile. There was a girl who could sell; and
had a product of her own, too.

The Old Man was at his big, oak desk but, a signal honor, he got up and
came half across the room to grab Ben's hand and shake it. "Got the full
report, son. Checked the tapes already. That's selling, boy! I'm proud
of you. Tell you what, Ben. Instead of waiting for a sales slack, I'm
going to move you and that sweet little wife of yours right into a
spanking new, special Country Gentleman unit I had in mind for myself.
And a nice, fat boost in your credit rating has already gone down to
accounting. Good? Good. Now, Ben, I have a real, artistic sales
challenge that is crying for your talent."

"Sir? Thank you. But, sir, there is the matter of the vacation--"

[Illustration]

"Vacation? Sure, Ben. Take a vacation anytime. But right now it seems to
the Old Man you're on a hot selling streak. I don't want to see you get
off the track, son; your interests are mine. And wait till you get
your teeth into this one. Books, Ben boy. Books! People are spending all
their time sitting in on Tri-deo, not reading. People should read more,
Ben. Gives them that healthy tired feeling. Now we have the product. We
have senior Robo-writers with more circuits than ever before. All
possible information, every conceivable plot. Maybe a saturation guilt
type campaign to start--but it's up to you, Ben. I don't care how you do
it, but move books."

"Books, eh? Well, now." Ben was interested. "Funny thing, sir, but that
ties in with something I was thinking about just last night."

"You have an angle? Good boy!"

"Yes, sir. Well, it is a wild thought maybe, but last summer when I was
on vacation I met a man up at that new camp and--well, I know it sounds
silly, but he was writing a book."

"Nonsense!"

"Just what I thought, sir. But I read some of it and, I don't know, it
had a sort of a feel about it. Something new, sir, it might catch on."

"All right, all right. That's enough. You're a salesman. You've sold
me."

"On the book?" Ben was surprised.

"Quit pulling an old man's leg, Ben. I'm sold on your needing a
vacation. I'll fill out your vacation pass right now." The Old Man,
still a vigorous, vital figure, turned and walked back to his Desk-sec.
"Yes sir," said the secretarial voice, "got it. Vacation clearance for
Tilman, Ben, any resort."
