man--any man around a beautiful girl half-undressed, and getting more
so.

She slipped under the sheets, tossing out the last of her clothing,
and crooning happily. "Gotta kiss me good-night, Willy. Nighty-night!"

He yanked the pull-cord savagely, cutting off the light, and fumbling
in the darkness. After what seemed hours of awkwardness, he slid in
beside her, feeling her arms go around him in complete acceptance. To
hell with _them_! They could chase him some other time!

He pulled her to him, while his blood beat in his neck, and he began
to lose any conscious volition of what he was doing. He drew her
tighter, while a great clot of emotion set fire to his brain. He--

Cold beyond anything he had known bit at him. A tremendous pressure
within him seemed about to force him to explode outwards, and the
shock jerked him into full awareness.

In a split second, he swung his eyes from the great, jagged landscape
on which he stood, up an impossible range of mountains that were all
harsh blacks and cold whites, to a cold black sky in which the stars
were blazing specks without a flicker. He saw the Earth above him,
bigger than the moon had ever been, and with the dim outlines of
continents showing through the soft stuff that must be clouds.

He was on the moon! And naked, without air!

       *       *       *       *       *

Almost at once, something clapped down around him, and the pressure
let up, while heat seemed to leap into the rocks under his feet and
make them comfortable. He gulped down the air that somehow seemed to
stay close to him, instead of evaporating into the vacuum.

The moon! Now they had him!

Fear blazed in him--a stark, unreasoning terror that was like a
physical thing. _Run--but you can't run! They've got you! You can't
escape!_

The light blotted out, and then snapped on, more strongly. He stood in
the kitchen of the cold-water apartment, still naked, with bits of
chalky dust between his toes.

He had no time for reason. His brain seemed to have jumped over a
hurdle and come down in a puddle beyond, foul with the stuff it had
found there. He heard Ellen shriek, and then cry out again.

He lurched into the bedroom, while she let out another gurgling cry as
the light showed him in the doorway. She came out of the bed, leaping
for him, crying his name--cold sober! But he wanted none of her act.
He shook her off.

"You damned alien! You filthy monster, disguised as a girl! When you
get in a spot where I'm sure to find you out, you have a cute trick up
your sleeve--but it won't work. You can send me back there--back to
the rest of your kind, from wherever they came. But you won't fool me
into thinking you're human again. You can't pass one test!"

He wouldn't be fooled into thinking it was a dream, either. He'd been
physically on the moon--the very dust on his feet proved that. They
might drive him insane, but they wouldn't do it that way.

She was crying now, gasping out words that he only half heard. "I'm
human, Will. Oh, I'm human!"

"Then prove it! Come here, and prove it!"

She cried again at that, as he pulled her down with him. But slowly
her crying quieted.

He awoke slowly, with sun-light streaming in the windows, and reached
for her. He owed her more apologies than one, though he wasn't too
sorry about most of it. She had proven herself human. And virginally
so. Her complete surrender still left something warm inside him,
where only the madness and the fear had been before.

Then he jerked upright, as he found her gone. He cursed himself for a
fool, and listened for a stir and bustle from the kitchen, but there
was none.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was getting used to dressing with a feeling of dire pressure
driving him on. He finished rapidly, and yanked the bedroom door open,
just as he heard the outer lock click. She was coming in with a bottle
of cream and a package of sausage as he reached the kitchen, and there
was a smile tucked into the corner of her mouth.

And this time, he knew she wouldn't have betrayed him. Yet the fear
increased in him. He darted past her as she leaned to kiss him,
heading for the door. The room seemed to quiver. The hall was filled
with a faint golden haze!

He had to get out! He jerked backwards, caught her hand, and pulled
her. "Ellen! We've got to get out!"

It was a half-articulate shout, and she resisted, but he began
dragging her after him. Something fumbled at the lock, and a key
slipped into it. The door opened.

Hawkes didn't know what kind of an alien he expected. He knew that men
could never have thrown him to the moon and back, not in another
thousand years. It had to be a monster.

But he should have known that monsters here came in human form--they'd
have to.

The fear rose to a shriek in his brain, and then died down as the
human form entered. It was too normal--too familiar. A medium-sized
man, dressed in a suit as inconspicuous as his own, wearing a silly
little mustache that no outland monster should ever wear.

The creature jumped in, slamming the door behind it. "Stay there! You
can't risk it outside now! We've got to--"

Hawkes hit the figure with his shoulder, in the best football fashion
he could muster. It could try--but it couldn't keep him and Ellen here
to be burned in their heat-ray bath, or treated to whatever alien
torture they had in mind. He felt his shoulder hit. And he knew he'd
missed. It was an arm that he struck against, and the arm brought him
upright, while a second arm drew back and came forward with a savage
right to his jaw.

He went out with a dull plopping sound in his brain. Then, slowly, an
ache came out of the blackness, and the beginning of sound. He was
fighting out of the unconsciousness, fighting against time and the
monster who'd try to steal Ellen.

But Ellen's hands were on his head, and an ice-cold towel was wet
against his forehead. "Will! Will!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He groaned and sat up. The other--alien or human--was gone.

"Where--?" he began.

She was trying to help him to his feet, and he got up groggily, with
his head beginning to clear.

"He just ran out, Will." Ellen was crying, this time almost silently,
with the words coming out between shakes of her shoulders. "Will,
we've got to get out. We've got to. The men are coming for you.
They'll be here any minute. And it's wrong--it won't work! Oh, Will,
hurry!"

"Men? Men are coming?" He'd almost forgotten that it could be men who
were after him.

"I called them, Will. I thought I had to. But it won't work. Will, do
anything you like, but _get_ out! They are fools. They...."

He opened the door and peered out the doorway into the hall, which
seemed quiet. He'd been a fool again. He'd trusted her for some
reason, as if a body and loyalty had to go together. They'd been
smart, picking a virgin for the job. It must have cost them plenty,
unless they'd twisted her mind somehow. Maybe they could do it.

But he knew that whatever they looked like, it couldn't be real men
who'd meet him out there.

"Why?" he asked, and was surprised at the flatness of his voice.

She shook her head. "Because I'm a fool, Will. Because I thought they
could help you--until _he_ came! And because I'm still in love with
you, even if you'd forgotten me."

But the fear inside him was drowning out her words, and the golden
haze was faint in the air again.

"Okay," he said finally. "Okay, don't burn her, too, now that she's
done your dirty work. I'm coming."

The haze disappeared slowly, and he started down the stairs, still
holding her hand.


VI

There were men with guns in the street. He'd heard two shots as he
came down the stairs, and had shoved Ellen behind him. But it was
silent now. People with dazed, frightened faces were still darting
into the houses, leaving the street to the men with the guns.

Hawkes marched forward grimly, perversely stripped of fear, even
though he was sure some of the men out there were monsters and others
were their dupes. He tapped one of the men on the shoulder.

"Okay, here I am. The girl goes free!"

The man spun around as if mounted on a ball bearing and pulled by
strings. The gun fell from his hands. His emotion-taut face loosened
suddenly, seemed to run like melted wax, and congealed again in an
expression of utter idiocy. He gargled frothily, and then
screamed--high and shrill, like a tortured woman.

Suddenly he was a lunging maniac, tearing up the street.

Now the others were running--some toward cars, and some toward the
corners, running flat and desperately on the flat of their feet,
without any spring to their motions.

Hawkes jerked his eyes down toward the big gas-storage tanks where
most of them had been, and the glow that had been in the corner of his
vision was gone. Men seemed to be coming out of a trance. They were
breaking away, forgetting about their guns and fleeing.

Three men alone were left.

Hawkes ducked back into the hall of the apartment, dragging Ellen with
him. The glass of the door was somewhat dirty, but it made a dim
mirror. He could see the slim young man and two others still there.
The two men darted into a waiting car, and the leader turned up the
street, running smoothly toward the apartment house.

Hawkes could make no sense of it--unless it was another of the seeming
tricks designed to drive him out of his mind. He had decided he was
one of the rats in the maze that didn't go crazy--the pressure could
drive him somewhat mad, but it couldn't keep him that way.

He didn't wait to see what had happened, or whether the sirens that
were sounding now were reinforcements for the men with guns or the
police. He didn't bother with the slim young man any more. They'd
apparently used their dupes to frighten out the people, and then had
scared off the dupes--the poor humans who didn't know what it was all
about. Now two of the three were gone, and the third monster was
coming for him.

He'd escaped before. But sooner or later, they'd catch him--once they
were sure he wouldn't be driven insane.

Or was this the beginning of insanity--a delusion of power, a feeling
that he could escape? He could never know, if it was. He had to assume
that he was sane.

       *       *       *       *       *

He crouched back behind the stairs, while the young man in the gray
tweeds dashed up them. Then he headed out into the street. The siren
was near now--and tardily, he realized that the siren might herald the
coming of the real monsters. It was as easy to look like a cop as any
other human!

He jerked open the door of the nearest car, pulled Ellen in, and
kicked the motor to life. He gunned away from the curb, tossed it into
second, and twisted around the corner, straight toward the siren that
was nearest. At the last minute, he jerked to the side of the street,
to let the police car shoot by. "Never run from a tiger--run toward
it. It sometimes works, and it's no worse."

The car was a big one, and the motor purred smoothly. He glanced down
at the dash, and frowned. There was no key in the switch. For a
second, he stared at it, and then grinned. He'd picked a monster's
car, apparently--they'd done a neat job of duplicating, but they
didn't need all the safeguards that humans used, and the switch had
obviously been a dummy.

He looked at the buttons on the dash, wondering which would make it
levitate. But he had no desire to test it, nor to stay in an auto
which could probably be traced so easily.

He braked to a halt outside the subway and led Ellen down.

"We're down to the last hole," he told her as the train pulled out of
