working with radiation sterilized food. He isolated a whole family of
bacteria from the food that not only survived, but lived normally in
the presence of heavy doses of radiation. The microbes all had one
thing in common--a peculiar reddish pigment that protected them.

"Luckily, the military of his nation--the United States, I think they
called it, thought that this pigment might be a useful protective
shield for supplies. Extracts were made and tested before the Blowup
came, and there was quite a bit of it on hand.

"But the real hero of protection was a general named Ardleigh. He
ordered every man and woman in his command inoculated with the extract
right after the Blowup--when communications were disorganized and
commanders of isolated units had unchallengeable power. He was later
found to be insane, but his crazy idea was right. The inoculations
killed ten per cent of his command and turned those who lived a bright
red, but none of the living showed a sign of radiation sickness after
they received the extract.

"By this time your ancestors--the Runners--had gone, and those who
stayed were too busy trying to remain alive to worry much about them.
The "Double A" vaccine--named for Anderson and Ardleigh--was given to
every person and animal that could be reached, but it was only a small
fraction of the population that survived. The others died. But enough
men and animals remained to get a toe-hold on their ruined world, and
they slowly rebuilt.

"We had forgotten about you Runners--but it seems you didn't forget
us. You sealed us off--forced us to remain on Earth. And by the time
we were again ready for space, you were able to prevent us. But we
will not be denied forever. It took an entire planet working together
to get me on Mars to learn your secrets. And when I got here, I found
that I wouldn't have time to learn. We had forgotten one simple
thing--my skin color. It isn't normal here and there is no way of
changing it since the extract combines permanently with body cells. So
I had to do the next best thing--obtain a sample of your technology
and bring it to Earth. I planned at first to get enough money to buy a
ship. But those creeps in Marsport don't lose like gentlemen. I damn
near had to beat my way out of that joint. And when a couple of them
came after me, I figured it was all up. I could kill them of course,
but that wouldn't solve anything. Since I can't fly one of your ships
yet, I couldn't steal one--and I wouldn't have time to buy one because
I was pretty sure the Patrol would be after me as soon as the rumors
of a red man got around. You see--_they_ know what we look like and
its their job to keep us cooped up--"

"Hmm," I said.

"Why do they do it?" Redman asked. "We're just as human as you are."
He shrugged. "At any rate," he finished, "I was at the end of my rope
when you came along. But you have a ship--you can fly--and you'll take
me back to Earth."

"I will?" I asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

He nodded. "I can make it worth your while," he said.

"How?" I asked.

"Money. You'll do anything for money." Redman looked at me soberly.
"You're a repulsive little weasel, Cyril, and I would distrust you
thoroughly except that I know you as well as you know me. That's the
virtue of being human. We understand each other without words. You are
a cheap, chiseling, doublecrossing, money-grabbing heel. You'd kick
your mother's teeth out for a price. And for what I'm going to offer
you, you'll jump at the chance to help us--but I don't have to tell
you that. You know already."

"What do you mean--know already?" I said. "Can I read your mind?"

"Do you mean to tell me--" Redman began. And then a peculiar smile
crossed his face, a light of dawning comprehension. "Why no," he said,
"why should you be telepathic--why should you? And to think I kept
hiding--" he broke off and looked at me with a superior look a man
gives his dog. Affectionate but pitying. "No wonder there were no
psych fields protecting that dice game--and I thought--" he started to
laugh.

       *       *       *       *       *

And I knew then why the Patrol had sealed Earth off. Mutated by
radiation, speeded up in their evolution by the effects of the Blowup,
Earthmen were as far ahead of us mentally as we were ahead of them
technologically. To let these telepaths, these telekinetics--and God
knows what else--loose on the Galaxy would be like turning a bunch of
hungry kelats loose in a herd of fat sloats. My head buzzed like it
was filled with a hive of bees. For the first time in years I stopped
thinking of the main chance. So help me, I was feeling _noble_!

"Just take it easy, Cyril," Redman said. "Don't get any bright ideas."

Bright ideas! Ha! I should be getting bright ideas with a character
who could read me like a book. What I needed was something else.

"If you cooperate," Redman said, "you'll be fixed for life."

"You're not kidding," I said. "I'd be fixed all right. The Patrol'd
hound me all the way to Andromeda if I helped you. And don't think
they wouldn't find out. While we can't read minds, we can tell when a
man's lying."

"Have you ever heard of Fort Knox?" Redman asked.

Fort Knox--Fort Knox--_fourknocks_! the thought staggered me.

"The gold I had came from there," Redman said.

Fourknocks! Sure, I'd heard of it. What citizen hadn't? They still
tell stories of that fabulous hoard of gold. Tons of it buried on
Earth waiting for someone with guts enough to go in and find it.

"All your ship will hold," Redman said. "After we analyze its
principles."

Five tons of gold! Six million munits! So much money! It staggered me.
I'd never dreamed of that much money. Redman was right. I _would_ kick
my mother's teeth out if the price was right. And the price--I jumped
convulsively. My arm brushed the control board, kicking off the
negative inertia and slapping the axial correction jets.

The ship spun like a top! Centrifugal force crushed me against the
control room floor. Redman, an expression of pained surprise on his
