like grabbing at a straw.

Then Alice had another thought, "By now there isn't anymore Space Ship
_Prometheus_," she said. "It has melted to a globe of incandescent
metal, kept hot by a slow atomic breakdown in its substance. But it's
sticking to the same tight orbit around Titan."

They hadn't seen it happen because by then the _Prometheus_ had passed
beyond the horizon. But the globe would circle Titan and return.

Alice kept trying to be cheerful. Bert felt a flicker of that same
mood when he said, "Sure, Allie." But then his mind dropped the
subject of the _Prometheus_. For there was too much terrible
uncertainty and human confusion to be dealt with.

Bert led Alice to the small, seldom-used airlock near the stern of the
camp ship. He had a logical hunch that Lawler would be waiting just
inside to tell them what the situation was on board.

The hunch proved true. The lock's inner door slid aside stiffly and
there was Lawler, a finger to his lips.

Quickly the Kraskows removed their radioactivity-tainted spacesuits.
Bert spoke softly.

"Well, Lawler, how do the gases that are spreading over Titan test out
chemically?"

"As was expected, Bert. Plenty of nitrogen. Some helium. Plenty of
hydrogen. A lot more oxygen. So that, as all of the hydrogen
burns--combines with it to form water-vapor--there still will be lots
of oxygen left over, floating free. Of course these gases are still so
radioactive that half a lungful would kill. Only time will tell if Doc
figured things straight. By the way, where is he?"

"Dead," Bert answered. "Murdered."

Lawler's lip curled, but he showed no surprise. "Uhunh," he grunted.
"We can't prove the sabotage of this ship's rockets, either. When we
tried to take off they just fizzled out their insides."

Then Lawler's eyes gleamed. "But," he said, "I foresaw funny business,
so I doctored the jets of Lauren's private spaceboat as a precaution.
He's still here with a couple of his stooges. He just about had
hysterics when the space cops couldn't find room for him. He's been
yelling accusations and promises of court action ever since while
trying to repair his spaceboat."

"How are the colonists taking what happened?" Bert cut in.

Lawler shrugged. "Not bad. Not good. What you'd expect. Lots of those
people are new to space. That was hard to take in itself. Add some
messy deaths, and now this. And with Lauren yelling--well--plenty of
them don't like us."

"Did anybody get hurt, yet?" Bert demanded.

"Not yet. Want to see the bunch?"

"Sure," Bert answered.

       *       *       *       *       *

He thrust Alice behind him as they approached the main lounge of the
ship where most of the colonists were assembled.

Trenton Lauren's voice burst on his ears. "There he is! Kraskow, I'll
see that you spend your life in prison! A Patrol ship is coming out
from Mars right now to get you! You may even hang! Out there in camp
are ten million dollars' worth of equipment--property of my
firm--which has been destroyed by your malicious action. And you've
made a whole world useless for colonization for centuries to come!
It's poisoned with radioactivity! Maybe we'll all die! Do you hear me,
Kraskow? Die!"

Bert Kraskow moved quietly forward, past faces that glowered at him.
Then he struck. There was a vicious thud. Lauren went down, drooling
blood, his eyes glazed. Bert did not lose a motion as he stepped
forward, and laid Lauren's two henchmen low with equal dispatch.

Minutes passed before the trio was awake again. Before Lauren could
spout more venom, Bert stopped him with a growl. "Get out of my
sight," he said. "Say another word and you'll get more of what you
just got."

They went, Lawler following to watch out for possible mischief.

"None of us are hurt, yet," Bert told those near him, "though some
things have gone wrong. Let's sit tight and see how matters turn out."

As he looked around him Bert felt that most of the colonists didn't
really care to listen to him. Maybe you couldn't blame them. They'd
all heard and seen too much. And, in a sense, Bert felt little
different than they did. There was fear in him, and tension. He had
released a colossus. Calculations and minor tests might call it a
genie of benevolence. But this remained still unproven.

Outside, the wind howled, making the ship quiver. The glow from the
Big Pill continued to paint the now murky sky. Bert and his wife
waited grimly and silently in the lounge with the others. Hours passed
without much change. Once, briefly, it was red-lit night. Then this
changed for a while to daylight that was blurred, but far stronger
than that to which a Saturnine moon was accustomed.

A little later Lawler came back to the lounge. "Trenton and his bums
got their spaceboat patched up," he announced. "I watched 'em do it.
They went out protected by spacesuits, of course. They did a botch
job, but I guess it'll hold. Now they're taking off."

Through the leaded glass of the window-ports, the colonists watched
the craft vanish into the steam-filled wind.

A minute later disaster struck the colonists.

The explosion was not heavy against the roar of the storm, but a
jagged hole, a yard across, was ripped in the ship's hull. Into the
hole rushed the hot, radioactive wind. Automatic safety doors failed
to close properly. Maybe they had been sabotaged, too, by Lauren.

Many of the colonists were wearing spacesuits. They were the lucky
ones, only having to slam their face-windows shut to be protected
sufficiently from radiation. The others had to scramble to armor
themselves. Bert and Alice Kraskow, and Lawler, had been outside. The
outer surfaces of their suits had been contaminated, so they had had
to remove them inside the ship to avoid tainting their surroundings.
And in the press of events they hadn't thought to put on other
spacesuits.

In the lounge and elsewhere, fastened against the walls, were such
armor for emergency use. Bert tried to help his wife get into one. But
she ordered sharply: "I can do this! Take care of yourself, Bert."

He didn't do that. Nor did Lawler. They ran down a passage toward the
