the distributor cap lying beneath it. He picked it up. She flung
herself at him screaming. He felt the hammer beat of her heart; her
fingers dug into his back like cat claws. Now it didn't matter. He had
the secret; he could go whenever he wanted to. Nonetheless he pushed
her away--tenderly, and with regret. To surrender like this was no
better than a capitulation to the compound. It was instinctively
important to make her understand that. He knew that much, but his
emotions were churned too close to fever pitch for him to reason out
what else that implied.

He clipped her neatly on the jaw and put her unconscious body on the
ground by the fire. He left the map with her so she could find her way
out in the morning; he knew it was really a very short hike to a
highway, where she would be picked up by a passing car or truck.

       *       *       *       *       *

He drove out the way he had come in--at least he tried to remember.
Four times he took a wrong turn and had to backtrack. It was,
therefore, dawn before he reached the outskirts of Hollywood. In any
other city he would not have been conspicuous--simply a man on his way
to work; only women slept late. However, Hollywood was off-limits to
every male. The city was not only the seat of the Directorate, but the
manufacturing center for the cosmetics industry. And since that gave
women her charm, it was a business no man worked at.

George had to have a disguise. He stopped on a residential street,
where the people were still likely to be in their beds. He read names
on mail boxes until he found a house where an unmarried woman lived.
He had no way of knowing if she had a husband on approval with her,
but the box was marked "Miss." With any luck he might have got what he
wanted without disturbing her, but the woman was a light sleeper and
she caught him as he was putting on the dress. He was sorry he had to
slug her, but she gave him no resistance. A spark of hope, a spark of
long-forgotten youth glowed in her eyes; before she slid into
unconsciousness.

Wearing the stolen dress, which fit him like a tent, and an enormous
hat to hide his face, George parked his sedan near the Directorate
and entered the building when it opened at eight. In room after room
automatons demonstrated how to dress correctly; robot faces displayed
the uses of cosmetics. There were displays of kitchen gadgets,
appliances, and other heavy machinery for the home; recorded lectures
on stock management and market control. Here women came from every
part of the country for advice, help and guidance. Here the Top
Directors met to plan business policy, to govern the nation, and to
supervise the production of the compound. For only the Top
Directors--less than a dozen women--actually knew the formula. Like
their stockholdings, the secret was hereditary, passed from mother to
daughter.

George searched every floor of the building, but found nothing except
exhibit rooms. Time passed, and still he did not find what he had come
for. More and more women crowded in to see the exhibits. Several times
he found new-comers examining him oddly; he found he had to avoid the
crowds.

Eventually he went down steps into the basement, though a door marked
"Keep Out." The door was neither locked nor guarded, but there was a
remote chance it might lead to the production center for the compound.
In the basement George found a mechanical operation underway; at first
he took it for another cosmetic exhibit. Conveyor belts delivered
barrels of flavoring syrup, alcohol and a widely advertised liquid
vitamin compound. Machines sliced open the containers, dumping the
contents into huge vats, from which pipes emptied the mixture into
passing rows of bottles.

The bottles: suddenly George recognized them and the truth dawned on
him, sickeningly. Here was the manufacturing center for the
compound--but it might just as well have been a barn in Connecticut or
a store window in Manhattan. No man was enslaved by the compound, for
the compound did not exist. He was imprisoned by his own sense of
guilt, his own fear of being different. George remembered his own fear
and guilt: he knew how much a man could be driven to make himself
conform to what he thought other men were like.

His revenge was as foolish as the sham he wanted to destroy. He should
have reasoned that out long ago; he should have realized it was
impossible to have immunity to an addictive drug. But, no, George
believed what he saw on the television programs. He was victimized as
much as any man had ever been.

He turned blindly toward the stairway, and from the shadows in the
hall the Morals Squad closed in around him. With a final gesture of
defiance, he ripped off the stolen dress and the absurd hat, and stood
waiting for the blast from their guns. An old woman, wearing the
shoulder insignia of a Top Director, pushed through the squad and
faced him, a revolver in her hand. She was neither angry nor
disturbed. Her voice, when she spoke, was filled with pity. Pity! That
was the final indignity.

"Now you know the truth," she said. "A few men always have to try it;
and we usually let them see this room and find out for themselves
before--before we close the case."

Tensely he demanded, "Just how much longer do you think--"

"We can get away with this? As long as men are human beings. It's
easier to make yourself believe a lie if you think everyone else
believes it, than to believe a truth you've found out on your own. All
of us want more than anything else to be like other people. Women have
created a world for you with television programs; you grow up
observing nothing else; you make yourself fit into the pattern. Only a
few independent-minded characters have the courage to accept their own
immunity; most of them end up here, trying to do something noble for
the rest of mankind. But you have one satisfaction, for what it's
worth: you've been true to yourself."

_True to yourself._ George found a strange comfort in the words, and
his fear was gone. He squared his shoulders and faced the mouth of her
gun. _True to yourself_: that was something worth dying for.

