
"You're not dreaming, Chan. I'm here with you now. Steady. Take it easy.
Lord, this air--it's pretty foul, but it smells good to me, and it'll
save our units. How ever do they get it down here?" He asked the
question in hope of steadying Beddoes; giving his mind something
definite to occupy it.

A soft ripple sounded just then; looking round, Ken saw that his two
guards had slipped back beneath the water, leaving them alone.

Chan Beddoes' helmet was off, but the rest of his body was still clad in
a sea-suit. He half squatted on the rocks, his face raised and peering
at the first torpooner fearfully, as if afraid he would disappear as
suddenly as he had come. The beam of light came from a hand-flash held
in his hand. Scattered around were pieces of whitish meat--fish--and the
air was sickening with its smell. Ten feet above was the chamber's domed
ceiling, from which water kept dripping to the slimy rocks below.

"Air?" repeated Beddoes, stupidly. His mind was obviously affected.
"They fetch it from the surface with seal-hide bags, and release it.
They change it often. All over the caverns. They have to breathe, too. I
think they sleep in rooms like this." His voice rose with hysteria.
"Ken, they're seals and yet they're human! Human, down here! They have
arms and legs and they breathe air, like whales--and they've kept me
here for weeks, years--I don't know! They're devils! It's been so dark
and cold and--and--" He began to cough painfully.

"I know," Ken told him sympathetically. "Steady, man. How did you get
here? How did they catch you?"

      *      *      *      *      *

Beddoes' eyes wandered. He sucked his lips.

"I can't remember," he said. "No. Yes! We left the _Narwhal_, both of
us, chasing those killers. They broke up and we went after different
ones, and I lost sight of you.

"I chased mine for a long time, and when I fired I only wounded him. He
went like hell, and I after him. After half an hour I was ready to give
up; I couldn't get close enough. God! Ready to return! To the submarine!
To life!"

His voice broke, and he paused until he was able to go on.

"Then I saw another shape ahead of the whale. A queer looking thing--one
of these human seals, though I didn't know it then. It seemed to be
fleeing from the killer, just as the killer was from me. There was
something big and dark ahead--a shadow, I thought, and kept my eyes on
the whale. And the next second my torpoon crashed and I was knocked
cold.

"It's a deliberate scheme," he went on at a tangent. "The seal things
get a killer chasing them and lead it towards the traps they've got in
the sides of these hillocks. They dart in and the whale follows; then
bars drop over the entrance and they've got the killer trapped. They eat
them."

"But how does the blubber-man get out?" Ken asked.

Beddoes scowled. "Oh, they're clever enough! A passage runs off the
trap, big enough for the seal thing, but not for a killer.... Well, my
torp had gone into the trap and was stuck in one of the walls. When I
came to I reversed my engines full, but I couldn't get free. The impact
had ruined my radio.

"Through the after peep-holes I could make out the killer in the trap
with me, lashing around like mad. The bars over the entrance were
wide-spaced enough to let the torp squeeze through--but I couldn't get
loose.

"As I lay there, wondering what to do, I saw some more of those
blubber-men in the corridor raising the bars. They had long spears and
knives--and in ten minutes that killer was dead and the place black with
its blood.

"Well, I thought I saw my chance. I got into my sea-suit, thinking I
maybe could dig the torp free and escape before the damned fish caught
me. I climbed out the port and was hacking at the mud bank with my
crowbar when a rope slipped over my head and they had me."

Ken nodded. "They got me in the same way," he said.

"And gave you the once-over in the big room," Chan declared. "You'll get
plenty more of that."

For most of the man's narrative his tone and manner had been sane
enough, but now again he broke out wildly.

"And I've been here for days! Weeks! And nothing but fish to eat, and
whale meat, and pieces of ice brought for me to drink, and the darkness
and the fish smell! God, it's driven me crazy! I can't stand it any
longer, Ken, and I won't. I've got to get out right away or kill myself.
I've got to!"

Ken gripped his shoulders and shook. "Steady!" he said sharply. "Get
control over yourself!"

"Steady!" Beddoes gasped. "You don't know how long I've kept control!
Waiting and hoping, for a chance. One little chance to escape!"

"Why haven't you tried before? Don't they leave you alone here?"

Chanley Beddoes laughed harshly. "Just because you can't see them, you
think that? Hell, no! Put on your helmet. Look down--down under the
water--and you'll see a guard at the entrance. There's always one
there--with a spear. And every now and then he comes up, to see what I'm
doing. But no matter; now that you're here we can make a break. You've
still got your crowbar; they took mine away. I've only had my flash to
work with."

In spite of his awful experience and intolerable predicament, Ken was
getting drowsy. He had been through much; he had been short on sleep
when he had started out. Nevertheless, he forced himself to consider
their situation. Since the blubber-men had kept Chan Beddoes a prisoner,
they would no doubt keep him one likewise. It did not mean immediate
death from suffocation, for there was air of a kind here; and food was
brought. But--imprisonment!

All around him was damp darkness; the rocks they lay on were jagged and
slime coated all over and there were little pools of water here and
there. Gloom; awful water beneath; slimy rocks to lie on; raw whale meat
to eat; stench of rotting fish. Imprisonment! Weeks of this! Suddenly he
felt deep admiration for Beddoes in having clung to sanity so long.

"Yes," he said slowly, "we've got to get out. But with that guard on
duty.... What's your plan?"

The other coughed long, then began:

"It all depends on whether they've moved my torpoon from the trap where
it stuck. You didn't see it anywhere? Well, it's got to be still in the
trap, and we've got to get to it. It'll carry both of us. The whale that
led me into the trap is dead, and we can finish prying the torp loose
with your crowbar."

Ken nodded. "But the guard?"

Chanley Beddoes said harshly: "I'm going to kill it!"

Ken looked at him. His pale, drawn face was contorted; his hands
clenched and unclenched. He repeated:

"Yes, kill it! I've a score to settle with these devils, anyway. I'll
take him unawares. One blow'll do it, if it's placed right. Then, down
the corridor and to the trap. I think I remember the way."

Ken thought it out, and shook his head.

"What's the matter?" Beddoes asked.

"We'd better not," he said "Not yet. And never, if we can help it."

"Why not?" Beddoes cried in great surprise.

"Don't you see? They haven't really harmed us. They're friendly. Yes,
they've kept you prisoner and they'll keep me, too--but probably they
don't think that's any terrible hardship for us. And they don't realize
how much we want to get free."

"What will we do then?" Beddoes broke in impatiently.

"When I see the leader again I've got to get it over that we want to be
released. It's a better risk than killing this guard, anyway. They're
disposed to be friendly; but if you killed one there'd be the devil to
pay." Ken paused, and his eyes closed. He said wearily:

"But, I'm dog tired; no sleep for twenty hours. Let me sleep an hour or
two; my head'll be much clearer and we'll talk it over."

Chanley Beddoes said nothing. Ken yawned and stretched his body as
comfortably as he could on the slime-coated rocks. Dazed from the rush
of amazing events his eyelids closed at once, and soon his breathing
settled into a regular beat.
