
Matson returned to his offices, filled with cold frustration. Even the
President believed he could do nothing, and these shortsighted
politicians who could see nothing more than the immediate gains--there
was a special hell reserved for them. There were too many fools in
politics. However, he would do what he could. His sense of duty was
stronger than his resentment. He would stay on and try to cushion some
of the damage which the Aztlans would inevitably cause, no matter how
innocent their motives. And perhaps the President was right--perhaps
the alien science would bring more good than harm.

       *       *       *       *       *

For the next two years Matson watched the spread of Aztlan ideas
throughout the world. He saw Aztlan devices bring health, food and
shelter to millions in underprivileged countries, and improve the lot
of those in more favored nations. He watched tyrannies and
authoritarian governments fall under the passive resistance of their
peoples. He saw militarism crumble to impotence as the Aztlan
influence spread through every facet of society, first as a trickle,
then as a steady stream, and finally as a rushing torrent. He saw
Mankind on the brink of a Golden Age--and he was unsatisfied.

Reason said that the star men were exactly what they claimed to be.
Their every action proved it. Their consistency was perfect, their
motives unimpeachable, and the results of their efforts were
astounding. Life on Earth was becoming pleasant for millions who never
knew the meaning of the word. Living standards improved, and
everywhere men were conscious of a feeling of warmth and brotherhood.
There was no question that the aliens were doing exactly what they
promised.

But reason also told him that the aliens were subtly and methodically
destroying everything that man had created, turning him from an
individual into a satisfied puppet operated by Aztlan strings. For man
is essentially lazy--always searching for the easier way. Why should
he struggle to find an answer when the Aztlans had discovered it
millennia ago and were perfectly willing to share their knowledge? Why
should he use inept human devices when those of the aliens performed
similar operations with infinitely more ease and efficiency? Why
should he work when all he had to do was ask? There was plan behind
their acts.

But at that point reason dissolved into pure speculation. Why were
they doing this? Was it merely mistaken kindliness or was there a
deeper more subtle motive? Matson didn't know, and in that lack of
knowledge lay the hell in which he struggled.


For two years he stayed on with the OSR, watching humanity rush down
an unmarked road to an uncertain future. Then he ran away. He could
take no more of this blind dependence upon alien wisdom. And with the
change in administration that had occurred in the fall elections he no
longer had the sense of personal loyalty to the President which had
kept him working at a job he despised. He wanted no part of this brave
new world the aliens were creating. He wanted to be alone. Like a
hermit of ancient times who abandoned society to seek his soul, Matson
fled to the desert country of the South-west--as far as possible from
the Aztlans and their works.

The grimly beautiful land toughened his muscles, blackened his skin,
and brought him a measure of peace. Humanity retreated to remoteness
except for Seth Winters, a leathery old-timer he had met on his first
trip into the desert. The acquaintance had ripened to friendship. Seth
furnished a knowledge of the desert country which Matson lacked, and
Matson's money provided the occasional grubstake they needed. For
weeks at a time they never saw another human--and Matson was
satisfied. The world could go its own way. He would go his.

Running away was the smartest thing he could have done. Others more
brave perhaps, or perhaps less rational--had tried to fight, to form
an underground movement to oppose these altruists from space; but they
were a tiny minority so divided in motives and purpose that they could
not act as a unit. They were never more than a nuisance, and without
popular support they never had a chance. After the failure of a
complicated plot to assassinate the aliens, they were quickly rounded
up and confined. And the aliens continued their work.


Matson shrugged. It was funny how little things could mark mileposts
in a man's life. If he had known of the underground he probably would
have joined it and suffered the same penalty for failure. If he hadn't
fled, if he hadn't met Seth Winters, if he hadn't taken that last trip
into the desert, if any one of a hundred little things had happened
differently he would not be here. That last trip into the desert--he
remembered it as though it were yesterday....


The yellow flare of a greasewood fire cast flickering spears of light
into the encircling darkness. Above, in the purplish black vault of
the moonless sky the stars shone down with icy splendor. The air was
quiet, the evening breeze had died, and the stillness of the desert
night pressed softly upon the earth. Far away, muted by distance, came
the ululating wail of a coyote.

Seth Winters laid another stick of quick-burning greasewood on the
fire and squinted across the smoke at Matson who was lying on his
back, arms crossed behind his head, eyeing the night sky with the
fascination of a dreamer.

"It's certainly peaceful out here," Matson murmured as he rose to his
feet, stretched, and sat down again looking into the tiny fire.

"'Tain't nothin' unusual, Dan'l. Not out here it ain't. It's been
plumb peaceful on this here desert nigh onto a million years. An'
why's it peaceful? Mainly 'cuz there ain't too many humans messin'
around in it."

"Possibly you're right, Seth."

"Shore I'm right. It jest ain't nacheral fer a bunch of Homo saps to
get together without an argyment startin' somewhere. 'Tain't the
nature of the critter to be peaceable. An' y'know, thet's the part of
this here sweetness an' light between nations that bothers me. Last
time I was in Prescott, I set down an' read six months of
newspapers--an' everything's jest too damn good to be true. Seems like
everybody's gettin' to love everybody else." He shook his head. "The
hull world's as sticky-sweet as molasses candy. It jest ain't
nacheral!"

"The star men are keeping their word. They said that they would bring
us peace. Isn't that what they're doing?"

"Shucks Dan'l--that don't give 'em no call to make the world a blasted
honey-pot with everybody bubblin' over with brotherly love. There
ain't no real excitement left. Even the Commies ain't raisin' hell
like they useta. People are gettin' more like a bunch of damn woolies
every day."

"I'll admit that Mankind had herd instincts," Matson replied lazily,
"but I've never thought of them as particularly sheeplike. More like a
wolf pack, I'd say."

"Wal, there's nothin' wolflike about 'em right now. Look, Dan'l, yuh
know what a wolf pack's like. They're smart, tough, and mean--an' the
old boss wolf is the smartest, toughest, and meanest critter in the
hull pack. The others respect him 'cuz he's proved his ability to
lead. But take a sheep flock now--the bellwether is jest a nice gentle
old castrate thet'll do jest whut the sheepherder wants. He's got no
originality. He's jest a noise thet the rest foller."

"Could be."

"It shore is! Jes f'r instance, an' speakin' of bellwethers, have yuh
ever heard of a character called Throckmorton Bixbee?"

"Can't say I have. He sounds like a nance."

"Whutever a nance is--he's it! But yuh're talkin' about our next
