
As Jasperson looked around at the watchful faces of the Engineer, the
Pilot, and the Navigator, some of the belligerence left his voice.

"Certainly not, Josiah! And anyway, it's not your knowledge I'm
quarreling with. If you run the ship according to the facts, you'll do
all right. It's when you let your judgment be influenced by your
imagination that I object. But by all means, do as you think best. When
the Star Line loses confidence in its Captains, they replace them. I'll
look in again, if I may, later in the day."

When the door had closed behind him, Pilot Thayer shook his head
wonderingly. "You'd think he ruled the universe!"

"He's a man of very limited imagination," said the Captain. "But never
forget, he wields a great deal of power. Now, are your orders clear?
Smith, you'll continue your charting."

"I'm doing my best, Captain, but what am I charting? Sometimes I wonder
if maybe your friend Jasperson isn't right. If the Ripples are
imaginary, maybe I'm getting gray hairs trying to make a map of
something that isn't there!"

"Chart it anyway! We can't take chances. Wyman, I'm not a bit satisfied
with the way Pile Ten is behaving. It should have cooled to normal
before now. Watch it. If we have to dump it, we want to act before it
gets too hot. Anything else?"

"One other thing, sir," said Engineer Wyman, pointing to the diagram of
the ship which hung on the wall. "Pile Ten is located just below
Lifeboat C, and the radiation index of Boat C is getting a little high."

"That's bad. Well, keep shoving in the dampers, and keep me posted."

After they had gone, he sat for a while at his desk, studying the data
on the papers before him. He paced the room for a few minutes, then
paused to pick up the little red volume of _Ley's Space Ships_. He had
no need to open it. It fell open of itself at the well-read page, and
his eyes rested for one rich moment on the words: _Captain: Josiah
Evans_.

What name, he wondered, feeling almost physically sick with
uncertainty, what name would be printed in the next edition?

       *       *       *       *       *

The orchestra played melodiously at lunch time. The chef had produced
delicacies even more delectable than usual, and at each table the
waiters poured sparkling white wine into long-stemmed glasses, while
murmuring softly, "Compliments of the Captain!"

"Is this a special occasion?" asked Tanya.

"Not that I know of, miss."

"Every meal feels like a special occasion," said Alan, "because I get to
talk to you."

"Sh-h! Here come the Halls."

Tom and Dorothy flitted in to the table, hand in hand, still absorbed in
the wonder of being together, scarcely aware of the world about them,
then left, without finishing their dessert. Alan and Tanya looked after
them with affectionate amusement, but Professor Larrabee seemed
withdrawn and a little sad, as though they evoked memories of a time now
lost to him forever.

"They make me feel so _old_!" said Tanya.

"And lonely?"

"Perhaps, a little. They seem so sure, somehow, that all the rest of
their lives will be just as happy as this, always."

"And why not?" said Professor Larrabee.

The orchestra swayed into a final soft chord, and immediately a voice
spoke from a loudspeaker in the ceiling.

"Ladies and gentlemen!" Conversation stopped, the room became quiet.

"Ladies and gentlemen. The customary lifeboat drill will be held this
afternoon at 1600 hours. The attendance of all passengers is requested."

The voice stopped, the orchestra resumed its playing, and the passengers
sipped their coffee.

"I wonder why he said 'customary'?" said Tanya. "We've been out about
three weeks, and this will be the first drill we've had. Do you suppose
something is wrong?"

"I'm afraid your sense of the dramatic gets the better of you," said
Alan. "What could be wrong with the _Star Lord_?"

"Maybe her name," murmured Professor Larrabee, and his eyes looked
haunted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Solitary at his table, Burl Jasperson sipped at a glass of ice water as
he pondered. For the first time in his life he was not quite sure what
course to follow. He wanted that Blue Ribbon for the Star Line, and
yet--he did not know what to do. While he listened to the announcement
of the lifeboat drill, his lip twisted in contempt. Just like Josiah
Evans, he thought, to be over-cautious and run the risk of starting a
panic.

Still thinking, he left the dining room and went to the main lounge to
study the illuminated map of the ship. The three-dimensional panorama
showed the slim and elegant body of the _Star Lord_, tapered like a
silver spindle. Six small ships, three on each side of the long axis,
each capable of carrying 250 people, were fastened into her hulk.
Seemingly a part of the ship itself, their outer walls forming a part of
the ship's wall, they were designed to be detached at the touch of a
button, and launched into space as free craft.

When the warning bells rang, he joined the crowd of passengers who were
assigned to Boat F, peered at the boat through the transparent panel,
and listened attentively to the instructions. It was Steward Davis, he
noted approvingly, who was in charge.

"Passengers will file in through the usual port and walk to the farthest
unoccupied seat, and buckle themselves into place. They have nothing
further to do. Crewmen will take care of the mechanics of detaching and
launching the boat. You will note that there are no separate cabins,
only rows of seats as in the primitive airplanes, but you will find this
no real discomfort, since the boat would undoubtedly be picked up after
a very short interval by some alerted space liner."

Jasperson raised his voice above the crowd's hum.

"What about provisioning? Are the boats stocked on Y-port?"

"No, Mr. Jasperson, except for food concentrates, and one air tank which
is placed there for the greater comfort of the crewmen who must go in to
clean or to make minor adjustments. The boats are not fully provisioned
until the need arises. After all, we don't want to invite trouble, do
we?"

People laughed appreciatively.

"No," he went on, "if there should be an emergency, we have specially
trained crewmen whose job it is to stock reserves of air and water. They
would go to work as automatically and efficiently as machines. Any other
questions?"

Jasperson lingered after the indifferent crowd, to inspect the boat more
closely, then slouched away.

       *       *       *       *       *

All that afternoon he prowled the ship, trying to make up his mind. He
stopped now and then to question a business acquaintance, ask a
journalist his opinion, and he quizzed Larrabee again, more sharply than
before, about the hypothetical Ripples. He kept moving, and as he walked
he calculated, bringing to bear all the power of a mind which he
believed to be logical, and which his financial success had proved to
be keen and intelligent. All his life he had trusted his judgment, and
it had rarely failed him--barring accidents like that unfair poker game.
At last, as the hours went on, his decision crystallized. He had made up
his mind.

At dinner he drank champagne in addition to his usual ice water, and
only half heard the scraps of conversation in the dining room. There was
to be a special masquerade dance, he gathered. People around him were
excitedly planning the improvisation of costumes. He would not get
himself up in any silly costume, he decided, but if his plans went well,
he might look in later in the evening, on the chance to being allowed to
glide over the waxed floor with the lovely Tanya.

After finishing his last drop of coffee he went directly to the cabin of
Captain Evans, who had just begun to eat his simple dinner.

The Chairman of the board of directors pulled up a chair and sat down,
without waiting to be asked.

"Look here, Josiah, I want to talk to you. I've been thinking. I'm
afraid I was too brusque this morning. That's a bad habit of mine, and I
want to apologize. But after all, we should not be quarreling, for your
interests and mine are the same, as you surely realize."

Captain Evans pushed away his tray, lit a cigar, and puffed stolidly. "I
realize that I must consider the safety of my passengers, if that's what
you mean."

"That's included, of course." Jasperson made his voice warm and
persuasive, the voice that had swayed boards of directors, the voice
that reassured hesitant bankers.

"Passenger safety is always paramount, of course, and I respect your
attitude there. But in this particular case, isn't it possible that you
are being too cautious?"

"But Burl! Can the Captain of a ship _ever_ be too cautious? Think of
his responsibility!"

"His responsibility is very great, and I would never advise you, nor
permit you, to shirk yours. But sometimes caution may cease to be a
virtue. Think about this caution of yours for a minute. Surely you
believe that I would never urge you to do anything against the interests
of the ship, or against your own conscience? Now you have an excellent
mind--logical, objective, clear. That was one reason we chose you for
this place. Try to consider, for a moment, the bare possibility that
your decision to reduce speed may not have been justified."

       *       *       *       *       *

Evans was silent, and finally Burl asked, "How far did we get today?"

"240 Light years."

"And if you decide to continue at that speed for five or six days, that
means we'll be approximately three days behind schedule in touching
Almazin III?"

"About that."

"And that means we won't break the record. Now consider the reason for
this very unhappy situation. Think about it with an open mind. You have
one Pile heating--but has that never happened to a ship before, even in
normal space? You and I both know it happens, and that ships have been
lost because of a defective Pile. Logically, why shouldn't this be just
another such case? You say it is caused by the Ripples, but as man to
man, what objective evidence can you bring forward to prove their
existence? I'm not trying to browbeat you, you understand, but just to
ask you to look at the matter carefully. You said yourself, this
morning, that you hadn't expected to be meeting the Ripples at this
point--you had thought they occurred in a rather different area of
hyperspace. Couldn't that mean that they don't really exist, anywhere?"

Captain Evans wiped his glistening forehead with his handkerchief.

"Yes," he said. "I was surprised. I'll admit I didn't expect them here.
But there's so much we don't know about hyperspace!"

"No, there's so much we _do_ know! Are you a child, to fancy there are
goblins outside just because it's dark? There is a perfectly rational,
alternative explanation for the things that worry you. Why can't you
accept them?"

Evans got up and began to pace the floor. "I guess I'm following a
hunch."

"But would you make us lose the Blue Ribbon for a mere hunch? Don't you
trust your own objective judgment?"

Sweating heavily, the Captain tried to stub out his cigar, but his hands
were moist and his fingers trembled.

"I don't know!" he shouted. Then he went on, his voice low and tired.
"You may be right. Burl. You may be right. We may not have hit the
Ripples. The Ripples may not even exist, although some very competent
spacemen and some very brilliant physicists are convinced they do. But
how can I judge? How can I be sure?"

Jasperson leaned forward, intent as a cat on a bird.

"None of the other Piles have started to heat? There's nothing else to
make you suspicious?"

"Nothing except the space record tape, and that makes no sense."

"Exactly. Then why don't you look at this situation as a hardheaded
spaceman should, and order full speed ahead?"

"Burl, there are fifteen hundred lives dependent on me. How can I take
such a chance?"

"It wouldn't be a chance. And if by the one unlucky chance in ten
million there should be trouble, you have ample lifeboat space for
everyone. Isn't it worth the gamble?"

"I don't like gambling lives against a piece of blue silk ribbon."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jasperson sighed. "Come, Josiah, be reasonable. I wouldn't think of
giving you an order, or trying to interfere with your decision in any
way, but surely I may be allowed to help you to reach the correct
decision? How will you feel when the _Star Lord_ limps into port four or
five days late, and you have to explain to the Board that she was
delayed because you were trying to dodge some non-existent Ripples. You
are afraid! Change your frightened point of view, and that will make you
change your orders and get us on the way once more, full speed!"

Muttering to himself, wiping his brow, Captain Evans walked around the
little room, while Jasperson sat back and watched him with cold, intent
eyes. Evans glanced once at the little red book, half covered with
papers, and pain contorted his face.

Suddenly he stepped to his desk and called Engineer Wyman.

"What about that space tape, Wyman? Has Smith been able to detect any
pattern in the impulses?"

"No, sir. No pattern of any sort we can recognize, anyway."

"And what report on Pile Ten?"

"Pile Ten is doing nicely, sir. Lost half a degree in the last hour. By
tomorrow she ought to be back to normal limits."

Clicking the phone, Evans resumed his pacing in the heavy silence. At
last he faced Jasperson and spread out his palms, his face gray as
parchment.

"All right, Burl. You're probably right. I won't argue any longer."

"Good man! The Star Line will know how to appreciate your decision." He
hesitated, and asked, "You'll agree, now, I didn't push you into this?
It's your own free decision?"

Calmly, Evans answered. "It is my own responsibility."

He buzzed Operations.

"Wyman? Captain Evans speaking. Full speed ahead!"

       *       *       *       *       *

On the dance floor late that night, a crooner in blue Venusian mask and
wig hummed the melody while the orchestra wailed and zinged behind him.
The lights had been dimmed to a purple midnight, and shadowy couples
flitted about the room, swaying, humming, laughing. Horned devils danced
with angels, pirates and Roman senators guided in their arms lovely
Cleopatras and sinuous mermaids. Hunched over the little tables,
clinking glasses, grotesque silhouettes of Martians, Venusians, and
