know who cut these rooms into the rock. Some race that lived a long,
long time ago--perhaps the legendary Murians, perhaps some other
race--had this island as an outpost. I think, also, they used it as a
scientific laboratory; a dangerous laboratory that they put far away
from their homeland. A place where their wise men--their
philosophers--could seek out the mysteries of nature."

"Um," Parker said. There was cold in him. He tried to force it away,
discovered it would not go.

"There is something else that is very strange about this island," the
priest continued. "Time is different here."

"How is time different?"

"In this way," Rozeno answered. "I came to the New World with Cortez."

"I see," Parker said.

"You take it very calmly."

"I do not doubt my own eyes nor do I doubt you."

The old priest glowed. "Good. Good. Tell me, my son, are there many men
like you in the world of today? I have a dream, a secret private dream,
that the scientists from your world might come here and study the
strange things on this island."

"They would come here in droves if they knew about it. And so would
everybody else. You would be over-run by hordes of the curious."

"Yes, we know that. That isn't quite what I meant. It was my hope that
perhaps we could make this island what it was in the olden days--secret
place where the wise men could come to study." The priest's face glowed
again. "There is so much here to be learned and here, also, is the time
in which to learn. Here great discoveries might be made. Here could
possibly be discovered not only the secrets of nature but the secrets of
the minds and the hearts of men. From this place, as the centuries
passed, there might be fed out, little by little, knowledge that would
change the world; knowledge that would change the hearts and the minds
of men; knowledge that would eliminate poverty, stop wars, knowledge
that would help the human race become what it must one day be."

The glow on Rozeno's face was bright. The dream he dreamed was suddenly,
in Parker's mind, a living, breathing vital hope, the hope of all
honest men everywhere, that tomorrow might be better!

"Would you, my son, help me achieve that dream? Will you go back through
the veil and explain to some of your greatest scientists what we have
here?"

"I would like nothing better," the big pilot answered. In a way, this
was his dream too, though up until now it had always been a secret,
hidden, impossible-to-accomplish thing. His hand went out to Rozeno.
Deep inside of him, the glow grew to greater heights. Only one other
thing was needed to make this glow a really perfect feeling, Effra, who
had found this island and had tried to tell him about it. But Effra was
gone.

They moved on to a big room where some of the scientific equipment of
the vanished race still functioned. Set in a sunken pool ten feet in
diameter in the center of the room was a circle of what looked like
mercury. Leading up from it were heavy bus bars of some unknown metal.
The bus bars came together and marched across the room to a control
panel, one of the strangest control panels Parker had ever seen. The
meters were graduated in colors. In front of the chair where the
operator sat was a keyboard like that of a vast pipe organ. How much
training would an operator need to operate this keyboard? Directly in
front of the operator's seat was a square panel that looked like a
television screen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Set in niches where the right hand of the operator could reach them
easily were statuettes of birds, animals, reptiles. Made of some metal,
they were perfect representations. Parker saw a condor, a bald-headed
eagle, a humming-bird, a cougar, a jaguar, an alligator. His eyes went
back to the pool in the center of the room.

"It is generating power," Rozeno said. "As it turns, it creates some
force, some energy. I do not understand this energy. No one now alive
understands it. Understanding is one of the things I hope your
scientists may achieve--come away, Ulnar." The last was spoken as the
Indian strayed near the operator's seat.

Ulnar grunted impatiently. There was something about that seat that
lured him. But he came away. They went into another room, leaving behind
them the pool of mercury that turned slowly, like a miniature earth on
some axis of its own. Parker took one look at the contents of this room,
and gasped.

The crown jewels of England were no greater than these! Here were crowns
of pounded yellow gold; here were gargoyle masks made of the same yellow
metal; masks that sparkled with gems. Here, lying on the rock shelves,
were ingots of what looked to be solid gold, each one heavy enough to be
a full load for a grown man.

Ulnar was examining a gargoyle mask. He touched a gold bar, his old
withered fingers seeming to savor the feel of it.

Rozeno smiled gently. "Ulnar treasures these things, they were put in
his charge a very long time ago. He has been faithful to his trust."

"But--" Parker whispered.

"This is a part of Montezuma's treasure, a part that Cortez did not get.
There is as much of it here as 400 men could carry away. Ulnar was one
of Montezuma's most trusted sub-chiefs. He brought the treasure here, to
keep it for his Chieftan."

Ulnar's wrinkled face broke into a grin. "Me take good care," he said
simply. "Me clean, me polish, me save for my Chief."

"Tell me one thing?" he said.

"Gladly, my son."

"Does Johnny Retch know this is here?"

"I suppose so. All who live on our island know about it."

Muscles knotted at the corners of Parker's jaws. He pressed his arms
down against his jacket so that he could feel the guns in the pockets.
The guns felt good.

"Father Rozeno!" a voice called from a corridor outside the treasure
room. "Father Rozeno? Where are you?"

"Here I am, my dear," the priest answered.

At the sound of that voice, Bill Parker forgot all about the guns in his
pockets, Johnny Retch, Montezuma's treasure, and everything else that
was on this island. He stood stock still, paralyzed.

A girl came through the opening into the treasure room. She wore a dark
dress; sandals; her hands were gloved; she had apparently been working
at some task. She smiled at Ulnar, glanced at Parker, nodded, looked at
Rozeno, smiled, then glanced back quickly at Parker as if he reminded
her of someone she had once known, then turned again to the priest.
"Father, I have been cleaning all morning--"

So far she got. Bill Parker broke his paralysis and swept her into his
arms.

"Effra--Effra--Effra--" His voice was a choked whisper, almost inaudible
in the treasure chamber of Montezuma. As she had come through the door,
his mind had given him a flashing picture of the plane wrecked on the
shore. Effra, fleeing from Dr. Yammer, had taken one last desperate
chance on finding her island; one last lonely flight out over the
Pacific. No wonder he had been unable to find her. She had found her
island. She had come here. She _was_ here, in his arms.

There was wonder and awe and bewilderment in the big pilot. Here was a
miracle almost past the understanding. "I've found you--Effra--"

For an instant, she lay in his arms like a frightened child who dared
not move. "Please--" she whispered. He did not hear her. His lips sought
hers, found them. She did not draw away, but neither did she respond.
"Effra--" Parker looked up. Rozeno and Ulnar were regarding him with
mild astonishment. In his arms, Effra stirred again. "Please--let me
go."

This time the big pilot heard her. Setting her back on her feet was one
of the hastiest movements he had ever made in his life. "Effra--I did
not mean to startle you--but darling--"

She stood irresolute, staring at him. "Please--You have no right--"

He saw that her eyes, fixed on him, regarded him as an utter and
complete stranger.

"Don't you know me, Effra?" There was almost a sob in his voice.

"I never saw you before in my life."

       *       *       *       *       *

Parker turned, moved to a window slot, stood looking out. The trees
below him, the island, the sea, the PT boat lying at anchor off shore,
he saw all of these things, but yet he did not see them.

He had found Effra and she did not remember him, did not know him.
Inside of him was agony, such pain as he had never known. He felt a
touch on his arm. Rozeno stood there, his face troubled. "Do you know
our Effra, my son?"

"Yes."

"Do you, perhaps, love her?"

"Yes."

"And you are very unhappy because she does not respond?"

"Yes."

The old priest's face grew a little more sad. "When she landed here, the
last time, she made an awkward landing. She was thrown forward and she
hit her head. She does not remember anything that happened before that."
Rozeno's finger bit deeply into Parker's arm. "Come now, and I will
introduce you to her, as a stranger."

Bill Parker found himself being introduced to the woman he loved. "I'm
sorry about my actions of a minute ago," he said. "I thought you were
someone else."

The smile she gave him was forgiving but it was also cool and distant.
"That's all right, Mr. Parker. I understand." Her voice went into
silence as another sound came into the room. The sound of rapid gunfire.

Parker had thought he had in his pocket the only two modern weapons on
the island, but somewhere in the growth of trees far below the window
slot, someone was firing a sub-machine gun.

Parker raced to the slot. Below him the island lay quiet. He turned.
Mercedes, her face working, was staring at him.

"Beel--Beel--I have not told you everything! That Johnny Retch, he hire
you to fly him here in 'copter, to find thees island. He also have men
in boat coming. Your job, which you did not know, was to find island,
then lead men in boat to it. Johnny means to take all thees." The
gesture of her hand included all the treasure of Montezuma. "He have men
in boat to help him take it. He does not mean to let anything stop him.
Not anything!"

Parker saw what he had not seen before, that Johnny Retch was a man who
would always have two strings for his bow. Too late, he saw that the
boat lying at anchor was not an accident.

"I should have killed that dog when I had the chance!" he snarled.

Shambling feet sounded in the corridor outside. Pedro burst into the
room. He grunted words at Ulnar.

"Pedro says men come up the ledge," Rozeno said. "They must be from the
boat. We must go to meet them. It will be a great pleasure to them.
Come, Ulnar. Come, Bill." He moved toward the door.

Parker was across the room in quick strides, catching Rozeno's arm.
"You can't do it, Father Rozeno. Those men who are coming up the ledge
mean to kill."

"My son!" Hurt showed on the priest's face. "Surely you do not know what
you are talking about!"

"But I do know!" Parker almost shouted the words. Quickly, desperately
he tried to explain the situation to Rozeno. To his growing horror, he
saw no comprehension in the old priest's eyes. Slowly Parker began to
realize that this old man was so gentle and so kind himself that he
could not comprehend even the thought of anyone else being--evil!

"You may stay here, if you wish, my son, but Ulnar and I will go speak
to these people who are coming up the ledge. Come, Ulnar."
