"Hillary, you keep forgetting about taxes."

"Then let them take it back by default. I'm through with it."

"Dammit," I said, "I looked into this deal. People don't take back
sanitariums like over-ripe bananas, especially when they got you on the
hook for more than it's worth. They'll hold you to the contract. And you
can't get your equity out if you don't protect it by keeping up your
payments. You have a wonderful start, and if you just fill the contracts
I have on file now you can pay it off and have plenty left to retire on.
But right now you aren't so solvent, boy."

Well, he finally came out of his trance long enough to agree to fulfill
the commitments I'd made for him, and I thought that once he got started
there would be no holding him.

Just to make sure I did something on my own. I let his identity and
whereabouts leak out.

It was a sneaky thing to do to him, but I figured that once he got a
real taste of the fame that was waiting him he would never let go of it.

The papers splashed it: "Mystery Genius Is Lad of 19!"

They swamped him. They swarmed over him and plastered him with honorary
literary degrees, domestic and foreign. They Oscared him and Nobelled
him. They wined, dined and adored him into a godhead of the arts.

The acting, publishing, TV, radio and movie greats paid homage to his
genius by the most hysterical bidding for his talents their check-books
could support. I kept waiting for the Secretary of the Treasury to
present him with the key to Fort Knox.

       *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile, I waited patiently--having no choice, since I started the
publicity nightmare myself--for the earthquake to settle down. As his
agent I was holding off all new commitments until he fulfilled the ones
on hand.

Six months passed, and Hillary was still wallowing in glory, too busy
sopping up plaudits to bother turning a hand.

Finally I sent a goon squad after him and dragged him to my office. He
arrived in a four-hundred dollar suit and a fifty-dollar tie. Each cuff
was decorated by a diamond link and a Hollywood starlet. I shooed out
the excess and came to the point.

"Recess is over," I said gently. "Now we settle down for a few months of
patty-cake with your secretaries. They're here in my offices now where I
can keep an eye on things. Okay?"

He grinned his old happy smile, and some of the dewey glaze seemed to
peel from his eyes. "You're right, George," he said much to my surprise.
"I can't coast forever--and believe me, I never visualized what this
would be like. It's wonderful. The world is at my feet, George. At my
feet!"

I had pegged him right. But after all, who could resist the accolade he
had received? For all his monomania on this business of mnemonics, he
was a red-blooded boy with active glands and youthful corpuscles.

To my further delight he threw off his imported suit-coat and said, "I'm
ready right now. Where do we start?"

       *       *       *       *       *

I broached the file and studied my priority list. "First off, Oscar
wants a play. That'll take a week or two, I suppose. Then I have an
assignment for a serial--"

I outlined about three months work for him, or what would have been
three months work last summer.

I moved him into my own penthouse apartment upstairs and herded him to
work the next morning. My squad of strong-arms guarded all entrances,
and Hec Blankenship finally convinced the public that we meant business
in getting a little privacy for our tame genius so he could hatch some
more immortal works.

I had lunch sent in to him in the next office and didn't see him until
five that first evening. I went in without knocking. One secretary was
filing her nails, and the other three were putting on their coats. The
covers were still on the typewriters and Hillary was asleep or in a coma
over in the corner.

I kicked his feet off his desk, and he rocked forward. "Come on
upstairs, I'll buy you a steak," I said.

He smiled weakly, "I need one. It didn't go so good." In the elevator he
added, "In fact, it didn't go at all."

"Take it easy," I assured him. "You're a little rusty, that's all. What
about the total recall? Is it still working?"

He nodded, but he didn't say any more about it.

Next day I stuck my head in before I went to lunch, and I congratulated
myself on not pushing him too hard the first day. Hillary was off in his
corner again, but his mouth was moving and all four girls were doing the
things that secretaries do when they are about two hours behind in their
work.

Eight days later the thing dropped on my desk. I wet a finger with keen
anticipation, but the spit wasn't dry before I was plowing into
Hillary's office trailing loose sheets.

"Are you kidding?" I yelled.

He was out of his chair over by the window staring out. All he did was
hunch up his shoulders. The girls were standing around trying to act
invisible.

