
It was the ancient internal battle between what Honath wanted to do, and
what he knew he ought to do. He had never heard of Kant and the
Categorical Imperative, but he knew well enough which side of his nature
would win in the long run. But it had been a cruel joke of heredity
which had fastened a sense of duty onto a lazy nature. It made even
small decisions egregiously painful.

But for the moment at least, the decision was out of his hands. Alaskon
was too sick to be moved. In addition, the strong beams of sunlight
which had been glaring in across the floor of the cave were dimming by
the instant, and there was a distant, premonitory growl of thunder.

"Then we'll stay here," he said. "It's going to rain again, and hard
this time. Once it's falling in earnest, I can go out and pick us some
fruit--it'll screen me even if anything is prowling around in it. And I
won't have to go as far as the stream for water, as long as the rain
keeps up."

The rain, as it turned out, kept up all day, in a growing downpour which
completely curtained the mouth of the cave by early afternoon. The
chattering of the nearby stream grew quickly to a roar.

By evening, Alaskon's fever seemed to have dropped almost to normal, and
his strength nearly returned as well. The wound, thanks more to the
encrusted matte of mold than to any complications within the flesh
itself, was still ugly-looking, but it was now painful only when the
navigator moved carelessly, and Mathild was convinced that it was
mending. Alaskon himself, having been deprived of activity all day, was
unusually talkative.

"Has it occurred to either of you," he said in the gathering gloom,
"that since that stream is water, it can't possibly be coming from the
Great Range? All the peaks over there are just cones of ashes and lava.
We've seen young volcanoes in the process of building themselves, so
we're sure of that. What's more, they're usually hot. I don't see how
there could possibly be any source of water in the Range--not even
run-off from the rains."

"It can't just come up out of the ground," Honath said. "It must be fed
by rain. By the way it sounds now, it could even be the first part of a
flood."

"As you say, it's probably rain-water," Alaskon said cheerfully. "But
not off the Great Range, that's out of the question. Most likely it
collects on the cliffs."

"I hope you're wrong," Honath said. "The cliffs may be a little easier
to climb from this side, but there's still the cliff tribe to think
about."

"Maybe, maybe. But the cliffs are big. The tribes on this side may never
have heard of the war with our tree-top folk. No, Honath, I think that's
our only course."

"If it is," Honath said grimly, "we're going to wish more than ever that
we had some stout, sharp needles among us."

       *       *       *       *       *

Alaskon's judgment was quickly borne out. The three left the cave at
dawn the next morning, Alaskon moving somewhat stiffly but not otherwise
noticeably incommoded, and resumed following the stream bed upwards--a
stream now swollen by the rains to a roaring rapids. After winding its
way upwards for about a mile in the general direction of the Great
Range, the stream turned on itself and climbed rapidly back toward the
basalt cliffs, falling toward the three over successively steeper
shelves of jutting rock.

Then it turned again, at right angles, and the three found themselves at
the exit of a dark gorge, little more than thirty feet high, but both
narrow and long. Here the stream was almost perfectly smooth, and the
thin strip of land on each side of it was covered with low shrubs. They
paused and looked dubiously into the canyon. It was singularly gloomy.

"There's plenty of cover, at least," Honath said in a low voice. "But
almost anything could live in a place like that."

"Nothing very big could hide in it," Alaskon pointed out. "It should be
safe. Anyhow it's the only way to go."

"All right. Let's go ahead, then. But keep your head down, and be ready
to jump!"

Honath lost the other two by sight as soon as they crept into the dark
shrubbery, but he could hear their cautious movements nearby. Nothing
else in the gorge seemed to move at all, not even the water, which
flowed without a ripple over an invisible bed. There was not even any
wind, for which Honath was grateful, although he had begun to develop an
immunity to the motionless ground beneath them.

After a few moments, Honath heard a low whistle. Creeping sidewise
toward the source of the sound, he nearly bumped into Alaskon, who was
crouched beneath a thickly-spreading magnolia. An instant later,
Mathilda's face peered out of the dim greenery.

"Look," Alaskon whispered. "What do you make of this?"

'This' was a hollow in the sandy soil, about four feet across and rimmed
with a low parapet of earth--evidently the same earth that had been
scooped out of its center. Occupying most of it were three grey,
ellipsoidal objects, smooth and featureless.

"Eggs," Mathild said wonderingly.

"Obviously. But look at the size of them! Whatever laid them must be
gigantic. I think we're trespassing in something's private valley."

Mathild drew in her breath. Honath thought fast, as much to prevent
panic in himself as in the girl. A sharp-edged stone lying nearby
provided the answer. He seized it and struck.

The outer surface of the egg was leathery rather than brittle; it tore
raggedly. Deliberately, Honath bent and put his mouth to the oozing
surface.

It was excellent. The flavor was decidedly stronger than that of birds'
eggs, but he was far too hungry to be squeamish. After a moment's
amazement, Alaskon and Mathild attacked the other two ovoids with a
will. It was the first really satisfying meal they had had in Hell. When
they finally moved away from the devastated nest, Honath felt better
than he had since the day he was arrested.

As they moved on down the gorge, they began again to hear the roar of
water, though the stream looked as placid as ever. Here, too, they saw
the first sign of active life in the valley: a flight of giant
dragonflies skimming over the water. The insects took fright as soon as
Honath showed himself, but quickly came back, their nearly non-existent
brains already convinced that there had always been men in the valley.

The roar got louder very rapidly. When the three rounded the long,
gentle turn which had cut off their view from the exit, the source of
the roar came into view. It was a sheet of falling water as tall as the
depth of the gorge itself, which came arcing out from between two
pillars of basalt and fell to a roiling, frothing pool.

"This is as far as we go!" Alaskon said, shouting to make himself heard
over the tumult. "We'll never be able to get up these walls!"

Stunned, Honath looked from side to side. What Alaskon had said was all
too obviously true. The gorge evidently had begun life as a layer of
soft, partly soluble stone in the cliffs, tilted upright by some
volcanic upheaval, and then worn completely away by the rushing stream.
Both cliff faces were of the harder rock, and were sheer and as smooth
as if they had been polished by hand. Here and there a network of tough
vines had begun to climb them, but nowhere did such a network even come
close to reaching the top.

Honath turned and looked once more at the great arc of water and spray.
If there were only some way to prevent their being forced to retrace
their steps--

Abruptly, over the riot of the falls, there was a piercing, hissing
shriek. Echoes picked it up and sounded it again and again, all the way
up the battlements of the cliffs. Honath sprang straight up in the air
and came down trembling, facing away from the pool.

At first he could see nothing. Then, down at the open end of the turn,
there was a huge flurry of motion.

A second later, a two-legged, blue-green reptile half as tall as the
gorge itself came around the turn in a single bound and lunged violently
into the far wall of the valley. It stopped as if momentarily stunned,
and the great grinning head turned toward them a face of sinister and
furious idiocy.

[Illustration] [2]

The shriek set the air to boiling again. Balancing itself with its heavy
tail, the beast lowered its head and looked redly toward the falls.

The owner of the robbed nest had come home. They had met a demon of Hell
at last.

       *       *       *       *       *

Honath's mind at that instant went as white and blank as the under-bark
of a poplar. He acted without thinking, without even knowing what he
did. When thought began to creep back into his head again, the three of
them were standing shivering in semidarkness, watching the blurred
shadow of the demon lurching back and forth upon the screen of shining
water.

It had been nothing but luck, not foreplanning, to find that there was a
considerable space between the back of the falls proper and the blind
