"Then," Joy replied sweetly, "I'd suggest you get out and slug that cop
quick and grab Uncle Peter before he makes a confession."

I had come to the cross-roads, so to speak. The necessity of a weighty
decision lay upon my shoulders. Was blood thicker than water? Was I
justified in breaking the law--assaulting an officer in order to keep my
uncle from becoming a blot on the family name?

I decided, grimly, that one owed all to one's relatives and I was
halfway out of the car. Then I paused. Uncle Peter did not seem to be
making a confession at all. He chatted easily with the officer and
indicated my Cadillac with a movement of his thumb. Something passed
from his hand to the hand of the policeman and the latter looked toward
us and scowled.

"Uncle Peter is pulling a fast one," Joy said. "The cop's coming after
_us_!"

I was uncertain as how to proceed now. I watched the scowling policeman
approach our car while Uncle Peter got back in with the blonde Cora and
drove away.

"Are you going to hang one on him, sweetheart?" Joy asked.

"What--what do you recommend?"

"I've got a hunch that if you don't, we go to the pokey and Uncle Peter
will be left free to blow up everybody in town."

I don't believe the officer meant to arrest us but at the moment my mind
wasn't too clear and I accepted Joy's point of view.

I doubled my fist as the officer approached. He wasted no time in
getting acquainted. He said, "How come you guys are tailing those guys?
You figuring a stickup or something?"

It was now or never. I hunched my right shoulder and aimed a stiff
knockout jolt at the officer's jaw. It wasn't too good a target because
he had a lantern jaw and it was bobbing up and down as he munched on a
wad of chewing gum.

But I did not connect. As my fist completed but half its lethal orbit,
the officer blew up in my face! He went _pop_, just as so many others
had gone _pop_ at our wedding reception; his entire anatomy flying in
all directions, to turn into a cloud of sooty smoke and mix with the
elements.

I was frozen with consternation. But not Joy. Instantly she dragged me
back into the car. "Don't you get it? Uncle Peter gave him that stick of
gum!"

"You're damn right!" Bag Ears stated. "The old monkey's gone clear off
his trolley. Maybe he plans to clean out the whole town!"

Joy, her eyes slitted, was weaving in and out of traffic so as not to
lose track of the blue roadster. "It's as plain as your nose! He's hand
in glove with McCaffery and that blonde is bird-dogging him around town
and pointing out McCaffery's enemies. Uncle Peter is knocking them off
like clay pigeons."

I was amazed at this revelation, but was also thunderstruck by the
underworld jargon flowing so easily from Joy's luscious lips. "Angel," I
gasped. "Where did you learn to talk like that? Those underworld terms!"

"I read all the true detective magazines I can get my hands on," she
said. "They're good fun, but that's beside the point. We've got to nail
Uncle Peter and nail him quick, or Aunt Gretchen will ring up a nice big
zero in the social world."

"How about nailing him without me?" Bag Ears suggested. "It's nine
o'clock and Red Nose Tessie never likes to miss none of the show."

"I'm sure, Bag Ears," Joy said, "that Tessie would sympathize with our
efforts to keep Uncle Peter out of the electric chair."

"I doubt it," he replied dubiously. "Tessie's brother got burned in
Frisco for knocking over a bank clerk and Tessie never even attended.
Let him fry in his own grease was what she said about it."

"Nevertheless," Joy said, "I have no time to stop and let you out."

A fast, fifteen-block chase followed. Once we lost the blue roadster
completely, but, by sheer luck, picked it up three blocks further on as
it came wheeling out of a side street.

We were in a quiet residential section now, so there was no one to
interfere as Joy skillfully forced the roadster to the curb. I jumped
out and leaped swiftly toward the driver's door.

       *       *       *       *       *

The blonde sat behind the wheel with a sullen look on her face. "What is
this?" she asked. "A stickup?"

"Don't be vulgar," I replied. "We are here to take charge of my uncle.
This weird slaughter must cease!"

Joy was by my side now, but Bag Ears hung back as though somewhat
worried about the possible consequences of our act.

I heard him muttering: "What if he can just shoot the stuff in your eye
maybe? What if a guy doesn't have to swallow it--?"

Joy's gayety was again coming to the surface. Her eyes were bright and I
was struck by the fact that she seemed to thrive on this sort of thing.
"Hello, Blondy," she said. "Get out from behind--"

The blonde's eyes threw sparks. "Who you think you're talking to, you
lard--"

"Not Truman," Joy said. "Now get--"

I seized Joy's wrist. "Angel! He's gone! Uncle Peter isn't here!" I
stared at Joy in horror. "Do you suppose he inadvertently chewed some of
his own gum?"

Joy did not reply. She shouldered me aside, opened the car door and
surprised me by getting a very scientific grip on Cora.

"Okay--where is he? What did you do with him?"

"He's not here!"

"Any fool can see that. Did he blow up?"

"Of course not. He went to keep a date."

The blonde jerked herself loose from Joy's hold and was sullenly
straightening her clothing. "I don't see why you and Pretty Boy have to
stick your big noses into this. It's none of your business."

"We're making it our business."

"You don't seem to realize," I said stiffly, "that Uncle Peter is very
dear to me. He has performed some horrible deeds, and as his loving
nephew--"

The blonde seemed puzzled. "You're off your crock! Pete's okay. He just
entered into a little private deal to help out Hands McCaffery. I don't
see where it's anybody's business, either. If he wanted your help he'd
ask for it!"

It made my blood run cold to hear this girl refer so casually to the
wholesale slaughter that had been going on around us. I strove to find
words to shame her, but Joy cut in. And apparently my dear wife was more
interested, at the moment, in the details of the affair rather than the
morals involved.

"McCaffery and Uncle Peter haven't got any deal," she said to the
blonde. "You lie as easily as you undress. If they had an arrangement to
knock off all those parties at our wedding reception, how come McCaffery
brought a machine gun along?"

The blonde had an answer. "Hands was a little doubtful. He didn't think
Pete could do it--blow people into thin air just from something they et.
He was willing to go along with the gag but he wasn't going to pass up
an opportunity to rub out the Zinsky gang--or as many as he could
hit--if the gimmick didn't click. That's why he brought the Tommy--just
in case."

Joy turned to me. "It fits," she said. "I've been trying to give Uncle
Pete the benefit of every doubt, but it looks as though you've got a mad
dog sniffing at the trunk of your family tree."

       *       *       *       *       *

Cora frowned. "You've got him all wrong. He's not--"

I continued with the questioning. "You are denying that Uncle Peter had
anything to do with this deadly serum that disintegrates people before
one's eyes?"

"I'm _not_ denying it."

"Then it follows that your moral sense is so badly corroded you no
longer consider murder to be a crime--"

"Now listen here!"

"In law," I went on, "the victim's standing in society is not taken into
consideration where murder is involved. It is just as wrong in the eyes
of the law to murder Cement Mixer Zinsky as the pastor of the First
Congregational Church."

The blonde looked wonderingly at Joy. "Is this guy for real?"

Joy reestablished her hold upon the blonde's anatomy. "Never mind that.
All we want from you is answers. Where did Uncle Peter go? Tell me!"

"Nuts to you!" Cora replied. "He doesn't want you bothering him."

Joy applied pressure. Cora squealed but remained mute. I stepped
forward. "Darling," I said grimly. "This sort of thing is not in your
