not before. One slug would not stop it. Dozens of slugs poured into it,
smashed it to a bloody pulp. Even as it died it still tried to reach the
man it had attacked.

As suddenly as it had started, the shooting stopped. Craig took the
smoking gun from his shoulder. The dragon gave one last convulsive heave
and lay still.

The man had scrambled to his feet. The sudden, blasting fury of the
gun-fire must have shocked him out of his wits. He had been facing
death, bravely; and suddenly death had struck down the creature that was
attacking him. He stood without moving. In the cave behind him the woman
left off her whimpering.

The man was darting glances out of the corners of his eyes, seeking the
source from which his sudden deliverance had come. Slowly he turned his
head. He saw the sailors on the lip of the ravine across from him.

A look of almost stupefying fear crossed his face. He had faced the
dragon with no show of cowardice. Now, seeing his benefactors for the
first time, he looked terrified. In the cave behind him the woman had
also located the humans. Without moving a muscle, she crouched against
the rock wall. Craig had seen wild animals, frightened by the sudden
appearance of a beast of prey, act like this. A rabbit, aware of the
swoop of a hawk, would be too terrified to move. A lamb, knowing the
wolf was near, would crouch trembling waiting for the final snarling
leap.

"He's scared of us," Craig whispered. "Don't make any sudden moves."

The man looked up at them.

"Ogrum!" he whispered. "Ogrum--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Very slowly he laid the club on the ground beside him. Then he stretched
himself face downward beside it in a gesture of obeisance older than
human history. Subject races welcomed their conqueror in a manner such
as this, slaves knelt before their master in this manner--in the days
before men ceased being slaves.

"He must think we're gods," Craig whispered. It was a logical
explanation of the man's actions yet it did not completely satisfy him.

"He thinks we are something else," Michaelson said. "He is acting like a
person who recognizes a strong enemy. He is mistaking us for somebody
else. Come on. I'm going down there."

The scientist was already scrambling down the side of the ravine. Craig
followed him. He recognized the correctness of Michaelson's deductions.
The man had whispered "Ogrum." Then he had knelt. There could only be
one explanation: he thought they were somebody else. The thought raised
a question in Craig's mind: What could inspire such terrifying fear in
this man? What horror walked through these jungles that a man would fear
more than he feared a dragon?

Craig looked up at his squad on the bank of the ravine. "Be on your
guard," he said.

"Aye, aye, sir," the answer came floating down. It was an order the
sailors would not be likely to need. They would be on the alert.

Michaelson was so eager to reach the man that he dashed ahead. When
Craig reached him, he was bending over the man. The scientist was wildly
excited. "He is human," Michaelson was babbling. "Look for yourself if
you don't believe me. See, he has all the characteristics of true man."

The scientist was acting as if he expected Craig to argue the point. The
big man didn't. "Of course he's human," he said. "What's so strange
about that?"

"You do not understand," Michaelson explained. "He is the dawn man. He
belongs to the first race of true humans ever to appear on earth. We
have found a dawn man. That is of great scientific importance. See!" The
scientist pointed to the club. "He has begun to use tools but he has not
yet learned to chip flint. He is pre-stone age, definitely pre-stone
age, but he is also definitely human, with the capacity to learn, as is
shown by his use of the club. He has already made one of the first great
inventions, a club. He has not yet made the second invention, fire, or
the third great discovery, how to shape stone. I cannot begin to tell
you how important this is."

The scientist was beside himself with excitement. Craig grinned. Science
had its thrills as well as adventure. Michaelson was apparently
experiencing one of science's great thrills--discovery.

The scientist promptly began to try to communicate with the man. But
first he had to win the man's confidence. This he did by talking softly
and gently. The man sat up to stare in dazed wonder at the scientist.
Back in the shallow cave the woman crouched without moving. Craig saw
what she was protecting, a child. This was a family they had saved from
the dragon. From fearful eyes the woman watched her lord and master talk
to the strangers.

       *       *       *       *       *

"His name is Guru," Michaelson said, indicating the dawn man. "I am able
to understand a little of what he says. His language is as yet
undifferentiated into complex grammatical forms, hence I can follow his
meaning without too much difficulty. He says he has lived here all his
life and that many more of his people live near here. He says they live
in families. Do you know what that means?" the scientist excitedly
challenged Craig.

Craig, unable to get Michaelson to leave the dawn man, had left two men
to guard the scientist and had taken the others on a wide scouting trip.
He had just returned.

"No, I don't know what that means," he answered.

"It means that Guru and his people have not yet reached the tribal stage
in their existence!" the scientist triumphantly pronounced. "They are
still in the family stage but they have not yet learned to live together
in tribes."

Michaelson sounded as if he thought this discovery was of the utmost
importance. Scientifically, it probably was important. But Craig had
other things on his mind.

"Ask him who he thought we were when he first saw us," he said. "Ask him
why he was so badly scared of us. Ask him who the Ogrum are."

Craig was talking to the scientist but he was watching Guru. When he
mentioned the Ogrum, the dawn man flinched. Fright appeared in his eyes.
Michaelson spoke to him, consulting a notebook in which he had already
jotted down words that he had learned, and listened carefully to his
reply. The scientist turned to Craig.

"Guru says the Ogrum are very bad," he said. "He says they are much
fiercer than the _death-that-flies_, by which he means the bird that was
attacking him when we came up. He says the Ogrum fly too, and that they
are like us, only different. He says he thought we were Ogrum when he
first saw us. He says the Ogrum hunt down his people, and capture them,
and take them to their city, and there feed them to the monster that
eats forever."

"The monster that eats forever!" Craig whistled thoughtfully. "What the
devil is that?"

Michaelson repeated Craig's question to Guru. The answer came haltingly,
slowly. The scientist turned to Craig. "I am not at all certain what he
means. Another definition would be the bright beast that is always
hungry. But I do not know what this beast is, and Guru seems unable to
tell me. He has never seen it, he says, only heard about it. He is much
afraid of the Ogrum."

"I don't blame him," Craig said. "But what are they?"

Guru seemed unable to grasp the meaning of this question. He showed a
strange disinclination to discuss the subject. He was so much afraid of
the Ogrum that he did not even want to talk about them. And yet--this
fact put a worried frown on Craig's forehead--Guru was no coward. They
had seen him fearlessly face the flying dragon, the death-that-flew.
What was there about the Ogrum that made Guru so terribly afraid of
them?

Guru seemed nervous and uneasy. He looked all around the ravine as
though he sensed the presence of hidden danger. Suddenly he looked up. A
single word fell from his lips.

"_Ogrum!_" he whispered. "_Ogrum!_"

Craig looked skyward. A single wedge-shaped plane was diving on silent
wings through the air. His first thought was that it was diving at them.
Then he saw it was passing above them, aiming at some other target. A
second plane was following the first, a third was following the second.
There was a whole line of them, diving silently on some secret target.

       *       *       *       *       *

The second he saw the planes, all question of the identity of the Ogrum
passed from Craig's mind. It was the Ogrum who flew those silent ships,
it was the Ogrum who had attacked the Idaho, who had sprayed the strange
acid on the sea that had damaged the ship. It was the Ogrum who now were
passing overhead intent on some other attack.

"Out of sight, everybody!" Craig shouted. The sailors slipped hastily to
cover. Craig joined them. Guru had already leaped back into the mouth of
his cave.

"What are those devils after this time?" Michaelson asked.

A second later, they had the answer.

Rolling across the swamps came the sound of a thunderous anti-aircraft
barrage from the Idaho.

The Ogrum were moving in to attack the warship, to deliver the last
smashing blow against the stranded battle wagon! Like vultures circling
a dying animal, they wheeled over the Idaho.

"Come on!" Craig said. "I don't know what we can do to help but we will
go and see."

As he hurried out of the ravine he saw Guru hastily helping his mate
carry the child to a higher, safer cave. Guru was hiding. The dawn man
might face a flying dragon, but the Ogrum were too much for him. Craig
did not blame him for hiding. He led his group hastily toward his boat.

Before they reached the place where they had left the small boat a crash
sounded behind them. Turning, they jerked up their guns. In this jungle
wilderness, anything might be attacking them. When they saw what was
following them, they dropped the muzzles of the weapons.

It was Guru. Waving his club, he had come to join them. He was
chattering excitedly.

"He says he has put his wife and little one where they will be safe,"
Michaelson translated. "He wants to know if we are going to fight the
Ogrum."

"Tell him yes," Craig answered.

"Then he says he wants to go along," the scientist interpreted.

For an instant Craig stared at the dawn man. Guru was scared. His fright
was obvious. Even thinking about the Ogrum scared him. But if his
new-found friends were going to fight the devils of the jungle, he was
going with them!

"There," said Craig appreciatively, "beats a fighting heart. Come on,
dawn man, you've got what it takes."

With Guru to lead them and point out passages through the swamp, they
made speedy time in the boat. Meanwhile, clearly audible but out of
sight, the sky was filled with the thunder of guns.

"The ack-ack will knock those planes out of the sky," one of the sailors
said.

"I wish I thought so," Craig answered.

"What do you mean?" Michaelson questioned.

"The Ogrum must know we have anti-aircraft defenses," the big man said
uneasily. "We shot one of their planes down when they attacked our
scouting flier. They know we can and will fight. If they attack us under
those circumstances, it means one of two things--either they're crazy or
they think they can take us in spite of our ack-ack. For all I know,
they may be crazy, but I'm betting they think they can take us. Sh--"
Craig listened.

The anti-aircraft barrage was thinning out. The guns were not firing as
furiously as they had at first. Uneasiness showing on their faces, the
sailors listened.

"Something's going wrong," one of them muttered.

"Get moving!" Craig barked. He knew too well that something was going
wrong. And, as they shoved the boat through the swamp, the guns from the
ship began to sound slower and slower until at last only occasional
blasts showed they were still being manned.

Then the gun-fire ceased altogether.

"Perhaps we have driven them off," Michaelson suggested.

"Perhaps we haven't!" Craig answered bitterly. "Look."

They were nearing the river. Through open spaces, the harbor was
visible. They caught a glimpse of the Idaho.

The planes of the Ogrum were still circling above it.

The Ogrum had not been driven off.

They had won a victory!




CHAPTER VI

The City of the Ogrum


Hidden on the shore, Craig and his men watched the looting of the Idaho.
The planes of the Ogrum were still wheeling overhead. Dozens had
alighted on the water around the doomed ship and the Ogrum were climbing
aboard. Craig saw how the ship had been taken. Gas! Trails of thin white
mist still floated around the vessel. The diving planes had sprayed some
kind of gas on the ship. It was obviously some kind of vapor different
from any known in the far-off Twentieth Century but equally obviously it
was devilishly effective. Guru verified the fact that gas had been used.

"White cloud makes sleep, Guru says," Michaelson supplied.

Before the sleep had come, the guns of the Idaho had taken a toll of the
attackers, as wrecked planes on the water testified. Craig saw the pilot
of one of the planes, obviously wounded, signal to the other Ogrum to
help him. His flier was sinking and he was unable to swim. His comrades
completely ignored his cries for help. The plane sank and the Ogrum
pilot, after vainly attempting to swim, went under too. There were
planes near that could have rescued him and certainly some of the Ogrum
saw him, but they made no attempt to help.

"Devils!" Craig said huskily. "They're devils. They don't even take care
of their own wounded comrades."

"If they treat their own men that way, what will they do to their
captives?" Michaelson questioned.

Craig could only stare at him in horror.

"Ask him," he jerked a finger toward Guru, "if the gas _kills_ the
people who inhale it."

The scientist put the question. Guru, squatting on his haunches,
answered slowly.

"He says they are only asleep, that after awhile they will wake up,"
Michaelson said.

"God!" Craig groaned. "I was afraid of that. Ask him what the Ogrum will
do with their captives?"

Again the scientist questioned the dawn man.

"He says the Ogrum will take them to their city and feed them to the
white beast that is always hungry."

Craig said nothing. He turned and looked at the Idaho. The skin was
drawn tight across his face and knots were bulging at the corners of his
jaws. He could see the Ogrum dancing on the decks. They looked something
like humans except that their bodies were distorted, out of proportion.
One was tall and very skinny. Another was short and fat. A third had one
long arm and one short arm. Another had a long body and two very short
legs. Just looking at them, he hated them.

"Damn you," he whispered. "Damn you--"

Something touched his arm. He turned and saw that Guru had risen to his
feet. The dawn man, a look of sympathy on his face, was awkwardly trying
to pat him on the shoulder.

"Guru is trying to tell you that he is sorry," Michaelson said.

"Thanks," Craig said chokingly. "We--we're not licked yet."

In his heart, he knew that he was whistling to keep up his own courage
when he said they weren't licked. If the Ogrum could conquer the Idaho,
what could a handful of sailors do against them? True, there were
several exploring parties ashore, but all of them did not total fifty
men.

What chance had fifty men against the might of the Ogrum? Fifty men
armed with sub-machine guns when there had been more than a thousand men
on the Idaho, armed with anti-aircraft cannons!

       *       *       *       *       *

From the shore, Craig and his companions watched the Ogrum loot the
ship. Oddly, they were not interested in any of the fittings of the
mighty vessel. The loot that interested them was--men! They brought in
large, cargo carrying planes, powered by the same weirdly silent motors,
moored them in the water beside the ship, then one by one carried the
sleep-stricken members of the crew to the side and dumped them into the
cargo planes. Craig thought he saw them drop Margy Sharp into one of the
planes. He sat silently cursing, fists clenched. Several times the Ogrum
missing connections in loading the cargo planes, with the result that
the unconscious human fell into the sea. The Ogrum made no attempt to
rescue the fallen men but let them float away in the current flowing
from the river. Triangular fins tore through the water toward these
helpless floaters.

"What the Ogrum miss, the sharks get!" Craig said fiercely. Blood was
flowing down his chin from his bitten lips. The sailors with him were
white-faced and grimly silent. Michaelson, after watching the scene for
a few minutes, turned abruptly and walked a few feet along the shore.
They could hear him being sick.

One by one the loaded cargo planes took off, carrying their loads of
helpless human freight. The fighter planes buzzed after them. The Idaho
was left deserted. Either the Ogrum had not known there were men ashore
or were not at present interested in them.

The sun was low in the west before Craig dared to venture back to the
Idaho. The other exploring parties, who had been watching from hidden
spots along the shore, joined him. Silently the little boats moved
toward the bulk of the deserted battle wagon.

       *       *       *       *       *

The gas had long since disappeared from the ship. By sun-down, Craig
knew the whole story.

About two hundred men, caught in the lower parts of the ship by the
attack and protected from the full effects of the gas by doors, were
reviving. Most of them were too deathly sick to be of any immediate use.
Mrs. Miller and her baby had been found hidden in the hospital bay, safe
but sick.

Captain Higgins had not been found.

Margy Sharp had not been found.

One man had been dragged, trembling, from the lowest hold where he had
taken refuge--Voronoff.

