another man out alone, but when he had to go himself, he made sure that
he was well protected.

Bruckner and his men had been gone almost an hour when Sweets heard the
sound of Big Stupe's hoarse squawking from outside the ship. There
seemed to be anger in the tones. Before Sweets reached the open portal
of the ship, he heard more excited squawks. They were similar to Big
Stupe's, but they weren't being made by him.

Outside, Sweets found Big Stupe facing three others of his breed,
exchanging loud angry squawks. Soon they began to walk rapidly in their
pseudo-dignified spraddles, each in a small circle.

Abruptly they were locked together and it was soon apparent that this
was no game. Big Stupe pulled with both flippers at the head of one of
his visitors, while another systematically raked his long claws down the
sides of Big Stupe's neck. Before Sweets could reach him, the neck was
streaming with blood.

Sweets remembered how Big Stupe had always been afraid of loud noises
and he raised his voice in a shout. The other stupes turned their backs,
but Big Stupe brought one flipper around and hit Sweets squarely between
the eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

As Sweets stood stunned, he felt Big Stupe's body crash against his
shoulders and this time, when he yelled, it was in alarm and fear.

Then he was free and his eyes swam back into focus. He saw Big Stupe
standing with his back turned. The three visitors were shambling off
awkwardly.

Sweets left Big Stupe and stumbled back to the ship.

Bruckner returned well pleased with his trip.

"I'd say we handled that exactly right," he said. "I don't know if the
other expeditions contacted this particular tribe or not, but at least
stories must have reached them of the potency of the Earthmen's weapons.
When we showed them that we preferred peace, but were ready to fight if
necessary, that was the end of the affair. And the presents we had for
Faffin, and for the native that Majesky hit, didn't hurt any. The one
thing to keep in mind is that we've got to make them respect us. And
those lads have plenty of respect for _Lacigule_ right now."

It seemed that Bruckner was right. There was no further difficulty with
the tribesmen as the engineers completed their mining and separating
operations and finished filling the hold of the ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two days later, they were ready to leave.

"Can we take Big Stupe along with us when we go?" one of the crewmen
asked Bruckner. Most of them were standing outside the ship, taking a
last look around at Waterfields Planet. The ship had been made
space-ready and all preparations for departure had been completed.

"I see no reason why not," Bruckner answered. "He certainly helps keep
our morale up. I wonder," he went on in an expansive mood, "if you men
realize why you get such a kick out of Big Stupe. You ought to read
Hobbs' essay on the basis of humor sometime.

"Hobbs does a fine job of showing that we enjoy humor because it caters
to our need for self-approval. When a monkey falls out of a tree, all
the other monkeys laugh, because it makes them feel so clever and wise
for not having fallen out of their tree. Whenever Big Stupe pulls one of
his outlandish stunts, we are all reminded of how much smarter we are.
It makes us feel good and so we like Big Stupe. We like anybody or
anything that makes us feel superior."

A few of the natives who had been watching the preparations for
departure from a distance walked closer.

Bruckner turned and waved cheerfully to them. "Farewell, friends.
Perhaps we'll see you again in a few years." He paused. "I've been
wondering," he said, pointing at Big Stupe, "what's your name for this
bird here?"

"_Lacigule_," the native answered.

They left Big Stupe behind.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Big Stupe, by Charles V. De Vet
