Towards noon, he paused to rest at the little pool on the edge of the
woods. He waved to a group of guards he saw peering at him across an
open field of what looked very much like grass. One of the men ran
over.

"The Jursan envoy is back, Your Illustrious Sublimity."

Vyrtl sighed.

"Tell General Wilkins to bring her here immediately."

He turned away and sat upon a flat stone beside the pool.

After a while, he noticed that the ground was liberally supplied with
pebbles for casting into the water. He was watching the spreading
ripples about fifteen minutes later when he heard approaching voices
behind him.

A glance over his shoulder showed him Wilkins and two guards escorting
the old woman. He turned away, tossing another pebble into the pool
with a half-hearted motion of his arm.

When Wilkins coughed discreetly behind him, he told the aide and the
guards to withdraw. He listened to the footsteps until he knew they
were beyond range of ordinary conversation.

"You are the same Daphne Foster?" he asked, still facing the pool.

"The same, Your Illustrious Sublimity."

"Let us dispense with formality. Tell me how you did it."

"It is simple ... in a way. But it requires the use of a not-so-simple
instrument."

"Such as I?" he asked, apparently intent upon the water.

"I did not mean Your Illustrious--I did not mean it that way. It is a
little triumph of our Jursan technicians, which will shortly be at
your disposal. I used it to force an illusion upon you."

"And very cleverly, I admit. Do you have it with you?"

"Yes. It is compact. It merely operates upon the idea that other
forces can be used to produce hypnosis besides lights, drugs, and
soothing sounds."

"Turn it on!" ordered Vyrtl.

       *       *       *       *       *

He waited a moment, then twisted around on the stone to face her.
There was no sign of the woman he had seen crossing the field. Before
him seemed to stand the black-haired, lithe girl.

The only change was in her eyes, which no longer smiled into his so
provocatively.

_Funny_, thought Vyrtl. _When we actually were strangers, she seemed
so intimate. Only now does she look at me so coldly._

"You see?" she said, and started to reach for some switch or button
concealed by the jewel at her breast.

Vyrtl stopped her with a gesture.

"You must also be skilled in the sciences of the mind," he remarked.
"What I mean is ... I suppose you never really looked like that?"

She shook her head a trifle ruefully.

"Not quite. Most of it is in your own imagination. We know a good deal
about you, Your--"

"You deduced somehow what I would look for," interrupted Vyrtl,
nodding. "I can see how a study of the things I chose to have about
me--paintings, statues, furnishings, even people--might yield keys to
my preferences. You did remarkably well."

He tossed another pebble and stared at the ripples.

"I suppose every man has his ideal of a woman," he said. "I doubt that
any man has _seen_ his absolute ideal--except me. I wonder if you know
what it does to one?"

He chose a flat pebble and sent it skipping across the surface with a
vicious snap of his wrist. It bounced three ... four ... five times,
and sank.

"I presume," said Daphne Foster, breaking a tight little silence,
"that you will grant me time to set my affairs in order?"

Vyrtl weighed a pebble in his hand.

"You expect to be executed," he stated flatly.

"Naturally, we knew all along that someone would have to pay for
tricking you. The Emperor of Pollux must, after all, maintain his
dignity."

Vyrtl wondered if he had detected a note of irony in the musical
voice. He marveled anew at the pleasure of listening to her. But of
course, he reminded himself, he heard his own imagined ideal of what a
lovely woman's voice should be.

"No," he said abruptly, swinging about. "I am merely going to insist
that you fulfill the terms of the agreement by remaining at my court.
I want you near me from now on."
