
The farmhouse was a wreck, but the barn still good. Our ship was in
there.

The door opened as we walked toward the barn. Ristal's tall figure was
framed in the doorway, and behind him stood Kresh, broad and ungainly.
The others crowded up behind them.

"Good work, Marko," Ristal said. We went into the ship, which filled the
whole interior of the barn.

"This is Commander Ristal, of the Venusian Intelligence," I told Copperd
and Beth.

"What's _your_ official title?" Beth asked bitterly.

"I am a special agent and language expert," I told her. Then I explained
why I had brought them here.

"Our civilization is in some way far in advance of yours. As you see, we
have mastered interplanetary travel. But it is essentially a peaceful
civilization. Our weapons, such as we have, are of limited range and
power.

"When it became known that Earth was developing monstrous weapons of
aggression we realized that we must be prepared for the worst. There was
only one way to discover what you already had and what you were working
on. Once we arrived here we found that a man named Copperd was the prime
figure in his country's atomic weapons research. It became our duty to
seek him out."

"I see," Copperd grunted. "And now you expect me to reveal secrets which
I am bound by oath to protect with my very life?"

"You will reveal them," Ristal told him.

I didn't like the way Ristal said that. There was a tinge of cruelty in
his tone and in the sudden tightening of his lips. I hadn't ever worked
with him before, or with Kresh, who was Ristal's second in command, but
I didn't like the methods their manner implied. Copperd looked worried.

"I told you we were a peaceful people," I put in.

"Let me handle this," Ristal said. He pointed to a machine which stood
in a corner.

"That," he explained to Copperd, "is a device which we ordinarily use in
surgery and diagnosis. It has the faculty of making the nerves
infinitely more sensitive to stimuli. Also to pain. Do you understand?"

"You can't use that on him!" I said. Ristal looked at me strangely.

"Of course not. But on his daughter, yes. No father likes to see his
daughter suffer."

"That's out," I said flatly. "You know what our orders are."

"I know what they were. This is my own idea, Marko. Please remember that
I am commander here."

I was duty bound to obey him, and I thought that I _was_ going to obey.
But as Kresh stepped toward Beth I found myself between them.

"I think that those higher up may have something to say about this," I
told Ristal.

"With the information this man can give me I shall be in a position to
ignore those higher up," Ristal grinned.

Kresh reached for Beth and I hit him. I knew now what Ristal had in
mind. With atomic weapons he could make himself master of Venus, and of
Earth. But even more important than that was the thought that he must
not harm Beth.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kresh was coming back at me. I hit him again and he went down. Then the
others came piling in. There were four of them, too many for me. I
fought like a madman but they overwhelmed me and held me helpless.

"Give him a shot of _bental_," Ristal ordered. "That ought to quiet him.
Then dump him in a cabin. We'll dispose of him later."

Then Kresh was coming at me with the hypodermic needle. I felt it stab
into my arm. He gave me a dose that might have killed an ordinary man.

I knew how _bental_ worked. It was a drug that would throw me into a
stupor, that would render my mind blank. Already it was taking effect. I
pretended to be unconscious. Two men lifted me and carried me to a
cabin, dropped me on the bunk and went out. The last thing I saw from
beneath my lids was Beth being dragged toward that diabolical machine.

My senses were leaving me. I knew that I had to overcome the effects of
the drug. I knew that I had to get out of that cabin. Somehow I dragged
myself out of the bunk and got a porthole open. I crawled through it and
dropped to the floor of the barn.

There were some loose boards and I pried them further apart and crawled
out into the open. I no longer knew what I was doing; I no longer
remembered Beth. I only knew that I had to run and keep on running.

       *       *       *       *       *

My broken rib was stabbing into me like a knife. Across my chest the
limb of the tree was a dead weight that crushed me. But now I knew who I
was and what I was doing.

Despite the agony I managed to get my hands under the limb. I pushed up
and felt it move. The pressure on my chest was gone. Inch by inch I slid
out from beneath the huge branch. I staggered to my feet.

How much time had elapsed I didn't know. I was running again, but now I
was running toward the dark barn. It wouldn't have taken Ristal long to
get started. Maybe by now Beth was.... I shut the thought from my mind.

I was a few hundred yards away when the first scream came. Through the
wind and the pelting rain it came, and it chilled me more than they had
