She was a little regretful she had no perfume; that was something they
didn't put into lifeboats.

She waited.

She heard the low rumble of male voices in the other room. They were
undoubtedly discussing it. She felt grateful relief that their voices
had not risen. They were not quarreling over her--not yet. She did hope
they would continue to be sensible.

She heard one of the stools scrape on the rough split log floor. She
caught her breath in a gasp, found her hands were clutching the covers
and pulling them tightly up to her chin. She willed her hands to relax.
She willed the tenseness out of her rigid body.

She heard the other stool scrape. Surely they were not both....

She heard their feet walking across the floor, the heavy steps of the
lieutenant, the lighter, springier steps of Sam. She gritted her teeth
and clenched her eyes tight shut.

And then she heard the outer door close softly.

Which one? Which had remained behind?

She waited.

Then she heard footsteps outside. She tried to identify, by sound, which
man was making the noise, but the shuffling of leaves was confusing, as
if more than one person were walking outside. And where was the other
man? Why had he made no sound in the outer room? Was he quietly drinking
up the wine--first? Then, distinctly, she recognized two pairs of feet
outside, going farther away, in the direction of the men's bunkhouse.

She could not bear the suspense. She sprang out of bed clutching one of
the blankets about her. Slowly, soundlessly, she opened her door a
crack. She could see no one in the flickering firelight of the room.
They had turned out the lights. Or--he had. She opened the door wide.

It had been they, not he. Both men had gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

Inadvertently something between a sob and a hiccough rattled her throat.
She choked back another. She would not give way to ... rage? ...
frustration? ... relief? ... _fear?_

Fear!

She had seen the movies, she had read the stories, she had overheard
boys. "I'll fix you when we get outside! You meet me in the alley and
I'll show you!"

These two men. Were they going off into the darkness to settle a
conflict which they had not been able to resolve through sensible
agreement? There, under the trees in the moonlight, would they, denying
all the progress of the sacred centuries, would they revert to the
primitive, the savage; and like two rutting male animals rend and tear
and battle with one another for the only female?

Oh, no! No, they must not! There was no doubt that the lieutenant with
his great, massive strength.... But the human race of New Earth must
have the fine sensitivity, the lithe grace of Sam's kind, also!

She tugged the blanket around her shoulders and ran toward the door. She
must reach them, step in between them, even at the cost of receiving
some of the blows upon herself, make them realize....

She felt herself shivering as she opened the door, shivering as if with
an ague. She felt her face burning, as if with a fever. Her teeth were
chattering in anguish. She tried to still the noise of her teeth, to
listen for those horrible sounds of silent men in a death conflict
somewhere out there in the moonlight.

Then she saw a chink of light through a crack in the wall of the
bunkhouse, where the clay had dried and fallen away from the logs.

In there? What were they doing in there?

Instead of their fists and crushing arms, were they stalking one another
with knives? She remembered scenes from Western movies, the overturned
tables, the crash of things thrown. Had some sense of chivalry still
remained in the lieutenant, and he, knowing Sam wouldn't stand a chance
in hand to hand conflict, devised some contest which would be more fair?

There need be no contest. If only they would be sensible, work out an
equitable schedule....

Barefooted, she ran across the ground toward the bunkhouse. She had
visions of herself throwing open the door, shocking them to stillness in
a tableau of violence. She was close now. She should be able to hear the
crashing of their table and chairs.

She could hear nothing at all. Was she too late? Even now, was one of
them standing above the other, holding a dripping knife? What horrors
might she run into, even precipitate, if she threw open the door?
Caution, Katheryn!

Instead, she crept up to the crack in the wall. Her teeth were
chattering so hard, she had difficulty in holding her head still enough
to peer through the slit of light. With her free hand, her shoulders
were shaking so hard she had difficulty in clutching the blanket about
her with the other, she grabbed her jaw and held on, to still her
shaking. Her eyes focused on the scene inside the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

She had a three-quarter vision of each man and the table between them.
They were dealing a greasy pack of cards! Were they going to gamble for
her? Relief and shame intermingled in her reaction. She would have
preferred they settle it with more elemental.... It would have made it
less.... Yet, this way neither would be killed. Sons and daughters from
both....

"How are we going to tell her now?" Sam asked, as he picked up his
cards. His voice came distinctly through the wall crack.

"We should have told her about our wives and families right at the
start," Harper answered morosely. "I don't know why we didn't. Except
that, well, none of us have talked about things back home. She didn't,
and so we didn't either."

"But I never dreamed Miss Kitty would start getting ideas," Sam said in
a heartsick voice. "I just never dreamed she...."

"We're going to have to tell her," Harper said resolutely. "We'll just
have to tell her that, well, there's still hope and as long as there's
hope...."

Blindly, in an anguish of shame such as she had never known, Miss Kitty
crept away from the bunkhouse, and stumbled back to the cabin. Now she
was shivering so violently she could hardly walk. The exposure to the
night air, the nervous tension, overwrought emotions....

She could not remember getting back into the cabin, crawling into bed.
She knew only that a little later she was in bed, still shaking
violently with a chill, burning with fever.

She was awakened in the morning with the sound of the axe chopping on
wood. She dragged herself out of bed, forlorn, sick, filled with shame.
Her head spun so wildly that she sank to her knees and lay it on the
bed. Then her pride and her will forced her to her feet, and she drove
herself to dress, to go into the big room, dig out glowing coals from
beneath ashes, put them in the little cook stove, pile fine slivers of
resin-rich kindling on top of them, blow on them.

Between painful breaths, she heard herself sobbing. Her teeth started
chattering again, and there was a ringing in her ears. She heard the
blows of the axe falling on the wood, and each blow transferred itself
to the base of her skull. The ringing in her ears grew louder and
louder.

She heard one of the men shout. It sounded like Sam. Had he hurt himself
with the axe, gashed his leg or something? She'd always been afraid of
