Pandit grinned at her. "Curiosity," he said. "A woman's trait on any
world."

Sria got up from the pilot chair but Pandit placed his hand on her
shoulder and gently shoved her down again. "They have a televid unit
aboard," he said, "remember?"

Sria nodded. The jet sped on.

They landed at the spacefield. They were the fourth jet down and one of
the other three had taken off on the return leg of the flight. A
Denebian Pandit had never seen before was supervising the loin-cloth
garbed laborers loading the crates aboard a Denebian spaceship. With
Sria he delivered their crate on the trundle-sled, returned with the
sled to their jet, and took off.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just short of four hours from the time they started they returned to the
Empty Places. They had gained a little time and were the second team
down. From the jet ahead of them, Raj Shiva led a puny, middle-aged
co-pilot.

Orkap stood in the underground storage room. Looking at his wrist chrono
he said to the four Ophiuchans who came down the ramp: "You made fine
time." Raj Shiva's puny companion said something, but Raj Shiva grabbed
his arm and they began to load a second crate. Pandit and Sria loaded
theirs in silence.

They made their second round trip in four hours exactly. It was
completely dark when they returned to the Empty Places. Sria was worried
they would overshoot the cargo point, but Pandit brought the little jet
down within a few hundred yards of its takeoff point.

They could see nothing when they shut off the jet's running lights,
except for the glow which came from the underground room. They reached
it and went down the ramp. Pandit judged that half the crates were gone
now. He took a quick tour of the dimly-lit room while Sria got the
trundle-sled into position against one of the crates.

"Nobody here," Pandit said in a whisper. "The Denebian must be sleeping
in the sand-sled."

"Yes," Sria said a little breathlessly.

"I was thinking--"

"What?" Sria said. "Don't stop."

"If we wanted to examine one of the boxes, it would be suicide to open
the one we take. But we could open one of them down here, see what it
is, take another for ourselves--"

"You would do this?" Sria asked him. "Why?"

Pandit shrugged. "I have eyes," he said. "Our gurus did not broadcast
the death-wish to outworlders until the Denebians came. Then they
started. Have the Denebians sold them on the idea?"

"I don't know," Sria said.

"Well, let's assume they have. Why? Why would they do such a thing,
Sria?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Let me get this straight, Pandit. First, you think the gurus actually
are making the outworlders kill themselves?"

"Of course," Pandit said. "It's mental suggestion, on a scale only our
gurus are capable of. But don't you see, Sria, they wouldn't do it on
their own. The gurus are dirty, careless about their bodies--but
terribly arrogant. Left alone, they wouldn't think the outworlders
important enough to be concerned over one way or another. They certainly
wouldn't kill them."

"Go on," Sria urged.

"All right. The gurus have great knowledge of the mystical, but
externally they're naive. Let's suppose someone came along--the
Denebians in this case--and found something they wanted very badly on
Ophiuchus. These crates here, Sria. What would they do? They'd go to the
gurus and convince them--it wouldn't be difficult--that any intercourse
with outworlders would be harmful to Ophiuchus, that the outworlders
want to colonize and exploit our world, that sort of thing. While the
gurus are stewing it over, the Denebians could have prepared this
shipment here--whatever it is--for departure. But the gurus, too well
convinced by them, could have acted sooner than they expected, making it
all but impossible for the small handful of outworlders, the Denebians
among them, to go abroad without fear of taking their own lives. Perhaps
a few, like Orkap and that other Denebian, are not at all suicide-prone.
Perhaps a few can withstand it. As for the rest, it's indoors and away
from the mental influence of the gurus, or off Ophiuchus entirely. Which
would leave the Denebians with a problem they hadn't thought of." His
words made sense.

"Yes!" cried Sria excitedly. "Now that they have their valuable cargo
ready to go, how can they get it off Ophiuchus without help?"

"We," said Pandit softly, "are that help."

Sria asked: "What are you going to do about it?"

"I don't know. I honestly don't. I never had anything against the
outworlders. How could I? We're all progeny of outworlders who came here
almost five hundred years ago from a place called India on Earth. But
the gurus--"

"--have been deceived. You said so yourself."

Pandit was sweating, and it was more than the heat which made him sweat.
He paced up to the crates, then back again, then to the crates. Suddenly
he said, "All right. All right, I'll do it. Someone's got to find out
what the Denebians want here."

And Pandit began to pry at one of the boxes with a knife he carried in
his loin cloth. Sria said, "I'll keep watch. You call me when it's
opened."

"Maybe you ought to get out of here. In case anything happens, I don't
want to get you involved."

But Sria went up the ramp and crouched there, waiting, watching. The
desert was very quiet, entirely windless, and hot even at night. Stars
sprinkled the sky overhead and far off she thought she heard the distant
whine of a jet. "Hurry," she called. From below she heard the sound of
wood being pried away from wood. She heard, or imagined she heard, the
jet coming closer. "Hurry!" she called softly.

Finally three words drifted up to her. "Come here, Sria." She felt a
little relieved. Now that he'd finished.

       *       *       *       *       *

She listened for the jet. Now she heard nothing. She went swiftly down
the ramp.

Pandit stood before one of the crates, perspiring freely. He had pried
loose one of the side walls and a smooth metal surface with stenciled
lettering on it was exposed.

He said: "I can't read that. It's a language I never saw before."

Sria bent closer and looked at the stenciled lettering. A voice, not
