
The house was serene and beautiful on the bay shore. The sun beat back
from its white walls, and glanced in at the windows of the rear terrace.
It shone on a grotesque figure there; a man with the torso of a giant,
but with no legs--a figure that hitched itself along on the backs of
calloused hands, using muscular arms as a means of locomotion.

But this figure was not as bizarre as the one to be found within the
house, behind shades drawn to keep out any prying eyes.

Here, in a dim room identifiable as a library, a tall man stood beside a
flat-topped desk. But all that could be told of the figure was that it
was male. For it was cloaked from heels to head in a red mantle. The
hands were covered by red rubber gloves. The face was concealed by a red
mask, and over the head was drawn a red skull-cap with two small
projections in mocking imitation of Lucifer's horns.

Doctor Satan!

In the red-gloved hands was a woman's gold-link purse. Doctor Satan
opened it. From the purse he drew a thing that defied analysis and
almost defied description.

It was of metal. It seemed to be a model in gleaming steel of a problem
in solid geometry: it was an angular small cage, an inch wide by perhaps
three and a half inches square. That is, at first it seemed square. But
a closer look revealed that no two corresponding sides of the little
cage were quite parallel. Each angle, each line was subtly different.

Doctor Satan pointed it at the library wall. The end he pointed was a
trifle wider than the end heeled in the palm of his hand. On this wider
end was one bar that was fastened only at one end. The red-covered
fingers moved this bar experimentally, slowly, so that it formed a
slightly altered angle with the sides....

The library wall was mist, then nothingness. The street outside was not
a street. A barren plain stood there, strewn with rocky shale, like a
landscape on the moon.

The little bar was moved back, and the library wall was once more in
place. A chuckle came from the red-masked lips; a sound that would have
made a hearer shiver a little. Then it changed to a snarl.

"Perfect! But again Ascott Keane interferes. This time I've got to
succeed in removing him. An exploded heart...."

He put the mysterious small cage back in the gold-link purse, and opened
the desk drawer. From it he took a business letterhead. It was a carbon
copy, with figures on it.

"Bostiff...."

On the rear terrace the legless giant stirred at the call. He moved on
huge arms to the door and into the library....

       *       *       *       *       *

In his tower suite, Keane paced back and forth with his hands clasped
behind him. Beatrice Dale watched him with quiet, intelligent eyes. He
was talking, not to her, but to himself; listing aloud the points
uncovered since his arrival here.

"A few seconds after talking with Madame Sin, Weems was stricken. Also,
the lady with the odd name was seen coming from the roulette room at
about the time when a party entered and found the croupier and eight
guests turned from people into statues. But she was nowhere around when
Wilson died in the conference room."

He frowned. "The watches were taken from all the sufferers from this
strange paralysis, save Weems. By whom? Madame Sin? Weems' watch is
absolutely in good order, but it won't run. The ball on the roulette
wheels stays on a slant instead of rolling down into a slot as it should
when the wheel is motionless. But the wheel doesn't seem to be quite
motionless. It apparently moved a fraction of an inch in the forty-five
minutes or so that I was in the room."

"You're sure you didn't touch it, and set it moving?" said Beatrice.
"Those wheels are delicately balanced."

"Not that delicately! I barely brushed it with my fingers as I examined
the ivory ball. No, I didn't move it. But I'm sure it did move...."

There was a tap at the door. He went to it. Gest was in the corridor.

"Here's the master key," he said, extending a key to Keane. "I got it
from the manager. But--you're sure it is necessary to enter Madame Sin's
rooms?"

"Very," said Keane.

"She is in now," said the president. "Could you--just to avoid possible
scandal--inasmuch as you don't intend to knock before entering----"

He glanced at Beatrice. Keane smiled.

"I'll have Miss Dale go in first. If Madame Sin is undressed
or--entertaining--Miss Dale can apologize and retreat. But I am sure
Madame Sin will be unaware of intrusion. In spite of the conviction of
your key clerk that she is in, I am quite sure that, at least
figuratively, she is out."

"_Figuratively_ out?" echoed Gest. "I don't understand."

"You will later--unless this is my fated time to lose in the fight I
have made against the devil who calls himself Doctor Satan. Are
Chichester and Kroner in the hotel?"

Gest shook his head.

"Kroner is in the Turkish bath two blocks down the street. Chichester
went home ten minutes ago."

"Madame Sin will be unaware of intrusion," Keane repeated enigmatically
and with seeming irrelevance.

He turned to Beatrice, and the two went to the woman's rooms.

       *       *       *       *       *

Keane softly closed Madame Sin's hall door behind him after Beatrice had
entered first and reported that the woman was alone and in what seemed a
deep sleep. At first, with a stifled scream, she had called out that
Madame Sin was dead; then she had pronounced it sleep....

Keane went at once to the central figure of the living-room: the body of
Madame Sin, on a chaise-lounge near the window. The woman was in a blue
negligee, with her shapely legs bare and her arms and throat pale ivory
against the blue silk. Her eyes were not quite closed. Her breast rose
and fell, very slowly, almost like the breathing of a chloroformed
person.

Keane touched her bare shoulder. She did not stir. There was no
alteration of the deep, slow breathing. He lifted one of her eyelids.
The eye beneath stared blindly at him, the lid went nearly closed again
at the cessation of his touch.

"Trance," Keane said. "And the most profound one I have ever seen. It's
about what I had expected."

"I've seen her somewhere before," said Beatrice suddenly.

Keane nodded. "You have. She is a movie extra, working now and then for
the Long Island Picture Company. But I'm not much interested in this
beautiful shell. For that's all she is at the moment--a shell, now
emptied and unhuman. We'll look around. You give me your impressions as
they come to you, and we'll see if they match mine."

They went to the bedroom of the apartment. Bedroom was like living-room
in that it was impersonal, a standard chamber in a large hotel. But this
seemed almost incredibly impersonal! There was not one picture, not one
feminine touch. In the bath there were scarcely any toilet articles; and
in the closet there was only an overnight bag and a suitcase by way of
luggage, with neither of them entirely emptied of their contents.

"One impression I get is that these rooms have not been lived in even
for twenty-four hours!" said Beatrice.

Keane nodded. "If Madame Sin retreated here only to fall into that deep
trance, and did not wake again till it was time for her to venture out,
the rooms would have just this look. And I think that is exactly what
she has done!"

Beatrice looked deftly through Madame Sin's meager wardrobe. Keane
searched dresser and table and bureau drawers. He wasn't looking for
anything definite, just something that might prove the final straw to
point him definitely toward the incredible goal he was more and more
convinced was near.

He found it in the top of the woman's suitcase.

His fingers were tense as he unfolded a business letterhead. It was a
carbon copy, filled with figures. And a glance told him what it was.

It was a duplicate of the financial statement of the Blue Bay
Development Company--that statement which was held highly confidential,
and which no one was supposed to have seen save the three Blue Bay
officials, and a bank officer or two.

