strain; break off the thin extension, which up to the present has served
as a handle, round off the broken edges in the flame, and join on and
indent a similar piece of small tubing to the opposite side of the
socket; the socket at this stage being shown by _f_. The "blank" for the
socket is now completed, but it must be heated to dull redness in order
to relieve strain and be placed in an annealing oven, where it should
be annealed for some hours.

The "blank" for the plug offers no special difficulty; it is made by
heating a glass rod and compressing it axially until a mass having the
form shown by _g_, Fig. 14, is produced; the end of this is heated
intensely and brought in contact with the rather less heated side of a
glass tube which has been drawn to the shape desired for the handle;
when contact is made a slight air pressure is maintained in the glass
tube, thus producing a hollow join. The ends of the tube are sealed and
the bottom of the plug is drawn off, thus giving the finished "blank" as
shown by _h_. This blank is now held in a pair of asbestos-covered
tongs, heated to dull redness all over, and transferred to the annealing
oven.

When cold, the socket is ground out by the second method given under
"Grinding Stoppers"; that is to say, by means of type-metal or copper
cone, and the plug is ground to fit in a corresponding mould. When the
fit is almost perfect, the transverse hole is drilled in the plug, and
the final finishing is made with fine abrasive powder. Great care must
be taken in the final grinding that there is no accumulation of
abrasive material in the transverse hole of the plug; if this is allowed
to occur there will be a ring ground out of the socket where the holes
move, and the tightness of the finished stopcock will be lost.

_Marking Glass._--As a preliminary to a consideration of the methods of
graduating and calibrating glass apparatus, it is convenient to consider
the various methods which are available for marking glass. Among these
are, the writing diamond, the carborundum or abrasive pencil, the
cutting-wheel, and etching by means of hydrofluoric acid. Each produces
a different class of marking and each is worthy of independent
consideration.

_The Writing Diamond._--This is the name given to a small irregular
fragment of "bort" which is usually mounted in a thin brass rod. Such a
diamond, if properly selected, has none of the characteristics of a
cutting diamond; although one occasionally finds so-called "writing
diamonds" which will produce a definite cut. These should be rejected.

The writing diamond is used in much the same way as a pencil, but is
held more perpendicularly to the object, and a certain amount of
pressure is necessary. The mark produced is a thin scratch which,
although fairly definite, lacks breadth, and this is a disadvantage
where the marking has to be read at a distance. This disadvantage may to
some extent be overcome by making a number of parallel scratches.

_The Abrasive Pencil._--A rod of carborundum composition may be ground
or filed to a point, and this forms a very useful pencil for general
work. The marking produced is rather less definite than that produced by
a writing diamond, but has the advantage of being broader.

_The Cutting Wheel._--"Cutting" in this case is scarcely the ideal
expression, it should rather be "grinding," but "cutting" is more
commonly used. Exceedingly good graduations may be made by the edge of a
small, thin, abrasive wheel which is mounted on the end of a small
mandrel and driven by a flexible shaft from an electric motor or any
other convenient source of power. The depth of the mark can be
controlled, and very light pressure will suffice.

_Etching._--This is often the quickest and easiest way of marking glass
apparatus. The object to be marked should first be warmed and coated
very thoroughly with a thin film of paraffin wax. When cold, the marking
is made through the paraffin wax by means of a needle point, and the
object is then exposed to the action of hydrofluoric acid. If a shallow
but clearly visible marking is desired, it is well to use the vapour of
the acid; this may be done by bending up a sheet-lead trough on which
the object can rest with the marked surface downwards. A little of the
commercial hydrofluoric acid, or a mixture of a fluoride and sulphuric
acid, is distributed over the bottom of the trough, and the whole
arrangement is allowed to stand for about an hour. The object is washed
thoroughly and the paraffin wax removed, either by melting and wiping
off or by the use of a solvent, and the marking is finished.

If a deep marking is desired, in order that it may afterwards be filled
with some pigment, a better result is obtained by the use of liquid
commercial hydrofluoric acid, which is a solution of hydrogen fluoride
in water. The acid is mopped on to the object after the markings have
been made on the paraffin wax film, and allowed to remain in contact for
a few minutes. It is advantageous to repeat the mopping-on process at
intervals during the etching.

In all cases where hydrofluoric acid is used, or stored, it is of great
importance to keep it well away from any optical instruments, as the
most minute trace of vapour in the air will produce a highly destructive
corrosion of any glass surfaces.

_Methods of Calibration._--In the case of apparatus for volumetric work,
this is usually carried out by weighing, although some of the smaller
subdivisions are often made by measurement. When the subdivisions are
made in this way it is of importance to see that the walls of the tube
or vessel to be calibrated are parallel. Great errors arise in some of
the commercial apparatus from neglect of this precaution. A convenient
method of testing for parallelism, in the case of a wide tube, is to
close one end and to weigh in successive quantities of mercury. An
observation of the length occupied by each successive quantity will
indicate any change in the bore. In the case of capillary tubes, it is
convenient to introduce an unweighed quantity of mercury, measure its
length accurately, and then to move it along the tube in stages, either
by tilting the tube or by the application of air pressure. A measurement
of the length at each stage will indicate whether the bore is
approximately parallel or not. Neither of these methods is to be relied
on without a careful examination of the tube, as it may happen that
there are local irregularities in the bore which compensate for each
other, and do not, therefore, affect the volume of a given length.
Obviously, the smaller the quantity of mercury with which the test is
carried out and the greater the number of observations made, the less
risk will there be of such an error. A liquid, such as water or alcohol,
which wets the glass is not suitable for such a test, unless special
precautions are taken.

When, however, a pipette or burette has to be calibrated to deliver a
certain volume of water, the final calibration must be made with this
liquid. Thus, the burette would first be calibrated by weighing in
definite quantities of mercury of say 13.54 grammes (1 cc at 15 deg.C.),
each of the 1 cc divisions should be marked by some temporary marking.
The burette is now filled with a solution of potassium bichromate and
sulphuric acid and allowed to soak for some time; the bichromate is
washed out and distilled water is put in. Successive quantities of water
are run out of the jet, a fixed time being allowed for draining, and the
weights of the quantities delivered are noted. This procedure will give
the necessary data for altering the marking so that it may correspond to
1 cc _delivered_. Each 1 cc division is now divided into tenths by the
method described below. A final verification of the markings should be
made when the subdivision is completed.

_Subdivision of Graduations._--Mark out the spaces to be subdivided on a
sheet of paper. Take a reliable ruler on which any convenient length is
divided into the desired number and place it across the lines at such an
angle that the limits noted on the rule exactly bridge the gap. Now draw
parallel lines through the markings.

_Copying a Scale._--When a scale has been prepared on paper and it is
necessary to copy that scale on the waxed-glass surface for etching, a
convenient method is to employ a long wooden bar having a sharp needle
passing through it at either end. The scale and object to be marked are
fastened in line with one another, and the caliper bar is used from step
to step. The mark is made by moving the bar through a minute portion of
a circle, which provided that the bar is two or three feet in length,
will not introduce any perceptible error in a scale of say a quarter of
an inch in width. The arrangement is shown by Fig. 15.

[Illustration: Fig. 15]

_Graduating a Thermometer._--Assuming that the thermometer has been made
of carefully selected tubing in which the bore is parallel and free from
any small irregularities, we have only to fix the freezing point and
boiling point. The intervening space may then be divided into 100 (if
the thermometer is to be Centigrade) or 180 (if Fahrenheit). This
division may be carried out by the method given under "Subdivisions of
Graduations." A thermometer should not be calibrated until some weeks
after making, as the glass bulb tends to contract.

_Joining Glass and Metal._--It sometimes happens that one needs to make
a more permanent and less flexible joint between a glass and metal tube
than can be obtained by means of a rubber tube. To this end, any one of
three slightly different methods may be employed. In the method of
Chatelier one first coats the glass with platinum or silver, which may
be done by moistening the glass with platinum chloride or silver nitrate
and then heating to redness; a layer of copper is then deposited
electrolytically on the treated surface of the glass, and soldering is
carried out in the usual manner.

McKelvy and Taylor call attention to two other methods in the _Journal
of the Chemical Society_ for September, 1920. In one of these methods
the glass is coated with platinum by covering it with a suspension of
platinum chloride in oil of lavender and heating until the oil is burnt
off. The metal tube is then tinned on its inner side and soldered to the
prepared glass, slightly acid zinc chloride being used as a flux.

In the second method, a joint is made by means of the Kraus flux, which
consists of equal weights of zinc oxide, borax, and powdered soda-glass
fused together. This is coated on the inner surface of the metal tube,
and the hot glass tube, which has had the end slightly flanged to give
support, is inserted. Fusion of the flux is completed by heating the
outside of metal tube.

_Silvering Glass._--In all cases where it is intended to deposit a
silver mirror on a glass surface, thorough cleaning is essential.
Prolonged soaking in a hot solution of potassium bichromate which has
been acidified with sulphuric acid will often prove useful. The glass
should then be washed thoroughly, rinsed in distilled water, and the
solution should then be used.

There are many formulae for the silvering solution, but that used in
Martin's method may be given:--

        A--Nitrate of Silver      40 grammes
           Distilled Water      1000 c. cm.

        B--Nitrate of Ammonium    60 grammes
           Distilled Water      1000 c. cm.

        C--Pure Caustic Potash   100 grammes
           Distilled Water      1000 c. cm.

        D--Pure Sugar Candy      100 grammes
           Distilled Water      1000 c. cm.

     Dissolve and add:--

           Tartaric Acid          23 grammes

     Boil for ten minutes, and when cool add:--

           Alcohol               200 c. cm.
           Distilled Water to   2000 c. cm.

For use take equal parts of A and B. Mix together also equal parts of C
and D in another vessel. Then mix both liquids together in the silvering
vessel and suspend the glass to be silvered face downwards in the
solution. Or if a vessel has to be silvered on the inside, the solution
is poured in. In this case, the deposition of silver may be hastened by
immersing the vessel to be silvered in warm water.

In working with a silver solution containing ammonia or ammonium salts
there is sometimes the possibility of forming an explosive silver
compound. It is well, therefore, to avoid keeping such solutions longer
than is necessary, and to bear in mind that any deposit formed by
solutions containing both silver and ammonia may have explosive
properties, especially when dry.




CHAPTER V

     Extemporised Glass-Blowing Apparatus--The Use of Oil or
     other Fuels--Making Small Rods and Tubes from Glass
     Scrap--The Examination of Manufactured Apparatus with the
     View to Discovering the Methods Used in Manufacture--Summary
     of Conditions Necessary for Successful Glass-Blowing.


If, in the early stages of his study of glass-blowing, the student
should attempt to work with the very simplest appliances, it is probable
that his progress will be hindered; the use of the apparatus will
require an undue amount of care and his attention will be distracted
from the actual manipulation of the glass. The case is widely different
after he has acquired a certain facility in glass-blowing.

_A Simple Form of Blowpipe._--Although there are even more simple forms
than that described here, we are not concerned with them. The form
described is the simplest with which any considerable amount of
glass-blowing can be carried out with certainty.

This form consists of a tube through which air may be blown with the
mouth, a condensation chamber in which any moisture from the breath can
condense, a blowpipe jet, a supporting piece and a source of flame.

The tube, condensation chamber, and jet are combined in the ordinary
Black's blowpipe, such as is used for blowpipe tests in qualitative
