he couldn't tell.

Finally she said. "That was an inexcusable, boorish thing to do. A
typical thoughtless egomanical Earth-male action if there ever was one.
Our men are all perfect here, and in comparison to them, you're a pretty
miserable specimen. I'm glad you showed up here. It's given me, and
other women, a good chance for comparison. It makes our men seem so much
better even than they were to us before."

He didn't say anything.

"Our men are perfect! Perfect you understand? What are you smiling
about? Their character is good. They're excellent conversationalists,
well informed, always attentive, moderate, sympathetic, interested in
life, and always interested in _us_."

"And I suppose they are also--human?"

"This is nonsense," she said, her voice rising slightly. "You will take
that door out please. The Council will decide what's to be done with
you."

He nodded, turned, and went through the door. There were two men there
waiting for him. They were both blond, with light blue eyes, just medium
height, perfectly constructed physically, perfectly groomed, impeccably
dressed. They smiled at him. Their teeth had been brushed every morning.
One of them wrinkled his nose, obviously as a reaction to Bowren. The
other started to reach, seemed reluctant to touch him.

"Then don't touch me, brother," Bowren said. "Put a hand on me, and I'll
slug you." The man reached away, and it gave Bowren an ecstatic
sensation to send his fist against the man's jaw. It made a cracking
sound and the man's head flopped back as his knees crumbled and he swung
around and stretched out flat on his face on the long tubular corridor.

"Always remember your etiquette," Bowren said. "Keep your hands off
people. It isn't polite."

The other man grunted something, still managing to smile, as he rushed
at Bowren. Bowren side-stepped, hooked the man's neck in his arm and ran
him across the hall and smashed his head into the wall.

He turned, opened the door into Munsel's office, dragged both of them in
and shut the door again. He walked down the corridor several hundred
feet before a woman appeared, in some kind of uniform, and said. "Will
you come this way please?"

He said he would.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a small room, comfortably furnished. Food came through a panel in
the wall whenever he pressed the right button. A telescreen furnished
entertainment when he pushed another button. Tasty mixed drinks
responded to other buttons.

He never bothered to take advantage of the facilities offered for
removing his beard, bathing, or changing clothes. Whatever fate was
going to befall him, he would just as soon meet it as the only man on
Mars who looked the part--according to Bowren's standards, at least--at
least by comparison.

He thought of trying to escape. If he could get away from the city and
into the Martian hills, he could die out there with some dignity. It was
a good idea, but he knew it was impossible. At least so far, it was
impossible. Maybe something would come up. An opportunity and he would
take it. That was the only thing left for him.

He was in there for what seemed a long time. It was still, the light
remaining always the same. He slept a number of times and ate several
times. He did a lot of thinking too. He thought about the men on Earth
and finally he decided it didn't matter much. They had brought it on
themselves in a way, and if there was anything like cause and effect
operating on such a scale, they deserved no sympathy. Man had expressed
his aggressive male ego until he evolved the H-bombs and worse, and by
then the whole world was neurotic with fear, including the women. Women
had always looked into the mirror of the future (or lack of it), of the
race, and the more she had looked, the more the insecurity. The atomic
wars had created a kind of final feeling of insecurity as far as men
were concerned, forced them to become completely psychologically and
physiologically self-sufficient. They had converted part of their own
kind into men, their own kind of men, and theoretically there wouldn't
be any more insecurity brought on by the kind of male psychology that
had turned the Earth around for so long.

All right, drop it right there then, he thought. It's about all over.
It's all over but the requiem. Sometime later he was in a mood where he
didn't mind it when an impersonal face appeared on the screen and looked
right at him and told him the Council's verdict. It was a woman, and her
voice was cold, very cold.

"Mr. Eddie Bowren. The Council has reached a verdict regarding what is
to be done with you. You are to be exterminated. It is painless and we
will make it as pleasant as possible."

"Thanks," Bowren said. A woman's world was so polite, so mannerly, so
remembering of all the social amenities. It would be so difficult after
a while to know when anyone was speaking, or doing anything real.
"Thanks," he said again. "I will do all in my power to make my
extermination a matter of mutual pleasure." By now he was pretty drunk,
had been drunk for some time. He raised his glass. "Here's to a real
happy time of it, baby."

The screen faded. He sat there brooding, and he was still brooding when
the door unlocked and opened softly. He sat there and looked at Gloria
Munsel for a while, wondering why she was here. Why she would look so
provocative, so enchanting, so devastating, whatever other words you
cared to dream up.

She moved toward him with a slight swaying motion that further disturbed
him. He felt her long white fingers rubbing over the stiff wiry beard of
his face. "I dreamed about the way that beard felt last night," she
said. "Silly of me wasn't it? I heard of the way you smell, of the way
you yelled at me, so impolitely. Why did I dream of it, I said this
morning, so now I'm here to find out why."

"Get out and let me alone," Bowren yelled. "I'm going to be
exterminated. So let me alone to my own company."

"Yes, I heard about that verdict," she said. She looked away from him.
"I don't know why they made that choice. Well, I do in a way, they're
afraid of you, your influence. It would be very disruptive socially.
Several of our men--"

"It doesn't matter why," Bowren said. "What matters is that it will be
as pleasant as possible. If you're going to kill a man, be nice about
it."

She stared down at him. Chills rippled down his back as her warm soft
fingers continued to stroke his bearded chin and throat. He got up. It
was too uncomfortable and it was torture. He said, "Get out of here.
Maybe I'm not a conformist, but I'm damn human!"

She backed away. "But--but what do you mean?"

He got up and put the flat of his hands cupping her shoulder blades. Her
