viz. The alpine P. villosa, and shows that it is fertilised exclusively by
Lepidoptera.); and to these probably others will be hereafter added.
Nevertheless, some species are homostyled; that is, they exist only under a
single form; but much caution is necessary on this head, as several species when
cultivated are apt to become equal-styled. Mr. Scott believes that P. Scotica,
verticillata, a variety of Sibirica, elata, mollis, and longiflora, are truly
homostyled; and to these may be added, according to Axell, P. stricta. (1/14.
Koch was aware that this species was homostyled: see "Treviranus uber Dichogamie
nach Sprengel und Darwin" 'Botanische Zeitung' January 2, 1863 page 4.) Mr.
Scott experimented on P. Scotica, mollis, and verticillata, and found that their
flowers yielded an abundance of seeds when fertilised with their own pollen.
This shows that they are not heterostyled in function. P. Scotica is, however,
only moderately fertile when insects are excluded, but this depends merely on
the coherent pollen not readily falling on the stigma without their aid. Mr.
Scott also found that the capsules of P. verticillata contained rather more seed
when the flowers were fertilised with pollen from a distinct plant than when
with their own pollen; and from this fact he infers that they are sub-
heterostyled in function, though not in structure. But there is no evidence that
two sets of individuals exist, which differ slightly in function and are adapted
for reciprocal fertilisation; and this is the essence of heterostylism. The mere
fact of a plant being more fertile with pollen from a distinct individual than
with its own pollen, is common to very many species, as I have shown in my work
'On the Effects of Cross and Self-fertilisation.'

Hottonia palustris.

This aquatic member of the Primulaceae is conspicuously heterostyled, as the
pistil of the long-styled form projects far out of the flower, the stamens being
enclosed within the tube; whilst the stamens of the short-styled flower project
far outwards, the pistil being enclosed. This difference between the two forms
has attracted the attention of various botanists, and that of Sprengel, in 1793,
who, with his usual sagacity, adds that he does not believe the existence of the
two forms to be accidental, though he cannot explain their purpose. (1/15. 'Das
entdeckte Geheimniss der Nature' page 103.) The pistil of the long-styled form
is more than twice as long as that of the short-styled, with the stigma rather
smaller, though rougher. H. Muller gives figures of the stigmatic papillae of
the two forms, and those of the long-styled are seen to be more than double the
length, and much thicker than the papillae of the short-styled form. (1/16. 'Die
Befruchtung' etc. page 350.) The anthers in the one form do not stand exactly on
a level with the stigma in the other form; for the distance between the organs
is greater in the short-styled than in the long-styled flowers in the proportion
of 100 to 71. In dried specimens soaked in water the anthers of the short-styled
form are larger than those of the long-styled, in the ratio of 100 to 83. The
pollen-grains, also, from the short-styled flowers are conspicuously larger than
those from the long-styled; the ratio between the diameters of the moistened
grains being as 100 to 64, according to my measurements, but according to the
measurements of H. Muller as 100 to 61; and his are probably the more accurate
of the two. The contents of the larger pollen-grains appear more coarsely
granular and of a browner tint, than those in the smaller grains. The two forms
of Hottonia thus agree closely in most respects with those of the heterostyled
species of Primula. The flowers of Hottonia are cross-fertilised, according to
Muller, chiefly by Diptera.

Mr. Scott made a few trials on a short-styled plant, and found that the
legitimate unions were in all ways more fertile than the illegitimate (1/17.
'Journal of the Linnean Society Botany' volume 8 1864 page 79.); but since the
publication of his paper H. Muller has made much fuller experiments, and I give
his results in Table 1.13, drawn up in accordance with my usual plan:--

TABLE 1.13. Hottonia palustris (from H. Muller).

Column 1: Nature of the Union.
Column 2: Number of Capsules examined.
Column 3: Average Number of Seeds per Capsule.

Long-styled by pollen of short-styled. Legitimate union:
34 : 91.4.

Long-styled by own-form pollen, from a distinct plant. Illegitimate union:
18 : 77.5.

Short-styled by pollen of long-styled. Legitimate union:
30 : 66.2.

Short-styled by own-form pollen, from a distinct plant. Illegitimate union:
19 : 18.7.

SUMMARY:

The two legitimate unions together:
64 : 78.8.

The two illegitimate unions together:
37 : 48.1.

The most remarkable point in this table is the small average number of seeds
from the short-styled flowers when illegitimately fertilised, and the unusually
large average number of seeds yielded by the illegitimately fertilised long-
styled flowers, relatively in both cases to the product of the legitimately
fertilised flowers. (1/18. H. Muller says 'Die Befruchtung' etc. page 352, that
the long-styled flowers, when illegitimately fertilised, yield as many seeds as
when legitimately fertilised; but by adding up the number of seeds from all the
capsules produced by the two methods of fertilisation, as given by him, I arrive
at the results shown in Table 1.13. The average number in the long-styled
capsules, when legitimately fertilised, is 91.4, and when illegitimately
fertilised, 77.5; or as 100 to 85. H. Muller agrees with me that this is the
proper manner of viewing the case.) The two legitimate unions compared with the
two illegitimate together yield seeds in the ratio of 100 to 61.

H. Muller also tried the effects of illegitimately fertilising the long-styled
and short-styled flowers with their own pollen, instead of with that from
another plant of the same form; and the results are very striking. For the
capsules from the long-styled flowers thus treated contained, on an average,
only 15.7 seeds instead of 77.5; and those from the short-styled 6.5, instead of
18.7 seeds per capsule. The number 6.5 agrees closely with Mr. Scott's result
from the same form similarly fertilised.

From some observations by Dr. Torrey, Hottonia inflata, an inhabitant of the
United States, does not appear to be heterostyled, but is remarkable from
producing cleistogamic flowers, as will be seen in the last chapter of this
volume.

Besides the genera Primula and Hottonia, Androsace (vel Gregoria, vel Aretia)
vitalliana is heterostyled. Mr. Scott fertilised with their own pollen 21
flowers on three short-styled plants in the Edinburgh Botanic Gardens, and not
one yielded a single seed; but eight of them which were fertilised with pollen
from one of the other plants of the same form, set two empty capsules. (1/19.
See also Treviranus in 'Botanische Zeitung' 1863 page 6 on this plant being
dimorphic.) He was able to examine only dried specimens of the long-styled
forms. But the evidence seems sufficient to leave hardly a doubt that Androsace
is heterostyled. Fritz Muller sent me from South Brazil dried flowers of a
Statice which he believed to be heterostyled. In the one form the pistil was
considerably longer and the stamens slightly shorter than the corresponding
organs in the other form. But as in the shorter-styled form the stigmas reached
up to the anthers of the same flower, and as I could not detect in the dried
specimens of the two forms any difference in their stigmas, or in the size of
their pollen-grains, I dare not rank this plant as heterostyled. From statements
made by Vaucher I was led to think that Soldanella alpina was heterostyled, but
it is impossible that Kerner, who has closely studied this plant, could have
overlooked the fact. So again from other statements it appeared probable that
Pyrola might be heterostyled, but H. Muller examined for me two species in North
Germany, and found this not to be the case.


CHAPTER II.

HYBRID PRIMULAS.

The oxlip a hybrid naturally produced between Primula veris and vulgaris.
The differences in structure and function between the two parent-species.
Effects of crossing long-styled and short-styled oxlips with one another and
with the two forms of both parent-species.
Character of the offspring from oxlips artificially self-fertilised and cross-
fertilised in a state of nature.
Primula elatior shown to be a distinct species.
Hybrids between other heterostyled species of Primula.
Supplementary note on spontaneously produced hybrids in the genus Verbascum.

The various species of Primula have produced in a state of nature throughout
Europe an extraordinary number of hybrid forms. For instance, Professor Kerner
has found no less than twenty-five such forms in the Alps. (2/1. "Die
Primulaceen-Bastarten" 'Oesterr. Botanische Zeitschrift' Jahr 1875 Numbers 3, 4
and 5. See also Godron on hybrid Primulas in 'Bull. Soc. Bot. de France' tome 10
1853 page 178. Also in 'Revue des Sciences Nat.' 1875 page 331.) The frequent
occurrence of hybrids in this genus no doubt has been favoured by most of the
species being heterostyled, and consequently requiring cross-fertilisation by
insects; yet in some other genera, species which are not heterostyled and which
in some respects appear not well adapted for hybrid-fertilisation, have likewise
been largely hybridised. In certain districts of England, the common oxlip--a
hybrid between the cowslip (P. veris, vel officinalis) and the primrose (P.
vulgaris, vel acaulis)--is frequently found, and it occurs occasionally almost
everywhere. Owing to the frequency of this intermediate hybrid form, and to the
existence of the Bardfield oxlip (P. elatior), which resembles to a certain
extent the common oxlip, the claim of the three forms to rank as distinct
species has been discussed oftener and at greater length than that of almost any
other plant. Linnaeus considered P. veris, vulgaris and elatior to be varieties
of the same species, as do some distinguished botanists at the present day;
whilst others who have carefully studied these plants do not doubt that they are
distinct species. The following observations prove, I think, that the latter
view is correct; and they further show that the common oxlip is a hybrid between
P. veris and vulgaris.

The cowslip differs so conspicuously in general appearance from the primrose,
that nothing need here be said with respect to their external characters. (2/2.
The Reverend W.A. Leighton has pointed out certain differences in the form of
the capsules and seed in 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History' 2nd series
volume 2 1848 page 164.) But some less obvious differences deserve notice. As
both species are heterostyled, their complete fertilisation depends on insects.
The cowslip is habitually visited during the day by the larger humble-bees
(namely Bombus muscorum and hortorum), and at night by moths, as I have seen in
the case of Cucullia. The primrose is never visited (and I speak after many
years' observation) by the larger humble-bees, and only rarely by the smaller
kinds; hence its fertilisation must depend almost exclusively on moths. There is
nothing in the structure of the flowers of the two plants which can determine
the visits of such widely different insects. But they emit a different odour,
and perhaps their nectar may have a different taste. Both the long-styled and
short-styled forms of the primrose, when legitimately and naturally fertilised,
yield on an average many more seeds per capsule than the cowslip, namely, in the
proportion of 100 to 55. When illegitimately fertilised they are likewise more
fertile than the two forms of the cowslip, as shown by the larger proportion of
their flowers which set capsules, and by the larger average number of seeds
which the capsules contain. The difference also between the number of seeds
produced by the long-styled and short-styled flowers of the primrose, when both
are illegitimately fertilised, is greater than that between the number produced
under similar circumstances by the two forms of the cowslip. The long-styled
flowers of the primrose when protected from the access of all insects, except
such minute ones as Thrips, yield a considerable number of capsules containing
on an average 19.2 seeds per capsule; whereas 18 plants of the long-styled
cowslip similarly treated did not yield a single seed.

The primrose, as every one knows, flowers a little earlier in the spring than
the cowslip, and inhabits slightly different stations and districts. The
primrose generally grows on banks or in woods, whilst the cowslip is found in
more open places. The geographical range of the two forms is different. Dr.
Bromfield remarks that "the primrose is absent from all the interior region of
northern Europe, where the cowslip is indigenous." (2/3. 'Phytologist' volume 3
page 694.) In Norway, however, both plants range to the same degree of north
latitude. (2/4. H. Lecoq 'Geograph. Bot. de l'Europe' tome 8 1858 pages 141,
144. See also 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History' 9 1842 pages 156, 515.
Also Boreau 'Flore du centre de la France' 1840 tome 2 page 376. With respect to
the rarity of P. veris in western Scotland, see H.C. Watson 'Cybele Britannica'
2 page 293.)

The cowslip and primrose, when intercrossed, behave like distinct species, for
they are far from being mutually fertile. Gartner crossed 27 flowers of P.
vulgaris with pollen of P. veris, and obtained 16 capsules; but these did not
contain any good seed. (2/5. 'Bastarderzeugung' 1849 page 721.) He also crossed
21 flowers of P. veris with pollen of P. vulgaris; and now he got only five
capsules, containing seed in a still less perfect condition. Gartner knew
nothing about heterostylism; and his complete failure may perhaps be accounted
for by his having crossed together the same forms of the cowslip and primrose;
for such crosses would have been of an illegitimate as well as of a hybrid
nature, and this would have increased their sterility. My trials were rather
more fortunate. Twenty-one flowers, consisting of both forms of the cowslip and
primrose, were intercrossed legitimately, and yielded seven capsules (i.e. 33
per cent), containing on an average 42 seeds; some of these seeds, however, were
so poor that they probably would not have germinated. Twenty-one flowers on the
same cowslip and primrose plants were also intercrossed illegitimately, and they
likewise yielded seven capsules (or 33 per cent), but these contained on an
average only 13 good and bad seeds. I should, however, state that some of the
above flowers of the primrose were fertilised with pollen from the polyanthus,
which is certainly a variety of the cowslip, as may be inferred from the perfect
fertility inter se of the crossed offspring from these two plants. (2/6. Mr.
Scott has discussed the nature of the polyanthus ('Proceedings of the Linnean
Society' 8 Botany 1864 page 103), and arrives at a different conclusion; but I
do not think that his experiments were sufficiently numerous. The degree of
infertility of a cross is liable to much fluctuation. Pollen from the cowslip at
first appears rather more efficient on the primrose than that of the polyanthus;
for 12 flowers of both forms of the primrose, fertilised legitimately and
illegitimately with pollen of the cowslip gave five capsules, containing on an
average 32.4 seeds; whilst 18 flowers similarly fertilised by polyanthus-pollen
yielded only five capsules, containing only 22.6 seeds. On the other hand, the
seeds produced by the polyanthus-pollen were much the finest of the whole lot,
and were the only ones which germinated.) To show how sterile these hybrid
unions were I may remind the reader that 90 per cent of the flowers of the
primrose fertilised legitimately with primrose-pollen yielded capsules,
containing on an average 66 seeds; and that 54 per cent of the flowers
fertilised illegitimately yielded capsules containing on an average 35.5 seeds
per capsule. The primrose, especially the short-styled form, when fertilised by
the cowslip, is less sterile, as Gartner likewise observed, than is the cowslip
when fertilised by the primrose. The above experiments also show that a cross
between the same forms of the primrose and cowslip is much more sterile than
that between different forms of these two species.

The seeds from the several foregoing crosses were sown, but none germinated
except those from the short-styled primrose fertilised with pollen of the
polyanthus; and these seeds were the finest of the whole lot. I thus raised six
plants, and compared them with a group of wild oxlips which I had transplanted
into my garden. One of these wild oxlips produced slightly larger flowers than
the others, and this one was identical in every character (in foliage, flower-
peduncle, and flowers) with my six plants, excepting that the flowers of the
latter were tinged of a dingy red colour, from being descended from the
polyanthus.

We thus see that the cowslip and primrose cannot be crossed either way except
with considerable difficulty, that they differ conspicuously in external
appearance, that they differ in various physiological characters, that they
inhabit slightly different stations and range differently. Hence those botanists
who rank these plants as varieties ought to be able to prove that they are not
as well fixed in character as are most species; and the evidence in favour of
such instability of character appears at first sight very strong. It rests,
first, on statements made by several competent observers that they have raised
cowslips, primroses, and oxlips from seeds of the same plant; and, secondly, on
the frequent occurrence in a state of nature of plants presenting every
intermediate gradation between the cowslip and primrose.

The first statement, however, is of little value; for, heterostylism not being
formerly understood, the seed-bearing plants were in no instance protected from
the visits of insects (2/7. One author states in the 'Phytologist' volume 3 page
703 that he covered with bell-glasses some cowslips, primroses, etc., on which
he experimented. He specifies all the details of his experiment, but does not
say that he artificially fertilised his plants; yet he obtained an abundance of
seed, which is simply impossible. Hence there must have been some strange error
in these experiments, which may be passed over as valueless.); and there would
be almost as much risk of an isolated cowslip, or of several cowslips if
consisting of the same form, being crossed by a neighbouring primrose and
producing oxlips, as of one sex of a dioecious plant, under similar
circumstances, being crossed by the opposite sex of an allied and neighbouring
species. Mr. H.C. Watson, a critical and most careful observer, made many
experiments by sowing the seeds of cowslips and of various kinds of oxlips, and
arrived at the following conclusion, namely, "that seeds of a cowslip can
produce cowslips and oxlips, and that seeds of an oxlip can produce cowslips,
oxlips, and primroses." (2/8. 'Phytologist' 2 pages 217, 852; 3 page 43.) This
conclusion harmonises perfectly with the view that in all cases, when such
results have been obtained, the unprotected cowslips have been crossed by
primroses, and the unprotected oxlips by either cowslips or primroses; for in
this latter case we might expect, by the aid of reversion, which notoriously
comes into powerful action with hybrids, that the two parent-forms in appearance
pure, as well as many intermediate gradations, would be occasionally produced.
Nevertheless the two following statements offer considerable difficulty. The
Reverend Professor Henslow raised from seeds of a cowslip growing in his garden,
various kinds of oxlips and one perfect primrose; but a statement in the same
paper perhaps throws light on this anomalous result. (2/9. Loudon's 'Magazine of
Natural History' 3 1830 page 409.) Professor Henslow had previously transplanted
into his garden a cowslip, which completely changed its appearance during the
following year, and now resembled an oxlip. Next year again it changed its
character, and produced, in addition to the ordinary umbels, a few single-
flowered scapes, bearing flowers somewhat smaller and more deeply coloured than
those of the common primrose. From what I have myself observed with oxlips, I
cannot doubt that this plant was an oxlip in a highly variable condition, almost
like that of the famous Cytisus adami. This presumed oxlip was propagated by
offsets, which were planted in different parts of the garden; and if Professor
Henslow took by mistake seeds from one of these plants, especially if it had
been crossed by a primrose, the result would be quite intelligible. Another case
is still more difficult to understand: Dr. Herbert raised, from the seeds of a
highly cultivated red cowslip, cowslips, oxlips of various kinds, and a
primrose. (2/10. 'Transactions of the Horticultural Society' 4 page 19.) This
case, if accurately recorded, which I much doubt, is explicable only on the
improbable assumption that the red cowslip was not of pure parentage. With
species and varieties of many kinds, when intercrossed, one is sometimes
strongly prepotent over the other; and instances are known of a variety crossed
by another, producing offspring which in certain characters, as in colour,
hairiness, etc., have proved identical with the pollen-bearing parent, and quite
dissimilar to the mother-plant (2/11. I have given instances in my work 'On the
Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication' chapter 15 2nd edition
volume 2 page 69.); but I do not know of any instance of the offspring of a
cross perfectly resembling, in a considerable number of important characters,
the father alone. It is, therefore, very improbable that a pure cowslip crossed
by a primrose should ever produce a primrose in appearance pure. Although the
facts given by Dr. Herbert and Professor Henslow are difficult to explain, yet
until it can be shown that a cowslip or a primrose, carefully protected from
insects, will give birth to at least oxlips, the cases hitherto recorded have
little weight in leading us to admit that the cowslip and primrose are varieties
of one and the same species.

Negative evidence is of little value; but the following facts may be worth
giving:--Some cowslips which had been transplanted from the fields into a
shrubbery were again transplanted into highly manured land. In the following
year they were protected from insects, artificially fertilised, and the seed
thus procured was sown in a hotbed. The young plants were afterwards planted
out, some in very rich soil, some in stiff poor clay, some in old peat, and some
in pots in the greenhouse; so that these plants, 765 in number, as well as their
parents, were subjected to diversified and unnatural treatment; but not one of
them presented the least variation except in size--those in the peat attaining
almost gigantic dimensions, and those in the clay being much dwarfed.

I do not, of course, doubt that cowslips exposed during SEVERAL successive
generations to changed conditions would vary, and that this might occasionally
occur in a state of nature. Moreover, from the law of analogical variation, the
varieties of any one species of Primula would probably in some cases resemble
other species of the genus. For instance I raised a red primrose from seed from
a protected plant, and the flowers, though still resembling those of the
primrose, were borne during one season in umbels on a long foot-stalk like that
of a cowslip.

With regard to the second class of facts in support of the cowslip and primrose
being ranked as mere varieties, namely, the well-ascertained existence in a
state of nature of numerous linking forms (2/12. See an excellent article on
this subject by Mr. H.C. Watson in the 'Phytologist' volume 3 page 43.):--If it
can be shown that the common wild oxlip, which is intermediate in character
between the cowslip and primrose, resembles in sterility and other essential
respects a hybrid plant, and if it can further be shown that the oxlip, though
in a high degree sterile, can be fertilised by either parent-species, thus
giving rise to still finer gradational links, then the presence of such linking
forms in a state of nature ceases to be an argument of any weight in favour of
the cowslip and primrose being varieties, and becomes, in fact, an argument on
the other side. The hybrid origin of a plant in a state of nature can be
recognised by four tests: first, by its occurrence only where both presumed
parent-species exist or have recently existed; and this holds good, as far as I
can discover, with the oxlip; but the P. elatior of Jacq., which, as we shall
presently see, constitutes a distinct species, must not be confounded with the
common oxlip. Secondly, by the supposed hybrid plant being nearly intermediate
in character between the two parent-species, and especially by its resembling
hybrids artificially made between the same two species. Now the oxlip is
intermediate in character, and resembles in every respect, except in the colour
of the corolla, hybrids artificially produced between the primrose and the
polyanthus, which latter is a variety of the cowslip. Thirdly, by the supposed
hybrids being more or less sterile when crossed inter se: but to try this fairly
two distinct plants of the same parentage, and not two flowers on the same
plant, should be crossed; for many pure species are more or less sterile with
pollen from the same individual plant; and in the case of hybrids from
heterostyled species the opposite forms should be crossed. Fourthly and lastly,
by the supposed hybrids being much more fertile when crossed with either pure
