the experts were free with their advice when it was not needed. When the
chips were down, they could do no more than smirk and shrug a helpless
shoulder.

He gave the command, and now there was no uncertainty.

"Fire!"

                                  ----

The celebration was being held in the Great Stadium, the largest, most
costly structure that Man had ever built. It was a fitting structure for
the more important football games; and used on occasion, if they could
be fitted in without upsetting the schedule, for State affairs. Now the
stadium was filled to capacity, its floor churned by the careless feet
of the thousands upon thousands who had managed to obtain an entrance.

From the quarter-mile-high tiers of seats, from the floor of the
stadium, the shouts welled up, washing over the platform at the North
end.

"Griswold! Griswold!"

It was not yet time for history to assess the justice of the massacre.

The President raised his hand. The battery of video cameras picked up
each move.

"Our hopes, our fears, our hearts, our prayers rode through every
space-dark, star-flecked mile with these glorious pioneers." He turned
then to the captain. "For the people of Earth, _Admiral_ Griswold, this
medal. A new medal for a Guider of Destiny, Maker of Empire, Son of
Man!"

The voice faltered, stopped.

The crowd on the floor of the stadium was pressing outward from the
center, screaming in pain and terror. At the moment when the people
should be quiet, rapt in reverence, they were emptying the floor of the
stadium. But not willingly. They were being pressed back and out, as a
great weight pushes its way through water. Those who could move outward
no farther were crushed where they stood.

And then the ship appeared.

Hazy of outline, shimmering with impossible angles, seen by its glinting
fire of light rather than by its solid form, as if its reality were in
some other dimension and this only a projection, the ship appeared.

The President's hand reached out and gripped Griswold's shoulder as he
leaned back and back, trying to determine its vast height. A silence
then clutched the crowd--a terrified silence.

A full minute passed. Even on the platform, where all the pioneers of
Mars were assembled with Earth's dignitaries, even there the people
cowered back away from this unseeable, unknowable horror.

But one man leaned forward instead, frantically studying the shimmering
outline of the ship. One man--Berkeley.

With the training of the ethnologist, a man who really can deduce an
entire civilization from mystifying data, he recognized the tremendous
import.

At the end of that minute, without warning, a group of figures hovered
in the air near the floor of the stadium.

                                  ----

Quickly, Berkeley's eyes assessed their form, their color, the
increasing solidity of the humanoids. There are some movements, some
gestures, common to all things of intelligence--the pause, the
resolution, the lift of pride.

"No!" he screamed and started forward. "Oh, no! We're civilized. We're
intelligent!" He was pulled back, as in his terror he tried to leap from
the platform to get at the humanoids.

Held there, unable to move, he read the meaning of the actions of the
group hovering near the ship. One flashed a shining tentacle around, as
if to point to the stadium, the pitifully small spaceship on display,
the crowds of people.

The leader manifestly ignored him. He flowed forward a pace, his ovoid
head held high in pride and arrogance. He pointed a tentacle toward the
south end of the stadium, and a pillar of leaping flame arose; fed with
no fuel, never to cease its fire, the symbol of possession.

He pointed his tentacles to the north, the south, the east, the west. He
motioned with his tentacles, as if to encircle all of Earth.

He unfurled a scroll and began to read.

--MARK CLIFTON & ALEX APOSTOLIDES

