As it is...." He straightened resignedly and accepted the responsibility
of Acting Commandant of Fleet Construction Technicians.

A week later, in the midst of official excitement at the gratifyingly
successful fleet trials, Sy and Arna slipped away by fast ground vehicle
to the tiny isolated cottage of old Loor. Hurriedly they set up the
ampli-tel apparatus. Loor reclined on his rude cot with his long, narrow
head in the mesh helmet, and Sy taped down contacts and checked
adjustments. He and Arna huddled over the Venusian for half an hour,
until he finally opened his eyes and smiled toothlessly.

"Contact with Tel. He says hello."

Sy's face was strained. "Okay. Give him this: Start--all--in. A nail and
a corncob, a book and a button. No nail, no corncob, no book, no button.
You can strum a zither. End--all--out."

Loor was silent in concentration. Finally he spoke. "Start--all--in. You
need a drink. End--all--out."

"Good work, Loor!" Sy began to untape the contacts. "Your job here is
now fin--"

The door creaked viciously wide. Arna gasped. A Sur-Malic officer behind
a needle gun moved into the small room. Five others crowded in behind
him, similarly armed.

The leader smiled venomously. "Very convenient, Sykin Supcel, for you to
leave your vehicle in the open. We have been watching your purulent
friend for days, but we didn't suspect tele--"

Even Arna, who knew what to expect, could detect only a blur of motion.
Loor jumped nervously as a pistol stuttered four times and four tiny
needles exploded in the floor; he blinked and finally managed to focus
his eyes on Sy only as the last Sur-Malic crumpled lifelessly.

"Solar Mother!" he muttered. "What happened?" He tore the helmet from
his head and leaped spryly to his feet.

Arna answered while Sy wiped his long knife on one of the bodies and
returned it to a sheath under his jacket. "Sy is able to move pretty
fast," she explained. "It's one of his lab-developed abilities. The
normal eye can't keep up with him when he puts on a spurt."

Loor continued to blink while Sy reduced the amplifier to jumbled scrap,
and then the old man found his voice again. "Why," he asked Sy, "didn't
you use your pistol on them? Wouldn't that be easier?"

Sy dragged the dead officers out of the doorway. "Can't depend on
mechanical things," he said briefly. He mopped perspiration from his
forehead and neck. "It's a matter of timing; I size up a situation, sort
of estimate distances and positions, and kind of _see_ myself carrying
out the actions--and then I go into high gear. It's hard to see, hear,
or even consciously think while I'm speeded up. At that speed triggers
just don't pull fast enough."

"If those men had been able to move aside fast enough," said Arna, "Sy
might have missed them entirely and not even known it until he slowed
down again." She looked with distaste at the bodies, but without
repugnance or fear.

Sy hurriedly thrust a bulging pouch of gold into Loor's hand. "Lock this
place up," he directed, "and start walking immediately for Haldane.
We've got to assume we're all known to Sur-Malic Intelligence. Arna and
I will remove the outside evidence. All we need now is a little chunk of
time!"

He walked out warily and soon pulled away in the dead officers' vehicle.
Arna followed close behind.

Having driven slowly back to Dirik, Sy parked beside a row of similar
vehicles to the rear of a city food market in the merchandise district.
He walked to where Arna waited and climbed into his own conveyance.
"Head for our little love-nest, slave," he directed. "You'll want your
toothbrush, and it would be a shame to leave my hard-won gold behind."

Arna breathed excitedly. "Are we leaving the planet, Sy? Is our work
completed? Was that what your message meant?"

"My, what a curiosity!" he taunted. He placed an arm about her
shoulders. "We're going into seclusion," he leered. "I'll have you all
to myself for days and days! Won't that be fun?"

Arna squirmed. "Stop it, Sy--I almost hit that old woman! And stop
making those pebbles jump up in the road!" She glanced at him bitingly.
"I suppose you've got things all arranged so we'll have to hide in a
single room!"

"The choice is yours, love." He waved expansively. "Either we steal a
scoutship or--how's the _Needle_ for speed?"

"Oh, Sy! Can we actually get the _Needle_? She'll outstrip any warship!
_And_ she has a nice private compartment, with a good solid deck outside
it for you. I'll loan you a pillow, maybe."

They took from the apartment only what would fit into small shoulder
bags that were matched to their uniforms. Sy briefed Arna while they
sped to the vast enclosure which walled off hundreds of impounded alien
ships.

His towering rage was very evident even as he climbed from the ground
vehicle. A callow sentry straightened at the approach of his glittering
insignia. Sy fixed him with a malific eye. The youth's mouth began to
twitch.

"Where," shouted Sy furiously, "is the moronic officer-in-charge?"

The sentry tried to speak.

"Never mind, you brainless rodent!" Sy roared. "Why wasn't that accursed
League ship delivered to the testing grounds this morning?"

The boy began to stammer.

"Quiet, you miserable lump of offal!" screamed Sy. He turned and
brutally cuffed Arna toward the gate. "Get in there, filthy drone, and
raise that ship before I kick your belly to pulp!"

The sentry unlocked the high gate frantically. He watched with ashen
features as Sy followed Arna across the yard, cursing, striking and
reviling her.

