life._

"You could have fought back, had we attempted to destroy you," Gray said
uncomfortably.

The next words were coldly contemptuous. _We are not wanton killers,
like man. We have no desire to destroy._

Gray winced and changed the subject. "You have found your new planet?"

_At last. We are about to begin transportation of our population to the
new world. For the first time since our ancestors became aware of the
awful presence of man on the Earth, we feel that we can look forward to
security._

Markham Gray remained quiet for a long time. "I am still amazed that you
were able to develop so far without our knowledge," he said finally.

There was an edge of amusement in the answering thought. _We are very
tiny, Mr. Gray. And our greatest efforts have always been to keep from
under man's eyes. We have profited greatly, however, by our suitability
to espionage; little goes on in the human world of which we don't know.
Our progress was greatly aided by our being able to utilize the science
that man has already developed. You've noted, for instance, how similar
our space ships are to your own._

Gray nodded to himself. "But I'm also impressed by the manner in which
you have developed some mechanical device to duplicate human speech.
That involved original research."

_At any rate, neither man nor we need dread the future any longer. We
have escaped the danger that overhung us, and you know now that we are
no alien enemies from space threatening you. We wish you well, mankind;
perhaps the future will see changes in your nature. It is in this
friendly hope that we have contacted humanity through you, Mr. Gray._

The elderly journalist said quietly, "I appreciate your thoughtfulness
and hope you are correct. Good luck to you in your new world."

_Thank you, Markham Gray, and goodbye._

The set was suddenly quiet again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Markham Gray stood before the assembled Military Council of the Solar
System. He had told his story without interruption to this most powerful
body on Earth. They listened to him in silence.

When he had finished, he waited for their questions. The first came from
SupSpaceCom Michell. He said, thoughtfully, "You believe their words to
be substantially correct, Gray?"

"I believe them to be entirely truthful, your excellency," the
journalist told him sincerely.

"Then they are on the verge of leaving the Earth and removing to this
other planet in some other star system?"

"That is their plan."

The SupSpaceCom mused aloud. "We'll be able to locate them when they
blast off en masse. Their single ships are so small that they missed
being observed, but a mass flight we'll be able to detect. Our cruisers
will be able to follow them all the way, blasting them as they go. If
any get through to their new planet, we'll at least know where they are
and can take our time destroying it."

The President of the Council added thoughtfully, "Quite correct,
Michell. And in the early stages of the fight, we should be able to
capture some of their ships intact. As soon as we find what kind of
insect they are, our bacteriologists will be able to work on a method to
eliminate any that might remain on Earth."

Markham Gray's face had paled in horror. "But why?" he blurted. "Why not
let them go in peace? All they've wanted for centuries is to escape us,
to have a planet of their own."

SupSpaceCom Michell eyed him tolerantly. "You seem to have been taken
in, Mr. Gray. Once they've established themselves in their new world, we
have no idea of how rapidly they might develop and how soon they might
become a threat. Even though they may be peaceful today, they are
potential enemies tomorrow. And a potential enemy _is_ an enemy, who
must be destroyed."

Gray felt sickness well through him "But ... but this policy.... What
happens when man finally finds on his borders a life form more advanced
than he--an intelligence strong enough to destroy rather than be
destroyed?"

The tolerance was gone now. The SupSpaceCom said coldly, "Don't be a
