whose abilities in brain-surgery were mentioned in hushed voices at
Johns Hopkins. Over a highball he told the whole story for the first
time, hoping it wouldn't be received with hoots.

It wasn't. The white-haired surgeon looked long and meditatively at his
drink. Then he said, "Kermit, I can't begin to account for it; I have
muddled around in the human brain enough to know that what we like to
call our scientific knowledge is at best empirical. You say this man had
his ability _before_ he was wounded?"

"He built a Sherman tank two years before we did," said the General.
"Yet he claims the whole process is purely logical."

"Logic!" exclaimed the brain-man with a scorn that matched the General's
own on the subject. "Logic is hindsight, Kermit. When our brains, by
some intuitive process of progressive thought, reach a desired point,
our egos reach backward to give the process a sort of order we call
logic. Actually we seldom know how we get where we do; but we're too
damned conceited to admit it.

"What in hell do we know about the brain?" he went on. "I knew a
perfectly healthy young girl once, who was killed when she was standing
beside her horse--the horse sneezed, jerked his head up, and jolted the
side of her jaw. Yet back in seventeen eighty-one, when Arnold ordered
the massacre at Fort Griswold, one old rebel was bayonetted, had his
skull smashed open so that his brains were oozing out on the ground. He
recovered and lived for forty years afterward, sane as you please. And
they didn't have fellows like me, not then. If they had, he'd probably
have died on the operating table."

"In other words you don't know," said the General.

"I don't know, Kermit," replied the other. "Another drink?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day the international situation showed signs of serious
deterioration, and the General took a plane to New York. All the way up
he thought of something else the Surgeon-General had said to him--"One
thing I have learned, it isn't exactly in my province, but I've run into
it enough to make an observation.

"Whenever I've met anyone with what might be called a special
gift--psychic or what have you--I've found them scared to death of it.
Damned if I know why...."

He ruminated a little before continuing. "You'd think they'd be
delighted--but they aren't. They either run to religion, and try to
drown it in ritual--or they try to explain it away by some
rationalization. Like your friend."

"Then you're willing to accept the fact he has a supernatural gift?" the
General asked.

The brain-man shrugged and said, "Supernatural--supernormal--he's got
something, if what you tell me is true. Can you think of a better 'ole?"


4

When he was driven up to the Long Island chalet early that afternoon,
the General was pleased to see a command car parked unobtrusively off
the road, a sentry sitting in an impromptu sentry-box made of pine bows,
that commanded a good view of the approaches. At least, he thought,
_They_ wouldn't find MacReedy easy to get at. According to the reports
he had seen there had been no further attempts.

Toby opened the door. He said, "Hello, General, this is fine. We were
going to send you a message tonight."

The General shook hands and said, "Progress?" and, when the boy nodded
excitedly, "Why aren't you in school?"

"It's after three o'clock," was the devastating reply, as Toby led him
toward the cellar stairs. The General wondered briefly how much he had
managed to forget in his fifty-two years.

Angus MacReedy was working at his carving table with a blow-up of the
spy-pictures tacked to the cellar wall in front of him, a pile of
rough-sketched plans on the table. He rose and said, "I was just doing a
little polishing, General. But you hit it about right."

"Good," said the General. "Got it solved?"

"I think so," said the model-maker. "Take a look."

It was an eerie-looking item--a sort of stove-pipe mounted on a disc,
surrounded by a flock of flying buttresses. Frowning the General peered
at it, then looked at the blow-ups on the walls. From the correct angle,
the similarity was ominously unmistakable. He said, "What in hell is it,
Captain?"

MacReedy grinned. "Looks weird, doesn't it? It had me stumped for the
better part of a week. There's only one thing it could be and that's
what it is. Look...."

He picked up a sort of miniature torpedo from the work-table, dropped it
down the stove-pipe. The thing worked like a trench-mortar. Some spring
in the base of the tube sent the rocket flying in a high arc to smack
the opposite wall and drop to the floor.

"It's a mobile rocket-launcher," he said needlessly. "I'd lay odds it
can be used for atomic warheads."

"Good Lord!" cried the General. His mind was in a racing turmoil. The
problem with the Nazi V-1 and V-2 weapons during World War Two had been
the immobility of their launching platforms. If _They_ had managed to
get around it....

He thought of an insuperable obstacle, said, "But what about back-blast?
Don't tell me they've found a metal able to stand up under the heat of
launching."

"I doubt it," replied MacReedy seriously. "They use this barrel to give
her a boost like a trench-mortar shell. My hunch is the rocket doesn't
fire until she's well off the ground."

"Is it accurate?" the General asked, thunderstruck.

"Is a trench-mortar accurate?" the model-maker countered. "Ask anybody
who's been in Korea."

It was a wallop for the General. Atomic rocket-launchers, mobile
rocket-launchers that could function as artillery, could outrange the
A-gun perhaps by hundreds of miles. And if the missiles thus fired could
be guided--he could see no reason why not--the A-gun was already
obsolete.

He sat down on a packing box and mopped his brow although the cellar was
far from hot. He said and his voice was unsteady, "Thanks, MacReedy, I
think maybe you have done it."

"I think so," said the model-maker. He wasn't boasting, but he was sure
of himself. "You want to take it along with you? It should be quite
simple to make. I've got a few improvements over _Their_ supports, I
think."

