_two_ of THE BEST WAYS TO GET AROUND. One, in the first of the ARCOT,
MOREY, and WADE stories, "PIRACY PREFERRED", was that of molecular
motion. All the little molecules in a bar of metal go madly around in
every possible direction. If you could invent, as Campbell did in the
story, an electro-magnetic vibration that would force all the mollecules
to go in the same direction, then the bar of metals would go in that
direction, since it would be them. So Mr. Campbell hooked the thing up
to his ship, and off he went to Venus, or some other planet. Well, it
_would_ work, wouldn't it, _provided_ (ah yes!) you could make all the
mollecules go into one directional flow.

And the other brainstorm was when Aarn Munro, in the MIGHTIEST MACHINE,
decided that momentum and velocity were wave formations, and therefore,
one should be able to _tune into them_! (Anyone should be able to think
up a simple theory like that.) Not a bad WAY TO GET AROUND--in a
science fiction story.

Back in 1930, or some such year, Charles R. Tanner wrote THE FLIGHT OF
THE MERCURY, in the old WONDER STORIES. In that story he told you just
how to go ahead and make an ETHERPROPELLER, provided there is such a
thing as ether, and Osmium B. The theory is: you use water screws, air
propellers, and so why not an ether propeller? Put a cork in motionless
water. Start a wave motion in the water with your hand. If the length of
the wave is greater than the diameter of the cork, the cork just bobs up
and down and stays where it is. If the lengths of the waves are shorter
than the diameter of the cork, the waves go around it, and the cork still
stays right where it is. If the length of the wave is exactly the
diameter of the cork, tho cork rides right off, in the trough of the
wave, at the same speed as that of the wave formation. Now invent an
electro-magnetic vibration--by useing the metal Osmium B--exactly the
length of a Copper atom. Make your ship of copper, putting the ether
propeller, that which causes vibration in the ether, at the end of the
ship, and presto! all the copper atoms move along in the trough of the
ether waves, at the same speed as the other waves, which is the speed of
light. And, Mr. Tanner is off for Mars, in a super-plausibly
scientifictional way.

HELL SHIP, in last year's ASTOUNDING, Arthur J. Burks put forth an idea
which had been discussed by engineers before he had ever used It. They
just didn't know how to do it. Mr. Burks did--didn't he write the story.
At least, the idea gave him more earthly benifit than it gave the
engineers. Maybe he thinks he invented it--I don't know, nor does it
matter: He used it, the idea of gravatic lines of force, forming a
spider web throughout the solar system. With the proper machinery,
which he ascribed with good attention to detail, you could crawl up
those lines of force like a spider. This idea is so plausable that it
might be placed in the same catagory as rocket propulsion, which is
fact.

THE MOTH, in this year's ASTOUNDING, contains another of those ideas of
interplanatary locomotion which I call one of THE BEST WAYS TO GET
AROUND. Don't worry, I'm not pointing to myself with pride. I just wrote
the story, Charles R. Tanner conceived the idea. He tossed it off
paranthetically one night, and promptly forgot about it. The idea----If
all objects are in motion, according to the Lorentz-Fitzgerald
contraction theory, lose length in the direction of motion, why couldn't
an artificialy produced cause instantaneous motion, why couldn't an
artificialy produced contraction cause instantaneous motion,
proportional to length-loss? Not a thing in the world against it, my
friends, all you have to do is to find a way to cause the artificial
contraction of the ship in question. Of course, in my story, I invented
a force-field----very handy when you're in a tight spot!----which caused
tho electrons to flatten out. This force acted on the ship and
everything within. Therefore, any speed up to a little below that of
light could be obtained, and that bogey man so often ignored in
scientifiction, acceleration, was disposed of at the start, since there
was nothing that had a tendancy to stay behind. There is the real
inertialess drive, which E.E. Smith talked of, but never used.

(Paranthetically: When Charles R. Tanner saw the story containing his
idea in print, he became enthused, and promptly invented and named all
machines used in the process, discovered a new and ultimate particle
called the "graviton", that which makes the proton 1846 times heavier
than the electron, and practically drew plans for the force field which
caused the contraction. When he finished we knew exactly _how_ to obtain
speeds far exceding both those of Smith and Campbell. Our inventions
were plausable, and they'd work, provided----)

I've just about reached the end of the list, though there are one or two
others that might be mentioned right here at the tail end of the
article. Jules Verne, I suppose, has to be credited with the first ship
fired from a canon, in ONCE AROUND THE MOON. Wells takes the bow for
gravity plates, which Willy Ley so neatly disposed of, only he called it
"cavorite" in THE FIRST MEN IN THE MOON., and Roy Cummings used it
effectivly in AROUND THE UNIVERSE (and a hundred others). In a story in
the old WONDER Donald Wolheim put his rocket ship on a huge wheel,
rotated the wheel and flung it off into space. Fair, except that the
acceleration would be killing.

AND THAT'S ABSOLUTLY ALL THE BEST WAYS TO GET AROUND. Unless there are
some of those which I haven't heard of. If you know of some, I would
like to be enlightened.

--ROSS ROCKYLYN




--THE SYMPHONIC ABDUCTION--


"I suppose you've heard about what happened to my brother Jerry?" Ray
Spencer asked me; I shook my head. "The whole family was worried about
him for a while: couldn't tell whether he had sleeping-sickness, or
what. All we knew was that he'd gone coma listening to some phonograph
records when he was alone in the house. Perhaps the intense emotional
effect of the music, plus its stentor, was the cause.

"When I returned home, he lay cold on the floor in front of the
radio-phonograph. The automatic release had shut off the record, but the
current was still on, and the volume dial was turned full strength.
Nothing I could do would rouse my brother, so--scared--I put him to bed
and called a doctor, who had him taken to a hospital for observation. No
one could determine what was the trouble, and since we couldn't afford
to keep him at the hospital indefinitely, we brought Jerry back home.
And although it wasn't exactly appropriate, I couldn't help remembering
the story of the Sleeping Beauty whenever I looked into his room and saw
him, apparently only napping.

"Then one day I heard him--still in his trance--whisperingly singing.
The indistinct notes were reminiscent of one of Chaikovsky's ballet
pieces. I tried vainly to wake him. He sighed on and on until the faint
breath of a voice softened into silence....

"When at last he did awake, I had been listening to some continental
communiques in the adjoining room, with the door open so that I could
look in on him in case of emergency. The program ended and was followed
by concert music. I don't care much for symphony, so I arose and went to
the radio to switch it off. At the same time, Jerry stirred: I heard his
bed creak. Turning to look his way, I twisted the wrong dial, and the
music thundered: my brother began to toss on his bed. Disregarding the
racket for a moment in excitement at seeing him move, I ran in to him,
shouting, shaking him a little. His hands groped, found mine, and clung
to them. Painfully he endeavored to raise himself, dropped back
perspiring and panting. Then he screamed--horribly!--as if all Hell's
devils were shovelling all Hell's coals on him, and opened his eyes, his
face taut with dread. He recognized me. In a moment I had soothed him
back to normalcy. He was perfectly all right from then on.

"Or at least we thought so. But since you're so interested in
metaphysics, get him to tell you about the vision he had during his
catalepsy. He won't feel embarrassed; he's told it to others. Just say
that I mentioned it to you." Ray had finished. Later, when I chanced
upon Jerry Spencer, I brot him up to my apartment for dinner. The meal
over, he smiled at my query concerning his comatose dream, and related:

"None in my family are as interested in music as I: my belief is that to
realize its full magic you must leave off talking--better still, listen
