us here."

"God damn you!"

"He has...."

Max Wyman paused a long time and said: "Go on, will you?" He realized
that anybody else would have apologized. But he couldn't and he knew
that T. G. knew he couldn't.

The old man said: "A little insane. Bottled-up hatred. It's better out
of you than in. It's better to sock the man you hate and stand a chance
of having him sock you back than it is just to hate him and let the
hate gnaw you like a grave-worm."

"What've you got against the Syndic?"

"Nothing, Max. Nothing against it and nothing for it. What I'm for is
people. The Syndic is people. You're people. Slug 'em if you want and
they'll have a chance to slug you back. Maybe you'll pull down the
Syndic like Samson in the temple; more likely it'll crush you. But
you'll be _doing_ something about it. That's the great thing. That's the
thing people have to learn--or they wind up in Riveredge."

"You're crazy."

"I told you I was, or I wouldn't be here."

The man came at sunset. He was short and pudgy, with a halo of wispy
hair and the coldest, grimmest eyes that Wyman had ever seen. He shook
hands with Wyman, and the young man noted simultaneously a sharp pain in
his finger and that the stranger wore an elaborate gold ring. Then the
world got hazy and confused. He had a sense that he was being asked
questions, that he was answering them, that it went on for hours and
hours.

When things quite suddenly came into focus again, the pudgy man was
saying: "I can introduce myself now. Commander Grinnel, of the North
American Navy. My assignment is recruiting. The preliminary examination
has satisfied me that you are no plant and would be a desirable citizen
of the N. A. Government. I invite you to join us."

"What would I do?" Wyman asked steadily.

"That depends on your aptitudes. What do you think you would like to
do?"

Wyman said: "Kill me some Syndics."

The commander stared at him with those cold eyes. He said at last: "It
can probably be arranged. Come with me."

       *       *       *       *       *

They went by train to Cape Cod. At midnight on January 15th, the
commander and Wyman left their hotel room and strolled about the
streets. The commander taped small packets to the four legs of the
microwave relay tower that connected Cape Cod with the Continental Press
common carrier circuits and taped other packets to the police station's
motor pool gate.

At 1:00 A.M., the tower exploded and the motor pool gate fused into an
impassible puddle of blue-hot molten metal. Simultaneously, fifty men in
turtle-neck sweaters and caps appeared from nowhere on Center Street.
Half of them barricaded the street, firing on citizens and cops who came
too close. The others systematically looted every store between the
barricade and the beach.

Blinking a flashlight in code, the commander approached the deadline
unmolested and was let through with Wyman at his heels. The goods, the
raiders, the commander and Wyman were aboard a submarine by 2:35 and
under way ten minutes later.

After Commander Grinnel had exchanged congratulations with the sub
commander, he presented Wyman.

"A recruit. Normally I wouldn't have bothered, but he had a rather
special motivation. He could be very useful."

The sub commander studied Wyman impersonally. "If he's not a plant."

"I've used my ring. If you want to get it over with, we can test him and
swear him in now."

They strapped him into a device that recorded pulse, perspiration,
respiration, muscle-tension and brainwaves. A sweatered specialist came
and mildly asked Wyman matter-of-fact questions about his surroundings
while he calibrated the polygraph.

Then came the pay-off. Wyman did not fail to note that the sub commander
loosened his gun in his holster when the questioning began.

"Name, age and origin?"

"Max Wyman. Twenty-two. Buffalo Syndic Territory."

"Do you like the Syndic?"

"I hate them."

"What are your feelings toward the North American Government?"

"If it's against the Syndic, I'm for it."

"Would you rob for the North American Government?"

"I would."

"Would you kill for it?"

"I would."

"Have you any reservations yet unstated in your answers?"

"No."

It went on for an hour. The questions were re-phrased continuously;
after each of Wyman's firm answers, the sweatered technician gave a
satisfied little nod. At last it ended and he was unstrapped from the
device.

Max was tired.

The sub commander seemed a little awed as he got a small book and read
from it: "Do you, Max Wyman, solemnly renounce all allegiances
previously held by you and pledge your allegiance to the North American
Government?"

"I do," the young man said fiercely.

In a remote corner of his mind, for the first time in months, the bell
ceased to ring, the pendulum to beat and the light to flash.

Charles Orsino knew again who he was and what was his mission.




VII


It had begun when the girl led him through the conference room door.
Naturally one had misgivings; naturally one didn't speak up. But the
vault-like door far downstairs was terrifying when it yawned before you
and even more so when it closed behind you.

"What is this place?" he demanded at last. "Who are you?"

She said: "Psychology lab."

It produced on him the same effect that "alchemy section" or "Division
of astrology" would have on a well-informed young man in 1950. He
repeated flatly: "Psychology lab. If you don't want to tell me, very
well. I volunteered without strings." Which should remind her that he
was a sort of hero and should be treated with a certain amount of
dignity and that she could save her corny jokes.

"I meant it," she said, fiddling busily with the locks of yet another
vault-like door. "I'm a psychologist. I'm also by the way, Lee
Falcaro--since you asked."

"The old man--Edward Falcaro's line?" he asked.

"Simon pure. He's my father's brother. Father's down in Miami, handling
the tracks and gaming in general."

The second big door opened on a brain-gray room whose air had a
curiously dead feel to it. "Sit down," she said, indicating a very
unorthodox chair. He did, and found that the chair was the most
comfortable piece of furniture he had ever known. Its contact with his
body was so complete that it pressed nowhere, it poked nowhere. The girl
studied dials in its back nevertheless and muttered something about
adjusting it. He protested.

"Nonsense," she said decisively. She sat down herself in an ordinary
seat. Charles shifted uneasily in his chair to find that it moved with
him. Still no pressure, still no poking.

"You're wondering," she began, "about the word 'psychology'. It has a
bad history and people have given it up as a bad job. It's true that
there isn't pressure nowadays to study the human mind. People get along.
In general what they want they get, without crippling effort. In your
uncle Frank Taylor's language, the Syndic is an appropriately-structured
organization of high morale and wide public acceptance. In my language
the Syndic is a father-image which does a good job of fathering. In good
times, people aren't introspective.

"There is, literally, no reason why my line of the family should have
kept up a tradition of experimental psychology. Way, way back, old
Amadeo Falcaro often consulted Professor Oscar Sternweiss of the
Columbia University psychology faculty--he wasn't as much of a dashing
improvisor as the history books make him out to be. Eventually one of
his daughters married one of Sternweiss' sons and inherited the
Sternweiss notebooks and library and apparatus. It became an irrational
custom to keep it alive. When each academic school of psychology managed
to prove that every other school of psychology was dead wrong and
psychology collapsed as a science, the family tradition was unaffected;
it stood outside the wrangling.

"Now, you're wondering what this has to do with trying to slip you into
the Government."

"I am," Charles said fervently. If she'd been a doll outside the Syndic,
he would minutes ago have protested that all this was foolish and walked
out. Since she was not only in the Syndic, but in the Falcaro line, he
had no choice except to hear her babble and _then_ walk out. It was all
rot, psychology. Id, oversoul, mind-vectors, counseling,
psychosomatics--rot from sick-minded old men. Everybody knew--

"The Government, we know, uses deinhibiting drugs as a first screening
of its recruits. As an infallible second screening, they use a
physiological lie-detector based on the fact that telling a lie causes
tensions in the liar's body. We shall get around this by slipping you in
as a young man who hates the Syndic for some valid reason--"

"Confound it, you were just telling me that they can't be fooled!"

"We won't fool them. You'll _be_ a young man who hates the Syndic. We'll
tear down your present personality a gray cell at a time. We'll pump you
full of Seconal every day for a quarter of a year.... We'll obliterate
your personality under a new one. We'll bury Charles Orsino under a
mountain of suggestions, compulsions and obsessions shoveled at you
sixteen hours a day while you're too groggy to resist. Naturally the
supplanting personality will be neurotic, but that works in with the
mission."

He struggled with a metaphysical concept, for the first time in his
life. "But--but--how will I know I'm _me_?"

"We think we can put a trigger on it. When you take the Government oath
of allegiance, you should bounce back."

He did not fail to note a little twin groove between her brows that
appeared when she said _think_ and _should_. He knew that in a sense he
was nearer death now than when Halloran's bullet had been intercepted.

"Are you staying with it?" she asked simply.

Various factors entered into it. _A life for the Syndic_, as in the
children's history books. That one didn't loom very large. But multiply
it by _it sounds like more fun than hot-rod polo_, and that by _this is
going to raise my stock sky-high with the family_ and you had something.
Somehow, under Lee Falcaro's interested gaze, he neglected to divide it
by _if it works_.

"I'm staying with it," he said.

She grinned. "It won't be too hard," she said. "In the old days there
would have been voting record, social security numbers, military
service, addresses they could check on--hundreds of things. Now about
all we have to fit you with is a name and a subjective life."

It began that spring day and went on into late fall.

The ringing bell.

The flashing light.

The wobbling pendulum.

You are Max Wyman of Buffalo Syndic Territory. You are Max Wyman of
Buffalo Syndic Territory. You are Max Wyman of Buffalo Syndic....

[Illustration]

Mom fried pork sausages in the morning, you loved the smell of
pumpernickel from the bakery in Vesey Street.

Mr. Watsisname the English teacher with the mustache wanted you to go to
college--

    _Nay, ye can not, though ye had Argus eyes,
    In abbeyes they haue so many suttyll spyes;
    For ones in the yere they have secret vvsytacyons,
    And yf ony prynce reforme...._

--but the stockyard job was closer, they needed breakdown men--

You are Max Wyman of Buffalo Syndic Territory. You are--

The ringing bell.

The flashing light.

The wobbling pendulum.

And the pork sausages and the teacher with the mustache and poems you
loved and

_page 24, paragraph 3, maximum speed on a live-cattle walkway is three
miles per hour: older walkways hold this speed with reduction gears
coupled to a standard 18-inch ehrenhafter unit. Standard practice in new
construction calls for holding speed by direct drive from a
specially-wound ehrenhafter. This places a special obligation in
breakdown maintenance men, who must distinguish between the two types,
carry two sets of wiring diagrams and a certain number of
mutually-uninterchangeable parts, though good design principles hold
these to a minimum. The main difference in the winding of a standard
18-incher and a lowspeed ehrenhafter rotor--_

Of course things are better now, Max Wyman, you owe a great debt to Jim
Hogan, Father of the Buffalo Syndic, who fought for your freedom in the
great old days, and to his descendants who are tirelessly working for
your freedom and happiness.

And bow-happiness is a girl named Inge Klohbel now that you're almost a
man.

You are Max Wyman of Buffalo Syndic Territory. You are Max Wyman of
Buffalo Syndic Territory.

And Inge Klohbel is why you put away the crazy dream of scholarship, for
her lips and hair and eyes and legs mean more to you than anything, more
than

_Later phonologic changes include palatal mutation; i.e., before_ cht
_and_ hs _the diphthongs_ eo, io, _which resulted from breaking, became_
ie (i, y) _as in_ cneoht, chieht, _and_ seox (_x equalling_ hs), siex,
six, syx....

the crazy dream of scholarship, what kind of a way is that to repay the
Mob and

The ringing bell.

The flashing light.

The wobbling pendulum.
