wrath of the imperialists--intolerant and short-sighted as imperialists
invariably are. Aquilonian regiments were secretly brought to the
borders of the marches, the Bossonian chiefs were invited to attend a
great conclave, and, in the guise of an expedition against the Picts,
bands of savage Shemitish soldiers were quartered among the unsuspecting
villagers. The unarmed chiefs were massacred, the Shemites turned on
their stunned hosts with torch and sword, and the armored imperial hosts
were hurled ruthlessly on the unsuspecting people. From north to south
the marches were ravaged and the Aquilonian armies marched back from the
borders, leaving a ruined and devastated land behind them.

And then the Pictish invasion burst in full power along those borders.
It was no mere raid, but the concerted rush of a whole nation, led by
chiefs who had served in Aquilonian armies, and planned and directed by
Gorm--an old man now, but with the fire of his fierce ambition undimmed.
This time there were no strong walled villages in their path, manned by
sturdy archers, to hold back the rush until the imperial troops could be
brought up. The remnants of the Bossonians were swept out of existence,
and the blood-mad barbarians swarmed into Aquilonia, looting and
burning, before the legions, warring again with the Nemedians, could be
marched into the west. Zingara seized this opportunity to throw off the
yoke, which example was followed by Corinthia and the Shemites. Whole
regiments of mercenaries and vassals mutinied and marched back to their
own countries, looting and burning as they went. The Picts surged
irresistibly eastward, and host after host was trampled beneath their
feet. Without their Bossonian archers the Aquilonians found themselves
unable to cope with the terrible arrow-fire of the barbarians. From all
parts of the empire legions were recalled to resist the onrush, while
from the wilderness horde after horde swarmed forth, in apparently
inexhaustible supply. And in the midst of this chaos, the Cimmerians
swept down from their hills, completing the ruin. They looted cities,
devastated the country, and retired into the hills with their plunder,
but the Picts occupied the land they had over-run. And the Aquilonian
empire went down in fire and blood.

Then again the Hyrkanians rode from the blue east. The withdrawal of the
imperial legions from Zamora was their incitement. Zamora fell easy prey
to their thrusts, and the Hyrkanian king established his capital in the
largest city of the country. This invasion was from the ancient
Hyrkanian kingdom of Turan, on the shores of the inland sea, but
another, more savage Hyrkanian thrust came from the north. Hosts of
steel-clad riders galloped around the northern extremity of the inland
sea, traversed the icy deserts, entered the steppes, driving the
aborigines before them, and launched themselves against the western
kingdoms. These newcomers were not at first allies with the Turanians,
but skirmished with them as with the Hyborians; new drifts of eastern
warriors bickered and fought, until all were united under a great chief,
who came riding from the very shores of the eastern ocean. With no
Aquilonian armies to oppose them, they were invincible. They swept over
and subjugated Brythunia, and devastated southern Hyperborea, and
Corinthia. They swept into the Cimmerian hills, driving the black-haired
barbarians before them, but among the hills, where cavalry was less
effectual, the Cimmerians turned on them, and only a disorderly retreat,
at the end of a whole day of bloody fighting, saved the Hyrkanian hosts
from complete annihilation.

While these events had been transpiring, the kingdoms of Shem had
conquered their ancient master, Koth, and had been defeated in an
attempted invasion of Stygia. But scarcely had they completed their
degradation of Koth, when they were over-run by the Hyrkanians, and
found themselves subjugated by sterner masters than the Hyborians had
ever been. Meanwhile the Picts had made themselves complete masters of
Aquilonia, practically blotting out the inhabitants. They had broken
over the borders of Zingara, and thousands of Zingarans, fleeing the
slaughter into Argos, threw themselves on the mercy of the
westward-sweeping Hyrkanians, who settled them in Zamora as subjects.
Behind them as they fled, Argos was enveloped in the flame and slaughter
of Pictish conquest, and the slayers swept into Ophir and clashed with
the westward-riding Hyrkanians. The latter, after their conquest of
Shem, had overthrown a Stygian army at the Nilus and over-run the
country as far south as the black kingdom of Amazon, of whose people
they brought back thousands as captives, settling them among the
Shemites. Possibly they would have completed their conquests in Stygia,
adding it to their widening empire, but for the fierce thrusts of the
Picts against their western conquests.

Nemedia, unconquerable by Hyborians, reeled between the riders of the
east and the swordsmen of the west, when a tribe of AEsir, wandering down
from their snowy lands, came into the kingdom, and were engaged as
mercenaries; they proved such able warriors that they not only beat off
the Hyrkanians, but halted the eastward advance of the Picts.

The world at that time presents some such picture: a vast Pictish
empire, wild, rude and barbaric, stretches from the coasts of Vanaheim
in the north to the southern-most shores of Zingara. It stretches east
to include all Aquilonia except Gunderland, the northern-most province,
which, as a separate kingdom in the hills, survived the fall of the
empire, and still maintains its independence. The Pictish empire also
includes Argos, Ophir, the western part of Koth, and the western-most
lands of Shem. Opposed to this barbaric empire is the empire of the
Hyrkanians, of which the northern boundaries are the ravaged lines of
Hyperborea, and the southern, the deserts south of the lands of Shem.
Zamora, Brythunia, the Border Kingdom, Corinthia, most of Koth, and all
the eastern lands of Shem are included in this empire. The borders of
Cimmeria are intact; neither Pict nor Hyrkanian has been able to subdue
these warlike barbarians. Nemedia, dominated by the AEsir mercenaries,
resists all invasions. In the north Nordheim, Cimmeria and Nemedia
separate the conquering races, but in the south, Koth has become a
battle-ground where Picts and Hyrkanians war incessantly. Sometimes the
eastern warriors expel the barbarians from the kingdom entirely; again
the plains and cities are in the hands of the western invaders. In the
far south, Stygia, shaken by the Hyrkanian invasion, is being encroached
upon by the great black kingdoms. And in the far north, the Nordic
tribes are restless, warring continually with the Cimmerians, and
sweeping the Hyperborean frontiers.

Gorm was slain by Hialmar, a chief of the Nemedian AEsir. He was a very
old man, nearly a hundred years old. In the seventy-five years which had
elapsed since he first heard the tale of empires from the lips of
Arus--a long time in the life of a man, but a brief space in the tale of
nations--he had welded an empire from straying savage clans, he had
overthrown a civilization. He who had been born in a mud-walled,
wattle-roofed hut, in his old age sat on golden thrones, and gnawed
joints of beef presented to him on golden dishes by naked slave-girls
who were the daughters of kings. Conquest and the acquiring of wealth
altered not the Pict; out of the ruins of the crushed civilization no
new culture arose phoenix-like. The dark hands which shattered the
artistic glories of the conquered never tried to copy them. Though he
sat among the glittering ruins of shattered palaces and clad his hard
body in the silks of vanquished kings, the Pict remained the eternal
barbarian, ferocious, elemental, interested only in the naked primal
principles of life, unchanging, unerring in his instincts which were all
for war and plunder, and in which arts and the cultured progress of
humanity had no place. Not so with the AEsir who settled in Nemedia.
These soon adopted many of the ways of their civilized allies, modified
powerfully, however, by their own intensely virile and alien culture.

