ears, welling up from below. Pulling up short and reining to the lip of
the cliff, he stared down into the dry river-bed that wound along the
foot of the ridge. Along that gorge rode a motley throng--bearded men on
half-wild horses, five hundred strong, bristling with weapons. And Conan
shouted suddenly, leaning over the edge of the cliff, three hundred feet
above them.

At his shout they reined back, and five hundred bearded faces were
tilted up towards him; a deep, clamorous roar filled the canyon. Conan
did not waste words.

'I was riding for Ghor!' he roared. 'I had not hoped to meet you dogs on
the trail. Follow me as fast as your nags can push! I'm going to Yimsha,
and--'

'Traitor!' The howl was like a dash of ice-water in his face.

'What?' He glared down at them, jolted speechless. He saw wild eyes
blazing up at him, faces contorted with fury, fists brandishing blades.

'Traitor!' they roared back, wholeheartedly. 'Where are the seven chiefs
held captive in Peshkhauri?'

'Why, in the governor's prison, I suppose,' he answered.

A bloodthirsty yell from a hundred throats answered him, with such a
waving of weapons and a clamor that he could not understand what they
were saying. He beat down the din with a bull-like roar, and bellowed:
'What devil's play is this? Let one of you speak, so I can understand
what you mean!'

A gaunt old chief elected himself to this position, shook his tulwar at
Conan as a preamble, and shouted accusingly: 'You would not let us go
raiding Peshkhauri to rescue our brothers!'

'No, you fools!' roared the exasperated Cimmerian. 'Even if you'd
breached the wall, which is unlikely, they'd have hanged the prisoners
before you could reach them.'

'And you went alone to traffic with the governor!' yelled the Afghuli,
working himself into a frothing frenzy.

'Well?'

'Where are the seven chiefs?' howled the old chief, making his tulwar
into a glimmering wheel of steel about his head. 'Where are they? Dead!'

'What!' Conan nearly fell off his horse in his surprize.

'Aye, dead!' five hundred bloodthirsty voices assured him.

The old chief brandished his arms and got the floor again. 'They were
not hanged!' he screeched. 'A Wazuli in another cell saw them die! The
governor sent a wizard to slay them by craft!'

'That must be a lie,' said Conan. 'The governor would not dare. Last
night I talked with him--'

The admission was unfortunate. A yell of hate and accusation split the
skies.

'Aye! You went to him alone! To betray us! It is no lie. The Wazuli
escaped through the doors the wizard burst in his entry, and told the
tale to our scouts whom he met in Zhaibar. They had been sent forth to
search for you, when you did not return. When they heard the Wazuli's
tale, they returned with all haste to Ghor, and we saddled our steeds
and girt our swords!'

'And what do you fools mean to do?' demanded the Cimmerian.

'To avenge our brothers!' they howled. 'Death to the Kshatriyas! Slay
him, brothers, he is a traitor!'

Arrows began to rattle around him. Conan rose in his stirrups, striving
to make himself heard above the tumult, and then, with a roar of mingled
rage, defiance and disgust, he wheeled and galloped back up the trail.
Behind him and below him the Afghulis came pelting, mouthing their rage,
too furious even to remember that the only way they could reach the
height whereon he rode was to traverse the river-bed in the other
direction, make the broad bend and follow the twisting trail up over the
ridge. When they did remember this, and turned back, their repudiated
chief had almost reached the point where the ridge joined the
escarpment.

At the cliff he did not take the trail by which he had descended, but
turned off on another, a mere trace along a rock-fault, where the
stallion scrambled for footing. He had not ridden far when the stallion
snorted and shied back from something lying in the trail. Conan stared
down on the travesty of a man, a broken, shredded, bloody heap that
gibbered and gnashed splintered teeth.

Impelled by some obscure reason, Conan dismounted and stood looking down
at the ghastly shape, knowing that he was witness of a thing miraculous
and opposed to nature. The Rakhsha lifted his gory head, and his strange
eyes, glazed with agony and approaching death, rested on Conan with
recognition.

'Where are they?' It was a racking croak not even remotely resembling a
human voice.

'Gone back to their damnable castle on Yimsha,' grunted Conan. 'They
took the Devi with them.'

'I will go!' muttered the man. 'I will follow them! They killed Gitara;
I will kill them--the acolytes, the Four of the Black Circle, the Master
himself! Kill--kill them all!' He strove to drag his mutilated frame
along the rock, but not even his indomitable will could animate that
gory mass longer, where the splintered bones hung together only by torn
tissue and ruptured fibre.

'Follow them!' raved Khemsa, drooling a bloody slaver. 'Follow!'

'I'm going to,' growled Conan. 'I went to fetch my Afghulis, but they've
turned on me. I'm going on to Yimsha alone. I'll have the Devi back if I
have to tear down that damned mountain with my bare hands. I didn't
think the governor would dare kill my headmen, when I had the Devi, but
it seems he did. I'll have his head for that. She's no use to me now as
a hostage, but--'

'The curse of Yizil on them!' gasped Khemsa. 'Go! I am dying. Wait--take
my girdle.'

He tried to fumble with a mangled hand at his tatters, and Conan,
understanding what he sought to convey, bent and drew from about his
gory waist a girdle of curious aspect.

'Follow the golden vein through the abyss,' muttered Khemsa. 'Wear the
girdle. I had it from a Stygian priest. It will aid you, though it
failed me at last. Break the crystal globe with the four golden
pomegranates. Beware of the Master's transmutations--I am going to
Gitara--she is waiting for me in hell--_aie, ya Skelos yar!_' And so he
died.

Conan stared down at the girdle. The hair of which it was woven was not
horsehair. He was convinced that it was woven of the thick black tresses
of a woman. Set in the thick mesh were tiny jewels such as he had never
seen before. The buckle was strangely made, in the form of a golden
serpent-head, flat, wedge-shaped and scaled with curious art. A strong
shudder shook Conan as he handled it, and he turned as though to cast it
over the precipice; then he hesitated, and finally buckled it about his
waist, under the Bakhariot girdle. Then he mounted and pushed on.

The sun had sunk behind the crags. He climbed the trail in the vast
shadow of the cliffs that was thrown out like a dark blue mantle over
valleys and ridges far below. He was not far from the crest when, edging
around the shoulder of a jutting crag, he heard the clink of shod hoofs
ahead of him. He did not turn back. Indeed, so narrow was the path that
the stallion could not have wheeled his great body upon it. He rounded
the jut of the rock and came upon a portion of the path that broadened
somewhat. A chorus of threatening yells broke on his ear, but his
stallion pinned a terrified horse hard against the rock, and Conan
caught the arm of the rider in an iron grip, checking the lifted sword
in midair.

'Kerim Shah!' muttered Conan, red glints smoldering luridly in his eyes.
The Turanian did not struggle; they sat their horses almost breast to
breast, Conan's fingers locking the other's sword-arm. Behind Kerim Shah
filed a group of lean Irakzai on gaunt horses. They glared like wolves,
fingering bows and knives, but rendered uncertain because of the
narrowness of the path and the perilous proximity of the abyss that
yawned beneath them.

'Where is the Devi?' demanded Kerim Shah.

'What's it to you, you Hyrkanian spy?' snarled Conan.

'I know you have her,' answered Kerim Shah. 'I was on my way northward
with some tribesmen when we were ambushed by enemies in Shalizah Pass.
Many of my men were slain, and the rest of us harried through the hills
like jackals. When we had beaten off our pursuers, we turned westward,
toward Amir Jehun Pass, and this morning we came upon a Wazuli wandering
through the hills. He was quite mad, but I learned much from his
incoherent gibberings before he died. I learned that he was the sole
survivor of a band which followed a chief of the Afghulis and a captive
Kshatriya woman into a gorge behind Khurum village. He babbled much of a
man in a green turban whom the Afghuli rode down, but who, when attacked
by the Wazulis who pursued, smote them with a nameless doom that wiped
them out as a gust of wind-driven fire wipes out a cluster of locusts.

'How that one man escaped, I do not know, nor did he; but I knew from
his maunderings that Conan of Ghor had been in Khurum with his royal
captive. And as we made our way through the hills, we overtook a naked
Galzai girl bearing a gourd of water, who told us a tale of having been
stripped and ravished by a giant foreigner in the garb of an Afghuli
chief, who, she said, gave her garments to a Vendhyan woman who
accompanied him. She said you rode westward.'

Kerim Shah did not consider it necessary to explain that he had been on
his way to keep his rendezvous with the expected troops from Secunderam
when he found his way barred by hostile tribesmen. The road to Gurashah
valley through Shalizah Pass was longer than the road that wound through
Amir Jehun Pass, but the latter traversed part of the Afghuli country,
which Kerim Shah had been anxious to avoid until he came with an army.
Barred from the Shalizah road, however, he had turned to the forbidden
route, until news that Conan had not yet reached Afghulistan with his
captive had caused him to turn southward and push on recklessly in the
hope of overtaking the Cimmerian in the hills.

'So you had better tell me where the Devi is,' suggested Kerim Shah. 'We
outnumber you--'

'Let one of your dogs nock a shaft and I'll throw you over the cliff,'
Conan promised. 'It wouldn't do you any good to kill me, anyhow. Five
hundred Afghulis are on my trail, and if they find you've cheated them,
they'll flay you alive. Anyway, I haven't got the Devi. She's in the
hands of the Black Seers of Yimsha.'

'_Tarim!_' swore Kerim Shah softly, shaken out of his poise for the
first time. 'Khemsa--'

'Khemsa's dead,' grunted Conan. 'His masters sent him to hell on a
landslide. And now get out of my way. I'd be glad to kill you if I had
the time, but I'm on my way to Yimsha.'

'I'll go with you,' said the Turanian abruptly.

Conan laughed at him. 'Do you think I'd trust you, you Hyrkanian dog?'

'I don't ask you to,' returned Kerim Shah. 'We both want the Devi. You
know my reason; King Yezdigerd desires to add her kingdom to his empire,
and herself in his seraglio. And I knew you, in the days when you were a
hetman of the _kozak_ steppes; so I know your ambition is wholesale
plunder. You want to loot Vendhya, and to twist out a huge ransom for
Yasmina. Well, let us for the time being, without any illusion about
each other, unite our forces, and try to rescue the Devi from the Seers.
If we succeed, and live, we can fight it out to see who keeps her.'

Conan narrowly scrutinized the other for a moment, and then nodded,
releasing the Turanian's arm. 'Agreed; what about your men?'

Kerim Shah turned to the silent Irakzai and spoke briefly: 'This chief
and I are going to Yimsha to fight the wizards. Will you go with us, or
stay here to be flayed by the Afghulis who are following this man?'

They looked at him with eyes grimly fatalistic. They were doomed and
they knew it--had known it ever since the singing arrows of the ambushed
Dagozai had driven them back from the pass of Shalizah. The men of the
lower Zhaibar had too many reeking bloodfeuds among the crag-dwellers.
They were too small a band to fight their way back through the hills to
the villages of the border, without the guidance of the crafty Turanian.
They counted themselves as dead already, so they made the reply that
only dead men would make: 'We will go with thee and die on Yimsha.'

'Then in Crom's name let us be gone,' grunted Conan, fidgeting with
impatience as he started into the blue gulfs of the deepening twilight.
'My wolves were hours behind me, but we've lost a devilish lot of time.'

Kerim Shah backed his steed from between the black stallion and the
cliff, sheathed his sword and cautiously turned the horse. Presently the
band was filing up the path as swiftly as they dared. They came out upon
the crest nearly a mile east of the spot where Khemsa had halted the
Cimmerian and the Devi. The path they had traversed was a perilous one,
even for hill-men, and for that reason Conan had avoided it that day
when carrying Yasmina, though Kerim Shah, following him, had taken it
supposing the Cimmerian had done likewise. Even Conan sighed with relief
when the horses scrambled up over the last rim. They moved like phantom
riders through an enchanted realm of shadows. The soft creak of leather,
the clink of steel marked their passing, then again the dark mountain
slopes lay naked and silent in the starlight.




8 Yasmina Knows Stark Terror


Yasmina had time but for one scream when she felt herself enveloped in
that crimson whirl and torn from her protector with appalling force. She
screamed once, and then she had no breath to scream. She was blinded,
deafened, rendered mute and eventually senseless by the terrific rushing
of the air about her. There was a dazed consciousness of dizzy height
and numbing speed, a confused impression of natural sensations gone mad,
and then vertigo and oblivion.

A vestige of these sensations clung to her as she recovered
consciousness; so she cried out and clutched wildly as though to stay a
headlong and involuntary flight. Her fingers closed on soft fabric, and
a relieving sense of stability pervaded her. She took cognizance of her
surroundings.

She was lying on a dais covered with black velvet. This dais stood in a
great, dim room whose walls were hung with dusky tapestries across which
crawled dragons reproduced with repellent realism. Floating shadows
merely hinted at the lofty ceiling, and gloom that lent itself to
illusion lurked in the corners. There seemed to be neither windows nor
doors in the walls, or else they were concealed by the nighted
tapestries. Where the dim light came from, Yasmina could not determine.
The great room was a realm of mysteries, or shadows, and shadowy shapes
in which she could not have sworn to observe movement, yet which invaded
her mind with a dim and formless terror.

But her gaze fixed itself on a tangible object. On another, smaller dais
of jet, a few feet away, a man sat cross-legged, gazing contemplatively
at her. His long black velvet robe, embroidered with gold thread, fell
loosely about him, masking his figure. His hands were folded in his
sleeves. There was a velvet cap upon his head. His face was calm,
placid, not unhandsome, his eyes lambent and slightly oblique. He did
not move a muscle as he sat regarding her, nor did his expression alter
when he saw she was conscious.

Yasmina felt fear crawl like a trickle of ice-water down her supple
spine. She lifted herself on her elbows and stared apprehensively at the
stranger.

'Who are you?' she demanded. Her voice sounded brittle and inadequate.

'I am the Master of Yimsha.' The tone was rich and resonant, like the
mellow tones of a temple bell.

'Why did you bring me here?' she demanded.

'Were you not seeking me?'

'If you are one of the Black Seers--yes!' she answered recklessly,
believing that he could read her thoughts anyway.

He laughed softly, and chills crawled up and down her spine again.

'You would turn the wild children of the hills against the Seers of
Yimsha!' He smiled. 'I have read it in your mind, princess. Your weak,
human mind, filled with petty dreams of hate and revenge.'

'You slew my brother!' A rising tide of anger was vying with her fear;
her hands were clenched, her lithe body rigid. 'Why did you persecute
him? He never harmed you. The priests say the Seers are above meddling
in human affairs. Why did you destroy the king of Vendhya?'

'How can an ordinary human understand the motives of a Seer?' returned
the Master calmly. 'My acolytes in the temples of Turan, who are the
priests behind the priests of Tarim, urged me to bestir myself in behalf
of Yezdigerd. For reasons of my own, I complied. How can I explain my
mystic reasons to your puny intellect? You could not understand.'

'I understand this: that my brother died!' Tears of grief and rage shook
in her voice. She rose upon her knees and stared at him with wide
blazing eyes, as supple and dangerous in that moment as a she-panther.

'As Yezdigerd desired,' agreed the Master calmly. 'For a while it was my
whim to further his ambitions.'

'Is Yezdigerd your vassal?' Yasmina tried to keep the timbre of her
voice unaltered. She had felt her knee pressing something hard and
symmetrical under a fold of velvet. Subtly she shifted her position,
moving her hand under the fold.

'Is the dog that licks up the offal in the temple yard the vassal of the
god?' returned the Master.

He did not seem to notice the actions she sought to dissemble. Concealed
by the velvet, her fingers closed on what she knew was the golden hilt
of a dagger. She bent her head to hide the light of triumph in her eyes.

'I am weary of Yezdigerd,' said the Master. 'I have turned to other
amusements--ha!'

With a fierce cry Yasmina sprang like a jungle cat, stabbing
murderously. Then she stumbled and slid to the floor, where she cowered,
staring up at the man on the dais. He had not moved; his cryptic smile
was unchanged. Tremblingly she lifted her hand and stared at it with
dilated eyes. There was no dagger in her fingers; they grasped a stalk
of golden lotus, the crushed blossoms drooping on the bruised stem.

She dropped it as if it had been a viper, and scrambled away from the
proximity of her tormenter. She returned to her own dais, because that
was at least more dignified for a queen than groveling on the floor at
the feet of a sorcerer, and eyed him apprehensively, expecting
reprisals.

But the Master made no move.

'All substance is one to him who holds the key of the cosmos,' he said
cryptically. 'To an adept nothing is immutable. At will, steel blossoms
bloom in unnamed gardens, or flower-swords flash in the moonlight.'

'You are a devil,' she sobbed.

'Not I!' he laughed. 'I was born on this planet, long ago. Once I was a
common man, nor have I lost all human attributes in the numberless eons
of my adeptship. A human steeped in the dark arts is greater than a
devil. I am of human origin, but I rule demons. You have seen the Lords
of the Black Circle--it would blast your soul to hear from what far
