received, and thou art warned. Begone!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He left with as much alacrity as he thought became him, and continued on
his way. For the remainder of the day he wandered, without attempting to
fix a course, or to avoid anything that might come to him. He was lost
in thought, with a great sense of well-being that he felt that nothing
could overcome.

As the shadows of evening began to lengthen, and the first stars to
shine, he found himself ascending the side of a small but respectably
rugged mountain. By the time of total darkness, he had reached the top,
and seated himself beneath a redwood tree. He began to feel hungry, but
not faint, and with a slight effort of his will the hunger passed away.
He sank into a revery, he sat still and thought and contemplated through
the long night hours. The cool dews came upon him, and the light winds
were whispering in the pale first light, and he was undisturbed.

He remained on the mountain for three days, eating nothing, and not
thinking of food. He felt the opposing forces of life within, through
and around him. The harmonious, continually pulsing tension of existence
became in a manner clear to him, its great necessity indubitable. He
knew that the battle of opposites, the co-operative strife of elements,
abilities, tendencies, must be fought within himself; he foresaw no
gain from the struggle's objectification, or its transferral to his
associations with others. He would have peaceful, profoundly and highly
aspiring, adequate companions, or he would remain alone.

During the fourth night, just before the dawn, he saw a shimmering light
over a higher crest in the distance. For an instant it seemed to become
a finger, pointing; and then it faded. He arose, light but unfaint from
fasting, and set out for the indicated mountain. He encountered no other
person along the way.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was in the late afternoon that he arrived. It was a large and
beautiful valley, into which he slowly descended. It was thickly
populated, and filled with a seething, a tremendous activity. Waves
of immense, ardent energy enveloped him, compound of great joy and
great despair; heart-ravishing music, barely audible, came to him,
spasmodically, on the faint breezes. And the weariness and the weakness
came to him also, strongly, the exhaustion of his great efforts of the
past several days. He lost consciousness, and sank in a seemingly almost
boneless heap to the side of the mountain.

He awoke the following morning in a small hut, secluded, in the shade of
a large tree and beside a stream. A spare old man, with a slight beard
and twinkling eyes, nodded to him.

"Smells good, does it?" he asked.

It smelled very good, and it looked better when the old man brought him
an ample breakfast, well prepared. He ate slowly, savoring each mouthful.

"If you don't know where you are," said the old man, "this is a
community of artists. We don't always get along very well together," he
smiled, "but usually we're minding our own business anyway; and it's
good to exchange ideas and insights now and then, and see each other's
work. And we co-operate too, especially on the stage productions, like
Noh plays, or Wagner, or something contemporary. I can introduce you to
a young man who has written some very powerful and apt music for the
Aeschylean choruses.

"I'm a poet myself," he continued, "and a dramatist now and then. I'm
pretty modest and easy-going, compared to most of the people here, but
I have my moments, and I've done some pretty good things in my life.
I'll probably show you some later on. It's a good thing for you I'm in a
silent period just now: if the old touch had been on my lyre, I'd never
have noticed you; or if I had, I'd not have attended to you. But come
on, you look healthy enough: let me show you around."

He arose to dress, and the old man looked him over with frank admiration.

"You're a fine figure," he said. "And the beard does you justice: or you
do justice to the beard. You're like one of the old Biblical patriarchs.
Or like my idea of them, anyway; which may be far enough from the truth."

They left the hut, and walked beside the stream into the main valley.

       *       *       *       *       *

They passed an occasional distracted figure, who paid them no heed.
Painters were numerous: one of them, burly and covered with paint,
had ostentatiously affixed his canvas to a rock wall, and was facing
away from all the beauties of the scenery: with furious strokes he was
nearing the completion of his vivid abstraction. One sat cross-legged,
quite self-contained, and with a few strokes of the brush, black on
white, achieved a bird that seemed almost ready to fly from the paper.
Another was painting a meltingly beautiful portrait of his mistress,
with flowers in her hair.

"When we get back, I'll show you a real picture," the old poet said.
"It's called Vasuki. He's the king of the snakes, according to the
Hindus. I don't know much about the man who did it, except that he's
got the most wonderful eyes I ever saw. I tried to do him justice
in a sonnet once, but I failed. He just appeared one day, and then
disappeared one day, and that's all anyone seems to know. Two of our
best young painters went out to look for him over a year ago, and they
haven't returned."

There were musical concerts, operas and plays. There were potters at
their wheels, and sculptors with their chisels and their clay. Every art
seemed represented.

"In that hut over there," said the poet, "lives one of the greatest
musical geniuses the world has ever known. Better even than Beethoven,
I think. Maybe you'll have a chance to meet him, if he turns sociable
while you're here. I trust you'll be here for a long time. Maybe you'll
stay for good? You seem to have the mark in your forehead."

He stayed for several months. He luxuriated in the splendor and the
beauty of this dedicated life. Great artistry of sound and word, color
and form, filled him: but never to overflowing, and never, fully, to
satisfaction. He grew weary of the continual reaching out, the perpetual
feeding upon dreams. He shared the raptures and the torments of the
artists, he felt powerfully and saw deeply, more than ever before:
but something was lacking. The occasional flashes of insight were
not enough, and the labor, the aspiration, was heart-breaking. What
he sought was still beyond, beyond art itself, beyond all possible
creation. And yet, it must be attainable.

       *       *       *       *       *

He aspired to poetry, he tried to give a voice to his aspiration and
his need. But it was not in him. And what if it had been? Why should he
write verses to complain that he was not Lit with the Sun? He thought
briefly of the Twentieth Century poetry that he had read, the poetry of
the Dark Ages, and shuddered at the thought of adding to that store.
He would never attempt expression again, until he knew something to
express. But when the time came, perhaps it would flow from him in such
a golden stream as he remembered from the great masters. Perhaps the
poet had not read too mistakenly the sign in his forehead.

He noticed that some of the artists, and those he considered the
profoundest and the surest, were not permanent residents here. They came
and went, with a light as of far peaks in their eyes. Like the painter
of Vasuki, which was truly a marvelous picture, instinct with a spirit
that made most other productions seem like mere daubs of paint. He felt
that that man knew something, and that he did not learn it here, that
he did not learn it as a painter at all. There must be other places,
