lamps, and here and there a gaslit window, or the yellow glare of
some late-working factory or crowded public-house.  Out of the
masses, clear and slender against the evening sky, rose a multitude
of tall chimneys, many of them reeking, a few smokeless during a
season of "play."  Here and there a pallid patch and ghostly
stunted beehive shapes showed the position of a pot-bank, or a
wheel, black and sharp against the hot lower sky, marked some
colliery where they raise the iridescent coal of the place.  Nearer
at hand was the broad stretch of railway, and half invisible trains
shunted--a steady puffing and rumbling, with every run a ringing
concussion and a rhythmic series of impacts, and a passage of
intermittent puffs of white steam across the further view.  And
to the left, between the railway and the dark mass of the low hill
beyond, dominating the whole view, colossal, inky-black, and
crowned with smoke and fitful flames, stood the great cylinders of
the Jeddah Company Blast Furnaces, the central edifices of the big
ironworks of which Horrocks was the manager.  They stood heavy and
threatening, full of an incessant turmoil of flames and seething
molten iron, and about the feet of them rattled the rolling-mills,
and the steam hammer beat heavily and splashed the white iron
sparks hither and thither.  Even as they looked, a truckful of fuel
was shot into one of the giants, and the red flames gleamed out,
and a confusion of smoke and black dust came boiling upwards
towards the sky.

"Certainly you get some fine effects of colour with your
furnaces," said Raut, breaking a silence that had become
apprehensive.

Horrocks grunted.  He stood with his hands in his pockets,
frowning down at the dim steaming railway and the busy ironworks
beyond, frowning as if he were thinking out some knotty problem.

Raut glanced at him and away again.  "At present your
moonlight effect is hardly ripe," he continued, looking upward.
"The moon is still smothered by the vestiges of daylight."

Horrocks stared at him with the expression of a man who has
suddenly awakened.  "Vestiges of daylight? . . . . Of course, of
course."  He too looked up at the moon, pale still in the midsummer
sky.  "Come along," he said suddenly, and, gripping Raut's arm in
his hand, made a move towards the path that dropped from them to
the railway.

Raut hung back.  Their eyes met and saw a thousand things in
a moment that their eyes came near to say.  Horrocks' hand
tightened and then relaxed.  He let go, and before Raut was aware
of it, they were arm in arm, and walking, one unwillingly enough,
down the path.

"You see the fine effect of the railway signals towards
Burslem," said Horrocks, suddenly breaking into loquacity, striding
fast, and tightening the grip of his elbow the while.  "Little
green lights and red and white lights, all against the haze.  You
have an eye for effect, Raut.  It's a fine effect.  And look at
those furnaces of mine, how they rise upon us as we come down the
hill.  That to the right is my pet--seventy feet of him.  I packed
him myself, and he's boiled away cheerfully with iron in his guts
for five long years.  I've a particular fancy for _him_.  That
line of red there--a lovely bit of warm orange you'd call it,
Raut--that's the puddlers' furnaces, and there, in the hot light,
three black figures--did you see the white splash of the
steam-hammer then?--that's the rolling mills.  Come along!
Clang, clatter, how it goes rattling across the floor!  Sheet tin,
Raut,--amazing stuff.  Glass mirrors are not in it when that stuff
comes from the mill.  And, squelch!--there goes the hammer again.
Come along!"

He had to stop talking to catch at his breath.  His arm
twisted into Raut's with benumbing tightness.  He had come striding
down the black path towards the railway as though he was possessed.
Raut had not spoken a word, had simply hung back against Horrocks'
pull with all his strength.

"I say," he said now, laughing nervously, but with an
undernote of snarl in his voice, "why on earth are you nipping my
arm off, Horrocks, and dragging me along like this?"

At length Horrocks released him.  His manner changed again.
"Nipping your arm off?" he said.  "Sorry.  But it's you taught me
the trick of walking in that friendly way."

"You haven't learnt the refinements of it yet then," said
Raut, laughing artificially again.  "By Jove!  I'm black and blue."
Horrocks offered no apology.  They stood now near the bottom of the
hill, close to the fence that bordered the railway.  The ironworks
had grown larger and spread out with their approach.  They looked
up to the blast furnaces now instead of down; the further view of
Etruria and Hanley had dropped out of sight with their descent.
Before them, by the stile rose a notice-board, bearing still dimly
visible, the words, "BEWARE OF THE TRAINS," half hidden by splashes
of coaly mud.

"Fine effects," said Horrocks, waving his arm.  "Here comes a
train.  The puffs of smoke, the orange glare, the round eye of
light in front of it, the melodious rattle.  Fine effects!  But
these furnaces of mine used to be finer, before we shoved cones in
their throats, and saved the gas."

"How?" said Raut.  "Cones?"

"Cones, my man, cones.  I'll show you one nearer.  The flames
used to flare out of the open throats, great--what is it?--pillars
of cloud by day, red and black smoke, and pillars of fire by night.
Now we run it off in pipes, and burn it to heat the blast, and the
top is shut by a cone.  You'll be interested in that cone."

"But every now and then," said Raut, "you get a burst of fire
and smoke up there."

"The cone's not fixed, it's hung by a chain from a lever, and
balanced by an equipoise.  You shall see it nearer.  Else, of
course, there'd be no way of getting fuel into the thing.  Every
now and then the cone dips, and out comes the flare."

"I see," said Raut.  He looked over his shoulder.  "The moon
gets brighter," he said.

"Come along," said Horrocks abruptly, gripping his shoulder
again, and moving him suddenly towards the railway crossing.  And
then came one of those swift incidents, vivid, but so rapid that
they leave one doubtful and reeling.  Halfway across, Horrocks'
hand suddenly clenched upon him like a vice, and swung him backward
and through a half-turn, so that he looked up the line.  And there
a chain of lamp-lit carriage-windows telescoped swiftly as it came
towards them, and the red and yellow lights of an engine grew
larger and larger, rushing down upon them.  As he grasped what this
meant, he turned his face to Horrocks, and pushed with all
his strength against the arm that held him back between the rails.
The struggle did not last a moment.  Just as certain as it was that
Horrocks held him there, so certain was it that he had been
violently lugged out of danger.

"Out of the way," said Horrocks, with a gasp, as the train
came rattling by, and they stood panting by the gate into the
ironworks.

"I did not see it coming," said Raut, still, even in spite of
his own apprehensions, trying to keep up an appearance of ordinary
intercourse.

Horrocks answered with a grunt.  "The cone," he said, and
then, as one who recovers himself, "I thought you did not hear."

"I didn't," said Raut.

"I wouldn't have had you run over then for the world," said
Horrocks.

"For a moment I lost my nerve," said Raut.

Horrocks stood for half a minute, then turned abruptly towards
the ironworks again.  "See how fine these great mounds of mine,
these clinker-heaps, look in the night!  That truck yonder, up
above there!  Up it goes, and out-tilts the slag.  See the
palpitating red stuff go sliding down the slope.  As we get nearer,
the heap rises up and cuts the blast furnaces.  See the quiver up
above the big one.  Not that way!  This way, between the heaps.
That goes to the puddling furnaces, but I want to show you the
canal first."  He came and took Raut by the elbow, and so they went
along side by side.  Raut answered Horrocks vaguely.  What, he
asked himself, had really happened on the line?  Was he deluding
himself with his own fancies, or had Horrocks actually held him
back in the way of the train?  Had he just been within an ace of
being murdered?

Suppose this slouching, scowling monster _did_ know anything?
For a minute or two then Raut was really afraid for his life,
but the mood passed as he reasoned with himself.  After all,
Horrocks might have heard nothing.  At any rate, he had pulled him
out of the way in time.  His odd manner might be due to the mere
vague jealousy he had shown once before.  He was talking now of the
ash-heaps and the canal.  "Eigh?" said Horrocks.

"What?" said Raut.  "Rather!  The haze in the moonlight. Fine!"

"Our canal," said Horrocks, stopping suddenly.  "Our canal by
moonlight and firelight is an immense effect.  You've never seen
it?  Fancy that!  You've spent too many of your evenings
philandering up in Newcastle there.  I tell you, for real florid
effects--But you shall see.  Boiling water . . ."

As they came out of the labyrinth of clinker-heaps and mounds
of coal and ore, the noises of the rolling-mill sprang upon them
suddenly, loud, near, and distinct.  Three shadowy workmen went by
and touched their caps to Horrocks.  Their faces were vague in the
darkness.  Raut felt a futile impulse to address them, and before
he could frame his words, they passed into the shadows.  Horrocks
pointed to the canal close before them now: a weird-looking place
it seemed, in the blood-red reflections of the furnaces.  The hot
water that cooled the tuyeres came into it, some fifty yards up--a
tumultuous, almost boiling affluent, and the steam rose up from
the water in silent white wisps and streaks, wrapping damply about
them, an incessant succession of ghosts coming up from the black
and red eddies, a white uprising that made the head swim.  The
shining black tower of the larger blast-furnace rose overhead out
of the mist, and its tumultuous riot filled their ears.  Raut kept
away from the edge of the water, and watched Horrocks.

"Here it is red," said Horrocks, "blood-red vapour as red and
hot as sin; but yonder there, where the moonlight falls on it, and
it drives across the clinker-heaps, it is as white as death."

Raut turned his head for a moment, and then came back hastily
to his watch on Horrocks.  "Come along to the rolling-mills," said
Horrocks.  The threatening hold was not so evident that time, and
Raut felt a little reassured.  But all the same, what on earth did
Horrocks mean about "white as death" and "red as sin?"
Coincidence, perhaps?

They went and stood behind the puddlers for a little while,
and then through the rolling-mills, where amidst an incessant din
the deliberate steam-hammer beat the juice out of the succulent
iron, and black, half-naked Titans rushed the plastic bars, like
hot sealing-wax, between the wheels.  "Come on," said Horrocks in
Raut's ear, and they went and peeped through the little glass hole
behind the tuyeres, and saw the tumbled fire writhing in the pit of
the blast-furnace.  It left one eye blinded for a while.  Then,
with green and blue patches dancing across the dark, they went to
the lift by which the trucks of ore and fuel and lime were raised
to the top of the big cylinder.

And out upon the narrow rail that overhung the furnace, Raut's
doubts came upon him again.  Was it wise to be here?  If Horrocks
did know--everything!  Do what he would, he could not resist a
violent trembling.  Right under foot was a sheer depth of seventy
feet.  It was a dangerous place.  They pushed by a truck of fuel to
get to the railing that crowned the place.  The reek of the
furnace, a sulphurous vapor streaked with pungent bitterness,
seemed to make the distant hillside of Hanley quiver.  The moon was
riding out now from among a drift of clouds, halfway up the sky
above the undulating wooded outlines of Newcastle.  The steaming
canal ran away from below them under an indistinct bridge, and
vanished into the dim haze of the flat fields towards Burslem.

"That's the cone I've been telling you of," shouted Horrocks;
"and, below that, sixty feet of fire and molten metal, with the air
of the blast frothing through it like gas in soda-water."

Raut gripped the hand-rail tightly, and stared down at the
cone.  The heat was intense.  The boiling of the iron and the
tumult of the blast made a thunderous accompaniment to Horrocks'
voice.  But the thing had to be gone through now.  Perhaps, after
all . . .

"In the middle," bawled Horrocks, "temperature near a thousand
degrees.  If _you_ were dropped into it . . . . flash into
flame like a pinch of gunpowder in a candle.  Put your hand out and
feel the heat of his breath.  Why, even up here I've seen the
rain-water boiling off the trucks.  And that cone there.  It's a
damned sight too hot for roasting cakes.  The top side of it's
three hundred degrees."

"Three hundred degrees!" said Raut.

"Three hundred centigrade, mind!" said Horrocks.  "It will
boil the blood out of you in no time."

"Eigh?" said Raut, and turned.

"Boil the blood out of you in . . . No, you don't!"

"Let me go!" screamed Raut.  "Let go my arm!"

With one hand he clutched at the hand-rail, then with both.
For a moment the two men stood swaying.  Then suddenly, with a
violent jerk, Horrocks had twisted him from his hold.  He clutched
at Horrocks and missed, his foot went back into empty air; in
mid-air he twisted himself, and then cheek and shoulder and knee
struck the hot cone together.

He clutched the chain by which the cone hung, and the thing
sank an infinitesimal amount as he struck it.  A circle of glowing
red appeared about him, and a tongue of flame, released from the
chaos within, flickered up towards him.  An intense pain assailed
him at the knees, and he could smell the singeing of his hands.  He
raised himself to his feet, and tried to climb up the chain, and
then something struck his head.  Black and shining with the
moonlight, the throat of the furnace rose about him.

Horrocks, he saw, stood above him by one of the trucks of fuel
on the rail.  The gesticulating figure was bright and white in the
moonlight, and shouting, "Fizzle, you fool!  Fizzle, you hunter of
women!  You hot-blooded hound!  Boil! boil! boil!"

Suddenly he caught up a handful of coal out of the truck, and
flung it deliberately, lump after lump, at Raut.

"Horrocks!" cried Raut.  "Horrocks!"

He clung crying to the chain, pulling himself up from the
burning of the cone.  Each missile Horrocks flung hit him.  His
clothes charred and glowed, and as he struggled the cone dropped,
and a rush of hot suffocating gas whooped out and burned round him
in a swift breath of flame.

His human likeness departed from him.  When the momentary red
had passed, Horrocks saw a charred, blackened figure, its head
streaked with blood, still clutching and fumbling with the chain,
and writhing in agony--a cindery animal, an inhuman, monstrous
creature that began a sobbing intermittent shriek.

Abruptly, at the sight, the ironmaster's anger passed.  A
deadly sickness came upon him.  The heavy odour of burning flesh
came drifting up to his nostrils.  His sanity returned to him.

"God have mercy upon me!" he cried.  "O God! what have I
done?"

He knew the thing below him, save that it still moved and
felt, was already a dead man--that the blood of the poor wretch
must be boiling in his veins.  An intense realisation of that agony
came to his mind, and overcame every other feeling.  For a moment
he stood irresolute, and then, turning to the truck, he hastily
tilted its contents upon the struggling thing that had once been a
man.  The mass fell with a thud, and went radiating over the cone.
With the thud the shriek ended, and a boiling confusion of smoke,
dust, and flame came rushing up towards him.  As it passed, he saw
the cone clear again.

Then he staggered back, and stood trembling, clinging to the
rail with both hands.  His lips moved, but no words came to them.

Down below was the sound of voices and running steps.  The
clangour of rolling in the shed ceased abruptly.




A MOONLIGHT FABLE

There was once a little man whose mother made him a beautiful suit
of clothes.  It was green and gold and woven so that I cannot
describe how delicate and fine it was, and there was a tie of
orange fluffiness that tied up under his chin.  And the buttons
in their newness shone like stars.  He was proud and pleased by his
suit beyond measure, and stood before the long looking-glass when
first he put it on, so astonished and delighted with it that he
could hardly turn himself away.

He wanted to wear it everywhere and show it to all sorts of
people.  He thought over all the places he had ever visited and all
the scenes he had ever heard described, and tried to imagine what
the feel of it would be if he were to go now to those scenes and
places wearing his shining suit, and he wanted to go out forthwith
into the long grass and the hot sunshine of the meadow wearing it.
Just to wear it!  But his mother told him, "No."  She told him he
must take great care of his suit, for never would he have another
nearly so fine; he must save it and save it and only wear it on
rare and great occasions.  It was his wedding suit, she said.  And
she took his buttons and twisted them up with tissue paper for fear
their bright newness should be tarnished, and she tacked little
guards over the cuffs and elbows and wherever the suit was most
likely to come to harm.  He hated and resisted these things, but
what could he do?  And at last her warnings and persuasions had
effect and he consented to take off his beautiful suit and fold it
into its proper creases and put it away.  It was almost as though
he gave it up again.  But he was always thinking of wearing it
and of the supreme occasion when some day it might be worn without
the guards, without the tissue paper on the buttons, utterly and
delightfully, never caring, beautiful beyond measure.

One night when he was dreaming of it, after his habit, he
dreamed he took the tissue paper from one of the buttons and found
its brightness a little faded, and that distressed him mightily in
his dream.  He polished the poor faded button and polished it, and
if anything it grew duller.  He woke up and lay awake thinking of
the brightness a little dulled and wondering how he would feel if
perhaps when the great occasion (whatever it might be) should
arrive, one button should chance to be ever so little short of its
first glittering freshness, and for days and days that thought
remained with him, distressingly.  And when next his mother let him
wear his suit, he was tempted and nearly gave way to the temptation
just to fumble off one little bit of tissue paper and see if indeed
the buttons were keeping as bright as ever.

He went trimly along on his way to church full of this wild
desire.  For you must know his mother did, with repeated and
careful warnings, let him wear his suit at times, on Sundays, for
example, to and fro from church, when there was no threatening of
rain, no dust nor anything to injure it, with its buttons covered
and its protections tacked upon it and a sunshade in his hand to
shadow it if there seemed too strong a sunlight for its colours.
And always, after such occasions, he brushed it over and folded it
exquisitely as she had taught him, and put it away again.

Now all these restrictions his mother set to the wearing of
his suit he obeyed, always he obeyed them, until one strange night
he woke up and saw the moonlight shining outside his window.  It
seemed to him the moonlight was not common moonlight, nor the night
a common night, and for a while he lay quite drowsily with this odd
persuasion in his mind.  Thought joined on to thought like things
that whisper warmly in the shadows.  Then he sat up in his little
bed suddenly, very alert, with his heart beating very fast and a
quiver in his body from top to toe.  He had made up his mind.  He
knew now that he was going to wear his suit as it should be worn.
He had no doubt in the matter.  He was afraid, terribly afraid, but
glad, glad.

He got out of his bed and stood a moment by the window looking
at the moonshine-flooded garden and trembling at the thing he meant
to do.  The air was full of a minute clamor of crickets and
murmurings, of the infinitesimal shouting of little living things.
He went very gently across the creaking boards, for fear that he
might wake the sleeping house, to the big dark clothes-press
wherein his beautiful suit lay folded, and he took it out garment
by garment and softly and very eagerly tore off its tissue-paper
covering and its tacked protections, until there it was, perfect
and delightful as he had seen it when first his mother had given it
to him--a long time it seemed ago.  Not a button had tarnished, not
a thread had faded on this dear suit of his; he was glad enough for
weeping as in a noiseless hurry he put it on.  And then back he
went, soft and quick, to the window and looked out upon the garden
and stood there for a minute, shining in the moonlight, with his
buttons twinkling like stars, before he got out on the sill and,
making as little of a rustling as he could, clambered down to the
garden path below.  He stood before his mother's house, and it was
white and nearly as plain as by day, with every window-blind but
his own shut like an eye that sleeps.  The trees cast still shadows
like intricate black lace upon the wall.

The garden in the moonlight was very different from the garden
by day; moonshine was tangled in the hedges and stretched in
phantom cobwebs from spray to spray.  Every flower was gleaming
white or crimson black, and the air was aquiver with the thridding
of small crickets and nightingales singing unseen in the depths of
the trees.

There was no darkness in the world, but only warm, mysterious
shadows; and all the leaves and spikes were edged and lined with
iridescent jewels of dew.  The night was warmer than any night had
ever been, the heavens by some miracle at once vaster and nearer,
and spite of the great ivory-tinted moon that ruled the world, the
sky was full of stars.

The little man did not shout nor sing for all his infinite
gladness.  He stood for a time like one awe-stricken, and then,
with a queer small cry and holding out his arms, he ran out as if
he would embrace at once the whole warm round immensity of the
world.  He did not follow the neat set paths that cut the garden
squarely, but thrust across the beds and through the wet, tall,
scented herbs, through the night stock and the nicotine and the
clusters of phantom white mallow flowers and through the thickets
of southern-wood and lavender, and knee-deep across a wide space of
mignonette.  He came to the great hedge and he thrust his way
through it, and though the thorns of the brambles scored him deeply
and tore threads from his wonderful suit, and though burs and
goosegrass and havers caught and clung to him, he did not care.  He
did not care, for he knew it was all part of the wearing for which
he had longed.  "I am glad I put on my suit," he said; "I am glad
I wore my suit."

Beyond the hedge he came to the duck-pond, or at least to what
was the duck-pond by day.  But by night it was a great bowl of
silver moonshine all noisy with singing frogs, of wonderful silver
moonshine twisted and clotted with strange patternings, and the
little man ran down into its waters between the thin black rushes,
knee-deep and waist-deep and to his shoulders, smiting the water to
black and shining wavelets with either hand, swaying and shivering
wavelets, amid which the stars were netted in the tangled
reflections of the brooding trees upon the bank.  He waded until he
swam, and so he crossed the pond and came out upon the other side,
trailing, as it seemed to him, not duckweed, but very silver in
long, clinging, dripping masses.  And up he went through the
transfigured tangles of the willow-herb and the uncut seeding grass
of the farther bank.  And so he came glad and breathless into the
highroad.  "I am glad," he said, "beyond measure, that I had
clothes that fitted this occasion."

The highroad ran straight as an arrow flies, straight into the
deep blue pit of sky beneath the moon, a white and shining road
between the singing nightingales, and along it he went, running now
and leaping, and now walking and rejoicing, in the clothes his
mother had made for him with tireless, loving hands.  The road was
deep in dust, but that for him was only soft whiteness, and as he
went a great dim moth came fluttering round his wet and shimmering
and hastening figure.  At first he did not heed the moth, and then
he waved his hands at it and made a sort of dance with it as it
circled round his head.  "Soft moth!" he cried, "dear moth!  And
wonderful night, wonderful night of the world!  Do you think my
clothes are beautiful, dear moth?  As beautiful as your scales and
all this silver vesture of the earth and sky?"

And the moth circled closer and closer until at last its
velvet wings just brushed his lips . . . . .

And next morning they found him dead with his neck broken in
the bottom of the stone pit, with his beautiful clothes a little
bloody and foul and stained with the duckweed from the pond.  But
his face was a face of such happiness that, had you seen it, you
would have understood indeed how that he had died happy, never
knowing the cool and streaming silver for the duckweed in the pond.




THE DIAMOND MAKER

Some business had detained me in Chancery Lane nine in the
evening, and thereafter, having some inkling of a headache, I was
disinclined either for entertainment or further work.  So much of
the sky as the high cliffs of that narrow canon of traffic left
visible spoke of a serene night, and I determined to make my way
down to the Embankment, and rest my eyes and cool my head by
watching the variegated lights upon the river.  Beyond comparison
the night is the best time for this place; a merciful darkness
hides the dirt of the waters, and the lights of this transitional
age, red glaring orange, gas-yellow, and electric white, are set in
shadowy outlines of every possible shade between grey and deep
purple.  Through the arches of Waterloo Bridge a hundred points of
light mark the sweep of the Embankment, and above its parapet rise
the towers of Westminster, warm grey against the starlight.  The
black river goes by with only a rare ripple breaking its silence,
and disturbing the reflections of the lights that swim upon its
surface.

"A warm night," said a voice at my side.

I turned my head, and saw the profile of a man who was leaning
over the parapet beside me.  It was a refined face, not unhandsome,
though pinched and pale enough, and the coat collar turned up and
pinned round the throat marked his status in life as sharply as a
uniform.  I felt I was committed to the price of a bed and
breakfast if I answered him.

I looked at him curiously.  Would he have anything to tell me
worth the money, or was he the common incapable--incapable even of
telling his own story?  There was a quality of intelligence in his
forehead and eyes, and a certain tremulousness in his nether lip
that decided me.

"Very warm," said I; "but not too warm for us here."

