and superstition. That saturation must, as a matter of plain
scientific fact, be regarded as virtually permanent so far as the
subconscious mind and inner instincts are concerned; for though the
area of the unknown has been steadily contracting for thousands of
years, an infinite reservoir of mystery still engulfs most of the
outer cosmos, whilst a vast residuum of powerful inherited
associations clings around all the objects and processes that were
once mysterious, however well they may now be explained. And more than
this, there is an actual physiological fixation of the old instincts
in our nervous tissue, which would make them obscurely operative even
were the conscious mind to be purged of all sources of wonder.

(continued next month)




TRUE GHOST STORIES


Edwin C. Hill talks on various subjects every night on the Columbia
Broadcasting System. One evening he devoted his program to ghost
stories about London that are supposed to be true. They sound very
convincing and have many witnesses. We leave it to the reader whether
to accept them as truth, or discard them as merely hallucinations.
However, they are extremely interesting, nevertheless.

Once, two sailors were roaming around London and came upon an old, but
handsome, mansion.

"Funny no one lives here," said one, "This shack seems too good to be
left vacant."

But the two sailors didn't intend to leave it vacant that night. They
had no money, and thus could not pay for lodging, so they entered the
old house, intending to spend the night there.

After climbing to the second floor and finding a fireplace, they built
a blazing fire with some wood they had secured. Curling up in some old
clothes, they went to sleep beside the roaring fire.

Suddenly, after many hours, one of the sailors awoke, half-conscious
of some noise. There it was again! It sounded like a door being
closed. Yes--that's what it must have been. A few pieces of wood to
bring the dying fire to renewed activity gave him some courage, but he
woke the other sailor anyway.

He had hardly time to explain to his friend the reason for his
disturbance, when the noise was repeated.

"It's the wind," said one, and they accepted that explanation,
preparing to go to sleep again, but instantly their returned with
greater confirmation. Another sound.

Any thoughts but of the supernatural were out of the question. This
time it was footsteps--but what footsteps! Not human--not animal! They
were padded sounds--something like bare feet. Nearer and nearer.

Suddenly they stopped, and the door opened. Slowly--and there was
revealed to their terrified senses the most horrible monstrosity
imaginable. It could not be of this earth!

One crazed sailor jumped past it and flew down the stairs, out of the
house, and screamed in mortal terror into the streets.

He told his story--and the next day the body of his companion was
found mangled on the ground. He had leaped out of a second story
window.

Another story tells the tale of a man walking through a London park at
day-break on the bank of the Thames. While passing a bridge, he spies
a woman jumping into the river, and he takes off his coat preparing to
save her, but a hand touches his shoulder. An officer.

"It's no use," he said, "You could not save her. She is not a living
woman. Return tomorrow at this time and you will see her repeat her
ghastly act."

The bewildered man did so, and the next morning was but a repetition
of the one before.

"You see?" said the officer, "She does that for seven consecutive
mornings each year. Today is the last one this year. She died here a
long time ago."

(This article will be concluded next month.)




THE BOILING POINT


You will remember the terrific outburst Forrest J. Ackerman made upon
Clark Ashton Smith's stories and weird tales in general in last
month's column. Shortly after the issue went to press, we received the
following postscript to his article which he requested to have printed
at the beginning of this month's column.

"I could as well pick on John Taine--a favorite author, mind you--for
'The Time Stream' in Wonder Stories, another story considered doubtful
science fiction. My only interest is to keep stf. in the stf.
publications, and let fantasies and weird tales appear in the
magazines featuring that type.

"It is to be hoped that Mr. Smith will discover many of his admirers
thru the writings of readers caring to present arguments...."

It is only fair that Mr. Smith himself should have the first blow
against Mr. Ackerman's argument, in defense of his own stories. He
calls his defense "Horror, Fantasy and Science."

"Mr. Ackerman's fervent and ebullient denunciation of my stories,
followed by Editor Hornig's invitation to join the melee, is not to be
resisted.

"I infer that Forrest J. Ackerman considers horror, weirdness and
unearthliness beyond the bounds of science or science or science
fiction. Since horror and weirdness are integral elements of life (as
is well known to those who have delved beneath the surface) and since,
in all likelihood, the major portion of the universe is quite
unearthly, I fail to understand the process of logic or syllogism by
which he has arrived at this truly amazing proscription.

"Let me recommend to Mr. Ackerman, and to others like him, a more
scientifically open and receptive attitude of imagination. If Mr.
Ackerman were transported to some alien world, I fear that he would
find the reality far more incredible, bizarre, grotesque, fantastic,
horrific, and impossible than any of my stories.

"In regard to 'The Light From Beyond,' I cannot see that this tale is
any more fantastic and unreal than others dealing with unknown
dimensions or planes of hyper-space. Physical entry into such planes
is improbable, but form an alluring theme for fictional speculation.

"It is curious that Mr. Ackerman should profess to like 'Flight Into
Super-Time', a story which is wilder, if anything, than the ones he
has denounced. I might also add that it was written as a satire on
time-travelling, and should not have been read too seriously.

"Of course, it is Forrest Ackerman's privilege to dislike my stories,
and to express his dislike whenever he chooses. I have merely tried to
point out that he is in error when he condemns them as being
inherently unsuitable for a scientifiction magazine."

H. P. Lovecraft also defends the weird tale:

"As for Ackerman's ebullition, I fear he can hardly be taken seriously
in matters involving the criticism of imaginative fiction. Smith's
story was really splendid, except for the cheap ending on which the
Editor Wonder Stories insisted. Ackerman once wrote me a letter with a
very childish attack on my work--he evidently enjoys verbal
pyrotechnics for their own sake and seems so callous to imaginative
impressions."

August W. Derleth liked everything in "The Fantasy Fan" except the
letter in this department from Forrest J. Ackerman "Who," he says,
"while usually quite interesting, nevertheless has the unpleasant
habit of trying to make everything over into his own imagine."

R. H. Barlow gives an open reply to Mr. Ackerman in defense of Clark
Ashton Smith.

"To my mind you are deplorably lacking in imagination to so condemn
some of the finest work of the greatest living fantasy writer. Must
you be so literal, physical, in your interpretation of imaginative
literature? Clark Ashton Smith, whom I have the honor of knowing, is
primarily and foremost a poet, his work having received the highest
commendation of such persons as Edwin Markham, George Sterling, etc.
Truly, his colourfully nightmarish visions are far superior to the
conventional type of--forgive me--trash--printed in the average
mercenary scientifiction magazine. The mere fact that a few helpless
