tell me there is a haunted look in my eyes, that lines are deepening in
my face. They tell me to buck up, to face life squarely.

       *       *       *       *       *

But I can't. I simply can't. I'll tell you why. After that night
when I ripped out the earphones and blew a fuse in the station by
short-circuiting a switch on the panel (I found that out later) I
went back in answer to a call from Hegstrom. He was very kind and
sympathetic. Wanted to know what had caused me to act so strangely
the night before--also wanted to know what had caused Ross's suicide.
Hegstrom is sharp. He saw the connection. But I clamped my jaws
together and refused to say anything.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then Hegstrom asked if the thing he held in his hand had anything to
do with Ross. I took the paper. Then I think I gasped or screamed or
something. It was a paper filled with some of that balderdash that Ross
had written that night. He must have filled two sheets, and I only
destroyed one.

       *       *       *       *       *

I left Hegstrom as mystified as ever, but I had that paper in my
pocket. I had a plan to save my sanity. I took the paper to a professor
at a college--a professor famous as a language specialist, ancient and
modern. I gave him the paper and one hundred dollars (he afterwards
returned the money) and asked him to find out from what country or
place it came from.

       *       *       *       *       *

I got my answer a week later.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no such language in either the modern or recorded ancient
times!




    SUPERNATURAL HORROR IN LITERATURE

    Part Seven

    by H. P. Lovecraft

    (Copyright 1927 by W. Paul Cook)


    III. The Early Gothic Novel

The shadow-haunted landscapes of _Ossian_, the chaotic visions of
William Blake, the grotesque witch-dances in Burns's _Tam O' Shanter_,
the sinister daemonism of Coleridge's _Christabel_ and _Ancient
Mariner_, the ghostly charm of James Hogg's _Kilmeny_, and the more
restrained approaches to cosmic horror in _Lamia_ and many of Keats's
other poems, are typical British illustrations of the advent of the
weird to formal literature. Our Teutonic cousins of the continent were
equally receptive to the rising flood, and Burger's _Wild Huntsman_
and the even more famous daemon-bridegroom ballad of _Lenore_--both
imitated in English by Scott, whose respect for the supernatural was
always great--are only a taste of the eerie wealth which German song
had commenced to provide. Thomas Moore adapted from such sources the
legend of the ghoulish statue-bride (later used by Prosper Merimee
in _The Venus of Ille_, and traceable back to great antiquity) which
echoes so shiveringly in his ballad of _The Ring_; whilst Goethe's
deathless masterpiece _Faust_, crossing from mere balladry into the
classic, cosmic tragedy of the ages, may be held as the ultimate height
to which this German poetic impulse arose.

But it remained for a very sprightly and worldly Englishman--none
other than Horace Walpole himself--to give the growing impulse
definite shape and become the actual founder of the literary
horror-story as a permanent form. Fond of mediaeval romance and mystery
as a dilettante's diversion, and with a quaintly imitated Gothic castle
as his abode at Strawberry Hill, Walpole in 1764 published _The Castle
of Otranto_, a tale of the supernatural which, though thoroughly
unconvincing and mediocre in itself, was destined to exert an almost
unparallelled influence on the literature of the weird. First venturing
it only as a 'translation' by one "William Marshal, Gent." from the
Italian of a mythical "Onuphrio Muralto," the author later acknowledged
his connection with the book and took pleasure in its wide and
instantaneous popularity--a popularity which extended to many editions,
early dramatizations, and wholesale imitation both in England and in
Germany.

The story--tedious, artificial, and melodramatic--is further impaired
by a brisk and prosaic style whose urbane sprightliness nowhere permits
the creation of a truly weird atmosphere. It tells of Manfred, an
unscrupulous and usurping prince determined to found a line, who after
the mysterious sudden death of his only son, Conrad, on the latter's
bridal morn, attempts to put away his wife Hippolita and wed the lady
destined for the unfortunate youth--the lad, by the way, having been
crushed by the preternatural fall of a gigantic helmet in the castle
courtyard. Isabella, the widowed bride, flees from this design; and
encounters in subterranean crypts beneath the castle a noble young
preserver, Theodore, who seems to be a peasant yet strangely resembles
the old lord Alfonso who ruled the domain before Manfred's times.
Shortly thereafter supernatural phenomena assail the castle in divers
ways; fragments of gigantic armour being discovered here and there,
a portrait walking out of its frame, a thunderclap destroying the
edifice, and a colossal armoured spectre of Alfonso rising out of the
ruins to ascend through parting clouds to the bosom of St. Nicholas.
Theodore, having wooed through death--for she is slain by her father
by mistake--is discovered to be the son of Alfonso and rightful heir
to the estate. He concludes the tale by wedding Isabella and preparing
to live happily ever after whilst Manfred, whose usurpation was the
cause of his son's death and his own supernatural harassings, retires
to a monastery for penitence; his saddened wife seeking asylum in a
neighboring convent.

Such is the tale; flat, stilted, and altogether devoid of the true
cosmic horror which makes weird literature. Yet such was the thirst
of the age for those touches of strangeness and spectral antiquity
it reflects, that it was seriously received by the soundest readers
and raised in spite of its intrinsic ineptness to a pedestal of lofty
importance in literary history. What it did above all else was to
create a novel type of scene, puppet-characters, and incidents; which,
handled to better advantage by writers more naturally adapted to weird
creation, stimulated the growth of an imitative Gothic school which in
turn inspired the real weavers of cosmic terror--the line of actual
artists beginning with Poe. This novel dramatic paraphernalia consisted
first of all of the Gothic castle, with its awesome antiquity, vast
distances and ramblings, deserted or ruined wings, damp corridors,
unwholesome hidden catacombs, and a galaxy of ghosts and appalling
legends, as a nucleus of suspense and daemoniac fright. In addition,
it included the tyrannical and malevolent nobleman as villain; the
saintly, long-persecuted, and generally insipid heroine who undergoes
the major terrors and serves as a point of view and focus for the
reader's sympathies; the valorous and immaculate hero, always of high
birth but often in humble disguise; the convention of high-sounding
foreign names; mostly Italian, for the characters; and the infinite
array of stage properties which includes strange lights, damp
trapdoors, extinguished lamps, mouldy hidden manuscripts, creaking
hinges, shaking arras, and the like. All this paraphernalia reappears
with amusing sameness, yet sometimes with tremendous effect, throughout
the history of the Gothic novel; and is by no means extinct even today,
though subtler technique now forces it to assume a less naive and
obvious form. An harmonious milieu for a new school had been found, and
the writing world was not slow to grasp the opportunity.

German romance at once responded to the Walpole influence, and soon
