Ludwig pulled out his watch, and thought for a second. "All right. Meet
you there tomorrow at three." The door slammed behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

They followed the guards through the chrome steel doors into the room
with the machines. All twenty typewriters were hammering out their
hundred words a minute.

"It is an honor to have a visit from you, Commissioner Ludwig," said
Hartridge. "We're very proud of Script-Lab. You'll agree, I know, that
the experiment has been eminently successful. Tough on you, of course,
Carre. But you Writers can always land on your feet."

"The decision has not yet been made," said Ludwig. "Now to business."
He pulled a chair up to the desk, opened his brief case, and took out
some papers.

"Before I examine the machines, I'd like to check with you the facts
and figures that Carre has compiled for me. In 1971, the first year of
the experiment, only ten per cent of Script-Lab's output of stories,
books, and articles was accepted by Adult Fiction, Earth. Right?"

"Right," said Hartridge. "But that was our worst year. Since then--"

Ludwig held up his hand. "In the second year, you supplied thirty-five
per cent of the needs of AFE. Check?"

"Check."

"In the two years following you supplied seventy-five per cent, and
in 1976, this year you are supplying about ninety per cent of all
published matter, with the Writers supplying only ten per cent.
Correct?"

"Correct. A wonderful record, Commissioner."

Ludwig turned to another sheet of data. "As I understand it, you feed
into the machine's memories, basic plots, factual data, conversational
variants, and they do the rest?"

"That's right. We give them the material, and they create with perfect
rationality. I myself read nearly everything they make, and even I am
amazed at their craftsmanship. And they are so efficient, and write so
swiftly!"

"Speed is no doubt a desirable feature," said Ludwig.

"But not the only one!" said Carre.

Hartridge smiled. "Professional jealously is warping your judgment, old
man. It may be hard to take, but you Writers have nothing to give the
world, anymore, that machines can't."

Ludwig turned his back and surveyed the room. "I would like to see,
now, some of your productions."

Hartridge beamed. "As a matter of fact, I have something that ought to
interest you, particularly. Just follow me, gentlemen. Here, by the
way, is our power source. Note how simple and efficient the circuit
design is. Ah, here we are. Knowing that you were making us a visit
today, I gave to Number Seven, here, the necessary data for creating
your own monologue on 'Our Duties to the Aged.' That was your doctoral
thesis, I believe?"

"But that's out of print! I haven't seen a copy myself in years!"

"To Script-Lab, that is unimportant. Feed it the data, the basic
premises, and it will do the rest. Would you like to see?"

The three men crowded around Number Seven, and watched the emergence of
paper from the typewriter as the keys tapped the words into lines, and
the carriage shifted. Ludwig, at first, showed only the pleasure which
any writer feels on re-reading a good piece of work. Gradually, his
face changed. He looked puzzled, uncertain, and then his skin reddened
with anger.

[Illustration: "_He looked puzzled, uncertain, and then his skin
reddened with anger._"]

The automatic knife chopped down and severed the completed page. Ludwig
scooped it up from the basket and read the page a second time. He
raised his eyes to meet the tense gaze of Carre.

"Is this what you were trying to tell me, Herbert?"

"That sort of thing. Yes."

"Is something wrong, Commissioner?" said Hartridge. "I thought you'd be
pleased."

"Pleased? But this is something I never wrote!"

"But you _must_ have written it," said Hartridge. "Or are you just
trying to sabotage my project with a deliberate misstatement?"

"Read it!" said Ludwig. "Read that paragraph out loud."

"'Our duties to the aged,'" read Hartridge, "'are closely bound to our
duties to ourselves. When the old become infirm, they should be quietly
