explained briefly about the _Mermaid_, but said nothing of whither she
was bound.

The addition of fourteen men to the rather small accommodations of the
_Mermaid_ was a serious matter to consider. The ship was able to hold
them all, and even to sail through the air with them, since Mr.
Henderson had provided an excess of power. But it was going to be a
problem to feed so many, and still save enough provisions for the long
voyage which lay ahead.

However, Mr. Henderson felt his first duty to be toward his fellowmen,
even if his voyage must be delayed, or given up for a time, while he got
more provisions. There would be no sleeping quarters for the sailors,
but when this was explained to them they cheerfully said they would
sleep on deck if necessary. In fact some of them had to, but as the
weather was warm and clear this was no hardship. A few found quarters in
the engine room and other apartments of the _Mermaid_.

Finding, after an examination, that his ship was in good order save for
the broken gas apparatus, Mr. Henderson gave orders to proceed along the
surface of the ocean. The sailors wanted to see how it felt to mount
into the air, but Mr. Henderson, refused to attempt a flight until he
had made complete repairs, and this would take a day or more.

At this there appeared to be some discontent among the survivors, and
they muttered to each other as they stood in a group on deck. But the
professor and his assistants were too busy with their preparations for
fixing the break to notice this.

While the men were gathered in a knot near the after part of the small
deck, the mate separated from them, and, coming close to where Mark was
standing, unscrewing some of the broken parts of the pipe said, in a low
voice.

"Tell the captain to watch out."

"What do you mean?" asked Mark quickly.

"Hush! Not so loud!" the mate exclaimed. "If the men hear me talking to
you, or see me, they may kill me. Tell the captain to look out; that's
all. Be on guard, and watch the engine room carefully."

"But why--?" Mark began, when, turning suddenly, the mate left him. It
was well he did so, for, at that instant, one of the sailors, who had
observed the two conversing, strolled in their direction.

Much alarmed, Mark sought Mr. Henderson and told him what he had heard.

"I suppose the fire may have turned the poor man's head," the scientist
said. "I wonder if he thinks the men I rescued would mutiny and take
possession of my ship? If they did they would not know how to work it,
so what good would it do?"

"Hadn't we better look out?" asked Mark.

"I'm not afraid," replied the professor. "I will be too busy the next
few days, repairing the break, to think of anything else. Besides, what
would they want to harm us for? Didn't we save their lives?"

Seeing the scientist placed no faith in what the mate had said, Mark
went back to his task.

It soon became too dark to work, and it was decided, after supper, to
halt the ship until morning as it would be less risky.

Mark did not sleep well, his dreams being disturbed by visions of
pirates and black flags. But morning came and nothing had developed. The
men seemed to recover their spirits with daybreak, and most of the crew,
after breakfast, greeted Mr. Henderson pleasantly, and asked to be
allowed to help fix the ship.

It took the skilled labor of the professor, Washington and the boys to
mend the break, and, even at that, it was four days in the repairing.
But at last the final bolt was in place, and the _Mermaid_ was able to
resume her trips through the air.

"We will rise the first thing in the morning," said the professor to
Mark and Jack that night. "I am anxious to see how the ship behaves with
a big load aboard."




                               CHAPTER IX

                               THE MUTINY


Mark was awakened that night by feeling some one trying to turn him
over. At first he thought it was Jack, and sleepily muttered that he
wanted to be let alone.

"Sorry I can't oblige ye, my hearty!" exclaimed a rough voice in his
ear, "but I got particular orders t' tie you up!"

At that Mark tried to sit up, but he found he could not. He discovered
that he was closely bound with many turns of a rope, while in front of
his bunk stood one of the rescued sailors.

"There," said the man, with a final tightening of the ropes. "I guess
you're safe."

"What's the matter? What does it all mean?" asked Mark, much bewildered.

"It means that we have possession of the ship," the sailor answered,
"and, if you're wise you'll not make a fuss. It wouldn't do any good,
anyhow, as all your friends are in the same condition."

Then, picking Mark up, as if he was a baby, the man slung him over his
shoulder and carried him to the living room. There Mark saw Jack, the
professor, Washington, and the others similarly bound.

"Do you realize what you are doing?" asked the professor angrily of his
captors. "You are mutinying, and are liable to severe punishment."

"If they ever get us," added one of the men. "We've got the ship now,
and we mean to keep her. You'll have to run her or show us how."

"Never!" cried the professor.

"I guess he will when he feels this," said one of the men, as he dragged
from a recess two wires. "I happen to know something of electricity, and
when he feels these perhaps he'll change his mind. I'll start the
dynamo."

The sailor showed that he was acquainted with machinery, for soon the
hum of the electric apparatus was heard.

"Now to make him tell!" the man with the wires exclaimed, advancing
toward the professor, who turned pale.

"Stop! You must not torture the old man!" cried a voice, and the mate of
the _Good Hope_ stepped in front of the sailor with the electrified
wires.

"Who's going to stop me?" asked the man.

"I will. It's not necessary," the mate went on quickly. "If we make him
weak we may kill him, and he can not tell us what we want to know. One
of the boys can tell us how to run the ship."

The mate came quickly over to where Mark lay, and whispered:

"Consent to tell. It is the only way of saving his life. Tell 'em how to
raise the craft. Then leave all to me. I will save you all and the ship,
too, if I can. But consent."

Mark nodded his head, and the mate cried:

"I knew I could fetch 'em. I have hypnotic power. This boy will raise
the ship for us. Loosen his bonds, some of you."

Satisfied that they were now on the way to experiencing a new sensation,
the sailors took the ropes off Mark's arms and legs, and he was allowed
to rise. With a reassuring nod toward the professor he led the way to
the engine room, followed by half the men. He resolved to start the gas
machine slowly, so as to make the upward trip last longer, thinking
before it had gone far, some way of escape from the mutineers might be
found.

While a crowd of the sailors stood near him, Mark operated the machinery
in the engine room that started the gas generating, and set the negative
gravity apparatus working.

"You'd better not try any tricks on us," said one of the men in an ugly
tone of voice.

"I'm not going to," replied Mark. "If you go out on deck you will soon
see the ship leaving the water and mounting into the air."

"Some of you go," ordered a man with a big bushy red beard. "See if the
ship rises. When she begins to go up sing out. I'm going to stay here
and see how the young cub does it so I can work it myself."

Obeying the red-bearded man, who seemed to be a leader, several of the
sailors went out on the deck. It was quite dark, but there was a
phosphorous glow to the water which made the rolling waves visible.

The gas was being generated, as could be told by the hissing sound. Mark
watched the machinery anxiously, for he knew much depended on him, and
the professor was not at hand to guide and instruct him. He watched the
dial of the gage which registered the gas pressure and saw it slowly
moving. In a little while it would be at the point at which the ship
ought to rise.

Presently a quiver seemed to run through the _Mermaid_. Now a shout came
from the watchers on deck.

"She's going up!"

The ship was indeed rising. The red-bearded man, who was addressed as
Tony, ran from the engine room to the deck. He saw that the ship was now
ten feet above the water. Back he came to where Mark stood by the gas
machine.

"Lucky for you that you didn't fool us, lad," he said with a leer. "See
that you mind me hereafter. Now show me how the shebang works."

When the ship had risen as far as Tony desired he made Mark send it
straight ahead. The boy adjusted the air tube to carry the craft toward
the south, but Tony, seeing by a compass in which direction they were
headed, ordered Mark to steer due east.

"Fix things so they will stay so, too," added Tony. "I don't want to
stop until I get a thousand miles away. Then we'll come down, sail to
some sunny island, and enjoy life."

Mark locked the steering apparatus so as to keep the _Mermaid_ headed
due east.

"Now you can go back to your friends," Tony said. "When I want you I'll
send for you."

With a heavy heart Mark rejoined the professor and others. He found them
with their bonds removed. But to guard against their escape several men
were on watch outside the door.

"What are they doing?" asked the professor eagerly as Mark entered, and
the boy told him what had taken place.

"They will ruin my ship and spoil the whole trip," cried the old
scientist. "Oh, why did I ever go to the rescue of the scoundrels?"

"Never mind," said Jack. "Perhaps we may yet outwit them."

Morning came at last. The ship was still shooting forward at fast speed,
in an easterly direction. The sailors had learned, in their short stay
aboard, where the food and stores were kept, and they lost little time
in getting breakfast. They sent some in to their captives, including a
big pot of hot coffee, and, after partaking of this the professor and
his friends felt better.

The mate of the _Good Hope_ came in to help clear away the dishes. As he
passed Mark he slipped into the boy's hand a note.

"Don't read it until you are alone," he said in a low voice, as he
hurried from the room.

As soon as the other sailors had left, Mark glanced at the slip of
paper. It bore these words:

"Open when you hear three raps, then two, then three, and keep silent."

"What is it?" asked Mr. Henderson.

Mark showed him the paper.

"I wonder what it means," the boy said.

"Do you think he is a friend of ours?" the professor asked.

Mark told him of the mate's conversation the night previous.

"I think we can trust him," the scientist went on. "He must intend to
pay us a visit when the others are asleep. When we hear the knocks as he
specifies we must open the door and let him in."

All that day the captives were kept in the living room. Once or twice
Mark was sent for to make some adjustment to the machinery, but the
apparatus, for the most part, was automatic, and needed little
attention. The professor, as well as the others, were all impatience for
the promised visit of the mate. Still they felt he would not come until
night.

In fact it was long past midnight before Mark, Jack and the professor,
who were anxiously listening, heard the three raps, then two, then three
more. Mark quickly opened the door, and the mate stepped inside, holding
his finger to his lips as a sign of caution. Old Andy, Washington, Bill
and Tom had fallen asleep.

"I have only time for a few words," the mate said. "I am closely
watched. Tony mistrusts me. I will save you if I can."

"Why have they repaid my kindness with such actions?" asked Mr.
Henderson.

"Because they are desperate men," replied the mate. "They are nothing
more than pirates. They mutinied on the other ship, killed the captain
and those of the crew who would not join them, and started off to seek
their fortunes. I pretended to join them to save my life, but I have
only been watching for a chance to escape.

"Because of lax discipline the ship was sent on fire. We tried to put it
out but could not. The rest you know.

"I heard them plan to capture this airship, but could do nothing to stop
them. Then I resolved to pretend to act with them. They fear pursuit for
their other mutiny, and are anxious to get as far away as possible."

"Do you think they will abandon the ship in a little while?" asked the
professor hopefully.

"I'm afraid not," answered the mate. "I think they want to get rid of
all of you, so they can sail about as they please. Tony is a smart man.
He could soon learn to run this ship, he thinks."

"I doubt it," Mr. Henderson answered. "But how are you going to help
us?"

"I have not fully made up my plans," the mate answered. "However I
wanted you to know I would do my best to save you. Now I must go. Be on
the watch and when I can I will let you know what I have decided on. I
will hand Mark a note when I bring your meals, just as I did to-day. I
think----"

"Hark! What was that?" asked the professor.

There was a noise outside the door, as if some one was listening.

"Put out the lights!" whispered the mate, and Jack switched off the
electric incandescents.

A knock sounded on the door and the voice of Tony called:

"Mark! Come here! I want you to look at the gas machine. It has stopped
working, and we are falling!"




                               CHAPTER X

                         FOOLING THEIR ENEMIES


Mark hurried into the corridor, taking care to close the door after him,
so Tony could get no glimpse of the mate who had risked so much to save
his friends. But he need not have been alarmed for the leader of the
mutineers was too excited over the stopping of the gas apparatus to give
any heed to who was in with the captives.

"Do you think you can fix it?" he asked the boy.

"I guess so," Mark replied confidently. "If I can't there is no danger,
for we will fall gradually and land in the water."

"But I don't want to do that," Tony objected. "I want to keep on through
the air."

Mark did not reply. By this time he was at the gas machine. He soon saw
nothing was the matter save that new material must be placed in the
retort where the vapor was generated. He refilled it, the gas was
manufactured once more, and the ship began to rise.

"I will know how to do it next time," Tony said with a grin. Mark
realized that every time he showed the leader of the mutineers something
about the ship it was putting the professor and his friends more and
more into the power of the scoundrels. But there was no help for it.
