wavering and the man who held it seemed confused. His face was covered
with a heavy growth of black whiskers and long hair peeped out from
under a battered helmet.

"Jake, it's really good to see you again." As if such things as
automatic rifles did not exist, Zen advanced with outstretched hand.

"Kurt Zen! I haven't seen you since--since--"

"The night that Denver got it," Zen answered. Horror overwhelmed him
as he remembered what had happened to the Mile-High city. A bomb had
struck from the sky that night and parts of Denver had gone much higher
than a mile.

"Yeah. That's it. Yeah. I thought you had got it that night, Kurt."

"I thought the same thing about you. What are you doing up here? And
what--what happened to Marcia?"

The instant Zen asked the question, he wished he had kept still. At the
name something happened in the man's eyes. They began to change, going
from comprehension to blankness, then coming back to understanding,
then losing that and going back to blankness. One instant the eyes
looked at Zen and the man remembered and liked this colonel. The next
instant, neither the eyes nor the mind behind them knew him. Zen was
then an alien, a stranger, to be distrusted and feared and possibly
destroyed. When Zen had known him in Denver, Jake had been a young
airman. He and Marcia had been newly married and very much in love with
each other.

"She--she--" The voice was choked and tight with pain. "The radiation
got her." For an instant, the memory held true. But there was too much
pain in the memory for this man to face it. The memory went away. Only
the pain remained. "Marcia? Oh, she's fine. The next leave I get, we're
going to have a second honeymoon." A glow appeared in the man's eyes.
"I can see her now, waiting for me. You must go with me, Kurt, and meet
her again, the next leave I get."

Zen could have slugged him. He could have lifted the rifle out of
Jake's hands without protest. Instead, he did nothing. The man's pain
was much too real to hurt him further.

"What's going on here?" a rough voice said.

It was the man in the ragged coat. Nedra and the man who had thrown the
rope had disappeared. There was no indication where they had gone. This
man's beard was thin and ragged. He had teeth like the fangs of a wolf
but the lights in his eyes did not shift. Instead, they remained fixed
in constant hostility and suspicion. He had a sub-machine gun in his
hands. The muzzle covered Zen.

"Oh, hello, Cal. I--" Jake became confused. "This is an old buddy of
mine. I knew him down below ... I knew him when.... He's all right."

Cal's eyes said he did not believe a word he had heard. He looked Zen
up and down. The muzzle of the gun did not waver from the intelligence
agent's stomach. "What are you doing up here?"

"Maybe I got tired of the way things are down there," Zen answered. He
was not lying. He _was_ tired of the way things were going. So were
uncounted millions of others.

Cal's eyes indicated he did not believe this. Zen could see him turning
over different possibilities in his mind. He was inclined to use the
gun. Dumping another body down the gorge would be an easy solution to
the problem of an intruder. "How are things going down there?" he
asked.

"Tough," Zen said, with conviction in his voice.

"What was the big boom over that way this morning?"

"Cuso letting go with a blooper."

Interest kindled in Cal's eyes. "What was over there that was worth the
cost of a blooper?"

"A column of troops heading for Cuso's lair," Zen answered. "He didn't
like it."

"I guess he wouldn't," Cal said. "You with 'em?"

"I was."

"Which way are they going now?"

"Back down hill to die," Zen answered.

"Why didn't you go with 'em?"

"I got tired," Zen said. He waved his hands in a gesture which was
intended to explain how a man sometimes got tired and went off to rest
for a while. Cal grunted. This he understood.

"Are you hot?" he asked.

"Nope. The medics checked me just before I took off."

"And are there others down there who feel like heading for the hills?"

"Most of them are too damned near dead to make the effort. Why desert
when you've had it?"

"The blooper got a lot of 'em, eh?"

"What the blast didn't get, the radioactivity did."

"Is the pass too hot for more troops to go through it?"

"My guess is that way."

"Your guess? Don't you know?"

"I didn't go up to see. I'm not that soft in the head."

"I see your point. Well, things must be really rough if colonels are
deserting. This is interesting." Cal fingered the gun but the muzzle no
longer pointed at Zen's stomach. "What are you looking for up here?"

"A place to hide out."

"For how long?"

"Hell, how long can this go on?" Zen answered. "Even when it's over, I
don't want to go back down there and walk on skulls."

"Walk on skulls?"

"That's all that will be left."

"You think the Asians are gonna win, then?"

"I got a hunch there will be more skulls than anything else in Asia,
too. No, I don't think they're going to win. I don't think anybody is
going to win this one, except the people who have enough sense to hide."

Jake came out of his dreaming and put his hand on Cal's shoulder.
"Kurt's all right," he said.

It was obvious that Cal did not think very highly of this
recommendation.

"He's my pal," Jake continued. "Let him join us. He'll make a good
hand. Besides, me and him were buddies. And there was a girl--" He
stopped speaking and broke into dark musing as the memory of his wife
came again into his mind.

"Were you with this woman?" Cal asked.

"He never was with this woman in his life!" Jake screamed. "She was
mine, I tell you. Mine!"

"Shut up, crazy head."

"Tell him, Kurt. Tell him Marcia was mine."

"Sure, Jake," Zen soothed. "Everybody knew you and Marcia were that
way. Cal and I were talking about another woman."

"Oh. That's different. But I don't want to hear either of you say that
Marcia didn't belong to me."

The wolf-faced man looked as if he was about to use his gun on Jake.
"You stinking nut head, you stay out of this!"

"All I was trying to do was to tell you Kurt was my pal."

"All right, you've told me. Now shut up." Cal turned to Zen again.
"About this woman, colonel? Were you together?"

"No," Zen said.

"But she yelled out to you when me and Ed grabbed her."

"I heard her."

"You did?" Cal's finger went around the trigger of the gun.

"Yeah. I was following her but I didn't know she knew it until she
yelled."

"Oh." Cal kept his finger on the trigger. "Why were you following her?"

"Hell, don't be stupid!" Zen exploded. "Why would any man follow a
woman like that?"

A trace of a grin went across the wolf face at this answer. Cal licked
his lips. This was an answer he understood. "I don't blame you for
that. But why was she coming up here?"

"That I don't know," Zen said. "I don't think it made much difference
anyhow. As soon as night came--" He squinted at the sun.

"Do you think she might be a spy for Cuso heading for his camp to
report?"

Zen felt his lower jaw sag. This was a thought that had not crossed
his mind. He knew only too well that the Asiatic had spies in as many
places as he could get them. Cuso's survival depended in a large degree
on knowing how many troops were moving against him, how they were armed
and over what passes they were coming.

"I see by your face that you had never thought of that," Cal said.
"Then what is she doing up here?"

"I don't know. I realized she was ahead of me about a mile back. As to
what she is doing, maybe she got tired of all that down there too, and
decided to come up here and live in the mountains?"

"A woman in this wilderness?"

"Some women have delusions that they can return to the primitive and
make a go of it."

"And maybe she had some other idea," Cal said.

Zen shrugged.

"Knowing this may be important to us," Cal said.

"Then we had better go ask her," Zen said. He was still shocked at the
thought that Nedra might be a spy. Up until now, he had thought he was
shockproof.

"You want to ask her?" Cal said.

"Sure."

"Okay, you do the asking. I'll listen. And don't get any funny ideas."
His finger curled around the trigger of the gun. "Remember, that if a
patrol should come looking for a deserter, they would only be going to
shoot him. I would be doing them a favor if I shot him in advance."

"I covered my tracks," Zen said. "Nobody will be looking for me."

"How did you do it?"

"I traded dog tags with a hunk of meat that had once been a GI. There
wasn't enough left of him to tell for sure what he was. The burial
detail will clip my tags from his body and another colonel will be
listed as killed in action. The GI will be listed as missing."

"That was smart," Cal said, approvingly. For the first time, Zen
thought he detected a note of admiration in the voice tones of the
ragged man.

Nedra was leaning against what had once been a work-bench in the
garage. Her helmet was off, her hair was ruffled, and her tunic had
been almost torn from her body. A look of pure gratitude appeared on
her face when Zen stepped through the doorway. A little cry of gladness
on her lips, she started toward him. Her eyes said she had never been
as happy to see anybody in her life as she was to see this tall, lean
colonel.

With her was the little bow-legged man. He didn't look happy as Zen
entered. "Stand still," he snarled at the girl. "Who the hell are you?"

At his words, Nedra let her body sag back against the bench.

"Ed, this is Kurt," Cal said. "He's joining us."

The look in Ed's eyes was pure venom. "He may join us but he won't last
long. This woman is mine. I saw her first."

Zen wished fervently that he had the carbine back in his possession.
Some vermin did not deserve to live. But Jake had that weapon. While he
could probably take the carbine away from Jake, the gun in Cal's hands
was very steady.

"She's not mine, you know," he said to Ed. "So far as I am concerned,
you are welcome to her."

"Oh, that's different," Ed said, relieved.

If Zen's words relieved Ed, they had the opposite effect on Nedra. She
opened her mouth to speak to him, then closed it in an apparent effort
to bite off words that no lady should use.

Cal laughed. "Ed is mighty touchy about his women. But don't let that
stop you. Ask her what she is doing up here?"

"None of your damned business, either of you," Nedra answered.

Zen shrugged and spread his hands in a gesture which said that he hoped
Cal would see how it was. Cal nodded. "We'll find out later." His
manner indicated there was no question in his mind that he would find
out what he wanted to know. "Right now it's time for chow. Jake, get on
the job."

Jake turned and walked across the street to another house. Cal bringing
up the rear, the others followed Jake. Ed took hold of Nedra's arm and
escorted her across the street. Seeing this, Kurt Zen again wished that
he had a gun.




VI


The meal was beef stew, which Jake prepared in a big pot on an old
wood-burning range. They all ate around the kitchen table.

"There are lots of wild cattle up here," Cal explained. "This used to
be good range country, you know. The remnants of the old beef herds are
still in existence, the ones that have learned how to dodge or whip the
