she would.  We couldn't keep within miles of our course, and our
progress was pitifully slow.

Instead of making for the island of Anoroc, we bore far to the right,
until it became evident that we should have to pass between the two
right-hand islands and attempt to return toward Anoroc from the
opposite side.

As we neared the islands Perry was quite overcome by their beauty.
When we were directly between two of them he fairly went into raptures;
nor could I blame him.

The tropical luxuriance of the foliage that dripped almost to the
water's edge and the vivid colors of the blooms that shot the green
made a most gorgeous spectacle.

Perry was right in the midst of a flowery panegyric on the wonders of
the peaceful beauty of the scene when a canoe shot out from the nearest
island.  There were a dozen warriors in it; it was quickly followed by
a second and third.

Of course we couldn't know the intentions of the strangers, but we
could pretty well guess them.

Perry wanted to man the sweeps and try to get away from them, but I
soon convinced him that any speed of which the Sari was capable would
be far too slow to outdistance the swift, though awkward, dugouts of
the Mezops.

I waited until they were quite close enough to hear me, and then I
hailed them.  I told them that we were friends of the Mezops, and that
we were upon a visit to Ja of Anoroc, to which they replied that they
were at war with Ja, and that if we would wait a minute they'd board us
and throw our corpses to the azdyryths.

I warned them that they would get the worst of it if they didn't leave
us alone, but they only shouted in derision and paddled swiftly toward
us.  It was evident that they were considerably impressed by the
appearance and dimensions of our craft, but as these fellows know no
fear they were not at all awed.

Seeing that they were determined to give battle, I leaned over the rail
of the Sari and brought the imperial battle-squadron of the Emperor of
Pellucidar into action for the first time in the history of a world.
In other and simpler words, I fired my revolver at the nearest canoe.

The effect was magical.  A warrior rose from his knees, threw his
paddle aloft, stiffened into rigidity for an instant, and then toppled
overboard.

The others ceased paddling, and, with wide eyes, looked first at me and
then at the battling sea-things which fought for the corpse of their
comrade.  To them it must have seemed a miracle that I should be able
to stand at thrice the range of the most powerful javelin-thrower and
with a loud noise and a smudge of smoke slay one of their number with
an invisible missile.

But only for an instant were they paralyzed with wonder.  Then, with
savage shouts, they fell once more to their paddles and forged rapidly
toward us.

Again and again I fired.  At each shot a warrior sank to the bottom of
the canoe or tumbled overboard.

When the prow of the first craft touched the side of the Sari it
contained only dead and dying men.  The other two dugouts were
approaching rapidly, so I turned my attention toward them.

I think that they must have been commencing to have some doubts--those
wild, naked, red warriors--for when the first man fell in the second
boat, the others stopped paddling and commenced to jabber among
themselves.

The third boat pulled up alongside the second and its crews joined in
the conference.  Taking advantage of the lull in the battle, I called
out to the survivors to return to their shore.

"I have no fight with you," I cried, and then I told them who I was and
added that if they would live in peace they must sooner or later join
forces with me.

"Go back now to your people," I counseled them, "and tell them that you
have seen David I, Emperor of the Federated Kingdoms of Pellucidar, and
that single-handed he has overcome you, just as he intends overcoming
the Mahars and the Sagoths and any other peoples of Pellucidar who
threaten the peace and welfare of his empire."

Slowly they turned the noses of their canoes toward land.  It was
evident that they were impressed; yet that they were loath to give up
without further contesting my claim to naval supremacy was also
apparent, for some of their number seemed to be exhorting the others to
a renewal of the conflict.

However, at last they drew slowly away, and the Sari, which had not
decreased her snail-like speed during this, her first engagement,
continued upon her slow, uneven way.

Presently Perry stuck his head up through the hatch and hailed me.

"Have the scoundrels departed?" he asked.  "Have you killed them all?"

"Those whom I failed to kill have departed, Perry," I replied.

He came out on deck and, peering over the side, descried the lone canoe
floating a short distance astern with its grim and grisly freight.
Farther his eyes wandered to the retreating boats.

"David," said he at last, "this is a notable occasion.  It is a great
day in the annals of Pellucidar.  We have won a glorious victory.

"Your majesty's navy has routed a fleet of the enemy thrice its own
size, manned by ten times as many men.  Let us give thanks."

I could scarce restrain a smile at Perry's use of the pronoun "we," yet
I was glad to share the rejoicing with him as I shall always be glad to
share everything with the dear old fellow.

Perry is the only male coward I have ever known whom I could respect
and love.  He was not created for fighting; but I think that if the
occasion should ever arise where it became necessary he would give his
life cheerfully for me--yes, I KNOW it.

It took us a long time to work around the islands and draw in close to
Anoroc.  In the leisure afforded we took turns working on our map, and
by means of the compass and a little guesswork we set down the
shoreline we had left and the three islands with fair accuracy.

Crossed sabers marked the spot where the first great naval engagement
of a world had taken place.  In a note-book we jotted down, as had been
our custom, details that would be of historical value later.

Opposite Anoroc we came to anchor quite close to shore.  I knew from my
previous experience with the tortuous trails of the island that I could
never find my way inland to the hidden tree-village of the Mezop
chieftain, Ja; so we remained aboard the Sari, firing our express
rifles at intervals to attract the attention of the natives.

After some ten shots had been fired at considerable intervals a body of
copper-colored warriors appeared upon the shore.  They watched us for a
moment and then I hailed them, asking the whereabouts of my old friend
Ja.

They did not reply at once, but stood with their heads together in
serious and animated discussion.  Continually they turned their eyes
toward our strange craft.  It was evident that they were greatly
puzzled by our appearance as well as unable to explain the source of
the loud noises that had attracted their attention to us.  At last one
of the warriors addressed us.

"Who are you who seek Ja?" he asked.  "What would you of our chief?"

"We are friends," I replied.  "I am David.  Tell Ja that David, whose
life he once saved from a sithic, has come again to visit him.

"If you will send out a canoe we will come ashore.  We cannot bring our
great warship closer in."

Again they talked for a considerable time.  Then two of them entered a
canoe that several dragged from its hiding-place in the jungle and
paddled swiftly toward us.

They were magnificent specimens of manhood.  Perry had never seen a
member of this red race close to before.  In fact, the dead men in the
canoe we had left astern after the battle and the survivors who were
paddling rapidly toward their shore were the first he ever had seen.
He had been greatly impressed by their physical beauty and the promise
of superior intelligence which their well-shaped skulls gave.

The two who now paddled out received us into their canoe with dignified
courtesy.  To my inquiries relative to Ja they explained that he had
not been in the village when our signals were heard, but that runners
had been sent out after him and that doubtless he was already upon his
way to the coast.

One of the men remembered me from the occasion of my former visit to
the island; he was extremely agree-able the moment that he came close
enough to recognize me. He said that Ja would be delighted to welcome
me, and that all the tribe of Anoroc knew of me by repute, and had
received explicit instructions from their chieftain that if any of
them should ever come upon me to show me every kindness and attention.

Upon shore we were received with equal honor.  While we stood
conversing with our bronze friends a tall warrior leaped suddenly from
the jungle.

It was Ja.  As his eyes fell upon me his face lighted with pleasure.
He came quickly forward to greet me after the manner of his tribe.

Toward Perry he was equally hospitable.  The old man fell in love with
the savage giant as completely as had I. Ja conducted us along the
maze-like trail to his strange village, where he gave over one of the
tree-houses for our exclusive use.

Perry was much interested in the unique habitation, which resembled
nothing so much as a huge wasp's nest built around the bole of a tree
well above the ground.

After we had eaten and rested Ja came to see us with a number of his
head men.  They listened attentively to my story, which included a
narrative of the events leading to the formation of the federated
kingdoms, the battle with the Mahars, my journey to the outer world,
and my return to Pellucidar and search for Sari and my mate.

Ja told me that the Mezops had heard something of the federation and
had been much interested in it.  He had even gone so far as to send a
party of warriors toward Sari to investigate the reports, and to
arrange for the entrance of Anoroc into the empire in case it appeared
that there was any truth in the rumors that one of the aims of the
federation was the overthrow of the Mahars.

The delegation had met with a party of Sagoths.  As there had been a
truce between the Mahars and the Mezops for many generations, they
camped with these warriors of the reptiles, from whom they learned that
the federation had gone to pieces.  So the party returned to Anoroc.

When I showed Ja our map and explained its purpose to him, he was much
interested.  The location of Anoroc, the Mountains of the Clouds, the
river, and the strip of seacoast were all familiar to him.

He quickly indicated the position of the inland sea and close beside
it, the city of Phutra, where one of the powerful Mahar nations had its
seat.  He likewise showed us where Sari should be and carried his own
coast-line as far north and south as it was known to him.

His additions to the map convinced us that Greenwich lay upon the verge
of this same sea, and that it might be reached by water more easily
than by the arduous crossing of the mountains or the dangerous approach
through Phutra, which lay almost directly in line between Anoroc and
Greenwich to the northwest.

If Sari lay upon the same water then the shore-line must bend far back
toward the southwest of Greenwich--an assumption which, by the way, we
found later to be true.  Also, Sari was upon a lofty plateau at the
southern end of a mighty gulf of the Great Ocean.

The location which Ja gave to distant Amoz puzzled us, for it placed it
due north of Greenwich, apparently in mid-ocean.  As Ja had never been
so far and knew only of Amoz through hearsay, we thought that he must
be mistaken; but he was not.  Amoz lies directly north of Greenwich
across the mouth of the same gulf as that upon which Sari is.

The sense of direction and location of these primitive Pellucidarians
is little short of uncanny, as I have had occasion to remark in the
past.  You may take one of them to the uttermost ends of his world, to
places of which he has never even heard, yet without sun or moon or
stars to guide him, without map or compass, he will travel straight for
home in the shortest direction.

Mountains, rivers, and seas may have to be gone around, but never once
does his sense of direction fail him--the homing instinct is supreme.

In the same remarkable way they never forget the location of any place
to which they have ever been, and know that of many of which they have
only heard from others who have visited them.

In short, each Pellucidarian is a walking geography of his own district
and of much of the country contiguous thereto.  It always proved of the
greatest aid to Perry and me; nevertheless we were anxious to enlarge
our map, for we at least were not endowed with the homing instinct.

After several long councils it was decided that, in order to expedite
matters, Perry should return to the prospector with a strong party of
Mezops and fetch the freight I had brought from the outer world.  Ja
and his warriors were much impressed by our firearms, and were also
anxious to build boats with sails.

As we had arms at the prospector and also books on boat-building we
thought that it might prove an excellent idea to start these naturally
maritime people upon the construction of a well built navy of staunch
sailing-vessels.  I was sure that with definite plans to go by Perry
could oversee the construction of an adequate flotilla.

I warned him, however, not to be too ambitious, and to forget about
dreadnoughts and armored cruisers for a while and build instead a few
small sailing-boats that could be manned by four or five men.

I was to proceed to Sari, and while prosecuting my search for Dian
attempt at the same time the rehabilitation of the federation.  Perry
was going as far as possible by water, with the chances that the entire
trip might be made in that manner, which proved to be the fact.

With a couple of Mezops as companions I started for Sari.  In order to
avoid crossing the principal range of the Mountains of the Clouds we
took a route that passed a little way south of Phutra.  We had eaten
four times and slept once, and were, as my companions told me, not far
from the great Mahar city, when we were suddenly confronted by a
considerable band of Sagoths.

They did not attack us, owing to the peace which exists between the
Mahars and the Mezops, but I could see that they looked upon me with
considerable suspicion.  My friends told them that I was a stranger
from a remote country, and as we had previously planned against such a
contingency I pretended ignorance of the language which the human
beings of Pellucidar employ in conversing with the gorilla-like
soldiery of the Mahars.

I noticed, and not without misgivings, that the leader of the Sagoths
eyed me with an expression that betokened partial recognition.  I was
sure that he had seen me before during the period of my incarceration
in Phutra and that he was trying to recall my identity.

It worried me not a little.  I was extremely thankful when we bade them
adieu and continued upon our journey.

Several times during the next few marches I became acutely conscious of
the sensation of being watched by unseen eyes, but I did not speak of
my suspicions to my companions.  Later I had reason to regret my
reticence, for--

Well, this is how it happened:

We had killed an antelope and after eating our fill I had lain down to
sleep.  The Pellucidarians, who seem seldom if ever to require sleep,
joined me in this instance, for we had had a very trying march along
the northern foothills of the Mountains of the Clouds, and now with
their bellies filled with meat they seemed ready for slumber.

When I awoke it was with a start to find a couple of huge Sagoths
astride me.  They pinioned my arms and legs, and later chained my
wrists behind my back.  Then they let me up.

I saw my companions; the brave fellows lay dead where they had slept,
javelined to death without a chance at self-defense.

I was furious.  I threatened the Sagoth leader with all sorts of dire
reprisals; but when he heard me speak the hybrid language that is the
medium of communication between his kind and the human race of the
inner world he only grinned, as much as to say, "I thought so!"

They had not taken my revolvers or ammunition away from me because they
did not know what they were; but my heavy rifle I had lost.  They
simply left it where it had lain beside me.

So low in the scale of intelligence are they, that they had not
sufficient interest in this strange object even to fetch it along with
them.

