Light from the summit of the cone of Mt Etna in the autumn of the year
1896 (more briefly described in Astronomy with the Naked Eye). There
are few lofty mountains so favorably placed as Etna for observations
of this kind. It was once resorted to by Prof. George E. Hale, in an
attempt to see the solar corona without an eclipse. Rising directly
from sea-level to an elevation of nearly eleven thousand feet, the
observer on its summit at night finds himself, as it were, lost in the
midst of the sky. But for the black flanks of the great cone on which
he stands he might fancy himself to be in a balloon. On the occasion
to which I refer the world beneath was virtually invisible in the
moonless night. The blaze of the constellations overhead was
astonishingly brilliant, yet amid all their magnificence my attention
was immediately drawn to a great tapering light that sprang from the
place on the horizon where the sun would rise later, and that seemed
to be blown out over the stars like a long, luminous veil. It was the
finest view of the Zodiacal light that I had ever enjoyed -- thrilling
in its strangeness -- but I was almost disheartened by the
indifference of my guide, to whom it was only a light and nothing
more. If he had no science, he had less poetry -- rather a remarkable
thing, I thought, for a child of his clime. The Light appeared to me
to be distinctly brighter than the visible part of the Milky Way which
included the brilliant stretches in Auriga and Perseus, and its color,
if one may speak of color in connection with such an object, seemed
richer than that of the galactic band; but I did not think of it as
yellow, although Humboldt has described it as resembling a golden
curtain drawn over the stars, and Du Chaillu in Equatorial Africa
found it of a bright yellow color. It may vary in color as in
conspicuousness. The fascination of that extraordinary sight has never
faded from my memory. I turned to regard it again and again, although
I had never seen the stellar heavens so brilliant, and it was one of
the last things I looked for when the morning glow began softly to
mount in the east, and Sicily and the Mediterranean slowly emerged
from the profound shadow beneath us.

The Zodiacal Light seems never to have attracted from astronomers in
general the amount of careful attention that it deserves; perhaps
because so little can really be made of it as far as explanation is
concerned. I have referred to the restraint that scientific writers
apparently feel in speaking of it. The grounds for speculation that it
affords may be too scanty to lead to long discussions, yet it piques
curiosity, and as we shall see in a moment has finally led to a most
interesting theory. Once it was the subject of an elaborate series of
studies which carried the observer all round the world. That was in
1845--46, during the United States Exploring Expedition that visited
the then little known Japan. The chaplain of the fleet, the Rev. Mr
Jones, went out prepared to study the mysterious light in all its
phases. He saw it from many latitudes on both sides of the equator,
and the imagination cannot but follow him with keen interest in his
world-circling tour, keeping his eyes every night fixed upon the
phantasm overhead, whose position shifted with that of the hidden sun.
He demonstrated that the flow extends at times completely across the
celestial dome, although it is relatively faint directly behind the
earth. On his return the government published a large volume of his
observations, in which he undertook to show that the phenomenon was
due to the reflection of sunlight from a ring of meteoric bodies
encircling the earth. But, after all, this elaborate investigation
settled nothing.

Prof. E. E. Barnard has more recently devoted much attention to the
Zodiacal Light, as well as to a strange attendant phenomenon called
the ``Gegenschein,'' or Counterglow, because it always appears at that
point in the sky which is exactly opposite the sun. The Gegenschein is
an extremely elusive phenomenon, suitable only for eyes that have been
specially trained to see it. Professor Newcomb has cautiously remarked
that

  it is said that in that point of the heavens directly opposite the
  sun there is an elliptical patch of light... This phenomenon is so
  difficult to account for that its existence is sometimes doubted;
  yet the testimony in its favor is difficult to set aside.

It certainly cannot be set aside at all since the observations of
Barnard. I recall an attempt to see it under his guidance during a
visit to Mount Hamilton, when he was occupied there with the Lick
telescope. Of course, both the Gegenschein and the Zodiacal Light are
too diffuse to be studied with telescopes, which, so to speak, magnify
them out of existence. They can only be successfully studied with the
naked eye, since every faintest glimmer that they afford must be
utilized. This is especially true of the Gegenschein. At Mount
Hamilton, Mr Barnard pointed out to me its location with reference to
certain stars, but with all my gazing I could not be sure that I saw
it. To him, on the contrary, it was obvious; he had studied it for
months, and was able to indicate its shape, its boundaries, its
diameter, and the declination of its center with regard to the
ecliptic. There is not, of course, the shadow of a doubt of the
existence of the Gegenschein, and yet I question if one person in a
million has ever seen or ever will see it. The Zodiacal Light, on the
other hand, is plain enough, provided that the time and the
circumstances of the observation are properly chosen.

In the attempts to explain the Zodiacal Light, the favorite hypothesis
has been that it is an appendage of the sun -- perhaps simply an
extension of the corona in the plane of the ecliptic, which is not
very far from coinciding with that of the sun's equator. This idea is
quite a natural one, because of the evident relation of the light to
the position of the sun. The vast extension of the equatorial wings of
the corona in 1878 gave apparent support to this hypothesis; if the
substance of the corona could extend ten million miles from the sun,
why might it not extend even one hundred million, gradually fading out
beyond the orbit of the earth? A variation of this hypothesis assumes
that the reflection is due to swarms of meteors circling about the
sun, in the plane of its equator, all the way from its immediate
neighborhood to a distance exceeding that of the earth. But in neither
form is the hypothesis satisfactory; there is nothing in the
appearance of the corona to indicate that it extends even as far as
the planet Mercury, while as to meteors, the orbits of the known
swarms do not accord with the hypothesis, and we have no reason to
believe that clouds of others exist traveling in the part of space
where they would have to be in order to answer the requirements of the
theory. The extension of the corona in 1878 did not resemble in its
texture the Zodiacal Light.

Now, it has so often happened in the history of science that an
important discovery in one branch has thrown unexpected but most
welcome light upon some pending problem in some other branch, that a
strong argument might be based upon that fact alone against the too
exclusive devotion of many investigators to the narrow lines of their
own particular specialty; and the Zodiacal Light affords a case in
point, when it is considered in connection with recent discoveries in
chemistry and physics. From the fact that atoms are compound bodies
made up of corpuscles at least a thousand times smaller than the
smallest known atom -- a fact which astounded most men of science when
it was announced a few years ago -- a new hypothesis has been
developed concerning the nature of the Zodiacal Light (as well as
other astronomical riddles), and this hypothesis comes not from an
astronomer, but from a chemist and physicist, the Swede, Svante
Arrhenius. In considering an outline of this new hypothesis we need
neither accept nor reject it; it is a case rather for suspension of
judgment.

To begin with, it carries us back to the ``pressure of light''
mentioned in the preceding chapter. The manner in which this pressure
is believed generally to act was there sufficiently explained, and it
only remains to see how it is theoretically extended to the particles
of matter supposed to constitute the Zodiacal Light. We know that
corpuscles, or ``fragments of atoms'' negatively electrified, are
discharged from hot bodies. Streams of these ``ions'' pour from many
flames and from molten metals; and the impact of the cathode and
ultra-violet rays causes them to gush even from cold bodies. In the
vast laboratory of the sun it is but reasonable to suppose that
similar processes are taking place. ``As a very hot metal emits these
corpuscles,'' says Prof. J. J. Thomson, ``it does not seem an
improbable hypothesis that they are emitted by that very hot body, the
sun.'' Let it be assumed, then, that the sun does emit them; what
happens next? Negatively charged corpuscles, it is known, serve as
nuclei to which particles of matter in the ordinary state are
attracted, and it is probable that those emitted from the sun
immediately pick up loads in this manner and so grow in bulk. If they
grow large enough the gravitation of the sun draws them back, and they
produce a negative charge in the solar atmosphere. But it is probable
that many of the particles do not attain the critical size which,
according to the principles before explained, would enable the
gravitation of the sun to retain them in opposition to the pressure of
the waves of light, and with these particles the light pressure is
dominant. Clouds of them may be supposed to be continually swept away
from the sun into surrounding space, moving mostly in or near the
plane of the solar equator, where the greatest activity, as indicated
by sunspots and related phenomena, is taking place. As they pass
outward into space many of them encounter the earth. If the earth,
like the moon, had no atmosphere the particles would impinge directly
on its surface, giving it a negative electric charge. But the presence
of the atmosphere changes all that, for the first of the flying
particles that encounter it impart to it their negative electricity,
and then, since like electric charges repel like, the storm of
particles following will be sheered off from the earth, and will
stream around it in a maze of hyperbolic paths. Those that continue on
into space beyond the earth may be expected to continue picking up
wandering particles of matter until their bulk has become so great
that the solar attraction prevails again over the light pressure
acting upon them, and they turn again sunward. Passing the earth on
their return they will increase the amount of dust-clouds careering
round it; and these will be further increased by the action of the
ultra-violet rays of the sunlight causing particles to shoot radially
away from the earth when the negative charge of the upper atmosphere
has reached a certain amount, which particles, although starting
sunward, will be swept back to the earth with the oncoming streams. As
the final result of all this accumulation of flying and gyrating
particles in the earth's neighborhood, we are told that the latter
must be transformed into the semblance of a gigantic solid-headed
comet provided with streaming tails, the longest of them stretching
away from the direction of the sun, while another shorter one extends
toward the sun. This shorter tail is due to the particles that we have
just spoken of as being driven sunward from the earth by the action of
ultra-violet light. No doubt this whole subject is too technical for
popular statement; but at any rate the general reader can understand
the picturesque side of the theory, for its advocates assure us that
if we were on the moon we would doubtless be able to see the
comet-like tails of the earth, and then we could appreciate the part
that they play in producing the phenomenon of the Zodiacal Light.

That the Light as we see it could be produced by the reflection of
sunlight from swarms of particles careering round the earth in the
manner supposed by Arrhenius' hypothesis is evident enough; and it
will be observed that the new theory, after all, is only another
variant of the older one which attributes the Zodiacal Light to an
extension of the solar corona. But it differs from the older theory in
offering an explanation of the manner in which the extension is
effected, and it differentiates between the corona proper and the
streams of negative particles shot away from the sun. In its details
the hypothesis of Arrhenius also affords an explanation of many
peculiarities of the Zodiacal Light, such as that it is confined to
the neighborhood of the ecliptic, and that it is stronger on the side
of the earth which is just turning away from a position under the sun
than on the other side; but it would carry us beyond our limits to go
into these particulars. The Gegenschein, according to this theory, is
a part of the same phenomenon as the Zodiacal Light, for by the laws
of perspective it is evident that the reflection from the streams of
particles situated at a point directly opposite to the sun would be at
a maximum, and this is the place which the Gegenschein occupies. Apart
from its geometrical relations to the position of the sun, the
variability of the Zodiacal Light appears to affirm its solar
dependence, and this too would be accounted for by Arrhenius'
hypothesis better than by the old theory of coronal extension. The
amount of corpuscular discharge from the sun must naturally be
governed by the state of relative activity or inactivity of the
latter, and this could not but be reflected in the varying splendor of
the Zodiacal Light. But much more extended study than has yet been
given to the subject will be required before we can feel that we know
with reasonable certainty what this mysterious phenomenon really is.
By the hypothesis of Arrhenius every planet that has an atmosphere
must have a Zodiacal Light attending it, but the phenomenon is too
faint for us to be able to see it in the case, for instance, of Venus,
whose atmosphere is very abundant. The moon has no corresponding
``comet's tail'' because, as already explained, of the lack of a lunar
atmosphere to repel the streams by becoming itself electrified; but if
there were a lunar Zodiacal Light, no doubt we could see it because of
the relative nearness of our satellite.

Marvels of the Aurora

One of the most vivid recollections of my early boyhood is that of
seeing my father return hastily into the house one evening and call
out to the family: ``Come outside and look at the sky!'' Ours was a
country house situated on a commanding site, and as we all emerged
from the doorway we were dumbfounded to see the heavens filled with
pale flames which ran licking and quivering over the stars. Instantly
there sprang into my terrified mind the recollection of an awful
description of ``the Day of Judgment'' (the Dies Irae), which I had
heard with much perturbation of spirit in the Dutch Reformed church
from the lips of a tall, dark-browed, dreadfully-in-earnest preacher
of the old-fashioned type. My heart literally sank at sight of the
spectacle, for it recalled the preacher's very words; it was just as
he had said it would be, and it needed the assured bearing of my
elders finally to convince me that

  That Day of Wrath, O dreadful day,
  When Heaven and Earth shall pass away,
  As David and the Sibyl say

had not actually come upon us. And even the older members of the
household were not untouched with misgivings when menacing spots of
crimson appeared, breaking out now here, now there, in the shuddering
sky. Toward the north the spectacle was appalling. A huge arch spanned
an unnaturally dark segment resting on the horizon, and above this
arch sprang up beams and streamers in a state of incessant agitation,
sometimes shooting up to the zenith with a velocity that took one's
breath, and sometimes suddenly falling into long ranks, and marching,
marching, marching, like an endless phalanx of fiery specters, and
moving, as I remember, always from east to west. The absolute silence
with which these mysterious evolutions were performed and the
quavering reflections which were thrown upon the ground increased the
awfulness of the exhibition. Occasionally enormous curtains of lambent
flame rolled and unrolled with a majestic motion, or were shaken to
and fro as if by a mighty, noiseless wind. At times, too, a sudden
billowing rush would be made toward the zenith, and for a minute the
sky overhead would glow so brightly that the stars seemed to have been
consumed. The spectacle continued with varying intensity for hours.

This exhibition occurred in Central New York, a latitude in which the
Aurora Borealis is seldom seen with so much splendor. I remember
another similar one seen from the city of New York in November, 1882.
On this last occasion some observers saw a great upright beam of light
which majestically moved across the heavens, stalking like an
apparition in the midst of the auroral pageant, of whose general
movements it seemed to be independent, maintaining always its upright
posture, and following a magnetic parallel from east to west. This
mysterious beam was seen by no less than twenty-six observers in
different parts of the country, and a comparison of their observations
led to a curious calculation indicating that the apparition was about
one hundred and thirty-three miles tall and moved at the speed of ten
miles per second!

But, as everybody knows, it is in the Arctic regions that the Aurora,
or the ``Northern Lights,'' can best be seen. There, in the long polar
night, when for months together the sun does not rise, the strange
coruscations in the sky often afford a kind of spectral daylight in
unison with the weird scenery of the world of ice. The pages in the
narratives of Arctic exploration that are devoted to descriptions of
the wonderful effects of the Northern Lights are second to none that
man has ever penned in their fascination. The lights, as I have
already intimated, display astonishing colors, particularly shades of
red and green, as they flit from place to place in the sky. The
discovery that the magnetic needle is affected by the Aurora,
quivering and darting about in a state of extraordinary excitement
when the lights are playing in the sky, only added to the mystery of
the phenomenon until its electro-magnetic nature had been established.
This became evident as soon as it was known that the focus of the
displays was the magnetic pole; and when the far South was visited the
Aurora Australis was found, having its center at the South Magnetic
Pole. Then, if not before, it was clear that the earth was a great
globular magnet, having its poles of opposite magnetism, and that the
auroral lights, whatever their precise cause might be, were
manifestations of the magnetic activity of our planet. After the
invention of magnetic telegraphy it was found that whenever a great
Aurora occurred the telegraph lines were interrupted in their
operation, and the ocean cables ceased to work. Such a phenomenon is
called a ``magnetic storm.''

The interest excited by the Aurora in scientific circles was greatly
stimulated when, in the last half of the nineteenth century, it was
discovered that it is a phenomenon intimately associated with
disturbances on the sun. The ancient ``Zurich Chronicles,'' extending
from the year 1000 to the year 1800, in which both sun-spots visible
to the naked eye and great displays of the auroral lights were
recorded, first set Rudolf Wolf on the track of this discovery. The
first notable proof of the suspected connection was furnished with
dramatic emphasis by an occurrence which happened on September 1,
1859. Near noon on that day two intensely brilliant points suddenly
broke out in a group of sun-spots which were under observation by Mr
R. C. Carrington at his observatory at Redhill, England. The points
remained visible for not more than five minutes, during which interval
they moved thirty-five thousand miles across the solar disk. Mr R.
Hodgson happened to see the same phenomenon at his observatory at
Highgate, and thus all possibility of deception was removed. But
neither of the startled observers could have anticipated what was to
follow, and, indeed, it was an occurrence which has never been
precisely duplicated. I quote the eloquent account given by Miss
Clerke in her History of Astronomy During the Nineteenth Century.

  This unique phenomenon seemed as if specially designed to
  accentuate the inference of a sympathetic relation between the
  earth and the sun. From August 28 to September 4, 1859, a magnetic
  storm of unparalleled intensity, extent, and duration was in
  progress over the entire globe. Telegraphic communication was
  everywhere interrupted -- except, indeed, that it was in some cases
  found practicable to work the lines without batteries by the agency
  of the earth-currents alone; sparks issued from the wires; gorgeous
  auroras draped the skies in solemn crimson over both hemispheres,
  and even in the tropics; the magnetic needle lost all trace of
  continuity in its movements and darted to and fro as if stricken
  with inexplicable panic. The coincidence was even closer. At the
  very instant of the solar outburst witnessed by Carrington and
  Hodgson the photographic apparatus at Kew registered a marked
  disturbance of all the three magnetic elements; while shortly after
  the ensuing midnight the electric agitation culminated, thrilling
  the whole earth with subtle vibrations, and lighting up the
  atmosphere from pole to pole with coruscating splendors which
  perhaps dimly recall the times when our ancient planet itself shone
  as a star.

If this amazing occurrence stood alone, and as I have already said it
has never been exactly duplicated, doubt might be felt concerning some
of the inferences drawn from it; but in varying forms it has been
repeated many times, so that now hardly anyone questions the reality
of the assumed connection between solar outbursts and magnetic storms
accompanied by auroral displays on the earth. It is true that the late
Lord Kelvin raised difficulties in the way of the hypothesis of a
direct magnetic action of the sun upon the earth, because it seemed to
him that an inadmissible quantity of energy was demanded to account
for such action. But no calculation like that which he made is final,
since all calculations depend upon the validity of the data; and no
authority is unshakable in science, because no man can possess
omniscience. It was Lord Kelvin who, but a few years before the thing
was actually accomplished, declared that aerial navigation was an
impracticable dream, and demonstrated its impracticability by
calculation. However the connection may be brought about, it is as
certain as evidence can make it that solar outbursts are coincident
with terrestial magnetic disturbances, and coincident in such a way as
to make the inference of a causal connection irresistible. The sun is
only a little more than a hundred times its own diameter away from the
earth. Why, then, with the subtle connection between them afforded by
the ether which conveys to us the blinding solar light and the
life-sustaining solar heat, should it be so difficult to believe that
the sun's enormous electric energies find a way to us also? No doubt
the impulse coming from the sun acts upon the earth after the manner
of a touch upon a trigger, releasing energies which are already stored
up in our planet.

But besides the evidence afforded by such occurrences as have been
related of an intimate connection between solar outbreaks and
terrestial magnetic flurries, attended by magnificent auroral
displays, there is another line of proof pointing in the same
direction. Thus, it is known that the sun-spot period, as remarked in
a preceding chapter, coincides in a most remarkable manner with the
periodic fluctuations in the magnetic state of the earth. This
coincidence runs into the most astonishing details. For instance, when
the sun-spot period shortens, the auroral period shortens to precisely
the same extent; as the short sun-spot periods usually bring the most
intense outbreaks of solar activity, so the corresponding short
auroral periods are attended by the most violent magnetic storms; a
secular period of about two hundred and twenty-two years affecting
sun-spots is said to have its auroral duplicate; a shorter period of
fifty-five and a half years, which some observers believe that they
have discovered appears also to be common to the two phenomena; and
yet another ``superposed'' period of about thirty-five years, which
some investigators aver exists, affects sun-spots and aurora alike. In
short, the coincidences are so numerous and significant that one would
have to throw the doctrine of probability to the winds in order to be
able to reject the conclusion to which they so plainly lead.

But still the question recurs: How is the influence transmitted? Here
Arrhenius comes once more with his hypothesis of negative corpuscles,
or ions, driven away from the sun by light-pressure -- a hypothesis
which seems to explain so many things -- and offers it also as an
explanation of the way in which the sun creates the Aurora. He would
give the Aurora the same lineage with the Zodiacal Light. To
understand the application of this theory we must first recall the
fact that the earth is a great magnet having its two opposite poles of
magnetism, one near the Arctic and the other near the Antarctic
Circle. Like all magnets, the earth is surrounded with ``lines of
force,'' which, after the manner of the curved rays we saw in the
photograph of a solar eclipse, start from a pole, rising at first
nearly vertically, then bend gradually over, passing high above the
equator, and finally descending in converging sheaves to the opposite
pole. Now the axis of the earth is so placed in space that it lies at
nearly a right angle to the direction of the sun, and as the streams
of negatively charged particles come pouring on from the sun (see the
last preceding chapter), they arrive in the greatest numbers over the
earth's equatorial regions. There they encounter the lines of magnetic
force at the place where the latter have their greatest elevation
above the earth, and where their direction is horizontal to the
earth's surface. Obeying a law which has been demonstrated in the
laboratory, the particles then follow the lines of force toward the
poles. While they are above the equatorial regions they do not become
luminescent, because at the great elevation that they there occupy
there is virtually no atmosphere; but as they pass on toward the north
and the south they begin to descend with the lines of force, curving
down to meet at the poles; and, encountering a part of the atmosphere
comparable in density with what remains in an exhausted Crookes tube,
they produce a glow of cathode rays. This glow is conceived to
represent the Aurora, which may consequently be likened to a gigantic
exhibition of vacuum-tube lights. Anybody who recalls his student days
in the college laboratory and who has witnessed a display of Northern
Lights will at once recognize the resemblance between them in colors,
forms, and behavior. This resemblance had often been noted before
Arrhenius elaborated his hypothesis.

Without intending to treat his interesting theory as more than a
possibly correct explanation of the phenomena of the Aurora, we may
call attention to some apparently confirmatory facts. One of the most
striking of these relates to a seasonal variation in the average
number of aurorae. It has been observed that there are more in March
and September than at any other time of the year, and fewer in June
and December; moreover (and this is a delicate test as applied to the
theory), they are slightly rarer in June than in December. Now all
these facts seem to find a ready explanation in the hypothesis of
Arrhenius, thus: (1) The particles issuing from the sun are supposed
to come principally from the regions whose excitement is indicated by
the presence of sun-spots (which accords with Hale's observation that
sun-spots are columns of ionized vapors), and these regions have a
definite location on either side of the solar equator, seldom
approaching it nearer than within 5 deg. or 10 deg. north or south, and never
extending much beyond 35 deg. toward either pole; (2) The equator of the
sun is inclined about 7 deg. to the plane of the earth's orbit, from which
it results that twice in a year -- viz., in June and December -- the
earth is directly over the solar equator, and twice a year -- viz., in
March and September -- when it is farthest north or south of the solar
equator, it is over the inner edge of the sun-spot belts. Since the
corpuscles must be supposed to be propelled radially from the sun, few
will reach the earth when the latter is over the solar equator in June
and December, but when it is over, or nearly over, the spot belts, in
March and September, it will be in the line of fire of the more active
parts of the solar surface, and relatively rich streams of particles
will reach it. This, as will be seen from what has been said above, is
in strict accord with the observed variations in the frequency of
aurorae. Even the fact that somewhat fewer aurorae are seen in June than
in December also finds its explanation in the known fact that the
earth is about three million miles nearer the sun in the winter than
in the summer, and the number of particles reaching it will vary, like
the intensity of light, inversely as the square of the distance. These
coincidences are certainly very striking, and they have a cumulative
force. If we accept the theory, it would appear that we ought to
congratulate ourselves that the inclination of the sun's equator is so
slight, for as things stand the earth is never directly over the most
active regions of the sun-spots, and consequently never suffers from
the maximum bombardment of charged particles of which the sun is
capable. Incessant auroral displays, with their undulating draperies,
flitting colors, and marching columns might not be objectionable from
the point of view of picturesqueness, but one magnetic storm of
extreme intensity following closely upon the heels of another, for
months on end, crazing the magnetic needle and continually putting the
telegraph and cable lines out of commission, to say nothing of their
effect upon ``wireless telegraphy'', would hardly add to the charms of
terrestrial existence.

One or two other curious points in connection with Arrhenius'
hypothesis may be mentioned. First, the number of aurorae, according to
his explanation, ought to be greatest in the daytime, when the face of
the earth on the sunward side is directly exposed to the atomic
bombardment. Of course visual observation can give us no information
about this, since the light of the Aurora is never sufficiently
intense to be visible in the presence of daylight, but the records of
the magnetic observatories can be, and have been, appealed to for
information, and they indicate that the facts actually accord with the
theory. Behind the veil of sunlight in the middle of the afternoon,
there is good reason to believe, auroral exhibitions often take place
which would eclipse in magnificence those seen at night if we could
behold them. Observation shows, too, that aurorae are more frequent
before than after midnight, which is just what we should expect if
they originate in the way that Arrhenius supposes. Second, the theory
offers an explanation of the alleged fact that the formation of clouds
in the upper air is more frequent in years when aurorae are most
abundant, because clouds are the result of the condensation of
moisture upon floating particles in the atmosphere (in an absolutely
dustless atmosphere there would be no clouds), and it has been proved
that negative ions like those supposed to come from the sun play a
master part in the phenomena of cloud formation.

Yet another singular fact, almost mystical in its suggestions, may be
mentioned. It seems that the dance of the auroral lights occurs most
frequently during the absence of the moon from the hemisphere in which
they appear, and that they flee, in greater part, to the opposite
hemisphere when the moon's revolution in an orbit considerably
inclined to the earth's equator brings her into that where they have
been performing. Arrhenius himself discovered this curious relation of
auroral frequency to the position of the moon north or south of the
equator, and he explains it in this way. The moon, like the earth, is
exposed to the influx of the ions from the sun; but having no
atmosphere, or almost none, to interfere with them, they descend
directly upon her surface and charge her with an electric negative
potential to a very high degree. In consequence of this she affects
the electric state of the upper parts of the earth's atmosphere where
they lie most directly beneath her, and thus prevents, to a large
extent, the negative discharges to which the appearance of the Aurora
is due. And so ``the extravagant and erring spirit'' of the Aurora
avoids the moon as Hamlet's ghost fled at the voice of the cock
announcing the awakening of the god of day.

There are even other apparent confirmations of the hypothesis, but we
need not go into them. We shall, however, find one more application of
it in the next chapter, for it appears to be a kind of cure-all for
astronomical troubles; at any rate it offers a conceivable solution of
the question, How does the sun manage to transmit its electric
