table"

[Illustration: CLAY PIPE ATTRACTED BY AN ELECTRIFIED GOBLET.]

The problem thus proposed may be solved by means of electricity. Take a
goblet like the one that supports the pipe, and rub it briskly against
your coat sleeve, so as to electrify the glass through friction. Having
done this, bring the goblet to within about a centimeter of the pipe
stem. The latter will then be seen to be strongly attracted, and will
follow the glass around and finally fall from its support.

This curious experiment is a pretty variation of the electric pendulum;
and it shows that pipe-clay--a very bad conductor of electricity--favors
very well the attraction of an electrified body.

Tumblers or goblets are to be found in every house, and a clay pipe
is easily procured anywhere. So it would be difficult to produce
manifestations of electricity more easily and at less expense than by
the means here described.--_La Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CASCADE BATTERY.

[Footnote: Lately read before the Society of Telegraph Engineers and
Electricians.]

By F. HIGGINS.


The battery which I have brought here to-night to introduce to your
notice is of the circulating kind, in which the alimentary fluid
employed passes from cell to cell by gravitation, and maintains the
action of the battery as long as it continues to flow. It cannot,
of course, compare with such abundant sources of electricity as
dynamo-electric machines driven by steam power, but for purposes in
which a current of somewhat greater volume and constancy than that
furnished by the ordinary voltaic batteries is required, it will, I
believe, be found in some cases useful. A single fluid is employed, and
each cell is provided with an overflow spout.

The cells are arranged upon steps, in order that the liquid may flow
from the cell on the topmost step through each successive cell by
gravitation [specimen cells were on the table before the audience] to
the reservoir at the bottom. The top and the bottom reservoirs are of
equal capacity, and are fitted with taps. The topmost tap is used to
regulate the flow of the solution, and the bottom one to draw it off. In
each cell two carbon plates are suspended above a quantity of fragments
of amalgamated zinc. The following is a sectional drawing of the
arrangement of the cell:

[Illustration]

A copper wire passes down to the bottom of the cell and makes connection
with the mercury; this wire is covered with gutta-percha, except where
immersed in the mercury. The pores of the carbon plates are filled
with paraffin wax. This battery was first employed for the purpose of
utilizing waste solution from bichromate batteries, a great quantity of
which is thrown away before having been completely exhausted. This waste
is unavoidable, in consequence of the impossibility of permitting such
batteries, when employed for telegraphic purposes, to run until complete
exhaustion or reduction of the solutions has been effected; therefore
some valuable chemicals have to be sacrificed to insure constancy in
working. The fragments of zinc in this cell were also the remains of
amalgamated zinc plates from the bichromate batteries, and the mercury
which is employed for securing good metallic connection is soon
augmented by that remaining after the dissolution of the zinc. It will
therefore be seen that not only the solution, but also the zinc and
mercury remnants of bichromate batteries are utilized, and at the same
time a considerable quantity of electricity is generated. The cells are
seven inches deep and six inches wide, outside, and contain about a
quart of solution in addition to the plates. The battery which I employ
regularly, consisting of 18 cells, is at present working nine permanent
current Morse circuits, which previously required 250 telegraphic
Daniell cells to produce the same effect, and is capable of working at
least ten times the number of circuits which I have mentioned; but as we
do not happen to have any more of such permanent current Morse circuits,
we are unable to make all the use possible of the capabilities of the
battery. The potential of one cell is from 1.9 to 2 volts with strong
solution, and the internal resistance varies from 0.108 to 0.170 of an
ohm with cells of the size described. In order to test the constancy of
the battery, a red heat was maintained in a platinum-iridium wire by the
current for six weeks, both day and night.

The absence or exhaustion of the zinc in any one cell in a battery is
indicated by the appearance of a red insoluble chromic salt of mercury,
in a finely divided state, floating in the faulty cell. It is then
necessary to drop in some pieces of zinc. The state of the zinc supply
may also be ascertained at any time by feeling about in the cells with a
stick. When not required, the battery may be washed by simply charging
the top reservoir with water, and leaving it to circulate in the usual
manner, or the solution may be withdrawn from each cell by a siphon. A
very small flow of the solution is sufficient to maintain the required
current for telegraphic working, but if the flow be stopped altogether
for a few hours, no difference is observed in the current, although when
the current is required to be maintained in a conductor of a few ohms
resistance, as in heating a platinum wire, it is necessary that the
circulation be maintained [heating a piece of platinum ribbon]. The
battery furnishing the current for producing the effect you now see is
of five cells, and as that number is reduced down to two, you see a glow
still appears in the platinum. The platinum strip employed was 5 inches
long and 1/8 inch wide, its resistance being 0.42 ohm, cold. That gives
an idea of the volume of current flowing. I have twelve electro magnets
in printing instruments joined up on the table, and [joining up the
battery] you see that the two cells are sufficient to work them. The
twelve electro-magnets are being worked (by the two cells) in multiple
arc at the same time. The current from the cells which heated the
platinum wire is amply sufficient to magnetize a Thomson recorder. I
have maintained five inches of platinum ribbon in a red hot state for
two hours, in order to make sure that the battery I was about to bring
before you was in good order. The cost of working such a battery when
waste solution cannot be obtained, and it is necessary to use specially
prepared bichromate solution, is about 21/4d. per cell per day, with a
current constantly active in a Thomson recorder circuit, or a resistance
of 11/2 ohms per cell; but if only occasionally used, the same quantity of
solution will last several weeks.

A comparison of this with another form of constant battery, the Daniell,
as used in telegraphy, shows that six of these cells, with a total
electromotive force of 12 volts and an internal resistance of 0.84 of
an ohm, cannot be replaced by less than 71 batteries of 10 cells each,
connected in multiple arc, or for quantity. This result, however large
it may appear, is considerably below that which may be obtained when
working telegraphic lines. A current of 0.02 weber, or ampere, will work
an ordinary sounder or direct writing Morse circuit; the cascade battery
is capable of working 100 such circuits at the same time, while the
combined resistance of that number of lines would not be below that in
which it is found that the battery is constant in action.

Objection may be made to the arrangement of the battery on the score of
waste of zinc by local action, because of the electro positive metal
being exposed to the chromic liquid; but if the battery be out of action
and the circulation stopped, the zinc amalgam is protected by the
immobility of the liquid and the formation of a dense layer of sulphate
of zinc on its surface. When in action, that effect is neutralized from
the fact that carbon in chromic acid is more highly electro-negative
than the chromate of mercury formed upon the zinc amalgam, and which
appears to be the cause of the dissolution of the zinc even when
amalgamated in the presence of chromic acid. The solution may be
repeatedly passed through the battery until the absence of the
characteristic warmth of color of chromic acid indicates its complete
exhaustion. During a description before the Society of thermo-electric
batteries some time ago, Mr. Preece mentioned that five of the
thermopiles which were being tried at the Post-Office were doing the
work of 2,535 of the battery cells previously employed. Thirty of
the cascade cells would have about the same potential as five such
thermopiles, but would supply three and a half times the current, and be
capable of doing the work of 8,872 cells if employed upon the universal
battery system in the same manner as the thermo batteries referred to.

Although this battery will do all that is required for a Thomson
recorder or a similar instrument much more cheaply in this country than
the tray battery, and with half the number of cells, I do not think it
would be the case in distant countries, on account of the difficulty and
cost of transport. A solid compound of chromic and sulphuric acids could
be manufactured which would overcome this difficulty, if permanent
magnetic fields for submarine telegraphic instruments continue to be
produced by electric vortices. In conclusion, and to enable comparisons
to be made, I may mention that the work this battery is capable of
performing is 732,482 foot pounds, at a total cost of 1s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *


[FROM THE SCHOOL JOURNAL.]




PERFECTLY LOVELY PHILOSOPHY.


CHARACTERS: Laura and Isabel, dressed very stylishly, both with hats on.
Enter hand in hand.

_Laura_. My dear Isabel, I was so afraid you would not come. I waited
at that horrid station a full half hour for you. I went there early on
purpose, so as to be sure not to miss you.

_Isabel_. Oh, you sweet girl!

_L_. Now, sit right down; you must be tired. Just lay your hat there on
the table, and we'll begin to visit right off. (_Both lay their hats on
the table and stand near by_.)

_I_. And how have you been all the ages since we were together at
Boston?

_L_. Oh, well, dear; those were sweet old school days, weren't they. How
are you enjoying yourself now? You wrote that you were taking lessons in
philosophy. Tell me how you like it. Is it real sweet?

_I_ Oh, those I took in the winter were perfectly lovely! It was about
science, you know, and all of us just doled on science.

_L_. It must have been nice. What was it about?

_I_. It was about molecules as much as anything else, and molecules are
just too awfully nice for anything. If there's anything I really enjoy,
it's molecules.

_L_. Oh, tell me about them, dear. What are molecules?

_I_. They are little wee things, and it takes ever so many of them, you
know. They are so sweet! Do you know, there isn't anything but that's
got a molecule in it. And the professors are so lovely! They explained
everything so beautifully.

_L_. Oh, how I'd like to have been there!

_I_. You'd have enjoyed it ever so much. They teach protoplasm, too,
and if there's one thing that is too sweetly divine, it's protoplasm. I
really don't know which I like best, protoplasm or molecules.

_L_. Tell me about protoplasm. I know I should adore it!

_I_. 'Deed you would. It's just too sweet to live. You know it's about
how things get started, or something of that kind. You ought to have
heard the professors tell about it. Oh. dear! (_Wipes her eyes with
handkerchief_) The first time he explained about protoplasm there wasn't
a dry eye in the room. We all named our hats after the professors. This
is a Darwinian hat. You see the ribbon is drawn over the crown this way
(_takes hat and illustrates_), and caught with a buckle and bunch of
flowers. Then you turn up the side with a spray of forget me-nots.

_L_. Oh, how utterly sweet! Do tell me some more of science. I adore it
already.

_I_. Do you, dear? Well, I almost forgot about differentiation. I am
really and truly positively in love with differentiation. It's different
from molecules and protoplasms, but it's every bit as nice. And our
professor! You should hear him enthuse about it; he's perfectly bound up
in it. This is a differentiation scarf--they've just come out. All
the girls wear them--just on account of the interest we take in
differentiation.

_L_. What is it, anyway?

_I_. Mull trimmed with Languedoc lace, but--

_L_. I don't mean that--the other.

_I_. Oh, differentiation! That's just sweet. It's got something to
do with species. And we learn all about ascidians, too. They are the
divinest things! If I only had an ascidian of my own! I wouldn't ask
anything else in the world.

_L_. What do they look like, dear? Did you ever see one?

_I_. Oh, no; nobody ever did but the poor dear professors; but they're
something like an oyster with a reticule hung on its belt. I think they
are just _too_ lovely for anything.

_L_. Did you learn anything else besides?

_I_. Oh, yes. We studied common philosophy, and logic, and metaphysics,
and a lot of those ordinary things, but the girls didn't care anything
about those. We were just in ecstasies over differentiations, and
molecules, and the professor, and protoplasms, and ascidians. I don't
see why they put in those common branches; we couldn't hardly endure
them.

_L_. (_Sighs_.) Do you believe they'll have a course like that next
year?

_I_. I think may be they will.

_L_. Dear me! There's the bell to dress for dinner. How I wish I could
study those lovely things!

_I_. You must ask your father if you can't spend the winter in Boston
with me. I'm sure there'll be another course of Parlor Philosophy next
winter. But how dreadful that we must stop talking about it now to dress
for dinner! You are going to have company, you said; what shall you
wear, dear?

_L_. Oh, almost anything. What shall you?

(_Exeunt arm in arm_.)

       *       *       *       *       *




THE PROPOSED DUTCH INTERNATIONAL COLONIAL AND GENERAL EXPORT EXHIBITION.


The Amsterdam International Exhibition, the opening of which has been
fixed for May 1, 1883, is now in way of realization. This exhibition
will present a special interest to all nations, and particularly to
their export trade. Holland, which is one of the great colonial powers,
proposes by means of this affair to organize a competition between the
various colonizing nations, and to contribute thus to a knowledge of
the resources of foreign countries whose richness of soil is their
fundamental power.

The executive committee includes the names of some of the most prominent
persons of the Netherlands: M. Cordes, president; M. de Clercq,
delegate; M. Kappeyne van di Coppello, secretary; and M. Agostini,
commissary general.

[Illustration: PLAN OF THE DUTCH INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION.

   1. Exhibition Palace.
   2. Netherlands Colonial Exhibition.
   3. Fine Arts.
   4. Annexes for Agricultural Machines, etc.
   5. Machines, Materials, etc.
   6. Concert Theater.
   7. Panorama.
   8. Jury Pavilion.
   9. Royal Pavilion.
  10. Committee Pavilion.
  11. International Society's Pavilion.
  12. Restaurant and Cafe.
  13. Music Kiosque and Electric Pharos.
  14. German Restaurant.
  15. Dutch Restaurant.
  16. English Restaurant.
  17. French Restaurant.
  18. Aquarium and Rockwork.
]

The exhibition will consist of five great divisions, to wit: 1. A
Colonial exhibition. 2. A General Export exhibition. 3. A Retrospective
exhibition of Fine Arts and of Arts applied to the Industries. 4.
Special exhibitions. 5. Lectures and Scientific Reunions.

The colonial part forms the base of the exhibition, and will be devoted
to a comparative study of the different systems of colonization
and colonial agriculture, as well as of the manners and customs of
ultramarine peoples. In giving an exact idea of what has been done, it
will indicate what remains to be done from the standpoint of a general
development of commerce and manufactures. Such is the programme of the
first division.

The second division will include everything that relates to the export
trade.

The third division will be reserved for works of art dating back from
the most remote ages.

The fourth division will be devoted to temporary exhibitions, such as
those of horticultural and agricultural products, etc.

The fifth division will constitute the intellectual part, so to speak,
of the exhibition. It will be devoted to lectures, and to scientific
meetings for the discussion of questions relating to teaching, to the
arts, to the sciences, to hygiene, to international jurisprudence, and
to political economy. Questions of colonial economy will naturally
occupy the first rank.

As will be seen, the programme of this grand scheme organized by the
Netherlands government is a broad one; and, owing the experience
acquired in recent universal exhibitions, especially that of Paris in
1878, very happy results may be expected from it.

At present, we give an illustration showing the general plan of the
exhibition. In future, in measure as the work proceeds, we shall be able
to give further details.--_Le Genie Civil_.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW METHOD OF DETECTING DYES ON YARNS AND TISSUES.

By JULES JOFFRE.


The reagents employed are a solution of caustic potassa in ten parts
of water; hydrochloric acid diluted with an equal bulk of water, or
occasionally concentrated; nitric acid, ammonia, ferric sulphate, and
a concentrated solution of tin crystals. The most convenient method of
operating is to steep small portions of the cloth under examination in a
little of the reagent placed at the bottom of a porcelain capsule. The
bits are then laid on the edge of the capsule, when the changes of color
which they have undergone may be conveniently observed. It is useful to
submit to the same reagents simultaneously portions of cloth dyed in a
known manner with the wares which are suspected of having been used in
dyeing the goods under examination.


RED COLORS.

By the action of caustic potassa, the reds are divided into four groups:
1, those which turn to a violet or blue; 2, those which turn brown;
3, those which are changed to a light yellow or gray; 4, those which
undergo little or no change.

The first group comprises madder, cochineal, orchil, alkanet, and
murexide. Madder reds are turned to an orange by hydrochloric acid,
while the three next are not notably affected. Cochineal is turned by
the potassa to a violet-red, orchil to a violet-blue, and alkanet to a
decided blue. Lac-dye presents the same reactions as cochineal, but
has less brightness. Ammoniacal cochineal and carmine may likewise be
distinguished by the tone of the reds obtained.

A characteristic of madder reds is that, after having been turned yellow
by hydrochloric acid, they are rendered violet on treatment with milk
of lime. A boiling soap-lye restores the original red, though somewhat
paler. Artificial alizarine gives the same reaction. Turkey-reds,
however, are quite unaffected by acid. Garancine and garanceux reds, if
treated first with hydrochloric acid and then with milk of lime, turn to
a dull blue.

Madder dyes are sometimes slow in being turned to a violet by potassa,
and this shade when produced is often brownish. They might thus be
confounded with the dyes of the fourth group, i.e., rosolic acid,
coralline, eosine, and coccine. None of these colors gives the
characteristic reaction with milk of lime and boiling soap-lye. If
plunged in milk of lime, they resume their rose or orange shades, while
the madder colors become violet. Murexide is turned, by potassa, gray
in its light shades and violet in its dark ones. It might, then, be
confounded with orchil, but it is decolorized by hydrochloric acid,
which leaves orchil a red. Moreover, it is turned greenish by stannous
chloride.

A special character of this dye (murexide) is the presence of mercury,
the salts of which serve as mordants for fixing it, and may be detected
by the ordinary reagents.

The second group comprises merely sandal wood or sanders red, which
turns to a brown. On boiling it with copperas it becomes violet, while
on boiling with potassium dichromate it changes to a yellowish brown.

The third group includes safflower, magenta, and murexide (light
shades). If the action of the potassa is prolonged the (soft) red woods
enter into this group. Safflower turns yellow by the action of potassa,
and the original rose shade is not restored by washing with water.
Hydrochloric acid turns it immediately yellow. Citric acid has no
action. Magenta is completely decolorized by potassa, but a prolonged
washing in water reproduces the original shade. This reaction is common
to many aniline colors. These decolorations and recolorations are easily
produced in dark shades, while in very light shades they are less easily
observed, because there is always a certain loss of color. Stannous
chloride turns magenta reds to a violet. Hydrochloric acid renders them
yellowish brown (afterward greenish?). Water restores the purple red
shade.

The fourth group comprises saffranine, azo-dinaphthyldiamine, rosolic
acid, coralline, pure eosine and cosine modified by a salt of lead,
coccina, artificial ponceau, and red-wood.

Saffranine is detected by the action of hydrochloric acid, which turns
it to a beautiful blue; the red color is restored by washing in water.
Azo-dinaphthyl diamine is recognized by its peculiar orange cast, and is
turned by hydrochloric acid to a dull, dirty violet. Rosolic acid and
coralline, as well as eosine, are turned by hydrochloric acid to an
orange-yellow: the two former are distinguished from eosine by their
shade, which inclines to a yellow. Potassa turns rosolic acid and
coralline from an orange-red to a bright red, while it produces no
change in eosine. If the action of potassa is prolonged, modified eosine
is blackened in consequence of the decomposition of the wool, the
sulphur of which forms lead sulphide. Coccine becomes of a light
lemon-yellow on treatment with hydrochloric acid. Washing with water
restores the original shade. It affords the same reactions as eosine,
but its tone is more inclined to an orange.

Artificial ponceau does not undergo any change on treatment with
hydrochloric acid, and resists potash. Red wood shades are turned toward
a gooseberry-red by hydrochloric acid, especially if strong. This last
reaction not being very distinct, red-wood shades might be mistaken
for those of artificial ponceau but for the superior brightness of the
latter. If the action of potassa is prolonged, the red-wood shades
are decolorized, and a washing with water then bleaches the tissue.
Rocelline affords the same reactions as artificial ponceau, but if
steeped in a concentrated solution of stannous chloride it is in time
