Lilac. It is habitually the case with the Red Maple. The middle bud, which
is smaller and develops later, is a leaf-bud. The others are flower-buds.

The leaf-scars are small, with three dots on each scar. The rings are very
plain. The flower-cluster leaves a round scar in the leaf-axil, as in
Cherry.

The leaves are opposite and the tree branches freely. The twigs seem to
be found just below the bud-rings, as the upper leaf-buds usually develop
best and the lower buds are single, containing flowers only.


NORWAY SPRUCE (_Picea excelsa_).

The buds are terminal, and axillary, from the axils of the leaves of the
preceding year, usually from those at the ends of the branchlets. They
are covered with brown scales and contain many leaves.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.--Branch of Cherry in winter state: _a_, leaf-scar;
_b_, bud-scar; _c_, flower-scar.]

[Illustration: FIG. 19.--Branch of Red Maple in winter state (reduced). 2.
Flower-buds]

The leaves are needle-shaped and short.[1] They are arranged densely on
the branches, alternately on the 8/21 plan (see section on phyllotaxy).
When they drop off they leave a hard, blunt projection which makes the
stem very rough. As the terminal bud always develops unless injured, the
tree is excurrent, forming a straight trunk, throwing out branches on
every side. The axillary buds develop near the ends of the branchlets,
forming apparent whorls of branches around the trunk. In the smaller
branches, as the tree grows older, the tendency is for only two buds to
develop nearly opposite each other, forming a symmetrical branch.

[Footnote 1: The pupils should observe how much more crowded the leaves
are than in the other trees they have studied. The leaves being smaller,
it is necessary to have more of them. Large-leaved trees have longer
internodes than those with small leaves.]

The bud-scales are persistent on the branches and the growth from year to
year can be traced a long way back.

The cones hang on the ends of the upper branches. They are much larger
than in our native species of Black and White Spruce.

The Evergreens are a very interesting study and an excellent exercise in
morphology for the older scholars.


2. _Vernation_. This term signifies the disposition of leaves in the bud,
either in respect to the way in which each leaf is folded, or to the
manner in which the leaves are arranged with reference to each other.
The pupils have described the folding of the leaves in some of their
specimens.

In the Beech, the leaf is _plicate_, or plaited on the veins. In the Elm,
Magnolia, and Tulip-tree, it is _conduplicate_, that is, folded on
the midrib with the inner face within. In the Tulip-tree, it is also
_inflexed_, the blade bent forwards on the petiole. In the Balm of Gilead,
the leaf is _involute_, rolled towards the midrib on the upper face.

Other kinds of vernation are _revolute_, the opposite of involute, where
the leaf is rolled backwards towards the midrib; _circinate_, rolled from
the apex downwards, as we see in ferns; and _corrugate_, when the leaf is
crumpled in the bud.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.--Branch of Norway Spruce.]

In all the trees we have studied, the leaves simply succeed each other,
each leaf, or pair of leaves, overlapping the next in order. The names of
the overlapping of the leaves among themselves, _imbricated, convolute,
etc_., will not be treated here, as they are not needed. They will come
under _aestivation_, the term used to describe the overlapping of the
modified leaves, which make up the flower.[1]

[Footnote 1: Reader in Botany. VIII. Young and Old Leaves.]


3. _Phyllotaxy_. The subject of leaf-arrangement is an extremely difficult
one, and it is best, even with the older pupils, to touch it lightly. The
point to be especially brought out is the disposition of the leaves so
that each can get the benefit of the light. This can be seen in any plant
and there are many ways in which the desired result is brought about. The
chief way is the distribution of the leaves about the stem, and this is
well studied from the leaf-scars.

The scholars should keep the branches they have studied. It is well to
have them marked with the respective names, that the teacher may examine
and return them without fear of mistakes.

In the various branches that the pupils have studied, they have seen that
the arrangement of the leaves differs greatly. The arrangement of leaves
is usually classed under three modes: the _alternate_, the _opposite_,
and the _whorled_; but the opposite is the simplest form of the whorled
arrangement, the leaves being in circles of two. In this arrangement, the
leaves of each whorl stand over the spaces of the whorl just below. The
pupils have observed and noted this in Horsechestnut and Lilac. In these
there are four vertical rows or ranks of leaves. In whorls of three leaves
there would be six ranks, in whorls of four, eight, and so on.

When the leaves are alternate, or single at each node of the stem, they
are arranged in many different ways. Ask the pupils to look at all the
branches with alternate leaves that they have studied, and determine in
each case what leaves stand directly over each other. That is, beginning
with any leaf, count the number of leaves passed on the stem, till one is
reached that stands directly over the first.[1] In the Beech and the Elm
the leaves are on opposite sides of the stem, so that the third stands
directly over the first. This makes two vertical ranks, or rows, of
leaves, dividing the circle into halves. It is, therefore, called the
1/2 arrangement. Another way of expressing it is to say that the angular
divergence between the leaves is 180 deg., or one-half the circumference.

[Footnote 1: The pupils must be careful not to pass the bud-rings when
they are counting the leaves.]

The 1/3 arrangement, with the leaves in three vertical ranks, is not very
common. It may be seen in Sedges, in the Orange-tree, and in Black Alder
_(Ilex verticillata)_. In this arrangement, there are three ranks of
leaves, and each leaf diverges from the next at an angle of 120 deg., or
one-third of the circumference.

By far the commonest arrangement is with the leaves in five vertical
ranks. The Cherry, the Poplar, the Larch, the Oak, and many other trees
exhibit this. In this arrangement there are five leaves necessary to
complete the circle. We might expect, then, that each leaf would occupy
one-fifth of the circle. This would be the case were it not for the fact
that we have to pass twice around the stem in counting them, so that each
leaf has twice as much room, or two-fifths of the circle, to itself. This
is, therefore, the 2/5 arrangement. This can be shown by winding a thread
around the stem, passing it over each leaf-scar. In the Beech we make one
turn of the stem before reaching the third leaf which stands over the
first. In the Apple the thread will wind twice about the stem, before
coming to the sixth leaf, which is over the first.

Another arrangement, not very common, is found in the Magnolia, the Holly,
and the radical leaves of the common Plantain and Tobacco. The thread
makes three turns of the stem before reaching the eighth leaf which stands
over the first. This is the 3/8 arrangement. It is well seen in the
Marguerite, a greenhouse plant which is very easily grown in the house.

Look now at these fractions, 1/2, 1/3, 2/5, and 3/8. The numerator of
the third is the sum of the numerators of the first and second, its
denominator, the sum of the two denominators. The same is true of the
fourth fraction and the two immediately preceding it. Continuing the
series, we get the fractions 5/13, 8/21, 13/34. These arrangements can
be found in nature in cones, the scales of which are modified leaves and
follow the laws of leaf-arrangement.[1]

[Footnote 1: See the uses and origin of the arrangement of leaves in
plants. By Chauncey Wright. Memoirs Amer. Acad., IX, p. 389. This essay
is an abstruse mathematical treatise on the theory of phyllotaxy. The
fractions are treated as successive approximations to a theoretical angle,
which represents the best possible exposure to air and light.

Modern authors, however, do not generally accept this mathematical view of
leaf-arrangement.]

[1]"It is to be noted that the distichous or 1/2 variety gives the maximum
divergence, namely 180 deg., and that the tristichous, or 1/3, gives the
least, or 120 deg.; that the pentastichous, or 2/5, is nearly the mean
between the first two; that of the 3/8, nearly the mean between the two
preceding, etc. The disadvantage of the two-ranked arrangement is that the
leaves are soon superposed and so overshadow each other. This is commonly
obviated by the length of the internodes, which is apt to be much greater
in this than in the more complex arrangements, therefore placing them
vertically further apart; or else, as in Elms, Beeches, and the like, the
branchlets take a horizontal position and the petioles a quarter twist,
which gives full exposure of the upper face of all the leaves to the
light. The 1/3 and 2/5, with diminished divergence, increase the number of
ranks; the 3/8 and all beyond, with mean divergence of successive leaves,
effect a more thorough distribution, but with less and less angular
distance between the vertical ranks."

[Footnote 1: Gray's Structural Botany, Chap, iv, p. 126.]

For directions for finding the arrangement of cones, see Gray's Structural
Botany, Chap. IV, Sect. 1.

The subject appears easy when stated in a text-book, but, practically, it
is often exceedingly difficult to determine the arrangement. Stems often
twist so as to alter entirely the apparent disposition of the leaves. The
general principle, however, that the leaves are disposed so as to get the
best exposure to air and light is clear. This cannot be shown by the study
of the naked branches merely, because these do not show the beautiful
result of the distribution.[1] Many house plants can be found, which will
afford excellent illustrations (Fig. 21). The Marguerite and Tobacco, both
easily grown in the house, are on the 3/8 plan. The latter shows the eight
ranks most plainly in the rosette of its lower leaves. The distribution is
often brought about by differences in the lengths of the petioles, as in
a Horsechestnut branch (Fig. 22) where the lower, larger leaves stand
out further from the branch than the upper ones; or by a twist in the
petioles, so that the upper faces of the leaves are turned up to the
light, as in Beech (Fig. 23). If it is springtime when the lessons are
given, endless adaptations can be found.

[Footnote 1: Reader in Botany. IX. Leaf-Arrangement.]

[Illustration: FIG. 21. Branch of Geranium, viewed from above.]

[Illustration: FIG. 22.]

[Illustration: FIG. 23.]

_Gray's First Lessons_. Sect. IV. VII, sec. 4. _How Plants Grow_. Chap. I,
51-62; I, 153.




V.

STEMS.


The stem, as the scholars have already learned, is the axis of the plant.
The leaves are produced at certain definite points called nodes, and the
portions of stem between these points are internodes. The internode,
node, and leaf make a single plant-part, and the plant is made up of a
succession of such parts.

The stem, as well as the root and leaves, may bear plant-hairs. The
accepted theory of plant structure assumes that these four parts, root,
stem, leaves, and plant-hairs, are the only members of a flowering plant,
and that all other forms, as flowers, tendrils, etc., are modified from
these. While this idea is at the foundation of all our teaching, causing
us to lead the pupil to recognize as modified leaves the cotyledons of a
seedling and the scales of a bud, it is difficult to state it directly
so as to be understood, except by mature minds. I have been frequently
surprised at the failure of even bright and advanced pupils to grasp this
idea, and believe it is better to let them first imbibe it unconsciously
in their study. Whenever their minds are ready for it, it will be readily
understood. The chief difficulty is that they imagine that there is a
direct metamorphosis of a leaf to a petal or a stamen.

Briefly, the theory is this: the beginnings of leaf, petal, tendril, etc.,
are the same. At an early stage of their growth it is impossible to tell
what they are to become. They develop into the organ needed for the
particular work required of them to do. The organ, that under other
circumstances might develop into a leaf, is capable of developing into a
petal, a stamen, or a pistil, according to the requirements of the plant,
but no actual metamorphosis takes place. Sometimes, instead of developing
into the form we should normally find, the organ develops into another
form, as when a petal stands in the place of a stamen, or the pistil
reverts to a leafy branch. This will be more fully treated under flowers.
The study of the different forms in which an organ may appear is the study
of _morphology_.


1. _Forms of Stems_.--Stems may grow in many ways. Let the pupils compare
the habits of growth of the seedlings they have studied. The Sunflower and
Corn are _erect_. This is the most usual habit, as with our common trees.
The Morning Glory is _twining_, the stem itself twists about a support.
The Bean, Pea and Nasturtium are _climbing_. The stems are weak, and
are held up, in the first two by tendrils, in the last by the twining
leaf-stalks. The English Ivy, as we have seen, is also climbing, by means
of its aerial roots. The Red Clover is _ascending_, the branches rising
obliquely from the base. Some kinds of Clover, as the White Clover, are
_creeping_, that is, with prostrate branches rooting at the nodes and
forming new plants. Such rooting branches are called _stolons_, or when
the stem runs underground, _suckers_. The gardener imitates them in
the process called layering, that is, bending down an erect branch and
covering it with soil, causing it to strike root. When the connecting stem
is cut, a new plant is formed. Long and leafless stolons, like those of
the Strawberry are called _runners_. Stems creep below the ground as well
as above. Probably the pupil will think of some examples. The pretty
little Gold Thread is so named from the yellow running stems, which grow
beneath the ground and send up shoots, or suckers, which make new plants.
Many grasses propagate themselves in this way. Such stems are called
_rootstocks_. "That these are really stems, and not roots, is evident
from the way in which they grow; from their consisting of a succession of
joints; and from the leaves which they bear on each node, in the form
of small scales, just like the lowest ones on the upright stem next the
ground. They also produce buds in the axils of these scales, showing the
scales to be leaves; whereas real roots bear neither leaves nor axillary
buds."[1] Rootstocks are often stored with nourishment. We have already
taken up this subject in the potato, but it is well to repeat the
distinction between stems and roots. A thick, short rootstock provided
with buds, like the potato, is called a _tuber_. Compare again the corm of
Crocus and the bulb of Onion to find the stem in each. In the former, it
makes the bulk of the whole; in the latter, it is a mere plate holding the
fleshy bases of the leaves.

[Footnote 1: Gray's First Lessons, revised edition, 1887, page 42.]

2. _Movements of Stems.--_Let a glass thread, no larger than a coarse
hair, be affixed by means of some quickly drying varnish to the tip of the
laterally inclined stem of one of the young Morning-Glory plants in the
schoolroom. Stand a piece of cardboard beside the pot, at right angles to
the stem, so that the end of the glass will be near the surface of the
card. Make a dot upon the card opposite the tip of the filament, taking
care not to disturb the position of either. In a few minutes observe that
the filament is no longer opposite the dot. Mark its position anew, and
continue thus until a circle is completed on the cardboard. This is a
rough way of conducting the experiment. Darwin's method will be found in
the footnote.[1]

[Footnote 1: "Plants growing in pots were protected wholly from the light,
or had light admitted from above or on one side as the case might require,
and were covered above by a large horizontal sheet of glass, and with
another vertical sheet on one side. A glass filament, not thicker than a
horsehair, and from a quarter to three-quarters of an inch in length,
was affixed to the part to be observed by means of shellac dissolved in
alcohol. The solution was allowed to evaporate until it became so thick
that it set hard in two or three seconds, and it never injured the
tissues, even the tips of tender radicles, to which it was applied. To the
end of the glass filament an excessively minute bead of black sealing-wax
was cemented, below or behind which a bit of card with a black dot was
fixed to a stick driven into the ground.... The bead and the dot on the
card were viewed through the horizontal or vertical glass-plate (according
to the position of the object) and when one exactly covered the other, a
dot was made on the glass plate with a sharply pointed stick dipped in
thick India ink. Other dots were made at short intervals of time and these
were afterwards joined by straight lines. The figures thus traced were
therefore angular, but if dots had been made every one or two minutes, the
lines would have been more curvilinear."--The Power of Movement in Plants,
p. 6.]

The use of the glass filament is simply to increase the size of the circle
described, and thus make visible the movements of the stem. All young
parts of stems are continually moving in circles or ellipses. "To learn
how the sweeps are made, one has only to mark a line of dots along the
upper side of the outstretched revolving end of such a stem, and to note
that when it has moved round a quarter of a circle, these dots will be on
one side; when half round, the dots occupy the lower side; and when the
revolution is completed, they are again on the upper side. That is, the
stem revolves by bowing itself over to one side,--is either pulled over or
pushed over, or both, by some internal force, which acts in turn all round
the stem in the direction in which it sweeps; and so the stem makes its
circuits without twisting."[1]

[Footnote 1: How Plants Behave. By Asa Gray. Ivison, Blakeman, Taylor &
Co., New York, 1872. Page 13.]

The nature of the movement is thus a successive nodding to all the points
of the compass, whence it is called by Darwin _circumnutation_. The
movement belongs to all young growing parts of plants. The great sweeps of
a twining stem, like that of the Morning-Glory, are only an increase in
the size of the circle or ellipse described.[1]

[Footnote 1: "In the course of the present volume it will be shown
that apparently every growing part of every plant is continually
circumnutating, though often on a small scale. Even the stems of seedlings
before they have broken through the ground, as well as their buried
radicles, circumnutate, as far as the pressure of the surrounding earth
permits. In this universally present movement we have the basis or
groundwork for the acquirement, according to the requirements of the
plant, of the most diversified movements. Thus the great sweeps made by
the stems of the twining plants, and by the tendrils of other climbers,
result from a mere increase in the amplitude of the ordinary movement of
circumnutation."--The Power of Movement in Plants, p. 3.]

When a young stem of a Morning-Glory, thus revolving, comes in contact
with a support, it will twist around it, unless the surface is too smooth
to present any resistance to the movement of the plant. Try to make
it twine up a glass rod. It will slip up the rod and fall off. The
Morning-Glory and most twiners move around from left to right like the
hands of a clock, but a few turn from right to left.

