contacts affecting the nociceptors and of the invisible contacts
by those intangible forces which affect the distance ceptors.
For example, each variation in speed of the light-producing
waves of ether causes a specific reaction in the brain.
For one speed of ether waves the reaction is the perception
of the color blue; for another, yellow; for another, violet.
Changes in the speed of air waves meet with specific response
in the brain patterns tuned to receive impressions through the
aural nerves, and so we distinguish differences in sound pitch.
If we can realize the infinite delicacy of the mechanisms adapted
to these infinitesimal variations in the speed and intensity of
invisible and intangible stimuli, it will not be difficult to conceive
the variations of brain patterns which render possible the specific
responses to the coarser contacts of visible environment.

Each brain pattern is adapted for but one type of motion,
and so the specific stimuli of the innumerable ceptors play
each upon its own brain pattern only.  In addition, each brain
pattern can react to stimuli applied only within certain limits.
Too bright a light blinds; too loud a sound deafens.  No mechanism
is adapted for waves of light above or below a certain rate of speed,
although this range varies in different individuals and in different
species according to the training of the individual and the need
of the species.

We have already referred to the fact that there is no receptive
mechanism adapted to the stimuli from the _x_-ray, from the
high-speed bullet, from electricity.  So, too, there are innumerable
forces in nature which can excite in man no adaptive response,
since there exist in man no brain patterns tuned to their waves,
as in the case of certain ethereal and radioactive forces.

On this mechanistic basis the emotions may be explained as activations
of the entire motor mechanism for fighting, for escaping, for copulating.
The sight of an enemy stimulates in the brain those patterns formed
by the previous experiences of the individual with that enemy, and also
the experiences of the race whenever an enemy had to be met and overcome.
Each of these many brain patterns in turn activates that part of
the body through which lies the path of its own adaptive response--
those parts including the special energizing or activating organs.
Laboratory experiments show that in an animal driven strongly
by emotion the following changes may be seen:  (1) A mobilization
of the energy-giving compound in the brain-cells, evidenced by a
primary increase of the Nissl substance and a later disappearance
of this substance and the deterioration of the cells (Figs. 5 and 13);
(2) increased output of adrenalin (Cannon), of thyroid secretion,
of glycogen, and an increase of the power of oxidation in the muscles;
(3) accelerated circulation and respiration with increased
body temperature; (4) altered metabolism.  All these are adaptations
to increase the motor efficiency of the mechanism.  In addition,
we find an inhibition of the functions of every organ and tissue that
consumes energy, but does not contribute directly to motor efficiency.
The mouth becomes dry; the gastric and pancreatic secretions are
lessened or are completely inhibited; peristaltic action stops.
The obvious purpose of all these activations and inhibitions is
to mass every atom of energy upon the muscles that are conducting
the defense or attack.

So strong is the influence of phylogenetic experience that though
an enemy to-day may not be met by actual physical attack,
yet the decks are cleared for action, as it were, and the weapons
made ready, the body as a result being shaken and exhausted.
The type of emotion is plainly declared by the activation
of the muscles which would be used if the appropriate physical
action were consummated.  In anger the teeth are set, the fists
are clenched, the posture is rigid; in fear the muscles collapse,
the joints tremble, and the running mechanism is activated
for flight; in sexual excitement the mimicry is as obvious.
The emotions, then, are the preparations for phylogenetic activities.
If the activities are consummated, the fuel--glycogen--and the activating
secretions from the thyroid, the adrenals, the hypophysis are consumed.
In the activation without action, these products must be eliminated
as waste products and so a heavy strain is put upon the organs
of elimination.  It is obvious that the body under emotion might be
clarified by active muscular exercise, but the subject of the emotion
is so strongly integrated thereby that it is difficult for him
to engage in diverting, clarifying exertion.  The person in anger
does not want to be saved from the ill effects of his own emotion;
he wants only to fight; the person in fear wants only to escape;
the person under sexual excitement wants only possession.

All the lesser emotions--worry, jealousy, envy, grief, disappointment,
expectation--all these influence the body in this manner, the consequences
depending upon the intensity of the emotion and its protraction.
Chronic emotional stimulation, therefore, may fatigue or exhaust
the brain and may cause cardiovascular disease, indigestion, Graves'
disease, diabetes, and insanity even.

The effect of the emotions upon the body mechanism may be compared
to that produced upon the mechanism of an automobile if its engines
are kept running at full speed while the machine is stationary.
The whole machine will be shaken and weakened, the batteries and weakest
parts being the first to become impaired and destroyed, the length
of usefulness of the automobile being correspondingly limited.

We have shown that the effects upon the body mechanism of the action
of the various ceptors is in relation to the response made by the brain
to the stimuli received.  What is this power of response on the part
of the brain but CONSCIOUSNESS?  If this is so, then consciousness
itself is a reaction to environment, and its intensity must vary
with the state of the brain and with the environmental stimuli.
If the brain-cells are in the state of highest efficiency, if their
energy has not been drawn upon, then consciousness is at its height;
if the brain is fatigued, that is, if the energy stored in the cells
has been exhausted to any degree, then the intensity of consciousness
is diminished.  So degrees of consciousness vary from the height
maintained by cells in full vigor through the stages of fatigue
to sleep, to the deeper unconsciousness secured by the administration
of inhalation anesthetics, to that complete unconsciousness
of the environment which is secured by blocking the advent to
the brain of all impressions from both distance and contact ceptors,
by the use of both local and inhalation anesthetics--the state
of anoci-association (Fig. 14).

Animals and man may be so exhausted as to be only semi-conscious.
While a brain perfectly refreshed by a long sleep cannot immediately
sleep again, the exhausted brain and the refreshed brain when subjected
to equal stimuli will rise to unequal heights of consciousness.
The nature of the physical basis of consciousness has been
sought in experiments on rabbits which were kept awake from
one hundred to one hundred and nine hours.  At the end of this
time they were in a state of extreme exhaustion and seemed
semi-conscious. If the wakefulness had been further prolonged,
this state of semi-consciousness would have steadily changed
until it culminated in the permanent unconsciousness of death.
An examination of the brain-cells of these animals showed physical
changes identical with those produced by exhaustion from other causes,
such as prolonged physical exertion or emotional strain (Figs. 45
and 46). After one hundred hours of wakefulness the rabbits were
allowed a long period of sleep.  All the brain-cells were restored
except those that had been in a state of complete exhaustion.
A single seance of sleep served to restore some of the cells,
but those which had undergone extreme changes required prolonged rest.
These experiments give us a definite physical basis for explaining
the cost to the body mechanism of maintaining the conscious state.
We have stated that the brain-cell changes produced by prolonged
consciousness are identical with those produced by physical exertion
and by emotional strain.  Rest, then, and especially sleep,
is needed to restore the physical state of the brain-cells which
have been impaired, and as the brain-cells constitute the central
battery of the body mechanism, their restoration is essential
for the maintenance of normal vitality.

In ordinary parlance, by consciousness we mean the activity
of that part of the brain in which associative memory resides,
but while associative memory is suspended the activities of the brain
as a whole are by no means suspended; the respiratory and circulatory
centers are active, as are those centers which maintain muscular tone.
This is shown by the muscular response to external stimuli made
by the normal person in sleep; by the occasional activation of motor
patterns which may break through into consciousness causing dreams;
and finally by the responses of the motor mechanism made to the injuring
stimuli of an operation on a patient under inhalation anesthesia only.

Direct proof of the mechanistic action of many of life's phenomena
is lacking, but the proof is definite and final of the part
that the brain-cells play in maintaining consciousness;
of the fact that the degree of consciousness and mental
efficiency depends upon the physical state of the brain-cells;
and finally that efficiency may be restored by sleep,
provided that exhaustion of the cells has not progressed too far.
In this greatest phenomenon of life, then, the mechanistic theory
is in harmony with the facts.

Perhaps no more convincing proof of our thesis that the body is
a mechanism developed and adapted to its purposes by environment
can be secured than by a study of that most constant manifestation
of consciousness--pain.

Like the other phenomena of life, pain was undoubtedly evolved
for a particular purpose--surely for the good of the individual.
Like fear and worry, it frequently is injurious.  What then may
be its purpose?

We postulate that pain is a result of contact ceptor stimulation
for the purpose of securing protective muscular activity.
This postulate applies to all kinds of pain, whatever their cause--
whether physical injury, pyogenic infection, the obstruction
of hollow viscera, childbirth, etc.

All forms of pain are associated with muscular action, and as in every
other stimulation of the ceptors, each kind of pain is specific
to the causative stimuli.  The child puts his hand in the fire;
physical injury pain results, and the appropriate muscular
response is elicited.  If pressure is prolonged on some parts
of the body, anemia of the parts may result, with a corresponding
discomfort or pain, requiring muscular action for relief.
When the rays of the sun strike directly upon the retina, light pain
causes an immediate protective action, so too in the evacuation
of the intestine and the urinary bladder as normal acts, and in
overcoming obstruction of these tracts, discomfort or pain compel
the required muscular actions.  This view of pain as a stimulation
to motor action explains why only certain types of infection are
associated with pain; namely, those types in which the infection
may be spread by muscular action or those in which the fixation
of parts by continued muscular rigidity is an advantage.
As a further remarkable proof of the marvelous adaptation
of the body mechanism to meet varying environmental conditions,
we find that just as nociceptors have been implanted in only those
parts of the body which have been subject to nocuous contacts,
so a type of infection which causes muscular action in one part
of the body may cause none when it attacks another.

This postulate gives us the key to the pain-muscular phenomena
of peritonitis, pleurisy, cystitis, cholecystitis, etc., as well as to
the pain-muscular phenomena in obstructions of the hollow viscera.
If pain is a part of a muscular response and occurs only
as a result of contact ceptor stimulation by physical injury,
infection, anemia, or obstruction, we may well inquire which part
of the nerve mechanism is the site of the phenomenon of pain.
Is it the nerve-ending, the nerve-trunk, or the brain?  That is,
is pain associated with the physical contact with the nerve-ending,
or with the physical act of transmission along the nerve-trunk,
or with the change of brain-cell substance by means of which
the motor-producing energy is released?

We postulate that the pain is associated with the discharge of energy
from the brain-cells. If this be true, then if every nociceptor in
the body were equally stimulated in such a manner that all the stimuli
should reach the brain-cells simultaneously, then the cells would
find themselves in equilibrium and no motor act would be performed.
But if all the pain nerve ceptors but one were equally stimulated,
and this one more strongly stimulated than the rest, then this
one would gain possession of the final common path--would cause
a muscular action and the sensation of pain.

It is well known that when a greater pain or stimulus is thrown
into competition with a lesser one, the lesser is submerged.
Of this fact the school-boy makes use when he initiates
the novice into the mystery of the painless pulling of hair.
The simultaneous but severe application of the boot to the blindfolded
victim takes complete but exclusive possession of the final common
path and the hair is painlessly plucked as a result of the triumph
of the boot stimulus over the pull on the hair in the struggle
for the final common path.

Persons who have survived a sudden, complete exposure to superheated steam,
or whose bodies have been enwrapped in flame, testify that they
have felt no pain.  As this absence of pain may be due to the fact
that the emotion of fear gained the final common path, to the exclusion
of all other stimuli, we are trying by experimentation to discover
the effects of simultaneous painful stimulation of all parts of the body.
The data already in hand, and the experiments now in progress,
in which anesthetized animals are subjected to powerful stimuli
applied to certain parts of the body only, or simultaneously to
all parts of the body, lead us to believe that in the former case
the brain-cells become stimulated or hyperchromatic, while in the latter
case no brain-cell changes occur.  We believe that our experiments
will prove that an equal and simultaneous stimulation of all parts
of the body leaves the brain-cells in a state of equilibrium.
Our theory of pain will then be well sustained, not only by common
observation, but by experimental proof, and so the mechanistic view
will be found in complete harmony with another important reaction.

We have stated that when a number of contact stimuli act simultaneously,
the strongest stimulus will gain possession of the final common path--
the path of action.  When, however, stimuli of the distance ceptors
compete with stimuli of the contact ceptors, the contact-ceptor
stimuli often secure the common path, not because they are stronger
or more important, but because they are immediate and urgent.
In many instances, however, the distance-ceptor stimuli are strong,
have the advantage of a lowered threshold, and therefore compete
successfully with the immediate and present stimuli of the
contact ceptors.  In such cases we have the interesting phenomenon
of physical injury without resultant pain or muscular response.
The distance-ceptor stimuli which may thus triumph over even powerful
contact-ceptor stimuli are those causing strong emotions--as great
anger in fighting; great fear in a battle; intense sexual excitement.
Dr. Livingstone has testified to his complete unconsciousness
to pain during his struggle with a lion; although he was torn
by teeth and claws, his fear overcame all other impressions.
By frequently repeated stimulation the Dervish secures a low
threshold to the emotions caused by the thought of God or the devil,
and his emotional excitement is increased by the presence of others
under the same stimulation; emotion, therefore, secures the final
common path and he is unconscious of pain when he lashes, cuts,
and bruises his body.  The phenomena of hysteria may be explained
on this basis, as may the unconsciousness of passing events
in a person in the midst of a great and overwhelming grief.
By constant practice the student may secure the final common path for
such impressions as are derived from the stimuli offered by the subject
of his study, and so he will be oblivious of his surroundings.
Concentration is but another name for a final common path secured
by the repetition and summation of certain stimuli.

If our premises are sustained, then we can recognize in man no will,
no ego, no possibility for spontaneous action, for every action must
be a response to the stimuli of contact or distance ceptors, or to their
recall through associative memory.  Memory is awakened by symbols which
represent any of the objects or forces associated with the act recalled.
Spoken and written words, pictures, sounds, may stimulate the brain
patterns formed by previous stimulation of the distance ceptors;
while touch, pain, temperature, pressure, may recall previous
contact-ceptor stimuli.  Memory depends in part upon the adequacy
of the symbol, and in part upon the state of the threshold.
If one has ever been attacked by a snake, the threshold to any
symbol which could recall that attack would be low; the later
recall of anything associated with the bite or its results would
produce in memory a recapitulation of the whole scene, while even
harmless snakes would thereafter be greeted with a shudder.
On the other hand, in a child the threshold is low to the desire
for the possession of any new and strange object; in a child,
therefore, to whom a snake is merely an unusual and fascinating object,
there is aroused only curiosity and the desire for the possession
of a new plaything.

If we are to attribute to man the possession of a governing
attribute not possessed by other parts of the animal creation,
where are we to draw the boundary line, and say "here the ego--
the will--the reason--emerges"? What attribute, after all, has man
which in its ultimate analysis is not possessed by the lowest
animals or by the vegetable creation, even?  From the ameba,
on through all the stages of animal existence, every action is
but a response to an adequate stimulus; and as a result of adequate
stimuli each step has been taken toward the higher and more
intricate mechanisms which play the higher and more intricate parts
in the great scheme of nature.

The Venus fly-trap responds to as delicate a stimulus as do
any of the contact ceptors of animals, and the motor activity
resulting from the stimulus is as complex.  To an insect-like touch
the plant responds; to a rough contact there is no response; that is,
the motor mechanism of the plant has become attuned to only such
stimuli as simulate the contact of those insects which form its diet.
It catches flies, eats and digests them, and ejects the refuse
(Fig. 47). The ameba does no less.  The frog does no more,
excepting that in its place in creation a few more reactions are
required for its sustenance and for the propagation of its species.
Man does no more, excepting that in man's manifold relations
there are innumerable stimuli, for meeting which adequately,
innumerable mechanisms have been evolved.  The motor mechanism
of the fly-trap is perfectly adapted to its purpose.
The motor mechanism of man is adapted to its manifold uses,
and as new environmental influences surround him, we must believe
that new adaptations of the mechanism will be evolved to meet
the new conditions.

Is not this conception of man's activities infinitely more wonderful,
and infinitely more comprehensible than is the conception that his
activities may be accounted for by the existence of an unknown,
unimaginable, and intangible force called "mind" or "soul"?

We have already shown how the nerve mechanism is so well adapted
to the innumerable stimuli of environment that it can accurately
transmit and distinguish between the infinite variations of speed
in the ether waves producing light, and the air waves producing sound.
Each rate of vibration energizes only the mechanism which has
been attuned to it.  With marvelous accuracy the light and sound
waves gain access to the nerve tissue and are finally interpreted
in terms of motor responses, each by the brain pattern attuned
to that particular speed and intensity.  So stimuli and resultant
actions multiplied by the total number of the motor patterns
in the brain of man give us the sum total of his life's activities--
they constitute his life.

As in evolutionary history the permanence of an adaptation of the body
mechanism depends upon its value in the preservation of the life
of the individual and upon its power to increase the value of
the individual to the race, so the importance and truth of these
postulates and theories may well be judged on the same basis.

The fundamental instincts of all living matter are self-preservation
and the propagation of the species.  The instinct for self-preservation
causes a plant to turn away from cold and damaging winds toward
the life-giving sun; the inert mussel to withdraw within its shell;
the insect to take flight; the animal to fight or to flee; and man
to procure food that he may oppose starvation, to shelter himself
and to provide clothes that he may avoid the dangers of excessive
cold and heat, to combat death from disease by seeking medical aid,
to avoid destruction by man or brute by fight or by flight.
The instinct to propagate the species leads brute man by crude methods,
and cultured man by methods more refined, to put out of his way sex
rivals so that his own life may be continued through offspring.
The life of the species is further assured by the protective
action exercised over the young by the adults of the species.
As soon as the youngest offspring is able successfully to carry on his
own struggle with environment there is no longer need for the parent,
and the parent enters therefore the stage of disintegration.
The average length of life in any species is the sum of the years
of immaturity, plus the years of female fertility, plus the adolescent
years of the offspring.

The stimuli resulting from these two dominant instincts are now
so overpowering as compared with all other environmental stimuli
that the mere possession of adequate knowledge of the damaging effects
of certain actions as compared with the saving effects of others will
(other things being equal) lead the individual to choose the right,--
the self- and species-preservative course of action, instead of the wrong,--
the self- and species-destructive course of action.

The dissemination of the knowledge of the far-reaching
deleterious effects of protracted emotional strain, of overwork,
and of worry will automatically raise man's threshold to
the damaging activating stimuli causing the strong emotions,
and will cause him to avoid dangerous strains of every kind.
The individual thus protected will therefore rise to a plane
of poise and efficiency far above that of his uncontrolled fellows,
and by so much will his efficiency, health, and happiness be augmented.

A full acceptance of this theory cannot fail to produce in those
in whose charge rests the welfare of the young, an overwhelming
desire to surround children with those environmental stimuli only
which will tend to their highest ultimate welfare.

Such is the stimulating force of tradition that many who
have been educated under the tenets of traditional beliefs
will oppose these hypotheses--even violently, it may be.
So they have opposed them; so they opposed Darwin; so they
have opposed all new and apparently revolutionary doctrines.
Yet these persons themselves are by their very actions proving
the efficiency of the vital principles which we have enunciated.
What is the whole social welfare movement but a recognition
on the part of municipalities, educational boards, and religious
organizations of the fact that the future welfare of the race
depends upon the administration to the young of forceful
uplifting environmental stimuli?

There are now, as there were in Darwin's day, many who feel that man
is degraded from his high estate by the conception that he is not
a reasoning, willing being, the result of a special creation.
But one may wonder indeed what conception of the origin of man can
be more wonderful or more inspiring than the belief that he has
been slowly evolved through the ages, and that all creatures
have had a part in his development; that each form of life has
contributed and is contributing still to his present welfare
and to his future advancement.


Recapitulation

Psychology,--the science of the human soul and its relations,--
under the mechanistic theory of life, must receive a new definition.
It becomes a science of man's activities as determined by the
environmental stimuli of his phylogeny and of his ontogeny.

On this basis we postulate that throughout the history of the race nothing
has been lost, but that every experience of the race and of the individual
has been retained for the guidance of the individual and of the race;
that for the accomplishment of this end there has been evolved through
the ages a nerve mechanism of such infinite delicacy and precision
that in some unknown manner it can register permanently within
itself every impression received in the phylogenetic and ontogenetic
experience of the individual; that each of these nerve mechanisms
or brain patterns has its own connection with the external world,
and that each is attuned to receive impressions of but one kind,
as in the apparatus of wireless telegraphy each instrument can
receive and interpret waves of a certain rate of intensity only;
that thought, will, ego, personality, perception, imagination,
reason, emotion, choice, memory, are to be interpreted in terms
of these brain patterns; that these so-called phenomena of human
life depend upon the stimuli which can secure the final common path,
this in turn having been determined by the frequency and the strength
of the environmental stimuli of the past and of the present.

Finally, as for life's origin and life's ultimate end,
we are content to say that they are unknown, perhaps unknowable.
We know only that living matter, like lifeless matter, has its own
place in the cosmic processes; that the gigantic forces which operated
to produce a world upon which life could exist, as a logical sequence,
when the time was ripe, evolved life; and finally that these cosmic
forces are still active, though none can tell what worlds and what
races may be the result of their coming activities.




A MECHANISTIC THEORY OF DISEASE[*]


[*] Oration in Surgery.  Delivered at the 147th Annual Meeting of the
Medical Society of New Jersey, at Spring Lake, N. J., June 11, 1913.

In this address the paragraphs which were taken from the preceding
paper, "A Mechanistic View of Psychology," have been omitted,
those portions only being republished in which the premises have
been applied in a discussion of certain medical problems rather
than of psychological problems.



The human body is an elaborate mechanism equipped first for such
conflict with environment as will tend to the preservation
of the individual, and second for the propagation of the species,
both of these functions, when most efficiently carried out,
tending to the upbuilding and perfection of the race.
From the date of Harvey's discovery of the circulation of the blood,
to the present day, the human body has been constantly compared
to a machine, but the time for analogy and comparison is past.
I postulate that the body is itself a mechanism responding in every
part to the adequate stimuli given it from without by the environment
of the present and from within by the environment of the past,
the memory of which is stored in the central battery of the mechanism--
the brain.
 *   *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *
 *   *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

If the full history of the species and of the individual
could be known in every detail, then every detail of that
individual's conduct in health and disease could be predicted.
Reaction to environment is the basis of conduct, of moral standards,
of manners and conventions, of work and play, of love and hate,
of protection and murder, of governing and being governed, in fact,
of all the reactions between human beings--of the entire web of life.
As Sherrington has stated, "Environment drives the brain, the brain
drives the various organs of the body," and here we believe we find
the key to a mechanistic interpretation of all body processes.

On this basis we may see that the activities of life depend upon
the ability of the parts of the body mechanism to respond adequately
to adequate stimulation.  This postulate applies not only to stimuli
from visible forces, but to those received by the invasion of
the micro-bodies which cause pyogenic or non-pyogenic infections.
In the case of dangerous assaults by visible or invisible enemies,
the brain, through the nerves and all parts of the motor mechanism,
meets the attack by attempts at adaptation.  Recovery, invalidism,
and death depend upon the degree of success with which the attacking
or invading enemies are met.  Questions regarding disease become,
therefore, questions in adaptation, and it is possible that,
when studied in the light of this conception, the key to many hitherto
unsolved physical problems may be found.

Perhaps no more convincing proof of our thesis may be secured
than by a study of that ever-present phenomenon--pain.  In whatever
part of the body and by whatever apparent cause pain is produced,
we find that it is invariably a stimulation to motor activity--
whose ultimate object is protection.  Thus by the muscular action
resulting from pain we are protected against heat and cold;
against too powerful light; against local anemia caused by prolonged
pressure upon any portion of the body.  So, too, pain of greater
or less intensity compels the required emptying of the pregnant
uterus and the evacuation of the intestine and the urinary bladder.

It should be noted that in every instance the muscular activity
resulting from pain is specific in its type, its distribution,
and its intensity, this specificity being true not only of pain
which is the result of external stimulation, but also of the pain
associated with certain types of infection.
