magnets are situated.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. GRAY'S GALVANOMETER.]

The needles have been given this form so that their extremities shall not
touch the sides of the bore during considerable deflections.

In the instrument which the inventors, Messrs. T. & A. Gray, used in
their experiments upon the resistance of glass, the needles were arranged
so that their poles of contrary name were opposite.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

The system of needles is suspended from the extremity of a screw, p,
which passes into a nut, n, movable between two stationary pieces. On
revolving the nut, we cause the screw to rise or lower, along with the
entire suspended part, without twisting the thread.

The four bobbins are grouped for tension, and have a total resistance of
30,220 ohms. They contain 16,000 feet of No. 50 copper wire, forming
62,939 revolutions, nearly equally divided between the four bobbins. When
a current is passing through the bobbins, the poles of one of the
horseshoe magnets are attracted toward the interior of the corresponding
bobbins, while those of the other are repelled toward the exterior by the
two other bobbins. We thus have a couple which tends to cause the system
to revolve around the suspension axis. A mirror, which is fixed upon a
vertical piece of aluminum, a, gives, in the usual manner, a reflected
image upon a scale, thus allowing the deflections to be read. A
compensating magnet, M, is supported by a vertical column fixed to the
case, above the needles. This magnet may be placed in the different
azimuths by means of a tangential screw, t. The extremities of the bobbin
wires are connected with three terminals, T, T', T squared, and the
instrument may, by a proper arrangement, became differential. These
terminals, as well as the communicating wires, are insulated with
ebonite.

Thus arranged, the instrument is capable of making a deflection of one
division of 1/50 inch upon a scale placed at a distance of a little more
than a yard, with the current produced by one daniell of 10 ohms. This is
a degree of sensitiveness that cannot be obtained with any of the astatic
instruments known up to the present. By regulating the needles properly,
a greater degree of sensitiveness may be attained, but then the duration
of the needles' oscillation becomes too great. The sensitiveness of the
instrument is sufficiently great to allow it to be used in many cases,
even with a moderate duration of oscillation.

In their experiments upon the resistance of glass, the inventors employed
an instrument that was not arranged for giving great sensitiveness, and
one with which resistances of from 10^{4} to 10^{5} megohms could be
measured by the use of a pile of 120 daniells.

The instrument can be given another form. The four bobbins may be
arranged symmetrically in the same plane, and the two horseshoe magnets
be supported by an S-shaped aluminum bar. The latter traverses the plate
that supports the bobbins, in such a way that one of the magnets enters
one of the bobbins that correspond to it on one side of the plate, and
the other on the other side, as shown in Fig. 2. The bobbins are so
connected that, when they are traversed by a current, both magnets are at
the same time attracted toward the interior or repelled toward the
exterior of the bobbins. Such a form of the instrument has the advantage
of being more easily constructed, while the regulation of the magnets
with respect to the bore of the bobbins is easier.

The chief advantage of the instrument results from the fact that, owing
to the arrangement of the magnets and bobbins, a large portion of the
wires of the latter is situated very near the poles of the magnets, and
in a position very favorable for electro-magnetic action. The instrument
presents no difficulties as regards construction, and costs no more than
an ordinary one.

We might even arrange a single horseshoe magnet, or an S-shaped one,
horizontally, and employ but a single pair of bobbins, and thus have a
non-astatic apparatus based upon the same principle. But in astatic
instruments it is better to place the magnets in such a way that the two
branches shall be in the same vertical plane.

Were the line that joins the two poles vertical, the system would be
perfectly astatic in a uniform field, since each magnet in particular
would then be perfectly astatic. A pair of horseshoe magnets may thus be
regulated in such a way as to form a perfectly astatic system in a
uniform field and to preserve an almost invariable zero, this being
something that it is very difficult to obtain with the ordinary
arrangement of needles, especially when a compensating magnet is used;
for, in such a case, one of the needles becomes more or less magnetized,
while the other becomes demagnetized, according to the position of the
compensating magnet.--_La Lumiere Electrique_.

       *       *       *       *       *




HISTOLOGICAL METHODS.


A cat, dog, rabbit, or Guinea pig will furnish parts from which sections
can be cut for the study of histology. Whichever animal is selected
should be young and well developed. Put it under influence of chloroform,
and open into the cavity of the chest; make an incision into the right
ventricle, and allow the animal to bleed to death; cut the trachea and
inject the lungs with a solution of one and a half drachms of chromic
acid in one quart of water, care being taken not to overdistend the lung.
Tie the severed end to prevent the escape of the fluid, and carefully
remove the lung. It is a difficult thing to do this without rupturing it,
but with care and patience it can be done. Place the lungs in a solution
of the same strength as used for injecting; after fifteen or twenty hours
change it to a fresh solution, and allow it to remain for about a month,
and then change it to rectified spirits, in which it may remain until
required.

Cut the tongue into several transverse and longitudinal pieces, also the
small intestines, and put them into a solution of fifteen and one-half
grains chromic acid, thirty grammes bichromate of potash, and three pints
of water; change the solution the next day, and let them remain two weeks
and then place in spirits. Cut longitudinal and transverse portions of
the stomach and large intestines, wash in a weak solution of salt and
water, and put them in the same solution as used for the lungs, and treat
similarly.

Cut the kidneys longitudinally and transversely, and put them in a
solution of six and one-half drachms bichromate of potash, two and
one-half drachms sodium sulphate, one quart of water; change the solution
the next day, and at the end of four weeks transfer to alcohol. Wash the
inner surface of the bladder with salt and water, and after cutting it
longitudinally and transversely, put the sections in a solution of three
drachms bichromate of potash in a quart of water. Cut the liver into
small parts, and place in the same solution as used for the kidneys;
change the solution after a day, and let them remain four or five weeks,
then change to spirits. The spleen and portions of the thin abdominal
muscles may be placed in a solution of three drachms chromic acid to one
quart of water, and transferred to alcohol after three or four weeks.
Carefully remove an eye and divide it behind the crystalline lens, put
the posterior portion in a solution made by dissolving fifteen grs.
chromic acid in five drachms water, and slowly adding five and one-half
ounces alcohol; change to spirits in two weeks. The lens should be put in
the same solution, but should remain a few days longer. Open the head,
remove the brain, and place transverse and longitudinal sections of it
in spirits for eighteen hours, then transfer to a solution of one drachm
chromic acid in a quart of water, and let it remain until hard enough to
cut. Place the uterus in a solution of one and one-half drachms chromic
acid in one quart of water, change to a new solution the next day, and at
the end of a month transfer to alcohol.

The bones from one of the legs should be carefully cleaned of its
muscles, cut into several pieces, and placed in a solution of fifteen and
one-half grains chromic acid, one-half drachm nitric acid, and six ounces
water. Change the fluid frequently until the bones are sufficiently
softened, and then change to alcohol.

_Section cutting_ machines for cutting sections can be procured of the
dealers, but a very simple and effective one can be easily made if one
does not wish to go to the expense of buying an instrument.

A strip of wood twelve or fourteen inches long and about two inches wide
has attached to its center a bridge-shaped piece of wood, a, Fig. 1. This
is covered with a brass plate, c, pierced with a hole one-half of an inch
in diameter. This hole extends through the wood, and is fitted with a
piston. Two long narrow inclined planes of nearly equal inclination, b,
b, grooved to slide on each other, are placed under the bridge; the lower
is to be fastened to the board; the end of the piston rests on the upper
one. The object from which we desire to cut a section is placed in the
hole, in the piston. If the upper plane be pushed in, the piston will be
forced upward, and with it the object. As the inclination of the plane is
very gradual, the vertical motion will be very slight as compared with
the horizontal.

When the object is raised a little above the brass plate, a keen edged
razor, thoroughly wet, is pushed over the hole, cutting the object. This
gives the section a smooth surface, and even with the plate; now push the
plane forward one-eighth to one-quarter of an inch, and cut again; this
will give a thin section of the object. The thickness of the section
depends, of course, on the distance the wedge is pushed.

With a little practice, much better sections can be cut by the hand than
by any machine; this does not apply of course to large sections. A razor
of good steel, with a blade thin and hard, are the most essential points
in an instrument for hand cutting. For ordinary purposes it is not
necessary to have the blade ground flat on one side, although many prefer
it. The knife should always be thoroughly wet, in order that the cut
tissue may float over its surface. Water, alcohol or salt and water may
be used for this purpose.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

_To out a section by hand_, hold the object between the thumb and first
two fingers of the left hand, supporting the back of the knife by the
forefinger. The knife is to be held firmly in the right hand, and in
cutting should never be pushed, but drawn from heel to point obliquely
through the tissue. The section should be removed from the knife by a
camel's hair brush.

When the object is too small to hold, it is usually _embedded_ in some
convenient substance. A carrot is sometimes very useful for this purpose.
A hole rather smaller than the object is cut out of the middle. Put
whatever is to be cut into this, and cut a thin section of the whole. The
carrot does not cling to either the knife or the section, and the knife
is wetted at every slice by it.

Paraffin is the agent usually employed for embedding purposes. Melt it,
and add a little lard to soften it; the addition of a little clove oil
renders it less adhesive.

Melt the paraffin at as low a temperature as possible, and pour it into a
paper cone. Dip the object into this and remove immediately; as soon as
the layer of paraffin surrounding it becomes hardened, replace it in the
paraffin; this prevents overheating the tissues.

Where the tissues are too soft to be cut, they may be soaked in a
solution of gum arabic and dried; in this condition they can be readily
cut, after which the gum can be dissolved off. This is an extremely
useful method for cutting the lung or other organs where an interstitial
support is needed. For a very thin object, a cork fitting any kind of a
tube is to be split, and the object placed between the two parts; the
cork is then thrust into the tube, and a sufficient degree of firmness
will be obtained to allow cutting. The sections should always be
manipulated with camel's hair brushes.

Much practice will be required before dexterity is attained.

_Methods of preserving the tissues_.--All water must be removed from the
tissue, either by drying or by immersing it in rectified spirits, and
then in absolute alcohol, and the alcohol driven off by floating it upon
oil of clove or turpentine. The substances used to preserve the tissues
are Canada balsam, Dammar balsam, glycerine, Farrant's solution,
potassium acetate, spirits, naphtha, and creosote.

The section is to be floated on to the slide or placed in position with a
camel's hair brush. It should be spread out, and then examined under the
microscope for the purpose of improving its position if necessary, or of
removing any foreign particles. A drop of the preserving medium is then
placed upon it, and another placed on the cover and allowed to spread
out. The cover is then taken by a pair of pincers and inverted over the
object, and one edge brought to touch the slide at one part of its
margin. The cover is then gently lowered, and the whole space beneath the
cover filled and the tissue completely saturated. If air bubbles show
themselves, raise the cover at one corner and deposit a further quantity
of the medium.

The slide should be set aside for a few days. First, the excess of the
medium must be removed; if it is glycerine, much of it can be removed by
a piece of blotting paper, but the cover must not be touched, for it is
easily displaced; that near the cover can be replaced by a camel's hair
brush. A narrow ring of glycerine jelly should be placed around the edge
of the cover, to fix it before the cement is applied. When this has set,
a narrow strip of cement is to be put on, just slightly overlapping the
edge of the cover and outside the margin of the jelly. Until it has been
perfectly secured, a slide carrying glycerine must never be placed in an
inclined position, as its cover will slide off.

_Preservative media_.--Canada balsam may be prepared as follows: Place
some pure Canada balsam in a saucer, and cover with paper to exclude
dust; dry it in an oven at a temperature of 150 deg.; when it cools, it will
become hard and crystalline. Dissolve this in benzole, and use in the
same way as glycerine.

Dammar is now used as a substitute for Canada balsam. By its use the
tissues are rendered more transparent. To prepare it, dissolve one-half
ounce of Dammar rosin and one-half ounce of gum mastic in three ounces of
benzole, and filter. This may be used to mount unsoftened bone and tooth,
hair, brain, and spinal column, and most tissues that have been hardened
in alcohol or chromic acid, which require to have their transparency
increased.

Glycerine is not adapted for white fibrous tissue or blood vessels,
unless they have been hardened in chromic acid, as it causes the white
fibers to swell up and lose their normal features. Sections of liver,
lung, skin, and alimentary canal show better in glycerine unless they
have been stained.

Farrant's solution may be substituted for glycerine in many instances,
because of its feebler tendency to render the tissues transparent. It
consists of equal parts of gum arabic, glycerine, and a saturated
solution of arsenious acid. In mounting preparations with this medium,
the covered object should be allowed to lie a day before the varnish is
applied, so that the cover may be fixed, and thereby prevented from being
displaced. Rectified spirits may be used for mounting softened bone and
tooth, and naphtha and creosote are useful for preserving urinary casts.

When the section is mounted in Canada or Dammar balsam, no cement is
required, but for all other preservative media the margin of the cover
must be covered with cement. To do this, dry the edges of the cover
thoroughly with bibulous paper, and paint a layer of gold size, allowing
it to overlap the cover an eighth or sixteenth of an inch, then cover
this with white zinc cement.

_Preparation for mounting the different tissues_.--To obtain a section of
bone or tooth requires a grinding down of the tissue until it is so thin
as to be transparent. A section should first be cut as thin as possible
by a fine saw. It should be attached by the flattest side to a piece of
glass, and then ground down by a grindstone or by very fine emery, on a
perfectly flat piece of lead. When sufficiently thin and transparent,
mount in rectified spirits or Dammar. Sections of the tongue may be made
by embedding in paraffin, and mounted in Farrant's solution or glycerine.

Sections of the stomach may also be made by embedding in paraffin, but
better ones can be made by freezing. Farrant's solution makes a good
mounting.

The intestines also give a better section from freezing than by
embedding, as the paraffin injures the villi; mount in the same medium as
the stomach.

The liver may be embedded in paraffin, and the section mounted in
Farrant's solution or glycerine. The kidney may be treated in the same
way. The cornea of the eye can be readily cut by embedding in paraffin,
and the section may be mounted in Farrant's solution. The crystalline
lens and retina may be treated similarly.

The brain and spinal cord should be embedded in paraffin or a carrot, and
the section mounted in Dammar. Sections of the uterus and ovaries are
best mounted in glycerine or Dammar. Sections of lung maybe made by
embedding in gum or by freezing, and mounted in Farrant's solution.

Every slide should be of uniform size, and labeled. The usual size is 3x1
inches, and should be of a good quality of glass, free from scratches or
air holes. They may be labeled either by writing with a diamond, or a
small piece of paper affixed to one end, on which is written what is
required.

       *       *       *       *       *




LIFE HISTORY OF A NEW SEPTIC ORGANISM.


At a recent meeting in London, of the Royal Miscroscopical Society, Dr.
Dallinger gave his annual address to what was probably the largest
gathering of Fellows ever assembled on a similar occasion. After briefly
referring to the increased interest lately manifested in the study of
minute organisms, and recalling the characteristics of the doctrines of
abiogenesis and biogenesis, he passed rapidly in review the results of
the observations of Tyndall, Huxley, and Pasteur as bearing upon these
questions, and called attention to the observations of Buchner as to the
transformation of _Bacillus anthracis_ and _Bacillus subtilis_, and _vice
versa_, and referred with approval to Dr. Klein's criticisms thereon.
Having spoken of the desirability of careful and continuous study of this
class of organisms, and the importance of endeavoring to establish the
relation of the pathogenic form to the whole group, he said he should be
better able to deal with the subject by recording a few ascertained facts
rather than by making a more extended review, and he therefore devoted
the main part of his address to a description of "the life history of a
septic organism hitherto unknown to science." In his observations of this
form--extending over four years--he had the advantage of the highest
quality of homogeneous lenses obtainable, ranging from one-tenth to
one-fiftieth of an inch, his chief reliance being placed upon a very
perfect one thirty-fifth of an inch; and from the continuous nature of
the observations as well as the circumstances under which they were
carried on, dry lenses had for the most part to be employed. Having in
his possession a maceration of cod-fish in a fluid obtained from boiled
rabbits, he found at the bottom of it, when in an almost exhausted
condition, a precipitate forming a slightly viscid mass, to which his
attention was particularly directed. It was seen to contain a vast number
of _Bacterium termo_, but on examination with a one-tenth inch objective
showed that it also contained a comparatively small number of intensely
active organisms--one being discovered in about eight or ten drops of the
sediment. These measured 1-10,000 of an inch in length by 1-19,500 of an
inch in breadth. The fluid had originally been kept at a temperature of
90 deg. to 95 deg. F., and it was noticed that, when placed upon a cold stage
under the microscope, the movements of the organisms became, gradually
slower, until at last they entirely ceased; the necessity, therefore,
arose for the use of a warm stage, and the very ingenious contrivance by
which a continuous and even temperature was maintained within the
one-tenth of a degree was exhibited. The greatest difficulty in the
matter was, however, experienced in obtaining specimens for observation,
in order to be able to trace them from their earliest to their latest
stage. The President then explained, by means of an admirable series of
illustrations projected upon a screen by the oxyhydrogen lantern, the
life history of the organism to which he had referred, exhibiting it
first as a translucent, elliptic, spindle-shaped body, with six long and
delicate flagella, the various positions in which the five specimens were
drawn giving a very good idea of its peculiar porpoiselike movements.

The various positions which it assumed in making an attack upon a portion
of decomposed matter were also shown, the movements quite fascinating the
observer by their rhythmical character. The supposed action of the
flagella in the production of the movements observed was explained,
distinct evidence being afforded of a remarkable spiral motion, at least
of those behind. The process of fission was illustrated in all its
observed stages from the first appearance of a construction to that of
final and complete separation, the whole being performed within the space
of eight or nine minutes. A description of the process of fusion from the
simple contact of two organisms to their entire absorption into each
other followed, as well as their transformation into a granular mass,
which gradually decreased in size in consequence of the dropping of a
train of granules in it wake as it moved across the field. The
development of these granules was traced from their minute semi-opaque
and spherical form to that of the perfect flagellate organism first
shown, the entire process being completed in about an hour. Experiments
as to their thermal death-point showed that, while the adults could not
be killed by a temperature less than 146 deg. F., the highest point endured
by the germs was 190 deg. F. Illustrations of a variety of other modes of
fission discovered in previous researches on similar forms were given,
showing the mode of multiple division and a similar process in the case
of an organism contained in an investing envelope. The President
concluded his address, which was listened to throughout with the greatest
attention, by remarking that, though the processes could be seen and
their progress traced, the _modus operandi_ was not traceable. Yet the
observer could not fail to be impressed with the perfect concurrent
adaptation of these organisms to the circumstances of their being; they
were subject to no caprices, their life-cycles were as perfect as those
of a crustacean or a bird, and while the action of the various processes
was certain, their rapidity of increase and the shortness of their life
history were such that they afforded a splendid opportunity of testing
the correctness of the Darwinian law.

       *       *       *       *       *




WINTER AND THE INSECTS.


For a number of years previous to 1878 we had in Pembroke but little or
no severe cold, owing to the prevalence of southeast, south, west, and
especially southwest winds. In many places, fuchsias that were left in
the ground for the entire year had not been frozen to the root within the
memory of man. Some of these plants had grown to be trees five or six
yards in height, and with a trunk the size of one's leg. Now, during the
same series of years, many insects that are common throughout the rest of
Great Britain did not cease to be rare with us, or rather were confined
to certain circumscribed limits. Thus, the Noctuellae, with the exception
of a few species abundant everywhere, were almost wanting, and I know of
no other country where the dearth of common species of nocturnal
butterflies was so great. But during the winter of 1878 there supervened
a radical change. Persistent winds from the northwest, driving back the
currents of warm air from the south, brought on an intense cold that
froze everything; or, when some variation occurred in them, clouds formed
and dissolved into a rain that immediately froze, so that the large roads
remained for weeks covered with a layer of rime from two to four inches
thick.

[Illustration: GREEN WOODPECKER SEARCHING FOR INSECTS.]

The winters of 1879 and 1880 were equally cold; we may even say that the
latter was the severest that had been experienced in fifty years. This
year the sea-sand, along with the ice and snow, formed a thick crust all
along the tide-line--this being something rarely seen along our coast.
