It was NEWCOMEN who made the modern steam engine.

When Newcomen came forward the labors of Worcester in Great Britain
had sufficed to attract the attention of all intelligent men to the
character of the problem to be solved, and to convince them of its
importance and promise. The work of Savery had shown the
practicability of the solution of the problem, both in mechanics and
finance. He succeeded, though under great disadvantages and
comparatively inefficiently. Once the task had been performed, though
ever so rudely, the rest came easily and promptly. The defects of the
Savery system were at once recognized; its great wastes of heat and of
steam were noted, and the fact that they were inherent in the system
itself was perceived. A complete change of type of machine was
obviously requisite; it was this which constituted the greatest
invention in the whole history of the steam engine, from Hero's time
to our own; and to Newcomen we owe more than to any other man who ever
lived, the value of the invention itself being considered, and the
importance of the services of its introducer being left out of
consideration. No such complete and vital improvement and modification
of the machine has ever been effected by any other man, Watt and
Corliss not excepted. Newcomen and his comrade Calley--we do not know
how the honors should be divided--produced the modern steam engine.
Its predecessor, the Savery engine, had been a mere steam "squirt."
Newcomen constructed an engine. Savery built a simple combination of
cylindrical or ellipsoidal vessels which wastefully and at once
performed all the several offices of engine, pump, condenser, and
boiler; Newcomen divided the several elements among as many parts,
each especially adapted to the performance of its task in the most
effective manner--the condenser excepted; for that was Watt's
principal invention--and thus produced the first steam engine in the
modern sense of that term.

It was Newcomen, not Watt, who gave us the train of mechanism that we
now call the steam engine. It is to Newcomen, rather than Watt, that
we owe the highest honors as an inventor in this series of the most
important of all the products of the inventive genius of mankind.
Newcomen brought into existence a new, the modern, type of engine, and
effected the greatest revolution that has been recorded in the history
of the arts. Without Newcomen, there might have been no Watt; without
Watt, there very possibly may not even yet have been brought into
existence that giant of our time, whose mighty powers are employed
more effectively than ever those of Aladdin's genii, in building
palaces, in transporting men and material, in doing the work of the
whole world; promoting the welfare of the race, in a single century,
more than had all the forces of matter and mind together in the whole
previous history of the world. Newcomen laid down a foundation beneath
our whole economic system, out of sight, almost, but the essential
base, nevertheless, on which Watt and his successors have carried up
the great superstructure which seems to us to-day so imposing; which
is so tremendous in magnitude, importance, and result. If to any one
man could be assigned the credit, it is Newcomen who is to be
considered the inventor of the steam engine.

James Watt, indisputably the great inventor that he was, found the
steam engine ready to his hand, applied himself to its improvement,
and made it substantially what it is to-day. His most important work,
the most unique service performed by him, was, however, that of its
adaptation and introduction to do the work of the world. James Watt
was the inaugurator of the era of refinement of the machine already
invented, and the greatest of its builders and distributors. His
inventions were all directed to the improvement of its details, and
his labors to its introduction and its application to the myriad tasks
awaiting it. By the hands of Watt it was made to pump water, to spin,
to weave, to drive every mill; and he it was who gave it the form
demanded by Stephenson, by Fulton, by the whole industrial world, for
use on railway and steamboat, and in mill and factory, throughout the
civilized countries of the globe. It was this great mechanic who
showed how it might be made to do its work with least expense, with
highest efficiency, with greatest regularity, with utmost
concentration of power.

The grand secret of his success was historical and economic, as much
as scientific and mechanical. He brought out his inventions just when
the world was economically and historically ready for them. The age of
authority was past, that of freedom was come; the period of political
and ecclesiastical tyranny was gone by, and that of the spontaneous
development of man was arrived. The great invention was offered to a
world ready and needing it, and, more than all, competent, for the
first time in history, to make and use it.

James Watt was himself a product of the modern scientific spirit. He
was a man so constituted mentally that he could apply scientific
methods to problems which his logical and clairvoyant mind could
readily and exactly formulate the instant he was led to their
consideration in the natural course of his progress. He was the ideal
great inventor and mechanic. With inventive genius he combined strong
common sense--not always a quality distinguishing the inventor--clear
perception, breadth of view, and scientific method and spirit in the
treatment of every question. His natural talent was re-enforced by an
experience and an environment which led him to develop these ways and
this mental habit. His trade was that of an instrument maker, his
position was that of custodian and repairer of the apparatus of
Glasgow University. He had for his daily companions and stimulus the
great men and ozonized atmosphere of that famous institution. He kept
pace with advancing science, and was imbued, both naturally and
through contact with its promoters, with that ambition and those
aspirations which are the life element of all progress, whether
scientific or other. He was aware of the nature of the problems
seeking solution at the time, and familiar with the state of his own
art and that of the great mechanicians about him. Everything was
favorable to his progress, so soon as he should be given an
opportunity to take a step in advance and to come into sight at the
front. The man and the time were both ready, and all conditions,
internal and external, social and personal, were favorable to his
development.

The invention upon which Watt was to improve was at his hand. A word
in regard to its status at the moment will throw some light upon that
of Watt and his creation. Newcomen had, as we have seen, produced the
modern type of steam engine as an original and wholly novel invention.
But this machine, marvelous as an advance upon pre-existing forms of
the steam engine, was still, as seen in the light of recent knowledge
and experience, exceedingly defective. The purpose of a steam engine
is to convert into usefully applicable power the hidden energy of
fuel, stored ages ago in the earth, by transformation, through the
action of vegetation, from the original form, the heat of the sun,
into an available form for reconversion, through thermodynamic
operations. In this process of reconversion, whatever the nature of
the machine used in the operation, there are invariably wastes, both
of heat required for conversion into power and of the power thus
produced. That machine which effects the most complete transmutation
of the heat supplied it into mechanical power, which wastes the least
amount of heat supplied and of power produced, is the best engine, and
constitutes an advance over every other.

It was this reduction of wastes that made the Newcomen engine so much
superior to that of Savery. The latter was by far the simpler and less
costly construction; but its enormous losses, both of heat and of
power, mainly the former, however, made it an extravagant expenditure
of money to buy and use it. The Newcomen engine, costly and cumbrous,
comparatively, nevertheless wasted so much less heat and steam and
fuel that no one could afford to buy the cheaper machine. Before
considering what Watt accomplished, we may find it profitable to
examine into the nature of the wastes which characterized this later
and better machine on which he effected his improvements.

The Newcomen engine consisted of a steam boiler, a steam cylinder, a
beam and a set of pumps. By making the boiler do its work separately,
the engine acting independently, and the pumps as a detached portion
of the mechanism, this inventor had reduced to an enormous extent
those wastes of heat and of steam and of fuel which were unavoidable
in the older machines in which all these parts were represented by a
single vessel, or by two at most, in each element. In the Savery
engine, the steam entering first heated up the interior of the working
vessel to its own temperature, and held it at that temperature in
spite of the cooling influence of the water present. This consumed
large quantities of heat. It then was compelled to surrender probably
much greater quantities still to the water itself, coming in direct
contact as it did with its surface. If the water was agitated, either
by the currents produced during its ingress or by the impact of the
steam entering the vessel, this heating action penetrated to
considerable depths and perhaps even warmed the whole mass very far
above its initial temperature. This constituted another and a very
serious loss. Then, again, as the water was gradually driven out of
the containing vessel by the steam pressing on its surface, new
portions of the vessel and new masses of water were continually
brought in contact with the hot steam, taking its full temperature,
and thus, often, probably, finally heating the whole mass of the
forcing vessel, and a large proportion of the water as well, up to the
temperature, approximately at least, of the steam itself. Thus in many
instances, if not always, vastly more heat and steam were wasted, in
this undesirable heating of water and forcing vessel, than were
usefully employed in the legitimate work of raising the water to a
higher level. In fact, in some cases in which these quantities were
measured, the wastes were one hundred times as much as the work done.
One per cent. of the heat supplied did the work; while ninety-nine per
cent. was thrown away. One dollar or one shilling expended for fuel to
do the work was accompanied by an expenditure of ninety-nine dollars
or shillings thrown away, because of the imperfections of the system
and machine. The whole history of the development of the steam engine
has been one of gradual reduction of these wastes; until to-day, our
best engines only compel us to spend five dollars for wastes to each
dollar paid out for useful work. A business man would think that amply
extravagant, however, and the man of science is continually seeking
methods of evading these losses, a large proportion of which are now
apparently unavoidable in heat engines, by finding some new system of
heat and energy transformation.

Watt was the instrument maker and repairer at Glasgow University in
the year 1763. His companions were, among others, the professors of
natural philosophy and of mathematics in the university. Their
conversation and their frequent presentation of practical and
scientific questions and problems stimulated his naturally inquiring
and inventive mind to the pursuit of a thousand interesting and
promising schemes for the improvement of existing methods and
machinery. Dr. Robison, then a student, suggested the invention of a
steam carriage for use on common roads, and the young mechanician at
once began experiments that, resulting in nothing at the time, were
nevertheless continued, in one or another form, until all modern
applications of steam came into view. Dr. Black taught Watt chemistry,
then a newly constructed science, and led him on to the discovery,
finally made by them independently, of the fact and the magnitude of
the latent heat of steam; the discovery coming of a series of
scientifically planned and accurately conducted investigations, such
as the man of science of to-day would deem creditable. The treatises
of Desaguliers and others on physics gave Watt a knowledge of that
domain of natural phenomena which stood him in good stead later, when
he attempted to apply its principles to the reduction of the wastes of
the steam engine.

It was while at Glasgow University, working under such influences and
in such an atmosphere of intellectual activity, that the accident of
the Newcomen model engine needing repair brought to the mind of Watt
the opportunity which, availed of at once, made him famous and gave
the world its greatest aid, its most powerful servant. The observing
mind of the great mechanic immediately noted its defects, sought their
causes, found their remedy. He discovered, at once, that the quantity
of steam entering the cylinder of the little engine has four times the
volume of the cylinder receiving it: in other words, three-fourths of
that steam must be condensed immediately on entrance. This meant,
evidently, that only one-fourth of the steam supplied was utilized,
and even then inefficiently, in doing its work. The reason of this was
as easily seen, immediately the fact was revealed. As Watt himself
expressed it, the causes of this loss, causes which would obviously be
exaggerated in a small engine, were: "First, the dissipation of heat
by the cylinder itself, which was of brass and both a good conductor
and a good radiator. Secondly, the loss of heat consequent upon the
necessity of cooling down the cylinder at every stroke in producing
the vacuum. Thirdly, the loss of power due to the pressure of vapor
beneath the piston, which was a consequence of the imperfect method of
condensation." This much determined, the next step looked toward the
confirmation of his conclusions and the remedy of the defects.

To meet the first difficulty he made a cylinder of wood, soaked in oil
and baked, a non-conducting and non-radiating material. Then he was
able to determine with some accuracy the quantities of steam and
injection water used in the engine; and a comparison with the original
cylinder and its operation showed that not only four times the
quantity of steam, but also four times the amount of injection water
was used as was necessary, assuming wastes checked. Further scientific
research on the part of Watt gave him measures of specific heats of
the metals and of wood, the specific volumes of steam at various
working pressures, the evaporative efficiency of boilers, the
pressures and temperatures of steam in the boiler under specified
conditions, the quantities of steam and of water required for the
operation of his little condensing engine.

Then came his enunciation of the grand principle of economy in the
construction and operation of the steam engine: "Keep the cylinder as
hot as the steam which enters it," as he expressed it. This was Watt's
guiding principle, as it has been that of all his successors in the
improvement of the economic performance of the steam engine and of all
other heat engines. The great source of waste is the dispersion of
heat, uselessly, which should be applied to the production of work by
its transformation, thermodynamically, into the latter form of energy.
The second form of waste is that of power thus produced in the
unprofitable work of moving the parts of the engine itself; and the
third is that of heat by transfer, without transformation, by
conduction and radiation to surrounding bodies. In modern engines, the
latter is but three or five per cent., in the best cases; the second
waste constitutes perhaps ten per cent.; while the first of these
losses amounts very usually to seventy per cent., of which last
one-third or one-fourth is of the kind discovered by Watt, the rest
being the thermodynamic waste incident to all known methods of
operation of heat engines, and apparently unavoidable. In our very
best and largest engines, the waste found by Watt to constitute three
fourths of all heat supplied has been brought down to ten per cent., a
fact which well exemplifies the advances made since his time of
apprenticeship by himself and his successors of this nineteenth
century. The steam engine of to-day, in its most successful operation,
gives us twenty-five times as much power from a pound of coal as did
the engine that the great inventor sought to improve: this is the
magnificent fruit of that one discovery of James Watt, and of
application of the simple principle which he so concisely and clearly
stated.

The method adopted by Watt to secure a remedy, so far as practicable,
of this defect of the older machine was as simple and as perfect as
was the principle which it embodied. He first removed from the
cylinder the prime source of its wastes; providing a separate
condenser, and thus avoiding the repeated chilling of its surfaces by
the cold water used in condensing the steam at exhaust, and also
permitting its strokes to be made with far greater frequency, thus
giving less time for cooling by the influence of the remaining vapors
after condensation. He next went still further, and provided the
cylinder with a closed top, keeping out the air, and a "jacket" of hot
boiler steam to _keep_ it as hot as the steam which entered it. These
were the two great improvements which converted the first real steam
engine into an economical form of heat engine and essentially finished
the work so grandly begun by Newcomen and Calley. These changes gave
us the modern steam engine; and these are Watt's first and greatest,
but by no means only, contributions to the production of the modern
world with all its comforts, its luxuries and its opportunities for
material, intellectual and moral advancement of individual and of
race. His work was to this extent complete in 1765.

But Watt did not stop here. There still remained for him the no less
important and the, in some senses, still more imposing, work of
finding employment for the new servant of mankind and of setting it at
its work of giving the human arm a thousand times greater strength, to
the mind of man uncounted opportunities to promote the advancement of
knowledge, of civilization, of every good of the race. His was still
the task of adapting the new machine to all the purposes of modern
industry. It had been hitherto confined to the task of raising water
from the depths of the mine; it was now to be harnessed to the railway
train; to be made to drive the machinery of the mill, to apply its
marvelous power to the impulsion of the river boat and ocean steamer;
to furnish energy, through endless systems of transfer and use, to
every kind of work that man could devise and should invent. All this
meant the giving of the machine forms as various as the purposes to
which it was to be devoted. It had previously only raised and
depressed a rod; it must now turn a shaft. It had then only operated a
pump; it must now turn a mill, grind our grain, spin our threads,
weave our cloths, drive our shops and factories, supply the powerful
blast of the iron furnace. It must be made to move with the utmost
conceivable regularity, and must, with all this, do its work in the
development of the hidden energy of the fuel, with the greatest
possible economy, through the expansion of its steam. All this was
achieved by James Watt.

The invention of the double-acting engine, in which the impulsion of
the steam is felt both in driving the piston forward and in forcing it
backward, both upward and downward, the application of its force
through crank and fly wheel, the creation of an automatic system of
governing its speed, and the discovery of the economy due to its
complete expansion, were all improvements of the first magnitude, and
of the greatest practical importance; and all these were in rapid
succession brought into existence by the creative mind that had
apparently been brought into the world for the express purpose of
giving to the hand of man this mighty agent, to perfect the mightiest
power that mind of man has yet conceived.

But to do the rest required more than inventive genius and mechanical
skill. It demanded capital and the stored energy of labor and genius
in other fields, directed by the mind of a great "captain of
industry." This came to Watt through Matthew Boulton, a manufacturer
of Birmingham, whose father and ancestors had gradually and
toilsomely, as always, accumulated the property needed for the
prosecution of a great business. The combination of genius and capital
is always an essential to success in such cases; and good fortune, a
Providence, we may well say, brought together the genius and the
capitalist to do their work, hand in hand, of providing the world with
the steam engine. Hand in hand they worked, and all the world to-day,
and the race throughout its future life, must testify gratitude for
the inexpressible obligations under which these two men have placed
them, doing the work of the world.

Boulton & Watt, the capitalist with the inventor, gave the world the
steam engine, finally, in such form and in such numbers that its
permanent establishment as the servant of man was insured. The
capitalist was as essential an element of success as was the inventor,
and, in this instance, as in a thousand others, the race is indebted
to that much-abused friend of the race, the capitalist, for much that
it enjoys of all that it desires. The industry and patience, the skill
and the wisdom required for the accumulation of this energy stored for
future use in great enterprises is as important, as essential, as
inventive power or any other form of genius. Talent and genius must
always aid each other. This firm was established in 1764 and its main
resources, aside from the bank account, were Watt's patent, about
expiring, and Watt's genius, and Boulton's talent as a man of
business. The patent was extended for twenty-four years, the new
inventions of Watt, now beginning to pour from his prolific brain in a
wonderful stream, were also patented, and the whole works were soon
employed upon the construction of engines for which numerous orders
soon began to pour in upon the now prosperous builders. The patent law
established Boulton and Watt and the firm paid back the nation with
handsome usury, giving it unimaginable profits indirectly through its
control of the work of the world and large profits directly through
the business brought them from all parts of the then civilized globe.
There has never, in the history of the world, been a more impressive
illustration of the value to a nation of that generous public policy,
that simply just legislation, which gives to the man of brain control
of the products of his mind. For a hundred years, Great Britain has,
largely through her encouragement of the inventor and her protection
of his mental property by securing the fruits of his labors, in fair
portion, to him, gained the power of dictating to the world and has
gained an advance that cannot be measured. Watt and Arkwright and
Stephenson and Crompton and their ilk, protected by their government
and its patent laws, made their country the peaceful conqueror of the
world. The story of the work of the inventor is a poem of mighty
meaning and of wonderful deeds. The inventor proved himself a mightier
magician than ever the world had seen.

    "A creature he called to wait on his will,
    Half iron, half vapor--a dread to behold;
    Which evermore panted, and evermore rolled,
    And uttered his words a millionfold."

Such was the outcome of this grand modern "trust," a combination of
the wisest legislation, the most brilliant invention, and the most
wisely applied capital. There are "trusts" of which the outcome is
most beneficent.

Since the days of Watt, the improvement of the steam engine and the
work of inventors has been confined to matters of detail. All the
fundamental principles were developed by Watt and his predecessors and
contemporaries and it only was left to his successors to find the best
ways of carrying them into effect. But these matters of detail have
been found to involve opportunities to make enormous strides in the
direction of securing improved efficiency of the machine. The further
application of the principle which led Watt to his greatest
inventions; of the principle, keep the cylinder as hot as the steam
which enters it, of that which he enunciated relative to the advantage
of expanding steam, and of that affecting the regulation of the
machine; have reduced the costs of steam and of fuel to a small
fraction of their earlier magnitude. One ton of engine to-day does the
work of eight or ten in the time of Watt: one pound of fuel or of
steam gives to-day ten times the power then obtained from it. A
steamship now crosses the Atlantic in one-eighth the time required by
the famous "liner" of the "Black Ball Line." The wastes of the engine
have been brought down from above eighty per cent. to eight; and a
half-ounce of fuel on board ship will now transport a ton of cargo
over a mile of ocean.

FREDERICK E. SICKELS gave us the first practicable form of expansion
gear in 1841; GEORGE H. CORLISS gave a new type of engine of marvelous
perfection and economy in 1849; Noble T. Green, Wm. Wright and many
less well known but no less meritorious inventors have since done
their part in the transformation of the old engine of Watt into the
modern wonder of concentrated and economical power, and marvel of
accurate and beautiful design and workmanship. The "trip cut-off,"
with reduced clearances, increased boiler pressure, higher rates of
expansion, accelerated speeds of engine, better construction in all
respects, as well as improved design, have enabled us to avail
ourselves to the utmost of the principles of Watt, and our mills, our
railways, our steamers and our fields, even, have gained almost as
extraordinarily by these advances, since the days of the great
inventor, as through his immediate labors.

With the introduction of the new form of older energy, electricity,
with the reduction of the lightning into thraldom, has now come a new
impulse affecting all the industries. Through its mysterious, its
still unknown action, steam now reaches out far from its own place,
driving the electric car along miles of rail; giving light throughout
all the country about it, turning night into day, and repressing crime
while encouraging legitimate labor, reaching into distant chambers and
every little workshop, to offer its powerful aid in all the
distributed work of cities. Without the steam engine there would be
little work available for electricity, but the appearance of this, the
latest and most useful handmaid of steam, has given the engine work to
do in an uncounted number of new fields, has called in the inventor
once more to adapt steam to its new work. The "high-speed engine" is
the latest form of the universal helper. And such has been the
readiness and the intelligence of the contemporary inventor that we
now have engines capable of turning their shafts three hundred
rotations a minute and without a perceptible variation of velocity,
whatever the change of load or the suddenness with which it is varied.
In the days of Watt a fluctuation of five per cent. in speed was
thought wonderfully small; in those of Corliss, the variation was
restricted to two per cent. and we wondered at this unanticipated
success. To-day, thanks to Porter and Allen, to Hartnell, to Hoadley,
to Sims, to Thomson, to Sweet, to Ide, and to Ball, we have seen the
speed fluctuation restricted to even less than one per cent. of its
normal average.

The inventors of the steam engine are, through their representatives
of to-day, according to the statisticians, doing the equivalent of
twelve times the work of a horse, for every man, woman and child on
the globe. We have not less, probably, than a half million of miles of
railway, transporting something over 150,000,000,000 of tons a mile a
year. A horse is reckoned to haul a ton weight about six and a half
miles, day by day, by the year together. In the United States, it is
reckoned that the steam engine, on the railways alone, hauls a
thousand tons one mile, for every inhabitant of the country, every
year, or, if it is preferred to so state it, a ton a thousand miles.
This is the way in which the East and the West are, by the inventors
of the steam engine, enabled to help each other. This costs about $10
each individual; it would require some 25 millions of horses to do the
work, and would cost about $1,000 a family, which is more than twice
the average family earnings.

Dr. Strong, in that remarkable book, "Our Country," says: "One man, by
the aid of steam, is able to do the work which required two hundred
and fifty men at the beginning of the century. The machinery of
Massachusetts alone represents the labor of more than 100,000,000 men,
as if one-half of all the workmen of the globe had engaged in her
service." And again: "Some thirty years ago, the power of machinery in
