it is for the return span, on which the parachutes are closed. Of course,
if metal were used instead of hemp, the case would be entirely different,
and intermediate supports would have to be used for anything but very
moderate lengths.

In practice, Mr. Jagn has employed two ropes wound upon the same pair of
drums, which are mounted upon a pontoon. The ropes are spread out from
each other, as in Fig. 1, making an angle of about 10 degrees. The low
specific gravity of the system enables ropes to be employed of as great a
length as 450 yards, each of them carrying 350 parachutes of 17.2 square
feet area. As half of these are in action at the same time, the total
working area for the two cables is 5,860 square feet. This immense area
furnishes a considerable amount of power even in a river of feeble
current. Comparing this with a floating water wheel of the type sometimes
employed, and supposing this to have only 172 square feet of working area,
such a wheel must have a length of 46 feet, a diameter of 23 feet, and
seventy-two floats, each 21/2 feet wide. The enormous dimensions thus
required for a comparatively small working area point sufficiently clearly
to the advantage which remains on the side of the parachute motor.

The general arrangement of the system is shown in the engraving. Behind
the return pulleys, D D, are attached cords, A A, with some parachutes
strung upon them. These present their openings to the current and preserve
the tension of the connecting ropes. At the further end of each cord is a
board, B, which is kept in a vertical plane, but lying at a slight angle
to the direction of the current; and this acts to keep the two moving
ropes apart from each other. The two return pulleys are, however,
connected by a line, E, which can be shortened or lengthened from the
pontoon, and in this way the angle of inclination between the two ropes
can be varied if required. A grooved pulley presses upon the trailing span
at the moment before it reaches the circumference of the drum. It is
mounted on a screwed spindle, which is depressed by a nut, and thus makes
the wet rope grip the outside of the drum in a thoroughly efficacious
manner.

The author has made a theoretical investigation of the power which may be
developed by the system, and has worked out tables by which, when the
velocity of the current and the other elements of the problem are known,
the power developed by any given number of parachutes can be at once
determined. We do not reproduce this investigation, which takes account of
the resistance of the returning parachutes and other circumstances, but
will content ourselves with quoting the final equation, which is as
follows: T = 0.328 S V cubed. Here T is the work done in H.P., S is the total
working area in sq. m., and V is the velocity of the current in m. per
sec. Taking V = 1, and S = 1 sq. m., which is by no means an impracticable
quantity, we have T = 0.328 H.P. per sq. m. We may check this result by
the equation given, in English measures, by Rankine--"Applied Mechanics,"
p. 398--for the pressure of a current upon a solid body immersed in it.
This equation, F = 1.8 m A v squared / 2g, where m is the weight of a unit of
volume of the fluid--say 62 lb.--A is the area exposed, and v the relative
velocity of the current. Mr. Jagn finds that the maximum of efficiency is
obtained when the rope moves at one-third the velocity of the stream. If
this velocity be 3 feet per second, we shall have v = 2. and we then get F
= 7 lb. per sq. ft. very nearly. Now 1 sq. meter = 10.76 sq. ft., and a
speed of 1 ft. per second (which is that of the rope) is 60 ft. per
minute. Hence the H.P. realized in the same case as that taken above will
be 7 x 10.76 x 60 / 33,000 = 0.137 H.P. The difference between the two
values is very large, but Rankine, of course, depends entirely on the
value of the constant 1.8, which is quite empirical, and is for a flat
band instead of a hollow parachute. Taking, however, his smaller figure,
and an area of 544 square inches, which Mr. Jagn has actually employed, we
get a gross power of = 0.137 x 544 = 7.43 H.P. Hence it will be seen that
the amount of power which can be realized by the system is far from being
inconsiderable.

Lastly, we may point out that the durability of the apparatus will be
considerable. There is no wear except at the moment when the rope is
passing round the drum, and even then there need be no slipping or
grinding. The apparatus worked in the Neva was in very good condition
after running for four months day and night. After five months about
one-fifth of the parachutes had to be replaced, but after seven months the
hemp rope still showed no signs of wear. We think we have said enough to
show that for certain purposes, and especially, as we have, already
mentioned, for irrigation purposes, the new motor is well worthy of a
careful and extended trial. It may be questioned even whether we have not
here the germ of an idea which may hereafter enable us to solve one of the
most interesting and important of engineering problems, viz., the
utilization of the great store of power provided for us twice daily in the
ebb and flow of the tide.--_The Engineer._

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED SHAFTING LATHE.


Our engraving represents a new departure in shaft turning lathes, and is
the result of thirty years' experience in the manufacture of shafting,
with many years' study, to perfect a machine of the greatest practical
capacity and efficiency.

[Illustration: IMPROVED SHAFTING LATHE.]

The principal points of difference from a common engine lathe are readily
distinguished, among which may be mentioned the absence of centers and
tail stock, a traveling head with hollow driving spindle, and a stationary
tool rest and water tank. By dispensing with a tail stock a much shorter
bed may be used, and the hollow driving spindle enables any length shaft
to be turned, with one setting of the tools. The tool rest is so arranged
as to allow of perfect lubrication of the tools, keeping the shaft cool,
and at the same time holding it perfectly rigid and strong; the operator
is not required to travel the length of the bed, but remains near the
driving belt, feed gearing, etc. Power is communicated to the driving
spindle by means of a sliding pinion on a splined rod inside the bed, the
driving belt and gears being at the end.

The driving head, after having traveled the length of the bed and turned a
shaft, is returned by a quick feed, and stops automatically, allowing
nearly time enough for the operator to grind tools and be ready with
another shaft, thus economizing the time completely.

Wood, Jennison & Co., Worcester, Mass., are the makers, and they say that
with a good quality of iron they have turned three hundred feet of two
inch iron in ten hours.

       *       *       *       *       *




POWER STRAIGHTENING MACHINE.


The machine is provided with a pair of rolls at each end of the bed, which
are adjustable for different lengths of shaft, and are made to revolve by
power applied through suitable gearing and a splined rod inside the bed;
the bar of iron being placed on the periphery of the rolls receives a
rotary motion by friction, and shows the crooked places in the same way
and with the same ease as though rotating on centers in the usual manner;
vertically adjustable blocks are arranged in the base of the press to
support the iron; power is applied by means of gearing to a splined rod at
the back of the machine, on which is a sliding clutch connecting, at the
will of the operator, with an eccentric; the eccentric conveys motion and
power through a link to the elbow joint at the front of the press, which
forces a plunger down against the iron.

[Illustration: POWER STRAIGHTENING MACHINE.]

Sufficient adjustment is provided for different sizes of iron by turning a
nut at the top of the press.

Any point in the length of the bar can be reached by moving the press on
the bed. Any length of iron can be straightened, and the most laborious
and disagreeable work in the process of making shafting is rendered easy
and rapid. Made by Wood, Jennison & Co., Worcester, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *




HYDRAULIC MINING IN CALIFORNIA.

By GEORGE O'BRIEN.


Our knowledge of the primitive operations of the aboriginal inhabitants of
the globe in pursuit of gold is barely traditional, as we are only aware
that from very early times the precious metal was collected and highly
prized by them, and that they chiefly extracted the visible gold, which
existed in prodigious quantities on or closely beneath the surface of the
earth, and of its being particularly abundant in Asia and Africa. But we
can draw more positive conclusions as we survey remains of the rude but
effective contrivances used by them in later, but still remote, periods,
with full evidence as to the extent of their operations, in the numerous
perpendicular shafts located at short distances from each other, over
large areas of auriferous gravel in India, as well as from precisely
similar memorials of ancient workings which remain also further
demonstrations, in the abandoned "hill diggings," and shifted beds, and
beds of rivers, in Peru South America, flowing between the sea and coast
ranges of the Andes, descending in a northeasterly direction to the river
Amazon, and that their much coveted and enormous productions were the
accumulated riches of the Incas, transferred as spoils of war to their
Spanish conquerors in the sixteenth century. And for similar explorations
in the same class of depositions we have the experiences of our own times,
and which explain by comparison all the previous operations alluded to.

Thus in the year 1849, after the cession of the northern portion of Mexico
to the United States of North America, the rich mineral district of
California was at once invaded by hardy and intelligent bands of mining
adventurers from all parts of the world, who, with little other means at
their disposal but pick, shovel, and pan, soon fell on the productive bars
of rivers and rich ravines where the gold was trapped, derived from its
original birthplaces, where it had been sparsely disseminated, to be
dispersed by the subsequent disintegrations and denudations of the
mountains themselves, and deposited in a disengaged form for the first
comer; and so perfect were sometimes these concentrations, in certain
localities where water once streamed, that, divested of its earthy matrix,
the cleansed pure metal was found deposited, detained by its superior
specific gravity, on the bare rock, and only hidden from vision by a
slight covering of vegetable mould. In this manner, as an example of such
concentration, a "pot" or "find" (in mining parlance) to the value of
L10,000 was collected in a space of 15 square yards, or within the limits
of a particular "mining claim," at the foot of Mokulumne Hill, in a
southern county of California, soon after the territorial transfer from
Mexico. And in search of such locations we must account for the numberless
shafts which still exist both in India and Peru, and sometimes sunk within
a few feet of each other, passing through the alluvium to a depth of 40
feet to the bed rock.

These mining adventurers soon extended their explorations over the other
recently acquired territories, and built Virginia City, the capital of
Montana, with the gold derived from the alluvium of a river channel which
they excavated; and its inhabitants were the founders of an institution
called the Vigilance Committee, with "Lynch law," and by it ruled
supremely for many years. But their surface diggings, by the manual
operations alone of multitudes, were soon exhausted in every direction,
and then their energies and powers of invention were dedicated to discover
and explore deeper and more permanent depositions, along the western
slopes of the Sierra Nevada, the Andes of the Western Territories, and
which originally were without doubt several miles higher than they are at
the present time--probably 20,000 feet above the sea-level--and of which,
or whatever superior elevation they formerly had, the greater portion of
it has already been removed, by the continuous natural action of
centuries, to form there, as elsewhere, the plains and prairies of the
earth, burying and diverting by the mutation the ancient river system,
whose sources of supply were consequently extinguished by the removal of
these altitudes. These denudations and subsequent depositions have been
caused by alternations of temperature and combined action of air, water,
and time since the creation of the world; and powerful demonstrations of
these transformations instruct us in all directions, if we care to observe
them. Thus in "Little Cottonwood" ravine, in the Wahsatch range of
mountains in Utah Territory, lie isolated in the center of the valley huge
masses of metamorphic granite, some blocks of which weigh individually
thousands of tons, and were dislodged from the hills--which on either side
are of limestone formation--with no visible granite in them, having been
undermined by the removal of their pulverized basis by denudation, and
which is the material now forming the tablelands, the foundation, of Salt
Lake City. The blocks of granite, having alone resisted the atmospheric
changes, were precipitated into the valley beneath, and the Mormons are
now constructing their cathedral church from these granitic remains.

The melting of the snow which formerly capped all these ranges of
mountains furnished the water that once flowed in the extinguished
channels of ancient rivers, and whose now diverted waters were also the
powerful agent to assist in causing these marvelous alternations; and by
the means of hydraulic mining we can advance our feeble knowledge on the
subject.

These mighty changes have gradually been accomplished, and the accumulated
denudations of the mineral zones have defended themselves by strata of
crystallized silicates of quartz of various thicknesses, and thus in
places beneath such system of defense, or by their own concretion, have
preserved in many localities a thickness of from 500 to 600 feet of
conglomerate, but without this necessary cementation its further removal
is very certain when again attacked by water. An example of this
continuous process is very observable in "Death Valley," Lower California,
where a width of about 100 miles has been filled up from the hills to the
gulf of same name, invading and occupying its former bed; and this
activity is still proceeding, and a temporary formation of tableland
above it is in course of removal, although already overgrown with forest
trees, which are toppling over the side which is being attacked. But
eternal snow now only covers a small portion of these Sierras, and a
period of comparative repose may be expected, as the distribution has
already been far advanced by the excessive reduction of the mountains.

The deep and extensive depositions which I now attempt to describe
attracted the early attention of the mining adventurers, and were called
"hill diggings," but not being properly understood were therefore not
immediately operated upon, and remained in abeyance, while the lower,
richer, and more manifest alluvials endured. They were designated "blue
gravel," the color being due to the action of sulphuret of iron and other
salts, the cementing auxiliaries requisite to form the hard conglomerate,
and on exposure to the atmosphere changes color to yellow and violet,
losing also its firmness by oxidation.

The "great blue lead" is another important mining term and designates the
alluvium found reposing in a well-defined channel on the bed rock, being
the well-worn path of an ancient river; and it is obvious that the
material in these channels should be richer than the general mass beyond
their limits.

"Rim rock" is the boundary line of the banks of the old channel, and, like
the bottom, is well worn and corrugated by the running water into cavities
and "pot holes," where the force of the stream eddied. The width of these
channels varies from 60 to 400 feet, and the cement near the rim and
bottom is always richer than elsewhere. The wider and deeper channels
generally course from N. to N.W. The richest and most explored belt of
gold-bearing alluvium in California lies between the South and Middle Yuba
Rivers, commencing near Eureka, in Nevada county, and extends downwards to
Smartsville and Timbuctoo, in Yuba county, a distance of 40 miles; and
from among snowy mountains the country falls gradually from where the
ravines or canons are cut by the actual rivers, which are 2,000 feet
beneath the auriferous gravel and region near Smartsville, and 2,000 feet
above the Yuba River, where snow is unknown, and near its terminus the
ancient river bed courses more westerly than it does above it, and crosses
Yuba below Timbuctoo, where the auriferous depositions disappear. The
whole distance of 40 miles has been ransacked by the earlier adventurers,
and around the village of Timbuctoo was a center famed for its wonderful
yield of gold, obtained chiefly in the ravines, in holes, and depressions
in the bed rock. These hollows detained the concentrations of the
denudated alluvium from the altitudes, and were generally closely beneath
the surface, and by such guidance and means of discovery the miners traced
the gold up the ravines to their sources in the lofty mounds and deposits,
or hills of cemented conglomerate, near Eureka in Nevada county; and by
constructing canals from a higher level began the new system of "hydraulic
mining" and washing, and gradually extended their operations over the area
of the metallic zone mentioned, of 40 miles long by 20 wide, using the
Yuba River below Timbuctoo to receive and discharge the tailings, or
refuse from their operations. The result in gold was considerable, but the
system is from its violent nature difficult to control, by presuming to
handle and remove such huge depositions in order to collect the richest
material. The idea was bold, being an anticipation of Nature's operations;
but the equitable disposal of the "tailings" in a cultivated country is
impossible, as the silt runs down the rivers, creating banks and bars in
their channels, obstructing navigation and agricultural arrangements.

_General Description of Hydraulic Mining._

The first work to be accomplished, after calculating that the amount or
value of the material to be operated upon is sufficient to guarantee the
cost of the undertaking in general, is the construction of a canal or
canals, to convey the requisite volume of water from the fountain-head,
and of sufficient elevation to command the ground to be worked upon,
having also in view the levels of the necessary tunnels and shafts as
outlets for the discharge of the gravel through them, these being
engineering operations requiring much skill and labor to avoid useless
after-cost.

Aqueducts of considerable elevation have to be constructed across deep
valleys, and the speculation is at all times problematical, as the ground
cannot be properly tested until the water arrives upon it, and disputes
may arise between the shareholders of the canal and the mining company,
ending frequently in the one devouring the other, unless the two interests
be quickly amalgamated.

The starting point should be the lowest level, or "bed rock," on the white
cement in the ancient channel, which is probably the original silt
collected in it, and is harder than the conglomerate above it, which is
more easily removed. The courses of these beds can be easily traced by
landmarks and undulations, and occasional exposures of the bed rock at low
levels; also trial shafts are sunk in various places in search of it, to a
depth of 100 feet, passing through blue gravel. The grades of these beds
are not steep, being from 10 to 40 feet per mile as of an ordinary river,
and the calculated thickness of the alluvial conglomerate is about 600
feet in many places across the ridge between the South and Middle Yuba
River across the Columbia.

The power of the water for the operation is dependent on a given volume
deposited in a reservoir, and at sufficient elevation above the points of
discharge, as on this depends effectivity to tear down the gravel. It is
delivered to the miner by huge pipes made of wrought iron, and laid down
to follow the curvatures of the surface of the ground; and the pipe I now
treat of, belonging to the Excelsior Water Company, has a diameter of 40
inches on a length of 6,000 feet, and 20 inches on the rest of its length
of 8,000 feet, being 9,000 feet in all; and this large pipe forms an
inverted siphon across a valley, following on the gravel, to the top of
the hill into the reservoir.

These pipes offer advantages over wooden aqueducts for spanning chasms,
and also to avoid coursing the sides of valleys; being also cheaper to
construct in general, and less liable to accidents from fire and storms,
and have the convenience for conveying the water from point to point, as
the work of excavation advances, necessitating the removal of portions of
the aqueduct forward. The watershed, or reservoir, of the Excelsior
Company embraces the valley of the South Yuba and its affluents, and the
entire cost of its eight amalgamated canals was 750,000 dollars.

The rainfall during three years in the mountains averaged 49 inches
annually, while the medium in the same period did not exceed 20 inches in
the plains beneath. The height of the reservoir above the tailing, or Yuba
River, is 393 feet: and the height of the head above the floor, or outlet
sluice-tunnel, of the Blue Gravel Mining Company was 197 feet.

The exact quantity of water required to wash every class of gravel is
difficult to estimate, but no quantity or pressure would be excessive if
properly arranged. The measurement of water is effected by miner's
inches, by allowing it to flow from the reservoir of the seller to the
purchaser through a box 10 or 12 feet square, with divisions to obtain a
quiet head, with a slide or opening capable of adjustment to any required
measure; thus an opening of 25 inches by 2 inches, with a quiet head of 6
inches above the middle of the orifice, would give 50 inches, or about
89,259 cubic feet of water, flowing during ten hours per day, being an
amount necessary for a first-class operation. The capability of the
Excelsior Canal in rainy seasons reached to a delivery in twenty-four
hours, to the various mining companies, of 21,120,000 cubic feet of water,
or 8,000 miner's inches, and the value of the water paid for by the Blue
Gravel Company in forty-three months ending November 9, 1867, was 157,261
dollars, being at the rate of 15 cents of a dollar per miner's inch; and
the proportion of water used to wash down 989,165 cubic yards of gravel
was 17,074,758 cubic yards, or 171/4 cubic yards of water to 1 cubic yard of
gravel; and when at work the quantity of gravel daily moved was 1,298
cubic yards, and the estimated cost to move one cubic yard of gravel was 5
and 7/10 cents of a dollar. But in the face of contingencies the Blue
Gravel Company moved 1,000,000 cubic yards of gravel in four years, or at
the rate of 250,000 cubic yards per annum, and the cost of washing each
cubic yard stands thus:

                                                 Cents.
  Cost of water, at 15 cents per miner's inch     5.77
  Cost of labor, gunpowder, sluices, and
      superintendence                            16.10
                                                 -----
                                                 21.87
    Or 213/4 cents of a dollar per cubic yard.

Thus the gravel should contain gold to the value of 22 cents of a dollar
per cubic yard to cover cost, and the value of the gravel referred to
ranged from 20 to 45 cents per cubic yard; and the cost of work done in
shafts and tunnels, in the said Blue Gravel Company's Mining claim,
reached 100,000 dollars. But with the cost of the necessary canals paid
for by the Excelsior Water Company apart, the total cost amounted to about
1,000,000 dollars, and we must note that the latter company sold water to
other mining companies.

The gross yield in gold of the Blue Gravel Company in four years was
837,399 dollars, and in the year 1866 the returns from the Blue Gravel
Company paid all the costs of the developments; but in 1867 assessments
were paid by the owners to meet the deficiency arising from the cost of
sinking two new shafts, and driving fresh tunnels on the lowest levels,
which evidently contain on the bed rock the richest concentrations.

In smaller mining adventures of this description, involving less capital,
large profits have been made in the gold-bearing zone treated of, by also
not having invested in costly canals, which would not have repaid the
latter investment; and thus it is evident that the water companies are
dependent blindly on the prosperity of the miners.

I will now more minutely describe the actual mining operations. The mining
ground being selected, a tunnel is projected from the nearest and most
convenient ravine, so that the starting-point on the bed rock toward the
face of the ravine shall approach the center of the material to be removed
at a gradient of 1 in 10 to 1 in 30. The dimensions of such tunnels are
usually 6 feet in width by 7 in height, and continuing in contact with the
hard river-bed, for the greater ease of excavation, collection of gold,
and conservation of quicksilver amalgam.

These tunnels vary in length from a few hundred feet to a mile, and some
of the longer ones occupying from one to seven years in execution, at a
cost of from 10 to 60 dollars per foot of frontage. The tunnel of the Blue
Gravel Company, with length of 1,358 feet, cost in labor alone 70,000
dollars, but it could now be driven for 35,000 dollars, as skilled labor
is cheaper now than then. The grade in this tunnel is about 12 per cent.,
and the end of the tunnel is designed to be 170 feet of elevation, and
reaching to a point beneath the surface of the gravel which is being
operated upon, and where a shaft or incline is sunk to or through the bed
rock or gravel, until it intersects the tunnel.

The object of this laborious operation is obvious, as the long tunnel
becomes a sluiceway, and through the whole length of which sluice boxes
are laid, for the double motive of carrying off the material and saving
the gold, and for this purpose a trough of strong planks is placed in the
tunnel, 21/2 feet wide, and with sides high enough to contain the stream.
The pavement of the trough is generally laid of blocks of wood 6 inches in
thickness, cut across the grain, and placed on their ends, to the width of
the sluiceway. The wooden blocks are usually alternated with sections of
stone pavement, the stones being set endwise, and in the interstices
between the stones and wooden blocks quicksilver is distributed, and as
much as 2 tons of this metal is required to charge a long sluice. The
water in the canal is brought by aqueducts, or other means, to the head of
the mining ground, having an elevation of 100 to 200 ft. above the lowest
level of the mining ground, and is finally conveyed to it by iron pipes,
sometimes sustained on a strong incline of timber.

These pipes are of sheet iron, of adequate strength, riveted at the
joints, and measure from 12 to 20 inches in diameter, and communicate at
the bottom with a strong prismatic box of cast-iron, on the top and sides
of which are openings for the adaptation of flexible tubes, made of very
