paragraphs of the catechism are taught the Sunday school pupil (and
they certainly ought to be so taught) the occurrence of suppuration,
hectic fever, septicaemia, pyaemia, and surgical erysipelas would be
practically unknown. Death, then, would seldom occur after surgical
operations, except from hemorrhage, shock, or exhaustion.

I have taken the liberty of bringing here a number of culture tubes
containing beautiful specimens of some of the more common and
interesting bacteria. The slimy masses seen on the surfaces of jelly
contained in the tubes are many millions of individual plants, which
have aggregated themselves in various forms as they have been
developed as the progeny of the few parent cells planted in the jelly
as a nutrient medium or soil.

With this feeble plea, Mr. President and members of the Society, I
hope to create a realization of the necessity for knowledge and
interest in the direction of bacteriology; for this is the foundation
of modern surgery. There is, unfortunately, a good deal of abominable
work done under the names of antiseptic and aseptic surgery, because
the simplest facts of bacteriology are not known to the operator.

_Rules to be observed in Operations at Dr. Roberts' Clinic at the
Woman's Hospital of Philadelphia._--After wounds or operations high
temperature usually, and suppuration always, is due to blood
poisoning, which is caused by infection with vegetable parasites
called bacteria.

These parasites ordinarily gain access to the wound from the skin of
the patient, the finger nails or hands of the operator or his
assistants, the ligatures, sutures, or dressings.

Suppuration and high temperature should not occur after operation
wounds if no suppuration has existed previously.

Bacteria exist almost everywhere as invisible particles in the dust;
hence, everything that touches or comes into even momentary contact
with the wound must be germ-free--technically called "sterile."

A sterilized condition of the operator, the assistant, the wound,
instruments, etc., is obtained by removing all bacteria by means of
absolute surgical cleanliness (asepsis), and by the use of those
chemical agents which destroy the bacteria not removed by cleanliness
itself (antisepsis).

Surgical cleanliness differs from the housewife's idea of cleanliness
in that its details seem frivolous, because it aims at the removal of
microscopic particles. Stains, such as housewives abhor, if germ-free,
are not objected to in surgery.

The hands and arms, and especially the finger nails, of the surgeon,
assistants, and nurses should be well scrubbed with hot water and
soap, by means of a nail brush, immediately before the operation. The
patient's body about the site of the proposed operation should be
similarly scrubbed with a brush and cleanly shaved. Subsequently the
hands of the operator, assistants, and nurses, and the field of
operation should be immersed in, or thoroughly washed with, corrosive
sublimate solution (1:1,000 or 1:2,000). Finger rings, bracelets,
bangles, and cuffs worn by the surgeon, assistants, or nurses must be
removed before the cleansing is begun; and the clothing covered by a
clean white apron, large enough to extend from neck to ankles and
provided with sleeves.

The instruments should be similarly scrubbed with hot water and soap,
and all particles of blood and pus from any previous operation removed
from the joints. After this they should be immersed for at least
fifteen minutes in a solution of beta-naphthol (1:2,500), which must
be sufficiently deep to cover every portion of the instruments. After
cleansing the instruments with soap and water, baking in a temperature
a little above the boiling point of water is the best sterilizer.
During the operation the sterilized instruments should be kept in a
beta-naphthol solution and returned to it when the operator is not
using them.

[The antiseptic solutions mentioned here are too irritating for use in
operations within the abdomen and pelvis. Water made sterile by
boiling is usually the best agent for irrigating these cavities, and
for use on instruments and sponges. The instruments and sponges must
be previously well sterilized.]

Sponges should be kept in a beta-naphthol or a corrosive sublimate
solution during the operation. After the blood from the wound has been
sponged away, they should be put in another basin containing the
antiseptic solution, and cleansed anew before being used again. The
antiseptic sutures and ligatures should be similarly soaked in
beta-naphthol solution during the progress of the operation.

No one should touch the wound but the operator and his first
assistant. No one should touch the sponges but the operator, his first
assistant, and the nurse having charge of them. No one should touch
the already prepared ligatures or instruments except the surgeon and
his first or second assistants.

None but those assigned to the work are expected to handle
instruments, sponges, dressings, etc., during the operation.

When any one taking part in the operation touches an object not
sterilized, such as a table, a tray, or the ether towel, he should not
be allowed to touch the instruments, the dressings, or the ligatures
until his hands have been again sterilized. It is important that the
hands of the surgeon, his assistants, and nurses should not touch any
part of his own body, nor of the patient's body, except at the
sterilized seat of operation, because infection may be carried to the
wound. Rubbing the head or beard or wiping the nose requires immediate
disinfection of the hands to be practiced.

The trailing ends of ligatures and sutures should never be allowed to
touch the surgeon's clothing or to drag upon the operating table,
because such contact may occasionally, though not always, pick up
bacteria which may cause suppuration in the wound.

Instruments which fall upon the floor should not be again used until
thoroughly disinfected.

The clothing of the patient, in the vicinity of the part to be
operated upon, and the blanket and sheets used there to keep him warm,
should be covered with dry sublimate towels. All dressings should be
kept safe from infection by being stored in glass jars, or wrapped in
dry sublimate towels.

       *       *       *       *       *




INFLUENCE OF REPOSE ON THE RETINA.


Some interesting researches have lately been published in an Italian
journal concerning the influence of repose on the sensitiveness of the
retina (a nervous network of the eye) to light and color. The
researches in question--those of Bassevi--appear to corroborate
investigations which were made some years ago by other observers. In
the course of the investigations the subject experimented upon was
made to remain in a dark room for a period varying in extent from
fifteen to twenty minutes. The room was darkened, it is noted, by
means of heavy curtains, through which the light could not penetrate.
After the eyes of the subject had thus been rested in the darkness, it
was noted that the sensitiveness of his sight had been increased
threefold. The mere sense of light itself had increased eighteen
times. It was further noted that the sensitiveness to light rays,
after the eye had been rested, was developed in a special order; the
first color which was recognized being red, then followed yellow,
while green and blue respectively succeeded. If color fatigue was
produced in the eye by a glass of any special hue, it was found that
the color in question came last in the series in point of recognition.
The first of these experiments, regarded from a practical point of
view, would appear to consist in an appreciation of the revivifying
power of darkness as regards the sight. The color purple of the retina
is known to become redeveloped in darkness; and it is probable,
therefore, that the alternation of day and night is a physical and
external condition with which the sight of animals is perfectly in
accord.

       *       *       *       *       *




SUN DIALS.


An article on the subject, recently published by us, has gained for us
the communication of two very interesting sun dials, which we shall
describe. The first, which we owe to the kindness of General Jancigny,
is of the type of the circular instrument, of which we explained the
method of using in our preceding article. The hour here is likewise
deduced from the height of the sun converted into a horary angle by
the instrument itself; but the method by which such conversion
operates is a little different. Fig. 1 shows the instrument open for
observation. We find here the meridian circle, M, and the equator E,
of the diagram shown in Fig. 3 (No. 4); but the circle with alidade is
here replaced by a small aperture movable in a slide that is placed in
a position parallel with the axis of the world. Upon this slide are
marked, on one side, the initials of the names of the months and on
the other side the corresponding signs of the zodiac. The sun
apparently describing a circle around the axis, PP¹, the rays passing
through a point of the axis (small aperture of the slide) will travel
over a circular cone around such axis. If, then, the apparatus be so
suspended that the circle, M, shall be in the meridian, the slide
parallel with the earth's axis, and the circle, E, at right angles
with the slide, the pencil of solar light passing through the aperture
will describe, in one day, a cone having the slide for an axis; that
is to say, concentric with the equator circle. If, moreover, the
aperture is properly placed, the luminous pencil will pass through the
equator circle itself; to this effect, the aperture should be in a
position such that the angle, a (Fig. 3, No. 4), may be equal to the
declination of the sun on the day of observation. It is precisely to
this end that the names of the months are inscribed upon the slide....

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--TRAVELER'S SUN DIAL.]

The accessories of the instrument are as follows: A ring with a pivot
for suspending the meridian circle, and the position of which, given
by a division in degrees marked upon this circle, must correspond with
the latitude of the place; two stops serving to fix the position of
the equator circle; finally the latitude of various cities. The
instrument was constructed at Paris, by Butterfield, probably in the
last quarter of the eighteenth century.

The second instrument, which is of the same nature as the cubical sun
dial--that is to say, with horary angle--is, unlike the latter, a true
trinket, as interesting as a work of art as it is as an astronomical
instrument. It is a little mandolin of gilded brass, and is shown of
actual size in Fig. 2. The cover, which is held by a hook, may be
placed in a vertical position, in which it is held by a second hook.
It bears in the interior the date 1612. This is the only explicit
historic datum that this little masterpiece reveals to us. Its maker,
who was certainly an artist, and, as we shall see, also a man of
science, had the modesty not to inscribe his name in it.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--SUN DIAL IN THE FORM OF A MANDOLIN,
CONSTRUCTED IN 1612.]

No. 2 of Fig. 3 represents the instrument open. It rests upon the tail
piece and neck of the mandolin. The cover is exactly vertical. The
bottom of the mandolin is closed by a horizontal silver plate,
beneath which is soldered the box of a compass designed to put the
instrument in the meridian, and carrying upon its face an arrow and
the indications S. OR. M. OC., that is to say, "Septentrion" (north),
"Orient" (east), "Midi" (south), "Occident" (west). One of the ends of
the needle of the compass is straight, while the other is forked. It
is placed in a position in which it completes the arrow, thus
permitting of making a very accurate observation (Fig. 2, No. 3).
Around the compass, the silver plate carries the lines of hours. It is
perfectly adjusted, and held in place by a screw that traverses the
bottom of the instrument. In front of the compass it contains a small
aperture designed to permit of the passage of the indicating thread,
which, at the other end, is fastened to the cover. The silver plate is
not soldered, in order that the thread may be replaced when it chances
to break. On the inner part of the cover are marked in the first place
the horary lines, traversed by curves that are symmetrical with
respect to the vertical and having the aspect of arcs of hyperbolas.
At the extremity of these lines are marked the signs of the zodiac. At
the top, a pretty banderole, which appears at first sight to form a
part of the _ensemble_ of the curves, completes the design. Such is
this wonderful little instrument, in which everything is arranged in
harmonious lines that delight the eye and easily detract one's
attention from a scientific examination of it. Let us enter upon this
drier part of our subject; we shall still have room to wonder, and let
us take up first the higher question.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--DIAGRAM EXPLANATORY OF THE MANDOLIN SUN DIAL.]

Let us consider a horizontal plane (Fig. 3, No. 2)--a plane
perpendicular to the meridian, and a right line parallel with the axis
of the world. Let P be a point upon this line. As we have seen, such
point is the summit of a very wide cone described in one day by the
solar rays. At the equinox this cone is converted into a plane, which,
in a vertical plane, intersects the straight line A B. Between the
vernal and autumnal equinoxes the sun is situated above this plane,
and, consequently, the shadow of P describes the lower curves at A B.
During winter, on the contrary, it is the upper curves that are
described. It is easily seen that the curves traced by the shadow of
the point P are hyperbolas whose convexity is turned toward A B. It
therefore appears evident to us that the thread of our sun dial
carried a knot or bead whose shadow was followed upon the curves. This
shadow showed at every hour of the day the approximate date of the day
of observation. The sun dial therefore served as a calendar. But how
was the position of the bead found? Here we are obliged to enter into
new details. Let us project the figure upon a vertical plane (Fig. 3,
No. 1) and designate by H E the summits of the hyperbolas
corresponding to the winter and summer solstices. If P be the position
of the bead, the angles, P H H¹, P E E¹, will give the height of the
sun above the horizon at noon, at the two solstices. Between these
angles there should exist an angle of 47 deg., double the obliquity of the
ecliptic, that is to say, the excursion of the sun in declination: now
P E E¹-P H H¹ = E P H = 47 deg..

Let us carry, at H and E, the angles, O H E = H E O = 43 deg. = 90 deg.-47 deg.;
the angle at 0 deg. will be equal to 180-86 = 94 deg.. If we trace the
circumference having O for a center, and passing through E and H, each
point, Q, of such circumference will possess the same property as the
angle, H Q E = 47 deg.. The intersection, P, of the circumference with the
straight line, N, therefore gives the position of the bead.

Let us return to our instrument. We have traced upon a diagram the
distance of the points of attachment of the thread, at the
intersection of the planes of projection. We have thus obtained the
position of the line, N S. Then, operating as has just been said, we
have marked the point, P. Now, accurately measuring all the angles, we
have found: N S R = 50 deg.; P H H¹ = 18 deg.; P E E¹ = 65 deg.. The first shows
that the instrument has been constructed for a place on the parallel
of 50 deg., and the others show that, at the solstices, the height of the
sun was respectively 18 deg. and 65 deg., decompounded as follows:

  18 deg. = polar height of the place -231/2 deg..
  65 deg. = "     "      "      "     +231/2 deg..

The polar height of the place where the object was to be observed
would therefore be 411/2 deg., that is to say, its latitude would be 481/2 deg..

Minor views of construction and measurement and the deformations that
the instrument has undergone sufficiently explain the divergence of
11/2 deg. between the two results, which comprise between them the latitude
of Paris.

After doing all the reasoning that we have just given at length, we
have finally found the means by which the hypothetic bead was to be
put in place. A little beyond the curves, a very small but perfectly
conspicuous dot is engraved--the intersection of two lines of
construction that it was doubtless desired to efface, but the scarcely
visible trace of which subsists. Upon measuring with the compasses the
distance between the insertion of the thread and this dot, we find
exactly the distance, N P, of our diagram. Therefore there is no doubt
that this dot served as a datum point. The existence of the bead upon
the thread and the use of it as a rude calendar therefore appears to
be certain.

The compass is to furnish us new indications. After dismounting it--an
operation that the quite primitive enchasing of the face plate renders
very easy--we took a copy of it, which we measured with care. The
arrow forms with the line O C-O R an angle of 90 deg. + 8 deg.. The compass
was therefore constructed in view of an eastern declination of 8 deg..

Now, here is what we know with most certainty as to the magnetic
declination of Paris at the epoch in question:

  Years.     Declinations.
  1550.         8 deg. east.
  1580.        11.30
  1622.         6.30
  1634.         4.16

On causing the curve (Fig. 3, No. 3) to pass through the four points
thus determined, we find, for 1612, the declination 81/2 deg.. This is, with
an approximation closer than that of the measurements that can be made
upon the small compass, the value that we found. From these data as a
whole we draw the two following conclusions: (1) The instrument was
constructed at Paris; and (2) the inventor was accurately posted in
the science of his time.

Certain easily perceived retouchings, moreover, show that this sun
dial is not a copy, but rather an original. We are therefore in an
attitude to claim, as we did at the outset, that the constructor of
this pleasing object was not only an artist, but a man of science as
well.

Let us compare a few dates: In 1612, Galileo and Kepler were still
living. Thirty years were yet to lapse before the birth of Newton.
Modern astronomy was in its tenderest infancy, and remained the
privilege of a few initiated persons.--_C.E. Guillaume, in La Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *

[MIND.]




THE UNDYING GERM PLASM AND THE IMMORTAL SOUL.

By Dr. R. VON LENDENFELD.

[The following article appeared originally, last year, in the German
scientific monthly, _Humboldt_. It, is reproduced here (by
permission)--the English from the hand of Mr. A.E. Shipley--as a
specimen of the kind of general speculation to which modern biology is
giving rise.--EDITOR.]


To Weismann is due the credit of transforming those vague ideas on the
immortality of the germ plasma which have been for some time in the
minds of many scientific men, myself among the number, into a clear
and sharply-defined theory, against the accuracy of which no doubt can
be raised either from the theoretical or from the empirical
standpoint. This theory, defined as it is by Weismann, has but
recently come before us, and some time must elapse before all the
consequences which it entails will be evident. But there is one
direction which I have for some time followed, and indeed began to
think out long before Weismann's remarkable work showed the importance
of this matter. I mean the origin of the conception of the immortal
soul.

Before I approach the solution of this problem, it may be advisable to
recall in a few words to my readers the theory of the immortality of
the germ plasm.

All unicellular beings, such as the protozoa and the simpler algae,
fungi, etc., reproduce themselves by means of simple fission. The
mother organism may split into two similar halves, as the amoeba does,
or, as is more common in the lowest unicellular plants, it may divide
into a great number of small spores. In these processes it often
happens that the whole body of the mother, the entire cell, may
resolve itself into two or more children; at times, however, a small
portion of the mother cell remains unused. This remnant, in the
spore-forming unicellular plants represented by the cell wall, is then
naturally dead.

From this it follows that these unicellular beings are immortal. The
mother cell divides, the daughter cells resulting from the first
division repeat the process, the third generation does the same, and
so on. At each division the mother cell renews its youth and
multiplies, without ever dying.

External circumstances can, of course, at any moment bring about the
death of these unicellular organisms, and in reality almost every
series of beings which originate from one another in this way is
interrupted by death. Some, however, persist. From the first
appearance of living organisms on our planet till to-day, several such
series--at the very least certainly one--have persisted.

The immortality of unicellular beings is not at any time absolute, but
only potential. Weismann has recently directed attention to this
point. External occurrences may at any moment cause the death of an
individual, and in this way interrupt the immortal series; but in the
intimate organization of the living plasma there exist no seeds of
death. The plasma is itself immortal and will in fact live forever,
provided only external circumstances are favorable.

Death is always said to be inherent in the nature of protoplasm. This
is not so. The plasm, as such, is immortal.

But a further complication of great importance affects the
reproduction and the rejuvenescence of these unicellular organisms;
this is the process of conjugation. Two separate cells, distinct
individuals, fuse together. Their protoplasmic bodies not only unite
but intermingle, and their nuclei do likewise; from two individuals
one results. A single cell is thus produced, and this divides. As a
rule this cell seems stronger than the single individual before the
union. The offspring of a double individual, originated in this way,
increase for some time parthenogenetically by simple fission without
conjugation, until at length a second conjugation takes place among
them. I cannot consider further the origin of this universally
important process of conjugation. I will only suggest that a kind of
conjugation may have existed from the very beginning and may have been
determined by the original method of reproduction, if such existed.

At any rate conjugation has been observed in very many plants and
animals, and is possibly universally present in the living world.

Conjugation does not affect the theory of immortality. The double
individual produced from the fusion of two individuals, which divides
and lives on in its descendants, contains the substance of both. The
conjugating cells have in no way died during the process of
conjugation; they have only united.

If we examine a little more closely the history of such a "family" of
unicellular beings from one period of conjugation to the next, we see
that a great number of single individuals, that is, single cells, have
proceeded from the double individual formed by conjugation. These may
all continue to increase by splitting in two, and then the family tree
is composed of dichotomously branching lines; or they may resolve
themselves into numerous spores, and then the family tree exhibits a
number of branches springing from the same point.

The majority of these branches end blindly with the death, caused by
external circumstances, of that individual which corresponds with the
branch. Only a few persist till the next period of conjugation, and
then unite with other individuals and afford the opportunity for
giving rise to a new family tree.

All the single individuals of such a genealogical table belong to one
another, even though they be isolated. Among certain infusoria and
other protista, they do, in fact, remain together and build up
branching colonies. At the end of each branch is situated an
infusorian (vorticella), and the whole colony represents in itself the
genealogical family tree.

In the beginning, there existed no other animal organisms than these
aggregations of similar unicellular beings, all of which reproduced
themselves. Later on, division of labor made its appearance among the
individuals of the animal colony, and it increased their dependence
upon one another, so that their individuality was to a great extent
lost, and they were no longer able to live independently of one
another.

By the development of this process, multicellular metazoa arose from
the colonies of similar protozoa, and at length culminated in the
higher animals and man.

If we examine the human body, its origin and end, in the light of
these facts, we shall see that a comparison between the simple
immortal protozoa and man leads us to the result that man himself, or
at least a part of him and that the most important, is immortal.

When we turn to the starting point of human development, we find an
egg cell and a spermatozoon, which unite and whose nuclei intermingle.
Thus a new cell is produced. This process is similar to the
conjugation of two unicellular beings, such as two acinetiform
infusoria, one of which, the female ([Symbol: Female]), is larger than
the other, the male ([Symbol: Male]). This difference of size in the
conjugating cell is, however, without importance.

From this double cell produced by conjugation many generations of
cells arise by continual cell division in divergent series. Among the
infusoria these are all immortal, but many of them are destroyed, and
only a few persist till conjugation again takes place. The same is the
case with man. Numerous series of cell families arise, which are all
immortal: of these but few--strictly speaking, only one--live till the
next period of conjugation and then give the impulse which results in
the formation of a new diverging series of cells. The difference
between man and the infusorian is only that in the former the cells
which originate from the double cell (the fertilized ovum) remain
together and become differentiated one from another, while in the
latter the cells are usually scattered but remain alike in appearance,
etc.

The seeds of death do not lie, as Weismann appears to assume, in the
differentiation of the cells of the higher animals. On the contrary,
all the cell series, not only those of the reproductive cells, are
immortal. As a matter of fact all must die; not because they
themselves contain the germs of death and have contained them from the
beginning, but because the structure which is built up by them
collectively finally brings about the death of all. The living plasm
in every cell is itself immortal. It is the higher life of the
collective organism which continually condemns countless cells to
death. They die, not because they cannot continue to exist as such but
because conditions necessary for their preservation are no longer
present.

Thus, while the cells are themselves immortal, the whole organism
which they build up is mortal. The complex inter-dependence between
the single cells, which, since they have adapted themselves to
division of labor, has become necessary, carries with it, from the
beginning, the seeds of death. The mutual dependence ceases to work,
and the various cells are killed.

The death of the individual is a consequence of the defective
precision in the working of the division of labor among the cells.
