only two inches will exhibit a curdled or marbled appearance over the
whole solar disk, caused by the intermixture of spaces of different
brightness. And I may add here that Dawes recommends a small aperture
for sun work, including spectroscopic examinations, he himself, like
Mr. Miller, our librarian, preferring to use for that purpose a four
inch refractor.

As you know, the North Star is a most beautiful double. Its companion
is of the ninth order of magnitude, that is, three magnitudes smaller
than the smallest star visible to the naked eye on a dark night. There
was a time when Polaris, as a double, was regarded as an excellent
test for a good three inch telescope; that is any three inch
instrument in which the companion could be seen was pronounced to be
first-class. But so persistently have instruments of small aperture
been improved that that star is no longer an absolute test for three
inch objectives of fine quality, or any first-rate objective exceeding
two inches for which Dawes proposed it as a standard of excellence, he
having found that if the eye and telescope be good, the companion to
Polaris may be seen with such an aperture armed with a power of
eighty. As a matter of fact, Dawes, who was, like Burnham, blessed
with most acute vision, saw the companion with an instrument no larger
than this small one in my hand--one inch and three-tenths. Ward saw it
with an inch and one-quarter objective, and Dawson with so small an
aperture as one inch. T.T. Smith has seen it with a reflector stopped
down to one inch and one-quarter, while in the instrument still known
as the "great Dorpat reflector," it has been seen in broad daylight.
This historic telescope has, I believe, a twelve inch object glass,
but the difficulty of seeing in sunshine so minute a star is such that
the fact may fairly be mentioned here.

Another interesting feature is this. Objects once discovered, though
thought to be visible in large telescopes only, may often be seen in
much smaller ones. The first Herschel said truly that less optical
power will show an object than was required for its discovery. The
rifts, or canals, in the Great Nebula in Andromeda is a case in point,
but two better illustrations may be taken from the planets. Though
Saturn was for many years subjected to most careful scrutiny by
skilled astronomers using the most powerful telescopes in existence,
the crape ring eluded discovery until November, 1850, when it was
independently seen by Dawes, in England, and Bond, in the United
States. Both were capital observers and employed excellent instruments
of large aperture, and it was naturally presumed that only such
instruments could show the novel Saturnian feature. Not so. Once
brought to the attention of astronomers, Webb saw the new ring with
his three and seven-tenths telescope and Ross with an aperture not
exceeding three and three-eighths in diameter. Nay, I am permitted to
say that a venerable member of this society made drawings of it with a
three inch refractor. With a two inch objective, Grover not only saw
the crape ring, but Saturn's belts, as well, and the shadow cast by
the ball of the planet upon its system of rings. Titan, Saturn's
largest moon, is merely a point of light as compared with the planet,
as it appears in a telescope, yet it has been seen, so it is said,
with a one inch glass. The shadow of this satellite, while crossing
the face of Saturn, has been observed by Banks with a two and
seven-eighths objective. By hiding the glare of the planet behind an
occulting bar, some of Saturn's smallest moons were seen by Kitchener
with a two and seven-tenths aperture and by Capron with a two and
three-fourths one. Banks saw four of them with a three and
seven-eighths telescope, Grover two of them with a three and
three-quarter inch, and four inches of aperture will show five of
them, so Webb says. Rhea, Dione and Tethys are more minute than
Japetus, yet Cassini, with his inferior means, discerned them and
traced their periods. Take the instance of Mars next. It was long
believed that Mars had no satellites. But in 1877, during one of the
highly favorable oppositions of that planet which occur but once in
about sixteen years, the able Hall, using the great 26 inch refractor
at Washington, discovered two tiny moons which had never been seen
before. One of these, called Deimos, is only six miles in diameter,
the other, named Phobos, is only seven, and both are exceedingly close
to the primary and in rapid revolution. The diameter of these
satellites is really less than the distance from High Park, on the
west of Toronto, to Woodbine race course, on the east of the city. No
wonder these minute objects--seldom, if ever, nearer to us than about
forty millions of miles--are difficult to see at all. Newcomb and
Holden tell us that they are invisible save at the sixteen year
periods referred to, when it happens that the earth and Mars, in their
respective orbits, approach each other more nearly than at any other
time. But once discovered, the rule held good even in the case of the
satellites of Mars. Pratt has seen Deimos, the outermost moon, with an
eight and one-seventh inch telescope; Erek has seen it with a seven
and one-third inch achromatic; Trouvellot, the innermost one, with a
six and three-tenths glass, while Common believes that any one who can
make out Enceladus, one of Saturn's smallest moons, can see those of
Mars by hiding the planet at or near the elongations, and that even
our own moonlight does not prevent the observations being made. It
chances for the benefit of observers, in the northern hemisphere
especially, that one of the sixteen year periods will culminate in
1893, when Mars will be most advantageously situated for close
examination. No doubt every one will avail himself of the opportunity,
and may we not reasonably hope that scores of amateur observers
throughout the United States and Canada will experience the delight of
seeing and studying the tiny moons of our ruddy neighbor?

And so I might proceed until I had wearied you with illustrations
showing what can be done with telescopes so small that they may fairly
be classed as "common," Webb says that such apertures, with somewhat
high powers, will reveal stars down to the eleventh magnitude. The
interesting celestial objects more conspicuous than stars of that
magnitude are sufficiently numerous to exhaust much more time than any
amateur can give to observing. Indeed, the lot of the amateur is a
happy one. With a good, though small, telescope, he may have for
subjects of investigation the sun with his spots, his faculae, his
prominences and spectra; the moon, a most superb object in nearly
every optical instrument, with her mountains, valleys, seas, craters,
cones, and ever-changing aspects renewed every month, her occupations
of stars, her eclipses, and all that; the planets, some with phases,
and other with markings, belts, rings, and moons with scores of
occupations, eclipses and transits due to their easily observed
rotation around their primaries; the nebulae, the double, triple and
multiple stars with sometimes beautifully contrasted colors, and a
thousand and one other means of amusing and instructing himself.
Nature has opened in the heavens as interesting a volume as she has
opened on the earth, and with but little trouble any one may learn to
read in it.

I trust it has been shown that expensive telescopes are not
necessarily required for practical work. My advice to an intending
purchaser would be to put into the objective for a refractor, or into
the mirror for a reflector, all the money he feels warranted in
spending, leaving the mounting to be done in the cheapest possible
manner consistent with accuracy of adjustment, because it is in the
objective or in the mirror that the _value_ of the telescope alone
resides. In the shops may be found many telescopes gorgeous in
polished tubes and brass mountings which, for effective work, are
absolutely worthless. On this subject, I consulted the most eminent of
all discoverers of double stars, an observer who, even as an amateur,
made a glorious reputation by the work done with a six inch telescope.
I refer to Mr. S.W. Burnham, of the Lick Observatory, who, in reply,
kindly wrote: "You will certainly have no difficulty in making out a
strong case in favor of the use of small telescopes in many
departments of important astronomical work. Most of the early
telescopic work was done with instruments which would now be
considered as inferior to modern instruments, in quality as well as in
size. You are doubtless familiar with much of the amateur work, in
this country and elsewhere, done with comparatively small apertures.
_The most important condition is to have the refractor_, whatever its
size may be, _of the highest optical perfection_, and then the rest
will depend on the zeal and industry of the observer." The italics are
mine.

Incidentally, it may be mentioned that much most interesting work may
be done even with an opera glass, as a few minutes' systematic
observation on any fine night will prove. Newcomb and Holden assure us
that "if Hipparchus had had even such an optical instrument, mankind
need not have waited two thousand years to know the nature of the
Milky Way, nor would it have required a Galilei to discover the phases
of Venus or the spots on the sun." To amplify the thought, if that
mighty geometer and observer and some of his contemporaries had
possessed but the "common telescope," is it not probable that in the
science of astronomy the world would have been to-day two thousand
years in advance of its present position?

       *       *       *       *       *




ARCHAEOLOGICAL DISCOVERIES AT CADIZ.


Those who have had the good fortune to visit Andalusia, that
privileged land of the sun, of light, songs, dances, beautiful girls,
and bull fighters, preserve, among many other poetical and pleasing
recollections, that of election to antique and smiling Cadiz--the
"pearl of the ocean and the silver cup," as the Andalusians say in
their harmonious and imaginative language. There is, in fact, nothing
exaggerated in these epithets, for they translate a true impression.
Especially if we arrive by sea, there is nothing so thrilling as the
dazzling silhouette which, from afar, is reflected all white from the
mirror of a gulf almost always blue.

The Cadiz peninsula has for centuries been legitimately renowned, for,
turn by turn, Phenicians, properly so called, Carthaginians, Romans,
Goths, Arabs and Spaniards have made of it the preferred seat of their
business and pleasure. In his so often unsparing verses, Martial,
even, celebrates with an erotic rapture the undulating suppleness of
the ballet dancers of _Gades_, who are continued in our day by the
_majas_ and _chulas_.

[Illustration: PHENICIAN TOMBS DISCOVERED AT CADIZ.]

For an epoch anterior to that of the Latin poet, we have the
testimony, among others, of Strabo, who describes the splendors,
formerly and for a long time famous, of the temple of Hercules, and
who gives many details, whose accuracy can still be verified,
concerning various questions of topography or ethnography. Thus the
superb tree called _Dracaena draco_ is mentioned as growing in the
vicinity of _Gadeira_, the Greek name of the city. Now, some of these
trees still exist in certain public and private gardens, and attract
so much the more attention in that they are not met with in any other
European country. However, although historically Cadiz finds her title
to nobility on every page of the Greek and Latin authors, and although
her Phenician origin is averred, nowhere has such origin, in a
monumental and epigraphic sense, left fewer traces than in the
Andalusian peninsula. A few short legends, imperfectly read upon
either silver or bronze coins, and that was all, at least up to recent
times. Such penury as this distressed savants and even put them into
pretty bad humor with the Cadiz archaeologists.

To-day, it seems that the ancient Semitic civilization, which has
remained mute for so long in the Iberic territory, is finally willing
to yield up her secret, as is proved by the engravings which we
present to our readers from photographs taken _in situ_. It is
necessary for us to enter into some details.

In 1887 there were met with at the gates of Cadiz, at about five
meters beneath the surface of the earth, three rude tombs of shelly
limestone, in which were found some skeletons, a few small bronze
instruments and some trinkets--the latter of undoubted oriental
manufacture.

In one of these tombs was also inclosed a monolithic sarcophagus of
white marble of the form called anthropoid and measuring 2.15 m. in
length by 0.67 in width. This sarcophagus is now preserved in the
local museum, whose director is the active, intelligent and
disinterested Father Vera. Although this is not the place to furnish
technical or scientific explanations, it will be permitted us to point
out the fact that although it is of essentially oriental manufacture,
our anthropoid has undoubtedly undergone the Hellenistic influence,
which implies an epoch posterior to that of Pericles, who died in 429
B.C. The personage represented, a man of mature age with noble
lineaments and aquiline nose, has thick hair corned up on the forehead
in the form of a crown, and a beard plaited in the Asiatic fashion. As
for the head, which is almost entirely executed in round relief, that
denotes in an undoubted manner the Hellenistic influence, united,
however, with the immutable and somewhat hierarchical traditions of
Phenician art. The arms are naked as far as to the elbow, and the
feet, summarily indicated, emerge from a long sheath-form robe. As for
the arms and hands, they project slightly and are rather outlined than
sculptured. The left hand grasps a fruit, the emblem of fecundity,
while the right held a painted crown, the traces of which have now
entirely disappeared. It suffices to look at this sarcophagus to
recognize the exclusively Phenician character of it, and the complete
analogy with the monuments of the same species met with in Phenicia,
in Cyprus, in Sicily, in Malta, in Sardinia, and everywhere where were
established those of Tyre and Sidon, but never until now in Spain.

On another hand, for those of our readers who are interested in
archaeology, we believe it our duty to point out as a source of
information a memoir published last year by our National Society of
Antiquaries. Let us limit ourselves, therefore, to fixing attention
upon one important point: The marble anthropoid was protected by a
tomb absolutely like the rude tombs contiguous to it.

The successive discoveries since the third of last January at nearly
the same place, and at a depth of from 3 to 6 meters beneath the
surface, of numerous _Inculi_ absolutely identical as to material and
structure with those of which we have just spoken, is therefore a
scientific event of high importance. Those discoveries, which were
purely accidental, were brought about by the work on the foundations
of the Maritime Arsenal now in course of construction at the gates of
Cadiz. Our Fig. 1 represents the unearthing of the _loculi_ on the
14th of April, and on the value of which there is no need to dwell. As
to the dimensions, it is easy to judge of these, since the laborer
standing to the left of the spectator holds in his hand a meter
measure serving as a scale. It will suffice to state that the depth of
each tomb is about two meters, and that upon the lower part of three
of the parallelopipeds there exist pavements of crucial appearance.
Finally, nothing denoted externally the existence of these sarcophagi
jealously hidden from investigation according to a usage that is
established especially by the imprecations graven upon the basaltic
casket now preserved in the Museum of the Louvre, and which contained
the ashes of Eshmanazar, King of Sidon.

[Illustration: ANTHROPOID SARCOPHAGUS DISCOVERED AT CADIZ.]

Space is wanting to furnish ampler information. Our object is simply
to call attention to a zone which is somewhat neglected from a
scientific point of view, and which, however, seems as if it ought to
offer a valuable field of investigation to students of things Semitic,
among whom, as well known, our compatriots hold a rank apart, since it
is to them that falls the laborious and very honorable duty of
collecting and editing the inscriptions in Semitic languages.

On another hand, although in the beginning the sepulchers were taken
to pieces and carried away (two of them imperfectly reconstructed may
be seen in the garden of the Cadizian Museum), there will be an
opportunity of making prevail the system of maintaining _in situ_ the
various monuments that may hereafter be discovered. Thus only could
one, at a given moment, obtain an accurate idea of what the Phenician
necropolis of Cadiz was, and allow the structures that compose it to
preserve their imposing stamp of rustic indestructibility.

The excavation is being carried on at this very moment, and a bronze
statuette of an oriental god and various trinkets of more or less
value have just enriched the municipal collection. Let us hope, then,
as was recently predicted by Mr. Clermont Ganneau, of the Institute,
that some day or another some Semitic inscription will throw a last
ray of light upon the past, which is at present so imperfectly known,
of Phenician Cadiz.--_L'Illustration._

       *       *       *       *       *




PREHISTORIC HORSE IN AMERICA.


_To the Editor of the Scientific American_:

Apropos to Professor Cope's remarks before the A.A.A.S. at Washington,
reported in SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, September 12, inclose sketch of a
mounted man, whether on a horse or some other mammal, is a question
open to criticism.

[Illustration: Height, 43 in.; length, 63 in. San Rafiel del Sur, 1878
Drawn for and forwarded to Peabody Museum--No. 53.]

The figure seems incomplete--whether a cloven foot or toes were
intended, cannot say.

A large fossil horse was exhumed in the marsh north of Granada, when
ditching in 1863. Then Lake Managua's outlet at Fipitapa ceased its
usual supply of water to Lake Nicaragua. When notified of the
discovery the spot was under water. Only one of the very large teeth
was given to me, which was forwarded to Prof. Baird, of
Smithsonian--Private No. 34.

When Lake Nicaragua was an ocean inlet, its track extended to foot
hills northward. Its waterworn pebbles and small bowlders were
subsequently covered by lake deposit, during the time between the
inclosure and break out at San Carlos. In this deposit around the lake
(now dry) fossil bones occur--elephas, megatherium, horse, etc. The
large alluvium plains north of lake, cut through by rivers, allow
these bones to settle on their rocky beds. This deposit is of greater
depth in places west of lake.

Now, if we suppose these animals were exterminated in glacial times,
it remains for us to show when this was consummated.

Subsequent to the lake deposit and exposure no new proofs of its
continuance are found.

1. This deposit occurred after the coast range was elevated.

2. Elevation was caused by a volcanic ash eruption, 5 or 6 of a
series. (Geologically demonstrated in my letters to _Antiquarian_ and
_Science_.)

3. Coast hills inclosed sea sediment, now rock containing fossil
leaves.

4. Wash from this sediment, carried with care, formed layers of
sandstone, up to ceiling.

5. This ceiling was covered with elaborate inscriptions.

6. The inscription sent you was a near neighbor to cave.

7. Another representing a saurian reptile on large granite bowlder is
also a neighbor (a glacial dropping).

8. Old river emptying into Lake Managua reveals fossil bones; moraines
east of it are found.

From these data we see the glacial action was prior to the sedimentary
rock here, and had spent its force when elevation of coast range
occurred. No nearer estimate is possible.

As the fossil horse occurs here, our mounted man may have domesticated
him, and afterward slaughtered for food like the modern Frenchman.
Unfortunately Prof. Cope did not find a similar inscription.

EARL FLINT.
Rivas, Nicaragua, October 27, 1891.

       *       *       *       *       *




FURTHER RESEARCHES UPON THE ELEMENT FLUORINE.

By A.E. TUTTON.


Since the publication by M. Moissan of his celebrated paper in the
_Annales de Chimie et de Physique_ for December, 1887, describing the
manner in which he had succeeded in isolating this remarkable gaseous
element, a considerable amount of additional information has been
acquired concerning the chemical behavior of fluorine, and important
additions and improvements have been introduced in the apparatus
employed for preparing and experimenting with the gas. M. Moissan now
gathers together the results of these subsequent researches--some of
which have been published by him from time to time as contributions to
various French scientific journals, while others have not hitherto
been made known--and publishes them in a long but most interesting
paper in the October number of the _Annales de Chimie et de Physique._
Inasmuch as the experiments described are of so extraordinary a
nature, owing to the intense chemical activity of fluorine, and are so
important as filling a long existing vacancy in our chemical
literature, readers of _Nature_ will doubtless be interested in a
brief account of them.


IMPROVED APPARATUS FOR PREPARING FLUORINE.

In his paper of 1887, the main outlines of which were given in
_Nature_ at the time (1887, vol. xxxvii., p. 179), M. Moissan showed
that pure hydrofluoric acid readily dissolves the double fluoride of
potassium and hydrogen, and that the liquid thus obtained is a good
conductor of electricity, rendering electrolysis possible. It will be
remembered that, by passing a strong current of electricity through
this liquid contained in a platinum apparatus, free gaseous fluorine
was obtained at the positive pole and hydrogen at the negative pole.
The amount of hydrofluoric acid employed in these earlier experiments
was about fifteen grms., about six grms. of hydrogen potassium
fluoride, HF.KF, being added in order to render it a conductor. Since
the publication of that memoir a much larger apparatus has been
constructed, in order to obtain the gas in greater quantity for the
study of its reactions, and important additions have been made, by
means of which the fluorine is delivered in a pure state, free from
admixed vapor of the very volatile hydrofluoric acid. As much as a
hundred cubic centimeters of hydrofluoric acid, together with twenty
grms. of the dissolved double fluoride, are submitted to electrolysis
in this new apparatus, and upward of four liters of pure fluorine is
delivered by it per hour.

This improved form of the apparatus is shown in the accompanying
figure (Fig. 1), which is reproduced from the memoir of M. Moissan. It
consists essentially of two parts--the electrolysis apparatus and the
purifying vessels. The electrolysis apparatus, a sectional view of
which is given in Fig. 2, is similar in form to that described in the
paper of 1887, but much larger.

The U-tube of platinum has a capacity of 160 c.c. It is fitted with
two lateral delivery tubes of platinum, as in the earlier form, and
with stoppers of fluorspar, F, inserted in cylinders of platinum, _p_,
carrying screw threads, which engage with similar threads upon the
interior surfaces of the limbs of the U-tube. A key of brass, E,
serves to screw or unscrew the stoppers, and between the flange of
each stopper and the top of each branch of the U-tube a ring of lead
is compressed, by which means hermetic closing is effected. These
fluorspar stoppers, which are covered with a coating of gum lac during
the electrolysis, carry the electrode rods, _t_, which are thus
perfectly insulated. M. Moissan now employs electrodes of pure
platinum instead of irido-platinum, and the interior end of each is
thickened into a club shape in order the longer to withstand
corrosion. The apparatus is immersed during the electrolysis in a bath
of liquid methyl chloride, maintained in tranquil ebullition at -23 deg..
In order to preserve the methyl chloride as long as possible, the
cylinder containing it is placed in an outer glass cylinder containing
fragments of calcium chloride; by this means it is surrounded with a
layer of dry air, a bad conductor of heat.

The purifying vessels are three in number. The first consists of a
platinum spiral worm-tube of about 40 c.c. capacity, immersed also in
a bath of liquid methyl chloride, maintained at as low a temperature
as possible, about -50 deg.. As hydrofluoric acid boils at 19.5 deg.
(Moissan), almost the whole of the vapor of this substance which is
carried away in the stream of issuing fluorine is condensed and
retained at the bottom of the worm. To remove the last traces of
hydrofluoric acid, advantage is taken of the fact that fused sodium
fluoride combines with the free acid with great energy to form the
double fluoride HF.NaF. Sodium fluoride also possesses the advantage
of not attracting moisture. After traversing the worm condenser,
therefore, the fluorine is caused to pass through two platinum tubes
filled with fragments of fused sodium fluoride, from which it issues
in an almost perfect state of purity. The junctions between the
various parts of the apparatus are effected by means of screw joints,
between the nuts and flanges of which collars of lead are compressed.
During the electrolysis these leaden collars become, where exposed to
the gaseous fluorine, rapidly converted into lead fluoride, which
being greater in bulk causes the joints to become hermetically sealed.
In order to effect the electrolysis, twenty-six to twenty-eight Bunsen
elements are employed, arranged in series. An ampere meter and a
commutator are introduced between the battery and the electrolysis
apparatus; the former affording an excellent indication of the
progress of the electrolysis.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--FLUORINE APPARATUS.]

As the U-tube contains far more hydrofluoric acid than can be used in
one day, each lateral delivery tube is fitted with a metallic screw
stopper, so that the experiments may be discontinued at any time, and
the apparatus closed. The whole electrolysis vessel is then placed
under a glass bell jar containing dry air, and kept in a refrigerator
until again required for use. In this way it may be preserved full of
acid for several weeks, ready at any time for the preparation of the
gas. Considerable care requires to be exercised not to admit the vapor
of methyl chloride into the U-tube, as otherwise violent detonations
