wonderfully into a mass of rolling and ever-changing flame, to speak
according to appearances. First, it was crowded down, as it were,
along the solar surface; later, it arose almost pyramidally 50,000
miles in height; then [Page 88] its summit was drawn down into long
filaments and threads, which were most curiously rolled backward and
forward, like the volutes of an Ionic capital, and finally faded
away, and by half-past two had vanished like the other. The whole
phenomenon suggested most forcibly the idea of an explosion under
the great prominence, acting mainly upward, but also in all
directions outward; and then, after an interval, followed by a
corresponding in-rush."

No language can convey nor mind conceive an idea of the fierce
commotion we here contemplate. If we call these movements hurricanes,
we must remember that what we use as a figure moves but one hundred
miles an hour, while these move one hundred miles a second. Such
storms of fire on earth, "coming down upon us from the north, would,
in thirty seconds after they had crossed the St. Lawrence, be in
the Gulf of Mexico, carrying with them the whole surface of the
continent in a mass not simply of ruins but of glowing vapor, in
which the vapors arising from the dissolution of the materials
composing the cities of Boston, New York, and Chicago would be
mixed in a single indistinguishable cloud." In the presence of
these evident visions of an actual body in furious flame, we need
hesitate no longer in accepting as true the words of St. Peter
of the time "in which the [atmospheric] heavens shall pass away
with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat;
the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burned
up."

This region of discontinuous flame below the corona is called the
chromosphere. Hydrogen is the principal material of its upper part;
iron, magnesium, and other [Page 89] metals, some of them as yet
unknown on earth, but having a record in the spectrum, in the denser
parts below. If these fierce fires are a part of the Sun, as they
assuredly are, its diameter would be from 1,060,000 to 1,260,000
miles.

Let us approach even nearer. We see a clearly recognized even disk,
of equal dimensions in every direction. This is the photosphere.
We here reach some definitely measurable data for estimating its
visible size. We already know its distance. Its disk subtends an
angle of 32' 12".6, or a little more than half a degree. Three
hundred and sixty such suns, laid side by side, would span the
celestial arch from east to west with a half circle of light. Two
lines drawn from our earth at the angle mentioned would be 860,000
miles apart at the distance of 92,500,000 miles. This, then, is
the diameter of the visible and measurable part of the sun. It
would require one hundred and eight globes like the earth in a line
to measure the sun's diameter, and three hundred and thirty-nine,
to be strung like the beads of a necklace, to encircle his waist.
The sun has a volume equal to 1,245,000 earths, but being only
one-quarter as dense, it has a mass of only 326,800 earths. It
has seven hundred times the mass of all the planets, asteroids,
and satellites put together. Thus it is able to control them all
by its greater power of attraction.

Concerning the condition of the surface of the sun many opinions
are held. That it is hot beyond all estimate is indubitable. Whether
solid or gaseous we are not sure. Opinions differ: some incline to
the first theory, others to the second; some deem the sun composed
of solid particles, floating in gas so condensed [Page 90] by
pressure and attraction as to shine like a solid. It has no sensible
changes of general level, but has prodigious activity in spots.
These spots have been the objects of earnest and almost hourly study
on the part of such men as Secchi, Lockyer, Faye, Young, and others,
for years. But it is a long way off to study an object. No telescope
brings it nearer than 200,000 miles. Theory after theory has been
advanced, each one satisfactory in some points, none in all. The
facts about the spots are these: They are most abundant on the two
sides of the equator. They are gregarious, depressed below the
surface, of vast extent, black in the centre, usually surrounded by
a region of partial darkness, beyond which is excessive light. They
have motion of their own over the surface--motion rotating about an
axis, upward and downward about the edges. They change their
apparent shape as the sun carries them across its disk by axial
revolution, being narrow as they present their edges to us, and
rounder as we look perpendicularly into them (Fig. 35).

[Illustration: Fig. 35.--Change in Spots as rotated across the Disk,
showing Cavities.]

These spots are also very variable in number, sometimes there being
none for nearly two hundred days, and again whole years during which
the sun is never without them. The period from minimum to maximum
[Page 91] of spots is about eleven years. We might look for them
again and again in vain this year (1878). They will be most numerous
in 1882 and 1893. The cause of this periodicity was inferred to be
the near approach of the enormous planet Jupiter, causing
disturbance by its attraction. But the periods do not correspond,
and the cause is the result of some law of solar action to us as yet
unknown.

These spots may be seen with almost any telescope, the eye being
protected by deeply colored glasses.

Until within one hundred years they were supposed to be islands of
scoriae floating in the sea of molten matter. But they were depressed
below the surface, and showed a notch when on the edge. Wilson
originated and Herschel developed the theory that the sun's real
body was dark, cool, and habitable, and that the photosphere was
a luminous stratum at a distance from the real body, with openings
showing the dark spots below. Such a sun would have cooled off in
a week, but would previously have annihilated all life below.

The solar spots being most abundant on the two sides of the equator,
indicates their cyclonic character; the centre of a cyclone is
rarefied, and therefore colder, and cold on the sun is darkness.
M. Faye says: "Like our cyclones, they are descending, as I have
proved by a special study of these terrestrial phenomena. They
carry down into the depths of the solar mass the cooler materials
of the upper layers, formed principally of hydrogen, and thus produce
in their centre a decided extinction of light and heat as long as
the gyratory movement continues. Finally, the hydrogen set free
at the base of the whirlpool becomes reheated at this [Page 92]
great depth, and rises up tumultuously around the whirlpool, forming
irregular jets, which appear above the chromosphere. These jets
constitute the protuberances. The whirlpools of the sun, like those
on the earth, are of all dimensions, from the scarcely visible pores
to the enormous spots which we see from time to time. They have,
like those of the earth, a marked tendency, first to increase and
then to break up, and thus form a row of spots extending along the
same parallel."

[Illustration: Fig. 36.--Solar spot, by Langley.]

A spot of 20,000 miles diameter is quite small; there was one 14,816
miles across, visible to the naked eye for a week in 1843. This
particular sun-spot somewhat [Page 93] helped the Millerites. On the
day of the eclipse, in 1858, a spot over 107,000 miles in extent was
clearly seen. In such vast tempests, if there were ships built as
large as the whole earth, they would be tossed like autumn leaves in
an ocean storm.

The revolution of the sun carries a spot across its face in about
fourteen days. After a lapse of as much more time, they often reappear
on the other side, changed but recognizable. They often break ont
or disappear under the eye of the observer. They divide like a
piece of ice dropped on a frozen pond, the pieces sliding off in
every direction, or combine like separate floes driven together
into a pack. Sometimes a spot will last for more than two hundred
days, recognizable through six or eight revolutions. Sometimes
a spot will last only half an hour.

The velocities indicated by these movements are incredible. An
up-rush and down-rush at the sides has been measured of twenty
miles a second; a side-rush or whirl, of one hundred and twenty
miles a second. These tempests rage from a few days to half a year,
traversing regions so wide that our Indian Ocean, the realm of
storms, is too small to be used for comparison; then, as they cease,
the advancing sides of the spots approach each other at the rate of
20,000 miles an hour; they strike together, and the rising spray
of fire leaps thousands of miles into space. It falls again into the
incandescent surge, rolls over mountains as the sea over pebbles, and
all this for eon after eon without sign of exhaustion or diminution.
All these swift succeeding Himalayas of fire, where one hundred
worlds could be buried, do not usually prevent the sun's appearing
to our far-off eyes as a perfect sphere.

[Page 94]
_What the Sun does for us._

To what end does this enormous power, this central source of power,
exist? That it could keep all these gigantic forces within itself
could not be expected. It is in a system where every atom is made
to affect every other atom, and every world to influence every
other. The Author of all lives only to do good, to send rain on
the just and unjust, to cause his sun to rise on the evil and the
good, and to give his spirit, like a perpetually widening river,
to every man to profit withal.

The sun reaches his unrelaxing hand of gravitation to every other
world at every instant. The tendency of every world is to fly off
in a straight line. This tendency must be momentarily curbed, and
the planet held in its true curve about the sun. These giant worlds
must be perfectly handled. Their speed, amounting to seventy times
as fast as that of a rifle-ball, must be managed. Each and every
world may be said to be lifted momentarily and swung perpetually
at arm's-length by the power of the sun.

The sun warms us. It would convey but a small idea of the truth
to state how many hundreds of millions of cubic miles of ice could
be hailed at the sun every second without affecting its heat; but,
if any one has any curiosity to know, it is 287,200,000 cubic miles
of ice per second.

We journey through space which has a temperature of 200 deg. below
zero; but we live, as it were, in a conservatory, in the midst of
perpetual winter. We are roofed over by the air that treasures the
heat, floored under by strata both absorptive and retentive of heat,
[Page 95] and between the earth and air violets grow and grains
ripen. The sun has a strange chemical power. It kisses the cold
earth, and it blushes with flowers and matures the fruit and grain.
We are feeble creatures, and the sun gives us force. By it the light
winds move one-eighth of a mile an hour, the storm fifty miles, the
hurricane one hundred. The force is as the square of the velocity.
It is by means of the sun that the merchant's white-sailed ships are
blown safely home. So the sun carries off the miasma of the marsh,
the pollution of cities, and then sends the winds to wash and
cleanse themselves in the sea-spray. The water-falls of the earth
turn machinery, and make Lowells and Manchesters possible, because
the sun lifted all that water to the hills.

Intermingled with these currents of air are the currents of electric
power, all derived from the sun. These have shown their swiftness
and willingness to serve man. The sun's constant force displayed
on the earth is equal to 543,000,000,000 engines of 400-horse power
each, working day and night; and yet the earth receives only
1/21500000000 part of the whole force of the sun.

Besides all this, the sun, with provident care, has made and given
to us coal. This omnipotent worker has stored away in past ages
an inexhaustible reservoir of his power which man may easily mine
and direct, thus releasing himself from absorbing toil.

EXPERIMENTS.

Any one may see the spots on the sun who has a spy-glass. Darken
the room and put the glass through an opening toward the sun, as
shown in Fig. 37. The eye-piece should be drawn out about half
an inch beyond [Page 96] its usual focusing for distant objects. The
farther it is drawn, the nearer must we hold the screen for a
perfect image.

By holding a paper near the eye-piece, the proper direction of
the instrument may be discovered without injury to the eyes. By
this means the sun can be studied from day to day, and its spots or
the transits of Mercury and Venus shown to any number of spectators.

[Illustration: Fig. 37.--Holding Telescope to see the Sun's Spots.]

First covering the eyes with very dark or smoked glasses, erect
a disk of pasteboard four inches in diameter between you and the
sun; close one eye; stand near it, and the whole sun is obscured.
Withdraw from it till the sun's rays just shoot over the edge of
the disk on every side. Measure the distance from the eye to the
disk. You will be able to determine the distance of the sun by
the rule of three: thus, as four inches is to 860,000 miles, so
is distance from eye to disk to distance from disk to the sun.
Take such measurements at sunrise, noon, and sunset, and see the
apparently differing sizes due to refraction.




[Page 97]
VI.

THE PLANETS, AS SEEN FROM SPACE.

"He hangeth the earth upon nothing."--_Job_ xxvi. 7.

[Page 98]
"Let a power be delegated to a finite spirit equal to the projection
of the most ponderous planet in its orbit, and, from an exhaustless
magazine, let this spirit select his grand central orb. Let him with
puissant arm locate it in space, and, obedient to his mandate, there
let it remain forever fixed. He proceeds to select his planetary
globes, which he is now required to marshal in their appropriate
order of distance from the sun. Heed well this distribution; for
should a single globe be misplaced, the divine harmony is destroyed
forever. Let us admit that finite intelligence may at length determine
the order of combination; the mighty host is arrayed in order.
These worlds, like fiery coursers, stand waiting the command to
fly. But, mighty spirit, heed well the grand step, ponder well
the direction in which thou wilt launch each wailing world; weigh
well the mighty impulse soon to be given, for out of the myriads
of directions, and the myriads of impulsive forces, there comes
but a single combination that will secure the perpetuity of your
complex scheme. In vain does the bewildered finite spirit attempt
to fathom this mighty depth. In vain does it seek to resolve the
stupendous problem. It turns away, and while endued with omnipotent
power, exclaims, 'Give to me infinite wisdom, or relieve me from
the impossible task!'"-0. M. MITCHEL, LL. D.




[Page 99]
VI.

_THE PLANETS, AS SEEN FROM SPACE_

If we were to go out into space a few millions of miles from either
pole of the sun, and were endowed with wonderful keenness of vision,
we should perceive certain facts, viz: That space is frightfully
dark except when we look directly at some luminous body. There is
no air to bend the light out of its course, no clouds or other
objects to reflect it in a thousand directions. Every star is a
brilliant point, even in perpetual sunshine. The cold is frightful
beyond the endurance of our bodies. There is no sound of voice in
the absence of air, and conversation by means of vocal organs being
impossible, it must be carried on by means of mind communication.
We see below an unrevolving point on the sun that marks its pole.
Ranged round in order are the various planets, each with its axis
pointing in very nearly the same direction. All planets, except
possibly Venus, and all moons except those of Uranus and Neptune,
present their equators to the sun. The direction of orbital and
axial revolution seen from above the North Pole would be opposite
to that of the hands of a watch.

[Illustration: Fig. 38.--Orbits and Comparative Sizes of the Planets.]

The speed of this orbital revolution must be proportioned to the
distance from the sun. The attraction of the sun varies inversely
as the square of the distance. [Page 100] It holds a planet with a
certain power; one twice as far off, with one-fourth that power.
This attraction must be counterbalanced by centrifugal force; great
force from great speed when attraction is great, and small from less
[Page 101] speed when attractive power is diminished by distance.
Hence Mercury must go 29.5 miles per second--seventy times as fast
as a rifle-ball that goes two-fifths of a mile in a second--or be
drawn into the sun; while Neptune, seventy-five times as far off,
and hence attracted only 1/5626 as much, must be slowed down to 3.4
miles a second to prevent its flying away from the feebler
attraction of the sun. The orbital velocity of the various planets
in miles per second is as follows:

  Mercury  29.55  |  Jupiter  8.06
  Venus    21.61  |  Saturn   5.95
  Earth    18.38  |  Uranus   4.20
  Mars     14.99  |  Neptune  3.36

Hence, while the earth makes one revolution in its year, Mercury
has made over four revolutions, or passed through four years; the
slower Neptune has made only 1/164 of one revolution.

The time of axial revolution which determines the length of the
day varies with different planets. The periods of the four planets
nearest the sun vary only half an hour from that of the earth,
while the enormous bodies of Jupiter and Saturn revolve in ten
and ten and a quarter hours respectively. This high rate of speed,
and its resultant, centrifugal force, has aided in preventing these
bodies from becoming as dense as they would otherwise be--Jupiter
being only 0.24 as dense as the earth, and Saturn only 0.13. This
extremely rapid revolution produces a great flattening at the poles.
If Jupiter should rotate four times more rapidly than it does, it
could not be held together compactly. As it is, the polar diameter
is five thousand miles less than the equatorial: the difference
in diameters produced by the [Page 102] same cause on the earth,
owing to the slower motion and smaller mass, being only twenty-six
miles. The effect of this will be more specifically treated
hereafter.

The difference in the size of the planets is very noticeable. If
we represent the sun by a gilded globe two feet in diameter, we
must represent Vulcan and Mercury by mustard-seeds; Venus, by a
pea; Earth, by another; Mars, by one-half the size; Asteroids, by
the motes in a sunbeam; Jupiter, by a small-sized orange; Saturn,
by a smaller one; Uranus, by a cherry; and Neptune, by one a little
larger.

Apply the principle that attraction is in proportion to the mass,
and a man who weighs one hundred and fifty pounds on the earth
weighs three hundred and ninety-six on Jupiter, and only fifty-eight
on Mars; while on the Asteroids he could play with bowlders for
marbles, hurl hills like Milton's angels, leap into the fifth-story
windows with ease, tumble over precipices without harm, and go
around the little worlds in seven jumps.

[Illustration: Fig. 39.--Orbit of Earth, showing Parallelism of
Axis and Seasons.]

The seasons of a planet are caused by the inclination of its axis
to the plane of its orbit. In Fig. 39 the rotating earth is seen
at A, with its northern pole turning in constant sunlight, and
its southern pole in constant darkness; everywhere south of the
equator is more darkness than day, and hence winter. Passing on
to B, the world is seen illuminated equally on each side of the
equator. Every place has its twelve hours' darkness and light at
each revolution. But at C--the axis of the earth always preserving
the same direction--the northern pole is shrouded in continual
gloom. Every place [Page 105] north of the equator gets more
darkness than light, and hence winter.

The varying inclination of the axes of the different planets gives
a wonderful variety to their seasons. The sun is always nearly
over the equator of Jupiter, and every place has nearly its five
hours day and five hours night. The seasons of Earth, Mars, and
Saturn are so much alike, except in length, that no comment is
necessary. The ice-fields at either pole of Mars are observed to
enlarge and contract, according as it is winter or summer there.
Saturn's seasons are each seven and a half years long. The alternate
darkness and light at the poles is fifteen years long.

But the seasons of Venus present the greatest anomaly, if its assigned
inclination of axis (75 deg.) can be relied on as correct, which is
doubtful. Its tropic zone extends nearly to the pole, and at the
same time the winter at the other pole reaches the equator. The
short period of this planet causes it to present the south pole to
the sun only one hundred and twelve days after it has been scorching
the one at the north. This gives two winters, springs, summers, and
autumns to the equator in two hundred and twenty-five days.
