Daniell's battery. In both cases, he obtained on the platinum wires a
black powder, in which were found very small octohedral crystals,
having the property of polishing rubies rapidly and perfectly--a
property characteristic of diamonds.

The use of voltaic apparatus of high tension has allowed Mr. Cross to
form a large number of mineral substances artificially, and among
these we may mention carbonate of lime, arragonite, quartz, arseniate
of copper, crystalline sulphur, etc.

As regards products formed with the concurrence of electricity
(oxides, sulphides, chlorides, iodides, etc.), see "Des Forces
Physico-Chimiques," by Becquerel (p. 231).

There is no doubt as to the part played by electricity in the chemical
effects of electro-metallurgy, but it will not prove useless for our
subject to remark that when, in this operation, the current has become
too weak, the deposit of metal, instead of forming in a thin,
adherent, and uniform layer, sometimes occurs under the form of
protuberances and crystalline, brittle nodules. When, on the contrary,
the current is very strong, the deposit is pulverulent, that is, in a
confused crystallization or in an amorphous state.

Further along, we shall find an application of this remark. We obtain,
moreover, all the intermediate effects of cohesion, form, and color of
galvanic deposits.

When, into a solution of acetate of lead, we pass a current through
two platinum electrodes, we observe the formation, at the negative
pole, of numerous arborizations of metallic lead that grow under the
observer's eye (Fig. 1). The phenomenon is of a most interesting
character when, by means of solar or electric light, we project these
brilliant vegetations on a screen. One might believe that he was
witness of the rapid growth of a plant (Fig. 2). The same phenomenon
occurs none the less brilliantly with a solution of nitrate of silver.
A large number of saline solutions are adapted to these
decompositions, in which the metal is laid bare under a crystalline
form. Further along we shall see another means of producing analogous
ramifications, without the direct use of the electric current.--_C.
Decharme, in La Lumiere Electrique._

       *       *       *       *       *




ELECTRIC TIME.

By M. LIPPMANN.


The unit of time universally adopted, the second, undergoes only very
slow secular variations, and can be determined with a precision and an
ease which compel its employment. Still it is true that the second is
an arbitrary and a variable unit--arbitrary, in as far as it has no
relation with the properties of matter, with physical constants;
variable, since the duration of the diurnal movement undergoes causes
of secular perturbation, some of which, such as the friction of the
tides, are not as yet calculable.

We may ask if it is possible to define an absolutely invariable unit
of time; it would be desirable to determine with sufficient precision,
if only once in a century, the relation of the second to such a unit,
so that we might verify the variations of the second indirectly and
independently of any astronomical hypothesis.

Now, the study of certain electrical phenomena furnishes a unit of
time which is absolutely invariable, as this magnitude is a specific
constant. Let us consider a conductive substance which may always be
found identical with itself, and to fix our ideas let us choose
mercury, taken at the temperature of 0 deg. C., which completely fulfills
this condition. We may determine by several methods the specific
electric resistance, [rho], of mercury in absolute electrostatic
units; [rho] is a specific property of mercury, and is consequently a
magnitude absolutely invariable. Moreover, [rho] is _an interval of
time_. We might, therefore, take [rho] as a unit of time, unless we
prefer to consider this value as an imperishable standard of time.

In fact, [rho] is not simply a quantity the measure of which is found
to be in relation with the measure of time. It is a concrete interval
of time, disregarding every convention established with reference to
measures and every selection of unit. It may at first sight, appear
singular that an interval of time is found in a manner hidden under
the designation _electric resistance_. But we need merely call to mind
that in the electrostatic system the intensities of the current are
speeds of efflux and that the resistances are times, i.e., the times
necessary for the efflux of the electricity under given conditions. We
must, in particular, remember what is meant by the specific
resistance, [rho] of mercury in the electrostatic system. If we
consider a circuit having a resistance equal to that of a cube of
mercury, the side of which = the unit of length, the circuit being
submitted to an electromotive force equal to unity, this circuit will
take a given time to be traversed by the unit quantity of electricity,
and this time is precisely [rho]. It must be remarked that the
selection of the unit of length, like that of the unit of mass, is
indifferent, for the different units brought here into play depend on
it in such a manner that [rho] is not affected.

It is now required to bring this definition experimentally into
action, i.e., to realize an interval of time which may be a known
multiple of [rho]. This problem may be solved in various ways,[1] and
especially by means of the following apparatus.

   [Footnote 1: In this system the measurement of time is not
    effected, as ordinarily, by observing the movements of a
    material system, but by experiments of equilibrium. All the
    parts of the apparatus remain immovable, the electricity alone
    being in motion. Such appliances are in a manner clepsydrae. This
    analogy with the clepsydrae will be perceived if we consider the
    form of the following experiment: Two immovable metallic plates
    constitute the armatures of a charged condenser, and attract
    each other with a force, F. If the plates are insulated, these
    charges remain constant, as well as the force, F. If, on the
    contrary, we connect the armatures of resistance, R, their
    charges diminish and the force, F, becomes a function of the
    time, _t_; the time, _t_, inversely becomes a function of P. We
    find _t_ by the following formula:

        t = [rho] x (lS / S[pi]es) x log hyp(F0/F)

    F0 and F being the values of the force at the beginning and
    at the end of the time, _t_. The above formula is independent of
    the choice of units. If we wish _t_ to be expressed in seconds,
    we must give [rho] the corresponding value ([rho] = 1.058 X
    10^-16). If we take [rho] as a unit we make [rho] = 1, and we
    find the absolute value of the time by the expression:

        (lS) / (8[pi]es) log hyp(F0/F)

    We remark that this expression of time contains only abstract
    numbers, being independent of the choice of the units of length
    and force. S and _e_ denote surface and the thickness of the
    condenser; _s_ and _l_ the section and the length of a column of
    mercury of the resistance, R. This form of apparatus enables us
    practically to measure the notable values of _t_ only if the
    value of the resistance, R, is enormous, the arrangement
    described in the text has not the same inconvenience.]

A battery of an arbitrary electromotive force, E, actuates at the same
time the two antagonistic circuits of a differential galvanometer. In
the first circuit, which has a resistance, R, the battery sends a
continuous current of the intensity, I; in the second circuit the
battery sends a discontinuous series of discharges, obtained by
charging periodically by means of the battery a condenser of the
capacity, C, which is then discharged through this second circuit. The
needle of the galvanometer remains in equilibrium if the two currents
yield equal quantities of electricity during one and the same time,
[tau].

Let us suppose this condition of equilibrium realized and the needle
remaining motionless at zero; it is easy to write the conditions of
equilibrium. During the time, [tau], the continuous current yields a
                           E
quantity of electricity = -- [tau]; on the other hand, each charge of
                           R
the condenser = CE, and during the time, [tau], the number of
             [tau]
discharges = -----, t being the fixed time between two discharges;
               t
[tau] and t are here supposed to be expressed by the aid of an
arbitrary unit of time; the second circuit yields, therefore, a
                                      [tau]
quantity of electricity equal to CE x -----. The condition of
                                        t
                      E              [tau]
equilibrium is then  ---[tau] = CE x ----- ; or, more simply, t = CR.
                      R                t
C and R are known in absolute values, i.e., we know that C is equal to
_p_ times the capacity of a sphere of the radius, _l_; we have,
therefore, C = _pl_; in the same manner we know that R is equal to _q_
times the resistance of a cube of mercury having l for its side. We
                             l      [rho]
have, therefore, R = q[rho] --- = q ----- ; and consequently t = pq[rho].
                             l squared       l

Such is the value of _t_ obtained on leaving all the units
undetermined. If we express [rho] as a function of the second, we have
_t_ in seconds. If we take [rho] = 1, we have the absolute value
[Theta] of the same interval of time as a function of this unit; we
have simply [Theta] = _pq_.

If we suppose that the commutator which produces the successive
charges and discharges of the condenser consists of a vibrating tuning
fork, we see that the duration of a vibration is equal to the product
of the two abstract numbers, _pq_.

It remains for us to ascertain to what degree of approximation we can
determine _p_ and _q_. To find _q_ we must first construct a column of
mercury of known dimensions; this problem was solved by the
International Bureau of Weights and Measures for the construction of
the legal ohm. The legal ohm is supposed to have a resistance equal to
106.00 times that of a cube of mercury of 0.01 meter, side
measurement. The approximation obtained is comprised between 1/50000
and 1/200000. To obtain _p_, we must be able to construct a plane
condenser of known capacity. The difficulty here consists in knowing
with a sufficient approximation the thickness of the stratum of air.
We may employ as armatures two surfaces of glass, ground optically,
silvered to render them conductive, but so slightly as to obtain by
transparence Fizeau's interference rings. Fizeau's method will then
permit us to arrive at a close approximation. In fine, then, we may,
_a priori_, hope to reach an approximation of one hundred-thousandth
of the value of _pq_.

Independently of the use which may be made of it for measuring time in
absolute value, the apparatus described possesses peculiar properties.
It constitutes a kind of clock which indicates, registers, and, if
needful, corrects automatically its own variations of speed. The
apparatus being regulated so that the magnetic needle may be at zero,
if the speed of the commutator is slightly increased, the equilibrium
is disturbed and the magnetic needle deviates in the corresponding
direction; if on the contrary the speed diminishes, the action of the
antagonistic circuit predominates, and the needle deviates in the
contrary direction. These deviations, when small, are proportional to
the variations of speed. They may be, in the first place, observed.
They may, further, be registered, either photographically or by
employing a Redier apparatus, like that which M. Mascart has adapted
to his quadrant electrometer; finally, we may arrange the Redier to
react upon the speed so as to reduce its variations to zero. If these
variations are not completely annulled, they will still be registered
and can be taken into account.

As an indicator of variations this apparatus can be of remarkable
sensitiveness, which may be increased indefinitely by enlarging its
dimensions.

With a battery of 10 volts, a condenser of a microfarad, 10 discharges
per second, and a Thomson's differential galvanometer sensitive to
10^{-10} amperes, we obtain already a sensitiveness of 1/1000000,
i.e., a variation of 1/1000000 in the speed is shown after some
seconds of a deviation of one millimeter. Even the stroboscopic method
does not admit of such sensitiveness.

We may therefore find, with a very close approximation, a speed always
the same on condition that the solid parts of the apparatus (the
condenser and the resistance) are protected from causes of variation
and used always at the same temperature. Doubtless, a well-constructed
astronomical clock maintains a very uniform movement; but the electric
clock is placed in better conditions for invariability, for all the
parts are massive and immovable; they are merely required to remain
unchanged, and there is no question of the wear and tear of
wheel-work, the oxidation of oils, or the variations of weight. In
other words, the system formed by a condenser and a resistance
constitutes a standard of time easy of preservation.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW METHOD OF MAINTAINING THE VIBRATION OF A PENDULUM.


A recent number of the _Comptes Rendus_ contains a note by M.J.
Carpentier describing a method of maintaining the vibrations of a
pendulum by means of electricity, which differs from previous devices
of the same character in that the impulse given to the pendulum at
each vibration is independent of the strength of the current employed,
and that the pendulum itself is entirely free, save at the point of
suspension. The vibrations are maintained, not by direct impulsion,
but by a slight horizontal displacement of the point of suspension in
alternate directions.

This, as M. Carpentier observes, is the method which we naturally
adopt in order to maintain the amplitude of swing of a heavy body
suspended from a cord held in the hand. The required movement of the
point of suspension is effected by means of a polarized relay, through
the coils of which the current is periodically reversed by the action
of the pendulum, in a manner which will presently be explained. The
armature of the relay oscillates between two stops whose distance
apart is capable of fine adjustment.

It is clear, therefore, that the impulse is independent of the
strength of the current in the relay, provided that the armature is
brought up to the stop on either side. The reversal of the current is
effected by means of a small magnet carried by the bob of the
pendulum, and which as it passes underneath the point of suspension is
brought close to a soft iron armature, which has the form of an arc of
a circle described about the point of suspension. This armature is
pivoted at its center, and thus executes vibrations synchronously with
those of the pendulum. These vibrations are adjusted to a very narrow
range, but are sufficient to close the contacts of a commutator which
reverses the current at each semi-vibration of the pendulum.

The beauty and ingenuity of this device will readily be appreciated.

       *       *       *       *       *




DR. MORELL MACKENZIE.


The name of the great English laryngologist, which has long been
honored by scientists of England and the Continent, has lately become
familar to everyone, even in unprofessional circles, in Germany
because of his operations on the Crown Prince's throat. If his wide
experience and great skill enable him to permanently remove the growth
from the throat of his royal patient, if his diagnosis and prognosis
are confirmed, so that no fear need be entertained for the life and
health of the Crown Prince, the English specialist will certainly
deserve the most sincere thanks of the German nation. Every phase of
this treatment, every new development, is watched with suspense and
hope.

Many have been unable to suppress the expression of regret that this
important case was not under the care of a German, and part of the
press look upon it as unjust treatment of the German specialists. But
science is international, it knows no political boundaries, and the
choice of Dr. Mackenzie by the family of the Crown Prince, whose
sympathy with England is natural, cannot be considered a slight to
German physicians when it is taken into consideration that the German
authorities pronounced the growth suspicious and advised a difficult
and doubtful operation, and that Prof. v. Bergman recommended that a
foreign authority be consulted. As Dr. Mackenzie removed the
obstruction, which had already become threatening and, in fact,
dangerous, causing a loss of voice, and promised to remove any new
growth from the inside without danger to the patient, the Crown Prince
naturally trusted him. Since Virchow has made a microscopic examination
of the part which was cut away, and has declared the new growth to be
benign, all Germans should watch the results of Dr. Mackenzie's
operations with sympathy, trusting that all further growth will be
prevented, and that the Crown Prince will be restored to the German
people in his former state of health.

[Illustration: DR. MORELL MACKENZIE.]

Dr. Morell Mackenzie has lately reached his fiftieth year, and has
attained the height of his fame as an author and practitioner. He was
born at Leytonston in 1837, and studied first in London. At the age
of twenty-two he passed his examination, then practiced as physician
in the London Hospital, and obtained his degree in 1862. A year later
he received the Jackson prize from the Royal Society of Surgeons for
his treatment of a laryngeal case.

He completed his studies in Paris, Vienna (with Siegmund), and
Budapest. In the latter place he worked with Czermak, making a special
study of the laryngoscope. Later he published an excellent work on
"Diseases of the Throat and Nose," which was the fruit of twelve
years' work. The evening before the day on which this work was to have
been issued, the whole edition was destroyed by a fire which occurred
in the printing establishment, and had to be reprinted from the proof
sheets, which were saved. In 1870 his work "On Growths in the Throat"
appeared, and he has also published many articles in the _British
Medical Journal_, the _Lancet_, _Medical Times and Gazette_, etc.,
which have been translated into different languages, making his name
renowned all over Europe.

Since he founded the first English hospital for diseases of the throat
and chest, in London in 1863, and held the position of lecturer on
diseases of the throat in the London Medical College, his career has
been watched with interest by the public, and his practice in England
is remarkable. Therefore it is no wonder that his lately published
work "On the Hygiene of the Vocal Organs" has reached its fourth
edition already. This work is read not only by physicians, but also by
singers and lecturers.

As a learned man in his profession, as an experienced diagnostician,
and as a skillful and fortunate practitioner, he is surpassed by none;
and his ability will be well known far beyond the borders of Great
Britain if fortune favors him and he restores the future Emperor of
Germany to his former strength and vigor, without which we cannot
imagine this knightly form. The certainty with which Dr. Mackenzie
speaks of permanent cures which he has effected in similar cases,
together with the clear and satisfactory report of the great
pathologist Virchow, lead us to look to the future with
confidence.--_Illustrirte Zeitung._

       *       *       *       *       *




HYPNOTISM IN FRANCE.[1]

  [Footnote 1: Translated for _Science_ from _Der Spinx_.]


The voluntary production of those abnormal conditions of the nerves
which to-day are denoted by the term "hypnotic researches" has
manifested itself in all ages and among most of the nations that are
known to us. Within modern times these phenomena were first reduced to
a system by Mesmer, and, on this account, for the future deserve the
attention of the scientific world. The historical description of this
department, if one intends to give a connected account of its
development, and not a series of isolated facts, must begin with a
notice of Mesmer's personality, and we must not confound the more
recent development of our subject with its past history.

The period of mesmerism is sufficiently understood from the numerous
writings on the subject, but it would be a mistake to suppose that in
Braid's "Exposition of Hypnotism" the end of this subject had been
reached. In a later work I hope to show that the fundamental ideas of
biomagnetism have not only had in all periods of this century capable
and enthusiastic advocates, but that even in our day they have been
subjected to tests by French and English investigators from which they
have issued triumphant.

The second division of this historical development is carried on by
Braid, whose most important service was emphasizing the subjectivity
of the phenomena. Without any connection with him, and yet by
following out almost exactly the same experiments, Professor
Heidenhain reached his physiological explanations. A third division is
based upon the discovery of the hypnotic condition in animals, and
connects itself to the _experimentum mirabile_. In 1872 the first
writings on this subject appear from the pen of the physiologist
Czermak; and since then the investigations have been continued,
particularly by Professor Preyer.

While England and Germany were led quite independently to the study of
the same phenomena, France experienced a strange development, which
shows, as nothing else could, how truth everywhere comes to the
surface, and from small beginnings swells to a flood which carries
irresistibly all opposition with it. This fourth division of the
history of hypnotism is the more important, because it forms the
foundation of a transcendental psychology, and will exert a great
influence upon our future culture; and it is this division to which we
wish to turn our attention. We have intentionally limited ourselves to
a chronological arrangement, since a systematic account would
necessarily fall into the study of single phenomena, and would far
exceed the space offered to us.

James Braid's writings, although they were discussed in detail in
Littre and Robin's "Lexicon," were not at all the cause of Dr.
Philips' first books, who therefore came more independently to the
study of the same phenomena. Braid's theories became known to him
later by the observations made upon them in Beraud's "Elements of
Physiology" and in Littre's notes in the translation of Mueller's
"Handbook of Physiology;" and he then wrote a second brochure, in
which he gave in his allegiance to braidism. His principal effort was
directed to withdrawing the veil of mystery from the occurrences, and
by a natural explanation relegating them to the realm of the known.
The trance caused by regarding fixedly a gleaming point produces in
the brain, in his opinion, an accumulation of a peculiar nervous
power, which he calls "electrodynamism." If this is directed in a
skillful manner by the operator upon certain points, it manifests
itself in certain situations and actions that we call hypnotic. Beyond
this somewhat questionable theory, both books contained a detailed
description of some of the most important phenomena; but with the
practical meaning of the phenomena, and especially with their
therapeutic value, the author concerned himself but slightly. Just on
account of this pathological side, however, a certain attention has
been paid to hypnotism up to the present time.

In the year 1847 two surgeons in Poictiers, Drs. Ribaut and Kiaros,
employed hypnotism with great success in order to make an operation
painless. "This long and horrible work," says a journal of the day,
"was much more like a demonstration in a dissecting room than an
operation performed upon a living being." Although this operation
produced such an excitement, yet it was twelve years later before
decisive and positive official intelligence was given of these facts
by Broca, Follin, Velpeau, and Guerinau. But these accounts, as well
as the excellent little book by Dr. Azam, shared the fate of their
predecessors. They were looked upon by students with distrust, and by
the disciples of Mesmer with scornful contempt.

The work of Demarquay and Giraud Teulon showed considerable advance in
this direction. The authors, indeed, fell back upon the theory of
James Braid, which they called stillborn, and of which they said,
"_Elle est restee accrochee en route_;" but they did not satisfy
themselves with a simple statement of facts, as did Gigot Suard in his
work that appeared about the same time. Through systematic experiments
they tried to find out where the line of hypnotic phenomena intersected
the line of the realm of the known. They justly recognized that
hypnotism and hysteria have many points of likeness, and in this way
were the precursors of the present Parisian school. They say that from
magnetic sleep to the hypnotic condition an iron chain can be easily
formed from the very same organic elements that we find in historical
conditions.

At the same time, as if to bring an experimental proof of this
assertion, Lasigue published a report on catalepsy in persons of
hysterical tendencies, which be afterward incorporated into his larger
work. Among his patients, those who were of a quiet and lethargic
temperament, by simply pressing down the eyelids, were made to enter
into a peculiar state of languor, in which cataleptic contractions
were easily produced, and which forcibly recalled hypnotic phenomena.
"One can scarcely imagine," says the author, "a more remarkable
spectacle than that of a sick person sunk in deep sleep, and
insensible to all efforts to arouse him, who retains every position in
which he is placed, and in it preserves the immobility and rigidity of
a statue." But this impulse also was in vain, and in only a few cases
were the practical tests followed up with theoretical explanations.
