production of the great _tide wave_. Thus the mean force of the moon,
as compared with that of the sun, is as 21/4 to 1.

The attractive force of the moon is most strongly felt by those parts
of the ocean over which she is vertical, and they are, consequently,
drawn toward her. In the same manner, the influence of the luminary
being less powerfully exerted on the waters furthest from her than on
the earth itself, they must remain behind. By these means, at the two
opposite sides of the earth, in the direction of the straight line
between the centers of the earth and moon, the waters are
simultaneously raised above their mean level; and the moon, in her
progressive westerly motion, as she comes to each meridian in
succession, causes two uprisings of the water--two high tides--the one
when she passes the meridian above, the other when she crosses it
below; and this is done, not by drawing after her the water first
raised, but by raising continually that under her at the time; this is
the _tide wave_. In a similar manner (from causes already referred to)
the sun produces two tides of much smaller dimensions, and the joint
effect of the action of the two luminaries is this, that instead of
four separate tides resulting from their separate influence, the _sun
merely alters the form of the wave raised by the moon_; or, in other
words, the greater of the two waves (which is due to the moon) is
modified in its height by the smaller (sun's) wave. When the summit of
the two happens to coincide, the summit of the combined wave will be
at the highest. When the hollow of the smaller wave coincides with the
summit of the larger, the summit of the combined wave will be at the
lowest.

It is necessary to have a clear and distinct conception of the
difference between the _motion_ of a _wave_ and that of a _current_.
In the current there is a transfer of water; in the wave the transfer
is no more than would be brought about by a particle of water
impinging on another where that particle has a motion perpendicular to
the surface, and a rising and falling results. The onward movement of
the wave itself is always perceptible enough. That the water is not
moving with the same velocity is also evident from watching the
progress of any light body floating on its surface. This fact may be
practically illustrated in the case of a ship at sea, sailing before
the wind in the same direction as the waves are moving. When the crest
of a wave is near the stern, drop a piece of wood on it. Almost
instantly the wave will be seen shooting ahead of the vessel, while
the wood is scarcely removed from the position where it fell on the
water. The wave has moved onward, preserving its identity as a wave,
the water of which it is formed being constantly changed; and thus the
motion of the wave is one thing, that of the water in which the waves
are formed is quite another thing.

Again, waves are formed by a force acting horizontally; but in the
case of the tide wave, that force acts uniformly from the surface to
the lowest depths of the ocean, and the breadth of the wave is that
curved surface which, commencing at low water, passes over the summit
of the tide down to the next low water--this is a wave of the first
order. In waves of the second order, the force raising them acts only
on the surface, and there the effect is greatest (as in the wind
waves)--where one assists in giving to the water oscillating motion
which maintains the next, and gradually puts the whole surface in
commotion; but at a short distance down that effect entirely
disappears.

If the earth presented a uniform globe, with a belt of sea of great
and uniform depth encircling it round the equator, the tide wave would
be perfectly regular and uniform. Its velocity, where the water was
deep and free to follow the two luminaries, would be 1,000 miles an
hour, and the height of tide inconsiderable. But even the Atlantic is
not broad enough for the formation of a powerful tide wave. The
continents, the variation in the direction of the coast line, the
different depths of the ocean, the narrowness of channels, all
interfere to modify it. At first it is affected with only a slight
current motion toward the west--a motion which only acquires strength
when the wave is heaped up, as it were, by obstacles to its progress,
as happens to it over the shallow parts of the sea, on the coasts, in
gulfs, and in the mouths of rivers. Thus the first wave advancing
meets in its course with resistance on the two sides of a narrow
channel, it is forced to rise by the pressure of the following waves,
whose motion is not at all retarded, or certainly less so than that of
the first wave. Thus an actual current of water is produced in straits
and narrow channels; and it is always important to distinguish between
the tide wave, as bringing high water, and the tidal stream--between
the rise and fall of the tide and the flow and ebb.

In the open ocean, and at a distance from the land, the tide wave is
imperceptible, and the rise and fall of the water is small. Among the
islands of the Pacific four to six feet is the usual spring rise. But
the range is considerably affected by local causes, as by the shoaling
of the water and the narrowing of the channel, or by the channel
opening to the free entrance of the tide wave. In such cases the range
of tide is 40 to 50 feet or more, and the tidal stream is one of great
velocity. It may under such circumstances even present the peculiar
phenomenon called the _bore_--a wave that comes rolling in with the
first of flood, and, with a foaming crest, rushes onward, threatening
destruction to shipping, and sweeping away all impediments lying in
its course.

It is certain that in the open ocean the _great tide wave_ could not
be recognized as a wave, since it is merely a temporary alteration of
the sea level.

_Waves_ which have their origin in the action of the wind striking the
surface of the water commence as a series of small and slow
undulations or wavelets--a mere ripple. As the strength, and
consequently the pressure, of the wind increases, waves are formed;
and a numerical relation exists between the length of a wave, its
velocity of progress, and the depth of the water in which it travels.

The _height_ of a wave is measured from trough to crest; and though
waves as seen from the deck of a small vessel appear to be "enormous"
and "overwhelming," their height, in an ordinary gale, in deep water,
does not exceed 15 to 20 feet. In a very heavy gale of some days'
continuance they will, of course, be much higher.

Scoresby has observed them 30 ft. high in the North Atlantic; and Ross
measured waves of 22 ft. in the South Atlantic. Wilkes records 32 ft.
in the Pacific. But the highest waves have been reported off the Cape
of Good Hope and Cape Horn, where they have been observed, on rare
occasions, from 30 to 40 ft high; and 36 ft. has been given as the
admeasurement in the Bay of Biscay, under very exceptional
circumstances. In the voyage round the world the Venus and Bonite
record a maximum of 27 ft., while the Novara found the maximum to be
35 ft. But waves of 12 to 14 ft. in shallow seas are often more trying
than those of larger dimensions in deeper water. It is generally
assumed that a distance from crest to crest of 150 to 350 ft. in the
storm wave gives a velocity (in the change of form) of from 17 to 28
miles per hour. But what is required in the computation of the
velocity is the period of passage between two crests. Thus a distance
of 500 to 600 ft. between two crests, and a period of 10 to 11
seconds, indicates a velocity of 34 miles per hour.

The following table, by Sir G.B. Airy (late Astronomer Royal), shows
the velocities with which waves of given lengths travel in water of
certain depth:

  Depth of |            Length of the Wave in Feet.[1]
  the Water|     |      |       |        |         |          |
  in Feet. |  10 |  100 | 1,000 | 10,000 | 100,000 |1,000,000 |10,000,000
  ---------+-----+------+-------+--------+---------+----------+----------
           |
           | Corresponding Velocity of Wave per Hour in Nautical Miles.
           |
         1 | 3.2 |  3.4 |   3.4 |    3.4 |     3.4 |      3.4 |       3.4
        10 | 4.3 | 10.1 |  10.7 |   10.8 |    10.8 |     10.8 |      10.8
       100 | 4.3 | 13.5 |  32.0 |   34.0 |    34.0 |     34.0 |      34.0
     1,000 | 4.3 | 13.5 |  42.9 |  101.8 |   107.5 |    107.5 |     107.5
    10,000 | 4.3 | 13.5 |  42.9 |  135.7 |   320.3 |    340.0 |     340.3
   100,000 | 4.3 | 13.5 |  42.9 |  135.7 |   429.3 |   1013.0 |    1075.3
  ---------+-----+------+-------+--------+---------+----------+----------

  [Footnote 1: As an example, this table shows that waves 1,000 feet
  in length travel 43 nautical miles per hour in water 1,000 feet
  deep. The length is measured from crest to crest.]

From these numbers it appears that--

1. When the length of the wave is not greater than the depth of the
water, the velocity of the wave depends (sensibly) only on its length,
and is proportional to the square root of its length.

2. When the length of the wave is not less than a thousand times the
depth of the water, the velocity of the wave depends (sensibly) only
on the depth, and is proportional to the square root of the depth.

It is, in fact, the same as the velocity which a free body would
acquire by falling from rest under the action of gravity through a
height equal to half the depth of the water.

_Rollers_ are of the nature of a violent _ground swell_, and possibly
the worst of them may be due to the propagation of an earthquake wave.
They come with little notice, and rarely last long. All the small
islands in the Mid-Atlantic experience them, and they are frequent on
the African coast in the calm season. They are also not unknown in the
other oceans. In discussing the meteorology of the equatorial district
of the Atlantic, extending from lat. 20 deg. to 10 deg. S, Captain Toynbee
observes that "swells of the sea are not always caused by the
prevailing wind of the neighborhood. For instance, during the northern
winter and spring months, northwesterly swells abound. They are
sometimes long and heavy, and extend to the most southern limit of the
district. Again, during the southern winter and spring months,
southerly and southwesterly swells abound, extending at times to the
most northern limit of the district. They are frequently very heavy
and long."

The great _forced sea waves_, due to earthquakes, and generally to
subterranean and volcanic action, have been known to attain the
enormous height of 60 feet or more, and sweep to destruction whole
towns situated on the shores where they have broken--as for example
Lisbon and places on the west coast of America and in the island of
Java. Though so destructive when they come in toward the land, and
begin to feel the shelving sea bottom, it is not probable that, in the
open ocean, this wave would do more than appear as a long rolling
swell. It has, however, been observed that "a wave with a gentle front
has probably been produced by gentle rise or fall of a part of the sea
bottom, while a wave with a steep front has probably been due to a
somewhat sudden elevation or depression. Waves of complicated surface
form again would indicate violent oscillations of the bottom."

The altitude and volume of the great sea wave resulting from an
earthquake depend upon the suddenness and extent of the originating
disturbance and upon the depth of water at its origin. Its velocity of
translation at the surface of the sea varies with the depth of the sea
at any given point, and its form and dimensions depend upon this also,
as well as upon the sort of sea room it has to move in. In deep ocean
water, one of these waves may be so long and low as to pass under a
ship without being observed, but, as it approaches a sloping shore,
its advancing slope becomes steeper, and when the depth of water
becomes less than the altitude of the wave, it topples over, and comes
ashore as an enormous and overwhelming breaker.

Lastly, there is the _storm wave_--the result of the cyclone or
hurricane--and, perhaps, the greatest terror to seamen, for it almost
always appears in the character of a _heavy cross sea_, the period of
which is irregular and uncertain. The disturbance within the area of
the cyclone is not confined to the air, but extends also to the ocean,
producing first a rolling swell, which eventually culminates in a
tremendous pyramidal sea and a series of storm waves, the undulations
of which are propagated to an extraordinary distance, behind, before,
and on each side of the storm field.

Enough has now been said to show that whatever the character of the
waves encountered by the Umbria and Martello in July last, they were
in no sense "tidal," but, if approximating to the dimensions stated,
they were either due to storm or earthquake, or, possibly, to a
combination of both the last agents.

For those of our readers who may be interested in wave observations,
we conclude by introducing Prof. Stokes' summary of the method of
observing the phenomenon:

          "_For a Ship at Sea._

    "(1.) The apparent periodic time,[2] observed as if the ship
    were at rest.

    "(2.) The _true_ direction from which the waves come, also the
    ship's _true_ course and speed per hour.

    "(3.) A measure or estimate of the height of the waves.

    "(4.) The depth of the sea if it is known, but, at any rate,
    the position of the ship as near as possible, either by cross
    bearings of land or any other method, so that the depth may be
    got from charts or other sources.

          "_For a Ship at Anchor._

    "(1.) The periodic time.

    "(2.) The true direction from which the waves come.

    "(3.) A measure or estimate of the height of the waves.

    "(4.) The depth of water where she is anchored."

  [Footnote 2: The period of a wave is the interval of time which
  elapses between the transits of two successive wave crests past a
  stationary floating body, the wave crest being the highest line
  along the ridge.]

It is the opinion of scientists that when the period of oscillation of
the ship and the period of the wave are nearly the same, the turning
over of the ship is an approximate consequence, and thus the wave to
such a ship would appear more formidable than to another ship with a
different period of oscillation.--_Nautical Magazine._

       *       *       *       *       *




PRACTICAL EDUCATION.


It is now recognized that one of the elements in which the public
school systems of the United States are most lacking is in the
practical branches in teaching trades and industry. There is too much
book learning, too little practical education. Throughout the
continent of Europe there are trade and industrial schools which have
accomplished much in turning out skilled workmen for the various
branches of industry. Here we have one. Our deficiency in this matter
was recognized by the late commissioner of education, and attention
called to it in several of his reports, and a number of the State
superintendents of education have also urged the establishment of
manual or training schools as a part of the State systems. We have
such an institution here in the Tulane Manual School. In Philadelphia,
Cleveland, and Chicago, the system has been adopted on a large scale,
and made part of the high school course. Another city which has
inaugurated the manual training school as a part of its public schools
is Toledo, O. A rich citizen of that town, who recently died, left a
large sum for the establishment of a university of arts and trades.
Instead of founding a separate university, however, the money was
applied to the establishment of manual schools in connection with the
public schools, for both boys and girls.

The course of girls' work given will afford some idea of what it is
proposed to do. This begins with the senior grammar school grade and
continues three years in high school. It includes free hand,
mechanical, and architectural drawing, light carpentry, wood carving,
designing for wood carving, wood turning, clay moulding, decorative
designing, etc. But more practical than these things are the lessons
in cooking, sewing, and household management. The course in domestic
economy "is arranged with special reference to giving young women such
a liberal and practical education as will inspire them with a belief
in the dignity and nobleness of an earnest womanhood, and incite them
to a faithful performance of the every day duties of life. It is based
upon the assumption that a pleasant home is an essential element of
broad culture, and one of the surest safeguards of morality and
virtue." The report of the school also remarks that "the design of
this course is to furnish thorough instruction in applied
housekeeping, and the sciences related thereto, and students will
receive practical drill in all branches of housework; in the purchase
and care of family supplies, and in general household management; but
will not be expected to perform more labor than is actually necessary
for the desired instruction."

A special branch which will be well received is that which proposes to
teach the girls how to cook. The curriculum is one that every
housekeeper ought to go through.

Boiling--Practical illustrations of boiling and steaming, and
treatment of vegetables, meats, fish, and cereals, soup making, etc.

Broiling--Lessons and practice in meat, chicken, fish, oysters, etc.

Bread Making--Chemical and mechanical action of materials used.
Manipulations in bread making in its various departments. Yeasts and
their substitutes.

Baking--Heat in its action on different materials in the process of
baking. Practical experiments in baking bread, pastry, puddings,
cakes, meat, fish, etc.

Frying--Chemical and mechanical principles involved and illustrated in
the frying of vegetables, meats, fish, oysters, etc.

Mixing--The art of making combinations, as in soups, salads, puddings,
pies, cakes, sauces, dressings, flavorings, condiments, etc.

In "marketing, economy," etc., the course comprises general teaching
on the following subjects:

    "The selection and purchase of household supplies. General
    instructions in systematizing and economizing the household
    work and expenses. The anatomy of animals used as food, and
    how to choose the several parts. Lessons on the qualities of
    water and steam; the construction of stoves and ranges; the
    properties of different fuels."

Again, there is a dressmaking and millinery department, where the
girls are taught how to cut and make dresses and other garments, and
the economical and tasteful use of materials.

So much for the girls. The courses in the boys' schools are somewhat
similar, turning, however, on the more practical instruction in trades
and industries, in carpentering, wood and iron work, etc.

The Toledo experiment has been tried there but one year, and has given
general satisfaction. The board of school directors has interested the
public in its efforts, and advisory committees of ladies and gentlemen
have been appointed to assist in managing these schools.

It is to be hoped that other and larger cities will imitate Toledo in
the matter. Those philanthropists who are giving money so liberally
for the establishment of institutions of higher learning might do much
good in providing for manual training schools of this kind that will
assure the country good housewives and skilled mechanics in the
future.--_Trustees' T. Jour._

       *       *       *       *       *




A GIGANTIC LOAD OF LUMBER.


When it was announced in the _Lumberman_ that the barge Wahnapitae had
carried a cargo of 2,181,000 feet of lumber, letters were received
asking if it was not a typographical error. It was thought by many
that no boat could carry such a load. For the purpose of showing the
barge on paper, a photograph was obtained of her when loaded at
Duluth, which is herewith reproduced. The freight rate obtained to
Tonawanda was $3.75 a thousand, which footed up to a total of
$8,178.75 The owners of the boat, however, were not satisfied with
such a record, and proceeded to break it by loading at Duluth
2,409,800 feet of lumber, which also went to Tonawanda, and which is
put down as the biggest cargo of lumber on record. At the latter place
the cargo was unloaded on Saturday afternoon and Monday forenoon--one
working day. It will be readily understood that the money-making
capacity of the barge is of the Jumbo order also.

[Illustration: THE BARGE WAHNAPITAE, LOADED WITH 2,181,000 FEET OF
LUMBER.]

The barge is owned by the Saginaw Lumber and Salt Company and the
Emery Lumber Company, and cost $30,000. She is 275 feet long and 51
feet beam. The lumber on her was piled 22 feet high and she drew 11
feet of water. Had she been 10 inches wider, she could not have passed
through the Soo canal. The boat was built on the Saginaw river a year
ago last winter, and was designed for carrying logs from the Georgian
bay to the Saginaw river and Tawas mills. The Canadian government,
however, increased the export duty on logs, and the barge was put into
the lumber-carrying trade--_N.W. Lumberman._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE NEWBERY-VAUTIN CHLORINATION PROCESS.


The process of extracting gold from ores by absorption of the precious
metal in chlorine gas, from which it is reduced to a metallic state,
is not a very new discovery. It was first introduced by Plattner many
years ago, and at that time promised to revolutionize the processes
for gold extraction. By degrees it was found that only a very clever
chemist could work this process with practically perfect results, for
many reasons. Lime and magnesia might be contained in the quartz, and
would be attacked by the chlorine. These consume the reagents without
producing any results, earthy particles would settle and surround the
small gold and prevent chlorination, then lead and zinc or other
metals in combination with the gold would also be absorbed by the
chlorine; or, again, from some locally chemical peculiarity in the
water or the ore, gold held in solution by the water might be again
precipitated in the tailings before filtration was complete, and thus
be lost. Henderson, Clark, De Lacy, Mears, and Deacon, all introduced
improvements, or what were claimed to be improvements, on Plattner,
but these chiefly failed because they did not cover every particular
variety of case which gold extraction presented. Therefore, where
delicate chemical operations were necessary for success, practice
generally failed from want of knowledge on the part of the operator,
and many times extensive plants have been pronounced useless from this
cause alone. Hence it is not to be wondered that processes requiring
such care and uncommon knowledge are not greatly in favor.

Mr. Claude Vautin, a gentleman possessed of much practical experience
of gold mining and extraction in Queensland, together with Mr. J.
Cosmo Newbery, analytical chemist to the government of Victoria, have
developed a process which they claim to combine all the advantages of
the foregoing methods, and by the addition of certain improvements in
the machinery and mode of treatment to overcome the difficulties which
have hitherto prevented the general adoption of the chlorination
process.

By reference to the illustrations of the plant below, the system by
which the ore is treated can be readily understood. The materials for
treatment--crushed and roasted ore, or tailings, as the case may
be--are put into the hopper above the revolving barrel, or
chlorinator. This latter is made of iron, lined with wood and lead,
and sufficiently strong to bear a pressure of 100 lb. to the square
inch, its capacity being about 30 cwt of ore. The charge falls from
the hopper into the chlorinator. Water and chlorine-producing
chemicals are added--generally sulphuric acid and chloride of
lime--the manhole cover is replaced and screwed down so as to be gas
