position of the various groups in space. If each couple of isomers
possess the same molecular weight, a certain modification of the new
Van't Hoff-Wislicenus theory as to the position of atoms in space is
rendered necessary; but if the two are polymers, one having a
molecular weight n times that of the other, then the theory in its
present form will still hold. Hence it was imperative to determine
without doubt the molecular weight of some two typical isomers. But
the compounds in question are not volatile, so that vapor density
determinations were out of the question. In this difficulty Prof.
Meyer has tested the discovery of M. Raoult upon a number of compounds
of known molecular weights, and found it perfectly reliable and easy
of application. The method depends upon the lowering of the
solidifying point of a solvent, such as water, benzine, or glacial
acetic acid, by the introduction of a given weight of the substance
whose molecular weight is to be determined. The amount by which the
solidifying point is lowered is connected with the molecular weight,
M, by the following extremely simple formula: M = T x (P / C); where C
represents the amount by which the point of congelation is lowered, P
the weight of anhydrous substance dissolved in 100 grammes of the
solvent, and T a constant for the same solvent readily determined from
volatile substances whose molecular weights are well known. On
applying this law to the case of two isomeric benzil derivatives, the
molecular weights were found, as expected, to be identical, and not
multiples; hence Prof. Meyer is perfectly justified in introducing the
necessary modification in the "position in space" theory. Now that
this generalization of Raoult is placed upon a secure basis, it takes
its well merited rank along with that of Dulong and Petit as a most
valuable means of checking molecular weights, especially in
determining which of two or more possible values expresses the
truth.--_Nature._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. 642, page 10258.]




THE DIRECT OPTICAL PROJECTION OF ELECTRO-DYNAMIC LINES OF FORCE AND
OTHER ELECTRO-DYNAMIC PHENOMENA.[1]

   [Footnote 1: An expansion of two papers read before the A.A.A.S.
   at the Ann Arbor meeting.]

By Prof. J.W. MOORE.


II. LOOPS.

If the wire, with its lines of force, be bent into the form of a
vertical circle 1-1/8 in. in diameter, and fixed in a glass plate,
some of the lines of force will be seen parallel to the axis of the
circle. If the loop is horizontal, the lines become points.

[Illustration: Fig. 14.]

[Illustration: Fig. 14a.]


FIELDS OF LOOPS AND MAGNETS.

Place now a vertical loop opposite to the pole of a short bar magnet
cemented to the glass plate with the N pole facing it. If the current
passes in one direction the field will be as represented by Fig.
14b; if it is reversed by the commutator, Fig. 14c is an image of
the spectrum. Applying Faraday's second principle, it appears that
attraction results in the first case, and repulsion in the second. The
usual method of stating the fact is, that if you face the loop and the
current circulates from left over to right, the N end of the needle
will be drawn into the loop.

[Illustration: Fig. 14b.]

[Illustration: Fig. 14c.]

It thus becomes evident that the loop is equivalent to a flat steel
plate, one surface of which is N and the other S. Facing the loop if
the current is right handed, the S side is toward you.


TO SHOW THE ACTUAL ATTRACTION AND REPULSION OF A MAGNET BY A "MAGNETIC
SHELL."

Produce the field as before (Fig. 14), carry a suspended magnetic
needle over the field. It will tend to place itself parallel to the
lines of force, with the N pole in such a position that, if the
current passes clockwise as you look upon the plane of the loop, it
will be drawn into the loop. Reversing the position of the needle or
of current will show repulsion.

Clerk Maxwell's method of stating the fact is that "every portion of
the circuit is acted on by a force urging it across the lines of
magnetic induction, so as to include a greater number of these lines
within the embrace of the circuit."[2]

   [Footnote 2: Electricity and Magnetism, Maxwell, p. 137, Sec.Sec. 489,
   490.]

If the horizontal loop is used (Fig. 14a), the needle tries to
assume a vertical position, with the N or S end down, according to the
direction of the current.

If it is desired to show that if the magnet is fixed and the loop
free, the loop will be attracted or repelled, a special support is
needed.

[Illustration: Fig. 15]

A strip (Fig. 15) of brass, J, having two iron mercury cups, K_{1}
K_{2}, screwed near the ends, one insulated from the strip, is
fastened upon the horizontal arm of the ring support, Fig. 9, already
described. The cups may be given a slight vertical motion for accurate
adjustment. Small conductors (Figs. 16, 17, 18), which are circles,
rectangles, solenoids, etc., may be suspended from the top of the
plate by unspun silk, with the ends dipping into the mercury. The
apparatus is therefore an Ampere's stand, with the weight of the
movable circuit supported by silk and with means of adjusting the
contacts. The rectangles or circles are about two inches in their
extreme dimension. Horizontal and vertical astatic system are also
used--Figs. 18, 18a. The apparatus may be used with either the
horizontal or vertical lantern.

[Illustration: Fig. 16. Fig. 17.]

[Illustration: Fig. 18. Fig. 18a.]

If the rectangle or circle is suspended and a magnet brought near it
when the current passes, the loop will be attracted or repelled, as
the law requires. The experiments usually performed with De la Rive's
floating battery may be exhibited.

The great similarity between the loop and the magnet may be shown by
comparing the fields above (Figs. 14b, 14c) with the actual fields
of two bar magnets, Figs. 19, 19a.

It will be noticed that the lines in Fig. 19, where unlike poles are
opposite, are gathered together as in Fig. 14b,--where the N end of
the magnet faces the S side of the magnetic shell; and that in 19a,
where two norths face, the line of repulsion has the same general
character as in 14c, in which the N end of the magnet faces the N
side of the shell.

[Illustration: Fig. 19.]

[Illustration: Fig. 19a.]

Instead of placing the magnet perpendicular to the plane of the loop,
it may be placed parallel to its plane. Fig. 14d shows the magnet
and loop both vertical.

The field shows that the magnet will be rotated, and will finally take
for stable equilibrium an axial position, with the N end pointing as
determined by the rule already given.

[Illustration: Fig. 14d.]

If two loops are placed with their axes in the same straight line as
follows, Figs. 14f, 14g, a reproduction of Figs. 14b and 14c
will become evident.

It is obvious from these spectra that the two loops attract or repel
each other according to the direction of the current, which fact may
be shown by bringing a loop near to another loop suspended from the
ring stand, Fig. 9, or by using the ordinary apparatus for that
purpose--De la Rive's battery and Ampere's stand.

[Illustration: Fig. 14f.]

[Illustration: Fig. 14g.]

If two loops are placed in the same vertical plane, as in Figs. 14h
and 14i, there will be attraction or repulsion, according to the
direction of the adjacent currents. The fields become the same as
Figs. 8 and 8a, as may be seen by comparing them with those figures.

[Illustration: Fig. 14h.]

[Illustration: Fig. 14i.]

Having thus demonstrated the practical identity of a loop and a
magnet, we proceed to examine the effects produced by loops on
straight wires.

If the loop is placed with a straight wire in its plane along one
edge, there will be attraction or repulsion, according to the
direction of the two currents, Figs. 20 and 20a, which are obviously
the same as Figs. 8 and 8a.

[Illustration: Fig. 20.]

[Illustration: Fig. 20a.]

[Illustration: Fig. 20b.]

[Illustration: Fig. 20c.]

If the wire is placed parallel to the plane of the loop and to one
side, Figs. 20b and 20c, there will be rotation (same as Figs.
4b and 4c).

If the loop is horizontal and the wire vertical and on one side, the
Figs. 20d, 20e are the same as 4d and 4e.

If the loop is horizontal and the wire vertical and axial, 20f and
20g, there will be rotation, and the figures are mere duplicates of
4g and 4h.

[Illustration: Fig. 20d.]

[Illustration: Fig. 20e.]

[Illustration: Fig. 20f.]

[Illustration: Fig. 20g.]

[Illustration: Fig. 20h.]

Fig. 20h shows a view of 20f when the wire is horizontal and the
plane of the loop vertical. It is like 4i.

To verify these facts, suspend a loop from Ampere's stand, Fig. 9, and
bring a straight wire near.

A small rectangle or circle may be hung in a similar manner. When the
circuit is closed, it tends to place itself with its axis in a N and S
direction through the earth's influence. The supposition of an E and W
horizontal earth current will explain this action.

To exemplify rotation of a vertical wire by a horizontal loop, Fig. 21
may be shown.

A circular copper vessel with a glass bottom (Fig. 21) has wound
around its rim several turns of insulated wire. In the center of the
vessel is a metallic upright upon the top of which is balanced in a
mercury cup a light copper [inverted U] shaped strip. The ends of the
inverted U dip into the dilute sulphuric acid contained in the
circular vessel.

The current passes from, the battery, up the pillar, down the legs of
the U to the liquid, thence through the insulated wire back to the
battery.

[Illustration: Fig. 21.]

This is the usual form of apparatus, modified in size for the vertical
or horizontal lantern.

(_To be continued._)

       *       *       *       *       *




POISONS.


"Poisons and poisoning" was the subject of a discourse a few days ago
at the Royal Institution. The lecturer, Professor Meymott Tidy, began
by directing attention to the derivation of the word "toxicology," the
science of poisons. The Greek word [Greek: toxon] signified primarily
that specially oriental weapon which we call a bow, but the word in
the earliest authors included in its meaning the arrow shot from the
bow. Dioscorides in the first century A.D. uses the word [Greek: to
toxikon] to signify the poison to smear arrows with. Thus, by giving
an enlarged sense to the word--for words ever strive to keep pace, if
possible, with scientific progress, we get our modern and significant
expression toxicology as the science of poisons and of poisoning. A
certain grim historical interest gathers around the story of poisons.

It is a history worth studying, for poisons have played their part in
history. The "subtil serpent" taught men the power of a poisoned fang.
Poison was in the first instance a simple instrument of open warfare.
Thus, our savage ancestors tipped their arrows with the snake poison
in order to render them more deadly. The use of vegetable extracts for
this purpose belongs to a later period. The suggestion is not
unreasonable that if war chemists with their powders, their gun
cotton, and their explosives had not been invented, warlike nations
would have turned for their _instrumenta belli_ to toxicologists and
their poisons. At any rate, the toxicologists may claim that the very
cradle of science was rocked in the laboratory of the toxicological
worker. Early in the history of arrow tipping the admixture of blood
with the snake poison became a common practice. Even the use of animal
fluids alone is recorded--e.g., the arrows of Hercules, which were
dipped in the gall of the Lernaean hydra. Hercules himself at last fell
a victim to the blood stained tunic of the dead Centaur Nessus. As
late as the middle of the last century Blumenbach persuaded one of his
class to drink 7 oz. of warm bullock's blood in order to disprove the
then popular notion that even fresh blood was a poison. The young man
who consented to drink the blood did not die a martyr to science.

The first important question we have to answer is, What do we mean by
a poison? The law has not defined a poison, although it requires at
times a definition. The popular definition of a poison is "a drug
which destroys life rapidly when taken in small quantity." The terms
"small quantity" as regards amount, and "rapidly" as regards time, are
as indefinite as Hodge's "piece of chalk" as regards size. The
professor defined a poison as "any substance which otherwise than by
the agency of heat or electricity is capable of destroying life,
either by chemical action on the tissues of the living body or by
physiological action by absorption into the living system." This
definition excepted from the list of poisons all agencies that
destroyed life by a simple mechanical action, thus drawing a
distinction between a "poison" and a "destructive thing." It explains
why nitrogen is not a poison and why carbonic acid is, although
neither can support life. This point the lecturer illustrated. A
poison must be capable of destroying life. It was nonsense to talk of
a "deadly poison." If a body be a poison, it is deadly; if it be not
deadly, it is not a poison. Three illustrations of the chemical
actions of poisons were selected. The first was sulphuric acid. Here
the molecular death of the part to which the acid was applied was due
to the tendency of sulphuric acid to combine with water. The stomach
became charred. The molecular death of certain tissues destroyed the
general functional rhythmicity of the system until the disturbance
became general, somatic death (that is, the death of the entire body)
resulting. The second illustration was poisoning by carbonic oxide.
The professor gave an illustrated description of the origin and
properties of the coloring matter of the blood, known as _haemoglobin_,
drawing attention to its remarkable formation by a higher synthetical
act from the albumenoids in the animal body, and to the circumstance
that, contrary to general rule, both its oxidation and reduction may
be easily effected. It was explained that on this rhythmic action of
oxidizing and reducing _haemoglobin_ life depended.

Carbonic oxide, like oxygen, combined with _haemoglobin_, produced a
comparatively stable compound; at any rate, a compound so stable that
it ceased to be the efficient oxygen carrier of normal _haemoglobin_.
This interference with the ordinary action of _haemoglobin_ constituted
poisoning by carbonic oxide. In connection with this subject the
lecturer referred to the use of the spectroscope as an analytical
agent, and showed the audience the spectrum of blood extracted from
the hat of the late Mr. Briggs (for the murder of whom Muller was
executed), and this was the first case in which the spectroscopic
appearances of blood formed the subject matter of evidence. The third
illustration of poisoning was poisoning by strychnine. Here again the
power of the drug for undergoing oxidation was illustrated. It was
noted that although our knowledge of the precise _modus operandi_ of
the poison was imperfect, nevertheless that the coincidence of the
first fit in the animal after its exhibition with the formation of
reduced _haemoglobin_ in the body was important.

There followed upon this view of the chemical action of poison in the
living body this question: Given a knowledge of certain properties of
the elements--for example, their atomic weights, their relative
position according to the periodic law, their spectroscopic character,
and so forth--or given a knowledge of the molecular constitution,
together with the general physical and chemical properties of
compounds--in other words, given such knowledge of the element or
compound as may be learned in a laboratory--does such knowledge afford
us any clew whereby to predicate the probable action of the element or
of the compound respectively on the living body? The researches of
Blake, Rabuteau, Richet, Bouchardat, Fraser, and Crum-Brown were
discussed, the results of their observations being that at present we
were unable to determine toxicity or physiological action by any
general chemical or physical researches. The lecturer pointed out that
such relationship was scarcely to be expected. Poisons acted on
different tissues, while even the same poison, according to the dose
administered and other conditions, expended its toxic activity in
different ways.

Further, the allotropic modifications of elements and the isomerism of
compounds increased the difficulties. Why should yellow phosphorus be
an active poison and red phosphorus be inert? Why should piperine be
the poison of all poisons to keep you awake, and morphine the poison
of all poisons to send you asleep, although to the chemist these two
bodies were of identical composition? The lecturer urged that the
science of medicine (for the poisons of the toxicologist were the
medicines of the physician) must be experimental. Guard jealously
against all wanton cruelty to animals; but to deprive the higher
creation of life and health lest one of the lower creatures should
suffer was the very refinement of cruelty. "Are ye not of much more
value then they?" spoke a still small voice amid the noisy babble of
well intentioned enthusiasts.--_London Times._

       *       *       *       *       *




ARTIFICIAL MOTHER FOR INFANTS.


All the journals have recently narrated the curious story of the
triplets that were born prematurely at the clinic of Assas Street.
Placed at their birth in an apparatus constructed on the principle of
an incubator, in order to finish their development therein, these
frail beings are doing wonderfully well, thanks to the assiduous care
bestowed upon them, and are even showing, it appears, a true emulation
to become persons of importance.

Every one now knows the incubator or "artificial hen"--that box with a
glass top in which, under the influence of a mild heat, hens' eggs,
laid upon wire cloth, hatch of themselves in a few days, and allow
pretty little chicks to make their way out of the cracked shell.

This ingenious apparatus, which has been adopted by most breeders,
gives so good results that it has already supplanted the mother hens
in all large poultry yards, and at present, thanks to it, large
numbers of eggs that formerly ended in omelets are now changing into
chickens.

Although not belonging to the same race, a number of children at their
birth are none the less delicate than these little chicks.

There are some that are so puny and frail among the many brought into
the world by the anaemic and jaded women of the present generation
that, in the first days of their existence, their blood, incapable of
warming them, threatens at every instant to congeal in their veins.
There are some which, born prematurely, are so incapable of taking
nourishment of themselves, of breathing and of moving, that they would
be fatally condemned to death were not haste made to take up their
development where nature left it, in order to carry it on and finish
it. In such a case it is not, as might be supposed, to the
exceptionally devoted care of the mother that the safety of these
delicate existences is confided. As the sitting hen often interferes
with the hatching of her eggs by too much solicitude, so the most
loving and attentive mother, in this case, would certainly prove more
prejudicial than useful to her nursling. So, for this difficult task
that she cannot perform, there is advantageously substituted for her
what is known as an artificial mother. This apparatus, which is
identical with the one employed for the incubation of chickens,
consists of a large square box, supporting, upon a double bottom, a
series of bowls of warm water. Above these vessels, which are renewed
as soon as the temperature lowers, is arranged a basket filled with
cotton, and in this is laid, as in a nest, the weak creature which
could not exist in the open air.

[Illustration: STILL BIRTH WARMING APPARATUS.]

Through the glass in the cover, the mother has every opportunity of
watching the growth of her new born babe; but this is all that she is
allowed to do. The feeding of the infant, which is regulated by the
physician at regular hours, is effected by means of a special rubber
apparatus, through the aid of an intelligent woman who has sole charge
of this essential operation. The aeration of the little being, which
is no less important, is assured by a free circulation, in the box, of
pure warm air, which is kept at a definite temperature and is
constantly renewed through a draught flue. The least variations in the
temperature are easily seen through a horizontal thermometer placed
beneath the glass.

Thus protected against all those bad influences that are often so
fatal at the inception of life, even to the healthiest babes,
preserved from an excess or insufficiency of food, sheltered from cold
and dampness, protected against clumsy handling and against pernicious
microbes, sickly or prematurely born babies soon acquire enough
