1861 to 1863 the noble patriotism of our farmers caused them to vie
with each other as to who should give the best and least money to help
the government; and cannot our government now do something for the
strength and sinew of the land, the farmers?

I was dealing in horses, more or less, from 1861 to 1863 (as I had
been before and long after), and many was the magnificent horse I saw
led out by the farmer for the government, at a minimum price, when,
previous to 1861, $400, $500, and even $600 was refused for the same
animals. Horses that would prove a headlight to any gentleman's coach
in the city, and others that would trot off fourteen to sixteen miles
an hour on the road as easy as they would eat their oats, went into
the cavalry or artillery or to baggage trains. What were left for
recuperation at the close of the war were mongrels from Canada or the
Indian and wild lands of the West, and such other lazy brutes as our
good farmers would not impose upon the government with or later were
condemned by the army buyers. These were largely of the Abdallah type
of horse, noted for coarseness, homeliness, also soft and lazy
constitutions. No one disputes the brute homeliness of the Abdallah
horse, and in this the old and trite saying of "Like begets like" is
exemplified in descendants, with which our country is flooded. The
speed element of which we boast was left in our mares of Arabian blood
through Clay and Morgan, but was so limited in numbers as to be an
apology for our present time standard in the breeding of fancy horses.
Knowing that Abdallah blood produced no speed, and being largely
ignorant as to the breeding of our mares, which were greatly scattered
over the land after the war, some kind of a guess had to be made as to
the possibility of the colts we were breeding, hence the time standard
fallacy. But it has ruined enough men, and gone far enough.

Upon Lieutenant Robertson's proposition, a turn can be made, and a
solid base for blood with breeding of all American horses can be
demanded by the government for the country's good.

From the earliest history of man, as a people increased in wealth,
they gave attention to mental culture with refinement; following which
the horse was cultivated to a high _blood_ standard with national
pride. From the Egyptians, the Moors, the Romans, and Britons to
France, Russia, and Prussia we look, finding the horse by each nation
had been a national pride--each nation resorting to the same primitive
blood from which to create its type, and that primitive was the
Arabian. Scientists have theorized, men have written, and boys have
imagined in print, as to some other than the Arabian from which to
create a type of horse, and yet through all ages we find that Arabian
has been the one stepping stone for each advanced nation upon which
blood to build its national horse.

Scientists have reasoned and explored, trying to prove to the
contrary, but what have they proved? The Arabian horse still remains
the fact.

The lion, the tiger, the leopard, still remain the same, as does the
ass and the zebra. As God created and man named them, with all animal
life, subject to the will of man, so do they all continue to remain
and reproduce, each true to its type, free from imperfections or
disease; also the same in vegetable and mineral life. In animal life,
the build, form, color, size, and instincts remain the same, true to
its blood from the first, and yet all was created for man through
which to amuse him and make him work.

It is a fact that all of man's creations from any primitive life,
either animal or vegetable, will degenerate and cease to be, while of
God's perfect creations, all continue the same.

We will condense on the horse. The Arabian is the most pliable in its
blood of any other known to man. From it, any other type can be
created. Once a type has been created, it must be sustained in itself
by close breeding, which can be continued for quite a number of years
without degeneracy. For invigoration or revitalizing, resort must be
made to its primitive blood cause. To go out of the family to colder
or even warmer creations of man means greater mongrelization of both
blood and instinct, also to invite new diseases.

Nothing is more infatuating than the breeding of horses. A gifted
practical student in the laws of animal life may create a new and
fixed type of horse, but it can be as quickly destroyed by the
multitude, through ignorant mongrelization.

In the breeding of horses, our people are wild; and in no industry can
our government do more good than in making laws relating to their
breeding. It can father the production of a national horse without
owning a breeding farm. It can make _blood_ and _breeding_ a standard
for different types, and see to it that its laws are obeyed, thus
benefiting all the agriculturists, and have breeding farms in America;
and also itself as a government, financially. We must not however
begin upon the creation of other nations, but independently upon God's
gift to man, as did England, France, and Russia. That a government
should interfere in the breeding of horses is no new thing. The Arabs
of the desert boast to this day of King Solomon's stud of horses; but
in each and every instance where a nation has regulated and encouraged
the breeding of the horse to a high standard of excellence, they have
all begun at the primitive, or Arabian. Thus England in boasting of
her thoroughbred race horse admits it to be of Arabian origin. Russia
in boasting of her Orloff trotting and saddle horse tells you it is of
Arabian origin. France boldly informs you that her Percheron is but an
enlarged Arabian, and offers annual special premiums to such as
revitalize it with fresh Arabian blood.

After the war of 1812 our forefathers imported many Arabian stallions
to recuperate the blood of their remnants in horses. From 1830 such
prominent men as Andrew Jackson and Henry Clay said all they could by
private letter and public speech to encourage the importation of and
breeding freely to the Arabian horse, and specially did the State of
Kentucky follow the advice of Henry Clay, so that from 1830 up to 1857
Kentucky had more Arabian stallions in her little district than the
combined States of the Union. Kentucky has had a prestige in her mares
since the war, and it comes in the larger amount of Arabian blood
influence she has had in them, than could be found elsewhere. Kentucky
is shut in, as it were, and retaining her mares largely impregnated
with Arabian blood, all that was necessary for them to do was to get
trotting-bred stallions from New York State, then eclipse all other
States in the produce. While I cheerfully award to Kentucky all credit
due to it, I am not willing that Lieut. Robertson should make his base
for government breeding establishment sectional, nor would I submit to
England through Kentucky. I am too American for that.

For cavalry purposes, the Prussian horse is the best in the world, and
is also Arabian in its closest foundation.

To get at this blood question more definitely, let us inquire into
these different recognized self-producing national types of horses
abroad.

First is the English thoroughbred race horse, which is simply an
improved Arab. The functions of this English national horse are but
twofold--to run races and to beget himself, after which he ceases to
be of value. He is not a producer of any other type of value; to breed
him out of his family is mongrelism and degeneracy, so we don't want
him, even though we could humiliate our American pride through our
loved State of Kentucky.

Count Orloff of Russia was a great horseman, exceedingly fond of
horseback riding independent of the chase. He tried in 1800 to breed a
satisfactory horse from the English thoroughbred race horse, but went
from bad to worse until he resorted to the ever-pliant blood of the
Arabian. He sent to Egypt and secured a thoroughbred Arabian stallion,
paying $8,000 for him (in our money). This horse he bred to Danish
mares, largely of Arabian blood, and created a very stout, short-backed
horse, standing from 151/2 to 153/4 and 16 hands high, of great trotting
speed, also able to run to weight, and with good disposition, which
the English thoroughbred did not have. This type he continued to
close-breed, going back to the Arabian for renewed stoutness. At his
death, his estates passed to his daughter, who continued her father's
breedings until the Russian government purchased the entire
collection, about 1846, since when the Russian government Orloff
trotting and saddle horse has become famous the world over as a
first-class saddle, cavalry, stage coach, and trotting horse combined.
They are broken at three years of age, and scarce any that cannot beat
2:30 at trotting speed, and from that down to 2:15 in their crude way
of hitching and driving. This is something for American breeders to
think very interestedly upon.

France wanted heavy draught horses, also proud coach horses; so rather
than go to any competing nation for their created types, her
enterprising subjects took the same Arabian blood, and from it created
the beautiful Percheron, also French coach horses, so greatly valued
and admired the world over, and which the gifted and immortal Rosa
Bonheur has so happily reproduced upon canvas. Can America show any
kind of a horse to tempt her brush?

With regard to a foundation for a government or national horse, I am
certain so gifted and able United States officer as Mr. S.C. Robertson
did not know that it was unnecessary to go to England for the blood of
their national horse, even though we smuggled it through Kentucky or
any other of our States. Again, it would be impossible to produce any
type of a horse from the English thoroughbred, except a dunghill, and
Mr. Robertson would not have his government breed national dunghills!

I love England as our mother country, but am an American, born and
dyed in the wool to our independence, from the "Declaration."

Now let us see what England says of her thoroughbred: "He is no longer
to be relied upon for fulfilling his twofold functions as a racer and
reproducer of himself. He is degenerating in stoutness and speed. As a
sire he has acquired faults of constitution and temper which, while
leaving him the best we have, is not the best we should aspire to
have. His stoutness and speed are distinctly Arabian qualities, to
which we must resort for fresh and pure blood." We have shown that the
Englishman says "his thoroughbred is full of radical and growing
defects in wind, tendons, feet, and temper, and that his twofold
functions are to run races and reproduce himself, which are the end of
his purpose." Does our government want breeding farms upon which to
nurse these admitted "defects," including the "confirmed roarer," for
cavalry horses? I quote again: "Those who have had most to do with him
are ready to admit that he no longer possesses the soundness,
stoutness, speed, courage, and beauty he inherited from his Arabian
parentage. As a sire for half-bred stock, he may do for those who will
use him, but we must resort to the Arabian if we would revitalize and
sustain our thoroughbred race horse."

In the face of these statements, in print abroad, would Lieut.
Robertson make the base for our proposed national horse that of the
English thoroughbred, scattering the weeds from such imperfect
breedings among the farmers of our land?

I am writing as an old horseman and breeder, and not as a newspaper
man or young enthusiast, although the enthusiasm of youth is still in
me, for which I am thankful.

This question of horse breeding I have been deeply interested in for
forty years past. Let me quote to the reader from one of many letters
I have received from Sir Wilfrid Seawen Blunt during the past seven
years. His practical knowledge of the English thoroughbred race horse
and his blood cause, the Arabian, is the equal if not superior to any
other one man of this present age.

With his wife, Lady Anne, he dwelt with the different tribes of the
desert, studying the Arabs as a people, in their customs and habits,
also traditions with beliefs. In matter of their horses, Mr. Blunt
made a special study, while Lady Anne put her diaries in book form
after her return, and which book should be owned by every cultured and
educated lady in America. After spending a year in Arabia, traveling
both sides of the Euphrates and through Mesopotamia, as no other
Anglo-Saxons have been known to do, living with the different Bedouin
tribes of the desert as they lived, Mr. Blunt and his wife, Lady Anne,
came out with sixteen of the choicest bred mares to be found, also two
stallions, the mares mostly with foal. These were placed upon their
estates, "Crabbet Park," to continue inbreeding as upon the desert,
pure to its blood. As this question in itself will make a long and
interesting article, I will avoid it at present, quoting to the reader
from one of my old letters:


    "CRABBET PARK, SUSSEX, ENGLAND.

    "Dear Sir: Political matters have prevented an earlier reply to
    your last.

    "I am well satisfied with my present results, and shall not
    abandon what I have undertaken. The practical merits of Arabian
    blood are well understood by us.

    "Our sale of young stock maintains itself in good prices in
    spite of bad times; indeed, my average within the past two years
    has risen from L84 to L102 on the pure-breds sold as yearlings,
    and we receive the most flattering and satisfactory accounts
    from purchasers, although it is known that I retain the best of
    each year's produce, and so have greatly improved my breeding
    stock.

    "You speak of the opinions of the press as against you. The
    sporting press are not breeders, but are the mouthpiece of
    prejudices. We have had them somewhat against us, but they now
    view things in more friendly tone.

    "For immediate use in running races (in which the sporting press
    are chiefly interested), the Arabian in his undeveloped state
    and under size will not compete with the English race horse.
    This fact has caused racing men to doubt his other many and more
    important merits; indeed, it is only those who have had personal
    experience of him that as yet acknowledge them.

    "The strong points in the Arabian are many:

    "_First_, his undoubted soundness in constitution, in _wind_,
    _limb_, and _feet_. It will be noticed that the Englishman must
    have soundness in wind, limb, and feet, showing that their
    thoroughbred is the thorn in that particular. The Arabian has
    also wonderful intelligence, great beauty, and good disposition,
    with an almost affectionate desire to adapt himself to your
    wishes.

    "In breeding, I have found the pure-breds delicate during the
    first few weeks after birth, and have lost a good many,
    especially those foaled early in the year; yet it is a
    remarkable fact that during the eight years of my breeding them,
    I have had no serious illness in the stables; once over the
    dangerous age, they seem to have excellent constitutions, and
    are always sound in _wind_, _limb_, and _feet_.

    "_Second_, they are nearly all good natural and _fast walkers_,
    also fast trotters; and from the soundness of their feet are
    especially fitted for fast road work, being able to do almost
    any number of miles without fatigue.

    "_Third_, they are nearly all good natural jumpers, and I have
    not had a single instance of a colt that would not go across
    country well to hounds.

    "They are very bold fencers, requiring neither whip nor spur.
    They carry weight well, making bold and easy jumps where other
    larger horses fail.

    "_Fourth_, they have naturally good mouths, and good tempers,
    with free and easy paces; so that one who has accustomed
    himself to riding a pure-bred Arabian will hardly go back, if he
    can help it, to any other sort of horse.

    "There is all the difference in riding the Arabian and the
    ordinary English hunter or half-bred that there is in riding in
    a well-hung gig or a cart without springs.

    "_Fifth._ As sires for half-bred stock, the Arabian may not be
    better than a _first-class_ English thoroughbred, but is
    certainly better than a _second_-class one, and _first_-class
    sires are out of the reach of all ordinary breeders; for that
    reason I recommend a fair trial of his quality, confident your
    breeders will not be disappointed.

    "With good young mares who require a horse to give their
    offspring quality, that is to say, beauty, with courage and
    stoutness, and with a turn of speed for fast road work, the
    Arabian is better than any class of English thoroughbreds that
    are used for cross breeding.

    "I trust then for that reason you will not allow yourself to be
    discouraged by the slowness of the people to appreciate all the
    merits of the Arabian at once.

    "Our breeders are full of prejudices, and only experience can
    teach them the value of things outside their own circle of
    knowledge.

    "I have no doubt whatever that truth will in the end prevail;
    but you must have patience. Remember that a public is always
    impatient, and most often unreasonably so.

    "My stud I keep at a permanent strength of twelve brood mares,
    and as many fillies growing in reserve.

    "You ask me regarding the _pacing_ gait. I have seen it in the
    pure-bred Arabs on the desert; and in many parts of the East it
    is cultivated, notably in Asia Minor and Barbary. The walk,
    pace, amble, trot, and run are found in the Arabian, and either
    can be cultivated as a specialty.

    "If you think any of my letters to you are of general value to
    your people, I am quite willing you should so use them.

    "I am, very truly yours,

                                      "WILFRID SCAWEN BLUNT.
    "To RANDOLPH HUNTINGTON, Rochester, N.Y."


My experience with Arabian blood the past seven years justifies all
that Mr. Blunt has predicted to me from time to time. So also do old
letters by Andrew Jackson and Henry Clay hold out the same inducements
to the breeders of Kentucky and Tennessee in their day.

From my long years of experience in all classes of horses, I am frank
to say to-day that I would not be without a thoroughbred Arabian
stallion on my place, and journalists who inform their readers that
they "are liable to splints, ringbones, and spavins," give themselves
away to all intelligent readers and breeders as exceedingly
superficial in matter of horses; for ringbones and spavins are
positively unknown among the Arabs. The way to get rid of such
imperfections in our mongrel breed of horses is to fill them up with
pure Arab blood.

Such paper men also talk about "_fresh Diomed_" and "fresh Messenger
blood," as though there had been a drop of it in never so diluted form
for any influence these many years, of course forgetting that _Diomed_
was a very strongly _inbred Arabian_ horse. He came to this country
when 21 years old.

He was foaled 1777, and arrived in Virginia in 1798. From his old age
and rough voyage in an old-fashioned ship, it required nearly a year
to recuperate from the journey, and was 23 years old before he could
do stud service to any extent. Then, at no time to his death was he a
sure foal getter, even to a few mares. He died in 1808, thirty-one
years old, long enfeebled and unfit for service.

Between 1808 and 1887 is quite a period of time, during which we have
had four different wars, beginning with 1812, and how much Diomed
blood does the reader suppose there is in this country? Yet I take up
daily and weekly papers devoted to horse articles, extolling the value
of _Diomed_ blood as cause for excellence in some young horse. Are we
a nation of idiots to be influenced by such nonsense?

I wish there was fresh Diomed blood; thus the public would know what
Arab blood had done for England. So I can say of imported Messenger.
What our breeders want is good, solid information in print, and not
the; dreamings of some professional writer for money. For myself, I am
on the downhill side of life, but so long as I can help the young by
pen or example, I shall try.

                                                 RANDOLPH HUNTINGTON.
Rochester, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *




SCENES AMONG THE EXTINCT VOLCANOES OF RHINELAND.


In the province of the Rhine there is a range of mountains, including
several extinct volcanoes, which offer grand and beautiful scenery and
every opportunity for geological study, leading the mind back to the
early ages of the earth.

Let us take an imaginary trip through this region, starting on our
wanderings from the Rhine, where it breaks through the vine-clad slate
mountains of the Westerwald and the Eifel. A short distance above the
mouth of the Ahr we leave its banks, turning to the west, and entering
the mountains at the village of Nieder Breisig. A pretty valley leads
us up through orchards and meadows. The lower hills are covered with
vineyards and the mountains with a dense growth of bushes, so that we
do not obtain an extended view until we reach an elevated ridge.

[Illustration: DISTANT VIEW OF THE VOLCANIC PORTION OF THE EIFEL,
TAKEN FROM THE HEIGHTS OF THE SCHNEIFEL.]

The valley of the Rhine lies far below us, but the glittering surface
of the river, with the little towns, the castles and villas and the
gardens and vineyards on its banks are still visible, while in the
background the mountains of the Westerwald have risen above the hills
on the river. This range stretches out into a long wooded ridge
crowned by cone-shaped peaks of basalt. To the northwest of this lies
Siebengebirge, with its numerous domes and pinnacles, making a grand
picture veiled in the blue mist of distance. On the opposite side we
have a very different view of curious dome and cone shaped summits
surrounded by undulating plateaus or descending into deep ravines and
gorges. It is the western part of the volcanic region of Rhineland
which lies before us, and in the center of which is the Laachersee or
lake of Laach. The origin of these volcanoes is not as remote as many
suppose, but their activity must have continued for a comparatively
long period, judging from the extent of their lava beds.

[Illustration: THE SHORES OF LAACHERSEE.]

There was a time when the sea covered the lowlands of North Germany,
and the waves of a deep bay washed the slopes of the Siebengebirge.
Then the bed of the Rhine lay in the highlands, which it gradually
washed away until the surface of the river was far, far below the
level of its old bed; and then the volcanoes poured forth their
streams of lava over the surrounding plains.

In the course of time the surface of the country has changed so that
these lava beds now lie on the mountain sides overhanging the valleys
of to-day. Some of the volcanoes sent forth melted stones and ashes
from their summits, and streams of lava from their sides, while the
craters of others cracked and then sank in, throwing their debris over
the neighboring country. In the Eifel there are many such funnels
which now contain water forming beautiful lakes (Maaren), which add
much to the scenery of the Eifel. The Laachersee is the largest of
these lakes. In the mean time the channel of the Rhine had been worn
away almost to its present level, but the mountains still sent forth
their streams of lava, which stopped brooks and filled the ravines,
and even the Rhine itself was dammed up by the great stream from
Fornicherkopf forming what was formerly the Neuwied. The old lava
stream which obstructed the river is still to be seen in a towering
wall of rock, extending close beside the road and track that follow
the shore.

[Illustration: CRATER AND LAKE ON TOP OF THE MOSENBERGE.]

After having made these observations, we descend from the height which
afforded us the view of the Vinrt Valley. A clear brook flows through
green meadows and variegated fields stretch along the mountain sides,
while modest little villages are scattered among the fruit trees. On
the other side of the valley rises the Herchenberg, an extinct
volcano. As we climb its sides we see traces of the former
devastation. Loose ashes cover the ground, bits of mica glittering in
the sun, and on the summit we find enormous masses of stone which were
melted and then baked together. In the center lies the old crater, a
quiet, barren place bearing very little vegetation, but from its wall
an excellent view of the surrounding country can be obtained. Not far
from this mountain lies the mighty Bausenberg, with its immense, well
preserved crater, only one side of which has been broken away, and
which is covered with a thick growth of bushes. The ledges of this
mountain are full of interest for the mineralogist. Nearer to Lake
Laach are the Wahnenkopfe, the proud Veitskopf, and other cone-shaped
peaks. To these we direct our steps, and after a long tramp over the
