the distributor with mica or some other non-conductor of heat and
electricity. The distributor is attached to and supported by the cross
arms, so that it turns with the armature.

The distributor is composed of a ribbon of iron or nickel, bent into a
continuous zigzag. This form has the advantage of presenting, in the
cool part of the distributor, an almost direct road for the lines of
force between the poles and the armature, thus diminishing the magnetic
resistance as far as possible. At the same time the Foucault currents
are minimized. To the same end it is useful to slit the ribbon, as in
Fig. 3. This also facilitates the folding into zigzags.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

The distributor is heated at two opposite points on a diameter by the
burners, _b b_, above which are the chimneys, _e e_. The cooling of the
alternate section is aided by the circulation of cold air, which is
effected by means of the draught in the chimneys, _e e_. At the points
of lowest temperature a jet of air or water is maintained. The cross
arms are insulated with mica or asbestos at the points where they extend
from the armature to the distributor.

It will now be evident that while the distributor is entirely cool, many
of the lines of force pass from N to S without entering the armature
core; but if heat is applied at the points 1 and 2 in the figure, so as
to increase the magnetic resistance at these points, then a great
portion of the lines will leave the distributor, and pass through the
armature core. Under these conditions, so long as heat is applied at two
points equidistant from N and S, we might, if we so pleased, cause the
armature to be rotated by an external source of power, and we should
then have an E.M.F. generated in the armature coils--that is to say, the
machine would work as an ordinary dynamo, and the power expended in
driving the armature would be proportionate to the output.

Suppose next that the points of heating, and with them the alternate
points of cooling 90 deg. apart, are shifted round about 45 deg., so
that the two hot regions are no longer symmetrically situated in respect
to each pole of the field. The distribution of the magnetization has
therefore become unsymmetrical, and the iron core is no longer in
equilibrium in the magnetic field. We have, in fact, the conditions of
Schwedoff's experiment upon a larger scale, and if the forces are
sufficient to overcome the frictional resistance, a rotation of the ring
ensues in the endeavor to restore equilibrium. The regions of heating
and cooling being fixed in space, this rotation is continuous so long as
the difference of temperature is maintained. The ring in rotating
carries with it the armature coils, and of course an E.M.F. is generated
in the same way as if the motive power came from an external source. In
this respect the machine therefore resembles a motor generator, and the
rotation is entirely automatic.

The armature coils are connected with a commutator in the usual way, and
the field may, of course, be excited either in shunt or in series. M.
Menges says that the residual magnetization is sufficient in his machine
to start the rotation by itself.

When the machine is to be used as a motor, it is evident that the
windings on the armature core need only be sufficient to supply current
to excite the field, or by the use of permanent magnets they may be
dispensed with altogether.

M. Menges has further designed a large number of variations on the
original type, varying the arrangement of the several parts, and
employing armatures and fields of many different types, such as are
already in use for dynamos.

In Fig. 4 a machine is represented in which the field is external to the
armature.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

In Fig. 5 we have a thermo-magnetic generator, which corresponds to the
disk machine in dynamos. Similar parts are indicated by the same letters
in each of these figures, so that no further detailed description is
necessary.

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

In another modification M. Menges proposes to rotate the burners and
leave the armature and distributor at rest. But in this case it is
evident that the E.M.F. produced would be much less, because the
magnetization of the core would only undergo a variation of intensity,
and would nowhere be reversed, except, perhaps, just in front of the
poles. In machines modeled on the Brush type it is evident that the
distributor need not be continuous.

Enough has, however, been said to indicate the extent of the field upon
which the principle may be applied.--_The Electrician._

       *       *       *       *       *




OBSERVATIONS ON ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICITY.[1]

   [Footnote 1: Abstract of a paper read before the British
   Association meeting at Manchester, September, 1887.]

BY PROF. L. WEBER.


I will try to give a short report of some experiments I have made during
the last year in regard to atmospheric electricity. It was formerly
uncertain whether the electrostatic potential would increase by rising
from the surface of the earth to more elevated region of the atmosphere
or not, and also whether the potential in a normal--that is,
cloudless--state of the atmosphere was always positive or sometimes
negative. Sir William Thomson found by exact methods of measuring that
the increase of the potential with elevation is very important, and
values about 100 volts per meter. That fact is proved by many other
observers, especially lately by Mr. F. Exner, at Vienna, who found an
increase of 60 to 600 volts per meter. The observations were made by
means of an electrometer. In respect of many inconveniences which are
connected with the use of an electrometer, I have tried the measurements
with a very sensitive galvanometer. In this case it is necessary to
apply a separating air exhaust apparatus, for example flame, or a system
of points at the upper end of the conductor, which is elevated in the
atmosphere. In order to get a constant apparatus, I have used 400 of the
finest needles inserted in a metallic ribbon. This system I have raised
in the air by means of a captive balloon, or by a kite, which was
attached to a conductor of twine or to a twisted line of the finest
steel wire. In this way I have attained a height of 100 to 300 meters.
When the lower end of the kite line was communicating with the
galvanometer whose other terminal was in contact with the earth, a
current passed through the galvanometer. For determining the strength of
this current I proposed to called a micro-ampere the 10^{-9} part of an
ampere. At the height of about 100 meters in the average the current
begins to be regular, and increases at the height of 300 meters to 4,000
or 5,000 of these units. The increase is very regular, and seems to be a
linear function of the height. I have, nevertheless, found the smallest
quantities of dust contained in the atmosphere or the lightest veil of
cirrus disturbed the measurement very materially, and generally made the
potential lower. In negative experiments of this nature I have made at
Breslau, at the Sohneekoppe, and at the "Reisengebirge," especially at
the last station, an increase of potential was observed, not only by
reason of the perpendicular height, but also by reaching such regions of
the atmosphere as were situated horizontally to about 200 meters from
the utmost steep of the same mountain, Sohneekoppe. Therefore it must,
according to Mr. Exner, be assumed that the surface of the air presents
a surface of equal potential, and that the falling surfaces of high
potential were stretched parallel over the plane contours of the air,
and more thinly or narrow lying over all the elevated points, as, for
example, mountains, church towers, etc. On the basis of these facts I
think it easy to explain the electricity of thunder storm clouds, in
fact every cloud, or every part of a cloud, may be considered as a
leading conductor, such clouds as have for the most part perpendicular
height. After being induced the change results by supposing the
conduction of electricity either from the upper or from the lower side,
according to greater or smaller speed of the air in the height. In the
first case the clouds will be charged positive, in the other negative. I
am inclined, therefore, to state that the electricity of thunder storm
clouds must be considered as a special but disturbed case of the normal
electric state of the atmosphere, and that all attempts to explain
thunder storm electricity must be based on the study of the normal
electric state of the atmosphere.

       *       *       *       *       *




LINNAEUS.[1]

   [Footnote 1: For the illustrations and many facts in the life of
   Linnaeus we are indebted to the _Illustrated Tidning_, Stockholm.]

BY C.S. HALLBERG.


At intervals in the history of science, long periods of comparative
inertia have attended the death of its more distinguished workers. As
time progresses and the number of workers increases, there is a
corresponding increase in the number of men whose labors merit
distinction in the literature of every language; but as these accessions
necessitate in most cases further division of the honors, many names
conspicuously identified with modern science fail of their just relative
rank, and fade into unmerited obscurity. Thus the earlier workers in
science, like Scheele, Liebig, Humboldt, and others of that and later
periods, have won imperishable fame, to which we all delight to pay
homage, while others of more recent times, whose contributions have
perhaps been equally valuable for their respective periods, are given
stinted recognition of their services, if indeed their names are not
quite forgotten. Nothing illustrates so clearly the steps in the
evolution of science as a review of the relative status of its
representatives. As in the political history of the world an epoch like
that of the French revolution stands out like a mountain peak, so in the
history of science an epoch occurs rather by evolution than revolution,
when a hitherto chaotic, heterogeneous mass of knowledge is rapidly
given shape and systematized. Previous to the seventeenth century an
immense mass of facts had accumulated through the labors of
investigators working under the Baconian philosophy, but these facts had
been thrown together in a confused, unsystematic manner. A man of master
mind was then needed to grasp the wonders of nature and formulate the
existing knowledge of them into a scientific system with a natural
basis. Such a system was given by Linnaeus, and so great were its merits
that it continues the foundation of all existing systems of
classification.

Charles Linnaeus was born May 13, 1707, in a country place named Roshult
in Smaland, near Skane, Sweden. He was called Charles after the well
known Swedish knight errant, King Charles XII., then at the height of
his renown.

The natural beauty of his native place, with its verdure-clad hills, its
stately trees, and sparkling brooks fringed with mosses and flowers,
inspired the boy Linnaeus with a love of nature and a devotion to her
teachings which tinged the current of his whole life. He was destined by
his parents for the ministry, and in accordance with their wish was sent
to the Vexio Academy ("gymnasium"). Here the dull theological studies
interfered so much with his study of nature that he would have felt lost
but for the sympathy of Dr. Rothman, one of his teachers, a graduate of
Harderwyk University, Holland, who had been a pupil of Boerhaave (the
most eminent physician and scientist of his day), and been much
impressed by his scientific teachings.

[Illustration]

Dr. Rothman took a great interest in Linnaeus, and assured his father
that he would prove a great success financially and otherwise as a
physician (an occupation whose duties then included a study of all
existing sciences). The father was satisfied, but dreaded the effect the
announcement of such a career would have on the mother, whose ambition
had been to see her son's name among the long list of clergymen of the
family who had been ministers to the neighboring church of Stentrohult.
She finally yielded, and the best possible use was made by Linnaeus of
Dr. Rothman's tuition. Latin, then the mother tongue of all scientists
and scholars, he wrote and spoke fluently.

At the age of twenty Linnaeus entered the University of Lund, and
remained there a year. Here he formed the acquaintance of a medical man,
a teacher in the university, who opened his home and his library to him,
and took him on his botanical excursions and professional visits. Some
time later, on Dr. Rothman's advice, Linnaeus entered the University of
Upsala, then the most celebrated university of Northern Europe. His
parents were able to spare him but one hundred silver thalers for his
expenses. At the end of a year his money was spent, his clothing and
shoes were worn out, and he was without prospects of obtaining a
scholarship. When things were at their gloomiest he accidentally entered
into a discussion with a stranger in the botanical garden, who turned
out to be a clergyman scientist named Celsius. Celsius, while staying at
Upsala, had conceived the plan of given a botanical description of
biblical plants. Having learned that Linnaeus had a herbarium of 600
plants, he took the young man under his protection, and opened up to him
his home and library.

While studying in this library, his observations regarding the sexes in
plants, hitherto in a chaotic state, took form, stimulated by an
abstract published in a German journal of Vaillant's views, and before
the end of 1729 the basis of the sexual system had appeared in
manuscript. This treatise having been seen by a member of the university
faculty, Linnaeus was invited to fill a temporary vacancy, and lectured
with great success therein one and a half years. Meanwhile the
foundation of the celebrated treatises afterward published on the sexual
system of classification and on plant nomenclature had been laid.

As in the history of most great men, a seemingly great misfortune proved
to be a turning point in his career. The position he had temporarily
filled with such credit to himself and profit to the students was
claimed by its regular occupant, and, despite the opposition of the
faculty, Linnaeus had to relinquish it. The two subsequent years were
spent in botanical investigations under the patronage of various eminent
men. During one of these he traveled through Lapland to the shores of
the Polar Sea, and the results of this expedition were embodied in his
"Lapland Flora," the first flora founded on the sexual system. He
delivered a peripatetic course of lectures, and during one of these he
formed the acquaintance of Dr. Moraeus, a pupil of the great Boerhaave.
Dr. Moraeus took Linnaeus into partnership with him. Here again a seeming
misfortune proved to be a great advantage. Linnaeus fell in love with the
eldest daughter of Dr. Moraeus, but was denied her hand until he should
graduate in medicine. Linnaeus, to complete his studies as a physician,
then entered the University of Harderwyk, Holland, the alma mater of his
first benefactor, Dr. Rothman, and of the great Boerhaave.

After two years' study he was graduated in medicine with high honors.
His thesis, "The Cause of Chills," received special commendation. He
visited all the botanical gardens and other scientific institutions for
which Holland was then renowned. A learned and wealthy burgomaster,
Gronovius, having read his "Systema Naturae" in manuscript, not only
defrayed the cost of its publication, but secured him the high honor of
an interview with the great Boerhaave--an honor for which even the Czar
Peter the Great had to beg.

Boerhaave's interest was at once awakened, and he gave Linnaeus so strong
a recommendation to Dr. Burman, of Amsterdam, that the influence of the
scientific circles of the Dutch metropolis was exerted in behalf of
Linnaeus, and he was soon offered the position of physician
superintendent of a magnificent botanical garden owned by a millionaire
horticultural enthusiast, Clifford, a director of the Dutch East India
Company. Linnaeus' financial and scientific future was now secure.
Publication of his works was insured, and his position afforded him
every opportunity for botanical research. After five years' residence in
Holland, during which he declined several positions of trust, he
determined to return to Sweden. His fame had become so widespread in
Western Europe that his system was already adopted by scientists and
made the basis of lectures at the Dutch universities. In the French
metropolis he was greatly esteemed, and during a visit thereto he was a
highly distinguished guest.

[Illustration: ROSHULT, SWEDEN, BIRTHPLACE OF LINNAEUS.]

His reception in Sweden was rather frigid, and but for the hearty
welcome by his family and betrothed he would probably have returned to
Holland. His _amour propre_ was also doubtless wounded, and he
determined to remain and fight his way into the magic circle of the
gilt-edged aristocracy which then monopolized all scientific honors in
Stockholm and the universities. He acquired a great reputation for the
treatment of lung disease, and was popularly credited with the ability
to cure consumption. This reached the ears of the queen (a sufferer from
the disease), who directed one of her councilors to send for Linnaeus. He
soon recognized the name of Linnaeus as one of great renown on the
Continent, and at once took him under his protection.

The star of Linnaeus was now in the ascendant. He was soon delegated to
various pleasant duties, among which was the delivery of lectures on
botany and mineralogy in the "auditorium illustre" at Stockholm. He at
this time founded the "Swedish Scientific Academy," and was its first
president. In 1741 he was elected professor of medicine in Upsala
University, which chair he exchanged for that of botany and the position
of director of the botanical garden. This opened up a new era for
science in Sweden. He who was regarded as the world's greatest botanist
abroad had at last been similarly acknowledged in his native land.

With the indomitable courage and tact characteristic of the man, he set
on foot a gigantic scientific popular educational project. The
government, under his direction, established a system of exploring
expeditions into the fauna, flora, and mineralogy of the whole Swedish
peninsula, partly for the purpose of developing the resources of the
country, partly in the interest of science, but more especially to
interest the mass of the people in scientific research. The vast
majority of the people of Sweden, like those of other countries, were
dominated by fetichic superstitions and absurd notions about plants and
vegetables, which were indorsed to a certain extent by popular handbooks
devoted more to the dissemination of marvels than facts. A popular
clergyman, for instance, stated in a description of the maritime
provinces that "certain ducks grew upon trees." The vast stride which
was made by the populace in the knowledge of nature was due to these
efforts of Linnaeus, who, in order to further popularize science,
established and edited, in conjunction with Salvius, a journal devoted
to the discussion of natural history.

During this period, on the first of May, semi-weekly excursions were
made from the university, the public being invited to attend. The people
came to these excursions by hundreds, and all classes were represented
in them--physicians, apothecaries, preachers, merchants, and mechanics,
all joined the procession, which left the university at seven in the
morning, to return at eve laden with zoological, botanical, and
mineralogical specimens.

A man who could thus arouse popular enthusiasm for science a century and
a half ago must have been a remarkable genius. Trusted students of
Linnaeus were sent on botanical exploring expeditions throughout the
world. The high renown in which Linnaeus was held was shown in the
significant title, almost universally bestowed upon him, of "The Flower
King."--_Western Druggist._

       *       *       *       *       *




ON A METHOD OF MAKING THE WAVE LENGTH OF SODIUM LIGHT THE ACTUAL AND
PRACTICAL STANDARD OF LENGTH.

BY ALBERT A. MICHELSON AND EDWARD W. MORLEY.


The first actual attempt to make the wave length of sodium light a
standard of length was made by Peirce.[1] This method involves two
distinct measurements: first, that of the angular displacement of the
image of a slit by a diffraction grating, and, second, that of the
distance between the lines of the grating. Both of these are subject to
errors due to changes of temperature and to instrumental errors. The
results of this work have not as yet been published; but it is not
probable that the degree of accuracy attained is much greater than one
part in fifty or a hundred thousand. More recently, Mr. Bell, of the
Johns Hopkins University, using Rowland's gratings, has made a
determination of the length of the wave of sodium light which is claimed
to be accurate to one two hundred thousandth part[2]. If this claim is
justified, it is probably very near the limit of accuracy of which the
method admits. A short time before this, another method was proposed by
Mace de Lepinay.[3] This consists in the calculation of the number of
wave lengths between two surfaces of a cube of quartz. Besides the
spectroscopic observations of Talbot's fringes, the method involves the
measurement of the index of refraction and of the density of quartz, and
it is not surprising that the degree of accuracy attained was only one
in fifty thousand.

   [Footnote 1: Nature, xx, 99, 1879; this Journal, III, xviii, 51, 1879.]

   [Footnote 2: On the absolute wave lengths of light, this Journal,
   III, xxxiii, 167, 1887.]

   [Footnote 3: Comptes Rendus, cii, 1153, 1886; Journal, de Phys.,
   II, v, 411, 1886.]

Several years ago, a method suggested itself which seemed likely to
furnish results much more accurate than either of the foregoing, and
some preliminary experiments made in June have confirmed the
anticipation. The apparatus for observing the interference phenomena is
the same as that used in the experiments on the relative motion of the
earth and the luminiferous ether.

Light from the source at s (Fig. 1), a sodium flame, falls on the
plane parallel glass, a, and is divided, part going to the plane
mirror, c, and part to the plane mirror, b. These two pencils are
returned along _cae_ and _bae_, and the interference of the two is
observed in the telescope at e. If the distances, _ac_ and _ab_, are
made equal, the plane, c, made parallel with that of the image of b,
and the compensating glass, d, interposed, the interference is at once
seen. If the adjustment be exact, the whole field will be dark, since
one pencil experiences external reflection and the other internal.

If now b be moved parallel with itself a measured distance by means of
the micrometer screw, the number of alternations of light and darkness
is exactly twice the number of wave lengths in the measured distance.
Thus the determination consists absolutely of a measurement of a length
and the counting of a number.

The degree of accuracy depends on the number of wave lengths which it is
possible to count. Fizeau was unable to observe interference when the
difference of path amounted to 50,000 wave lengths. It seemed probable
that with a smaller density of sodium vapor this number might be
increased, and the experiment was tried with metallic sodium in an
exhausted tube provided with aluminum electrodes. It was found possible
to increase this number to more than 200,000. Now it is very easy to
estimate tenths or even twentieths of a wave length, which implies that
it is possible to find the number of wave lengths in a given fixed
distance between two planes with an error less than one part in two
millions and probably one in ten millions. But the distance
corresponding to 400,000 wave lengths is roughly a decimeter, and this
cannot be determined or reproduced more accurately than say to one part
in 500,000. So it would be necessary to increase this distance. This
can be done by using the same instrument together with a comparer.

The intermediate standard decimeter, lm (Fig. 2), is put in place of
the mirror, b. It consists of a prism of glass one decimeter long with
one end, l, plane, and the other slightly convex, so that when it
touches the plane, m, Newton's rings appear, and these serve to
control any change in the distance, lm, which has been previously
determined in wave lengths.

The end, l, is now adjusted so that colored fringes appear in white
light. These can be measured to within one-twentieth of a wave length,
and probably to within one-fiftieth. The piece, lm, is then moved
