part in the Paris exhibition, and from the wide range of its
specialties exhibits largely in three important branches of industry:
mechanics, electricity, and the optics of lighthouses and projectors.
In these three branches MM. Sautter, Lemonnier & Co. occupy a leading
position in all parts of the world.

The invention of the aplanetic projector, due to Col. Mangin, was a
clever means of overcoming difficulties, practically insurmountable,
that were inseparable from the construction of parabolic mirrors; this
contributed chiefly to the success of MM. Sautter, Lemonnier & Co. in
this direction. The firm has produced more than 1,500 of these
apparatus, representing a value of nearly L500,000, for the French and
other governments.

Besides the great projector, which forms the central and crowning
object of the exhibit of MM. Sautter, Lemonnier & Co. in the machinery
hall, the firm exhibits a projector 90 centimeters in diameter mounted
on a crane traveling on wheels, in the pavilion of the War Department.
The lamp used for this apparatus has a luminous value of 6,000
carcels, with a current of 100 amperes; the amplifying power of the
mirror is 2,025, which gives an intensity of ten millions to twelve
millions of carcels to the beam.

Projectors used for field work are mounted on a portable carriage,
which also contains the electric generator and the motor driving it.

[Illustration: MILITARY PORTABLE ELECTRIC LIGHT AT THE PARIS
EXHIBITION.]

It consists of a tubular boiler (Dion, Bouton & Trepardoux system).
This generator is easily taken to pieces, cleaned, and repaired, and
steam can be raised to working pressure in 20 minutes. The mechanical
and electrical part of the apparatus consists of a Parsons
turbo-motor, of which MM. Sautter, Lemonnier & Co. possess the license
in France for application to military and naval purposes. The speed of
the motor is 9,000 revolutions per minute, and the dynamo is driven
direct from it; at this speed it gives a current of 100 amperes with
and from 55 to 70 volts; the intensity of the light is from 5,500 to
6,000 carcels. The carriage upon which the whole of this apparatus is
mounted is carried on four wheels, made of wood with gun metal
mountings. These are more easy to repair when in service than if they
were wholly of iron. The weight of the carriage is three
tons.--_Engineering._

       *       *       *       *       *




ELECTRIC MOTOR FOR ALTERNATING CURRENTS.


Prof. Galileo Ferraris, of Turin, who has carefully studied
alternating currents and secondary transformers, has constructed a
little motor based upon an entirely new principle, which is as
follows: If we take two inductive fields developed by two bobbins, the
axes of which cut each other at right angles, and a pole placed at the
vertex of the angle, this pole will be subjected to the simultaneous
action of the two bobbins, and the resultant of the magnetic actions
will be represented in magnitude and direction by the diagonal of the
parallelogram, two consecutive sides of which have for their length
the intensity of the two fields, and for their direction the axes of
the two bobbins.

If into each of these bobbins we send alternating currents having
between one bobbin and the other a difference of phase of 90 deg., the
extremity of the resultant will describe a circle having for its
center the vertex of the right angle.

If, instead of a fixed pole, we use a metal cylinder movable on its
axis, we shall obtain a continuous rotatory motion of this part, and
the direction of the movement will change when we interchange the
difference of phase in the exciting currents. This rotatory movement
is not due to the Foucault currents, for the metal cylinder may
consist of plates of iron insulated from each other.

In order to realize the production of these fields, several means can
be employed: The current is sent from an alternating current machine
into the primary circuit of a transformer and thence into one of the
bobbins, the other being supplied by means of the secondary current of
the transformer. A resistance introduced into the circuit will produce
the required difference of phase, and the equality of the intensities
of the fields will be obtained by multiplying the number of turns of
the secondary wire on the bobbin. Moreover, the two bobbins may be
supplied by the secondary current of a transformer by producing the
difference of phase, as in the first case.

In the motor constructed by Prof. Ferraris the armature consisted of a
copper cylinder measuring 7 centimeters in diameter and 15 centimeters
in length, movable on its axis. The inductors were formed of two
groups of two bobbins. The bobbins which branched off from the primary
circuit of a Gaulard transformer, and were connected in series,
comprised 196 spirals with a resistance of 13 ohms; the bobbins
comprising the secondary circuit were coupled in parallel, and had 504
spirals with 3.43 ohms resistance. In order to produce the difference
of phase, a resistance of 17 ohms was introduced into the second
circuit, when the dynamo produced a current of 9 amperes with 80
inversions per second. Under these conditions the available work
measured on the axis of the motor was found for different speeds:
Revolutions per minute: 262--400--546--650--722--770. Watts measured
at the brake: 1.32--2.12--2.55--2.77--2.55--2.40. The maximum
rendering corresponds to a speed of rotation of 650 revolutions, and
Prof. Ferraris attributes the loss of work for higher speeds to the
vibrations to which the machine is exposed. At present the apparatus
is but a laboratory one.--_Bulletin International de l'Electricite._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ELECTRIC AGE.

By CHARLES CARLETON COFFIN.


The application of electricity for our convenience and comfort is one
of the marvels of the age. Never in the history of the world has there
been so rapid a development of an occult science. Prior to 1819 very
little was known in regard to magnetism and electricity. During that
year Oersted discovered that an electric current would deflect a
magnetic needle, thus showing that there was some relationship between
electric and magnetic force. A few months later, Arago and Sir Humphry
Davy, independently of each other, discovered that by coiling a wire
around a piece of iron, and passing an electric current through it,
the iron would possess for the time being all the properties of a
magnet. In 1825 William Sturgeon, of London, bent a piece of wire in
the form of the letter U, wound a second wire around it, and, upon
connecting it with a galvanic battery, discovered that the first wire
became magnetic, but lost its magnetic property the moment the battery
was disconnected. The idea of a telegraphic signal came to him, but
the electric impulse, through his rude apparatus, faded out at a
distance of fifty feet. In 1830 Prof. Joseph Henry, of this country,
constructed a line of wire, one and a half miles in length, and sent a
current of electricity through it, ringing a bell at the farther end.
The following year Professor Faraday discovered magnetic induction.
This, in brief, is the genesis of magnetic electricity, which is the
basis of all that has been accomplished in electrical science.

The first advance after these discoveries was in the development of
the electric telegraph--the discovery in 1837, by the philosopher
Steinhill, that the earth could serve as a conductor, thus requiring
but one wire in the employment of an electric current. Simultaneously
came Morse's invention of the mechanism for the telegraph in 1844,
foreshadowed by Henry in the ringing of bells, thus transmitting
intelligence by sound. Four years later, in 1848, Prof. M. G. Farmer,
still living in Eliot, Me., attached an electro-magnet to clockwork
for the striking of bells to give an alarm of fire. The same idea came
to William F. Channing. The mechanism, constructed simply to
illustrate the idea by Professor Farmer, was placed upon the roof of
the Court House in Boston, and connected with the telegraph wire
leading to New York, and an alarm rung by the operator in that city.
The application of electricity for giving definite information to
firemen was first made in Boston, and it was my privilege to give the
first alarm on the afternoon of April 12, 1852.

At the close of the last century, Benjamin Thompson, born in Woburn,
Mass., known to the world as Count Rumford, was in the workshop of the
military arsenal of the King of Bavaria in Munich, superintending the
boring of a cannon. The machinery was worked by two horses. He was
surprised at the amount of heat which was generated, for when he threw
the borings into a tumbler filled with cold water, it was set to
boiling, greatly to the astonishment of the workmen. Whence came the
heat? What was heat? The old philosopher said that it was an element.
By experiment he discovered that a horse working two hours and twenty
minutes with the boring machinery would heat nineteen pounds of water
to the boiling point. He traced the heat to the horse, but with all
his acumen he did not go on with the induction to the hay and oats, to
the earth, the sunshine and rain, and so get back to the sun. One
hundred years ago there was no chemical science worthy of the name, no
knowledge of the constitution of plants or the properties of light and
heat. The old philosophers considered light and heat to be fluids,
which passed out of substances when they were too full. Count Rumford
showed that motion was convertible into heat, but did not trace the
motion to its source, so far as we know, in the sun.

It is only forty-six years since Professor Joule first demonstrated
the mutual relations of all the manifestations of nature's energy.
Thirty-nine years only have passed since he announced the great law of
the convertibility of force. He constructed a miniature churn which
held one pound of water, and connected the revolving paddle of the
churn with a wheel moved by a pound weight, wound up the weight, and
set the paddle in motion. A thermometer detected the change of
temperature and a graduated scale marked the distance traversed by the
descending weight. Repeated experiments showed that a pound weight
falling 772 feet would raise the temperature of water one degree, and
that this was an unvarying law. This was transferring gravitation to
heat, and the law held good when applied to electricity, magnetism,
and chemical affinity, leading to the conclusion that they were
severally manifestations of one universal power.--_Congregationalist._

       *       *       *       *       *




EARLY ELECTRIC LIGHTING.


The opening of the new station of the Electric Lighting Co., of Salem,
Mass., was recently celebrated with appropriate festivities.

Among the letters of regret from those unable to attend the opening
was the following from Prof. Moses G. Farmer:

                                        "ELIOT, Me., Aug. 5, 1889.

"_To the Salem Electric Lighting Company, Charles H. Price,
President_:

"GENTLEMEN: It would give me great pleasure to accept your kind
invitation to be present at the opening of your new station in Salem
on the 8th of this present August.

"It is now thirty years since the first dwelling house in Salem was
lighted by electricity. That little obscure dwelling, 11 Pearl Street,
formerly owned by 'Pa' Webb, had the honor to be illuminated by the
effulgent electric beam during every evening of July, 1859, as some of
your honored residents, perhaps, well remember. Mr. George D. Phippen
can doubtless testify to one or more evenings; Mr. Wm. H. Mendell, of
Boston, can also add his testimony; dozens of others could also do the
same, had not some of them already passed to the 'great beyond,' among
whom I well recollect the interest taken by the late and honored Henry
L. Williams, Mr. J. G. Felt, and I do not know how many others. I well
remember reading some of the very finest print standing with my back
to the front wall and reading by the light of a 32 candle power lamp
on the northernmost end of the mantel piece in the parlor; very
possibly the hole in which the lamp was fastened remains to this day.
In a little closet in the rear sleeping room was a switch which could
be turned in one direction and give a beautiful glow light, while if
turned in the other direction, it instantly gave as beautiful a dark.
My then 12 year old daughter used to surprise and please her visitors
by suddenly turning on and off the 'glim.' It is not well to despise
the day of small things, for although the dynamo had not at that date
put in an appearance, and though I used thirty-six Smee cells of six
gallons capacity each, yet I demonstrated then and there that the
incandescent electric light was a possibility, and although I
innocently remarked to the late Samuel W. Bates, of Boston, who with
his partner, Mr. Chauncey Smith, furnished so generously in the
interest of science, not wholly without hope of return, the funds for
the experiment, that it 'did not take much zinc,' and though Mr. Bates
as naively replied, 'I notice that it takes some silver, though,'
still it was then and there heralded as the coming grand illuminant
for the dwelling. I am thankful to have lived to see my predictions
partly fulfilled.

"During the early fifties I published a statement something like this:
'One pound of coal will furnish gas enough to maintain a candle light
for fifteen hours. One pound of gas (the product of five pounds of
coal) will, in a good fishtail gas burner, furnish one candle light
for seventy-five hours. One pound of coal burned in a good furnace,
under a good boiler, driving a good steam engine, turning a good
magneto-electric machine, will give a candle light for one thousand
hours. But if all the energy locked up in one pound of pure carbon
could be wholly converted into light, it would maintain one candle
light for more than one and a half years.'

"So, gentlemen, _nil desperandum_; there is still room for
improvement. Let your motto be 'Excelsior.' Possibly you may have
already extracted from one-fifteenth to one-twelfth of the energy
stored in the pound of carbon, but hardly more. Go on, go on, and
bring it so cheap as to reach the humblest dwelling when you shall
celebrate the centennial of the opening of your new station.

"I do most sincerely regret that I cannot be with you in the flesh. I
am, like Ixion of old, confined to a wheel (chair in my case), cannot
walk, cannot even stand; hence, owing to the impairment of my
understanding (???), I must wish you all the enjoyments of the
evening, and gladly content myself that you have made so much
possible.

                    "Very truly yours, MOSES G. FARMER."

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MODERN THEORY OF LIGHT.[1]

    [Footnote 1: Being the general substance of a lecture to the
    Ashmolean Society in the University of Oxford, on Monday, June
    3, 1889. [Reprinted from the _Liverpool University College
    Magazine_.]]

By Prof. OLIVER LODGE.


To persons occupied in other branches of learning, and not directly
engaged in the study of physical science, some rumor must probably
have traveled of the stir and activity manifest at the present time
among the votaries of that department of knowledge.

It may serve a useful purpose if I try and explain to outsiders what
this stir is mainly about, and why it exists. There is a proximate and
there is an ultimate cause. The proximate cause is certain experiments
exhibiting in a marked and easily recognizable way the already
theoretically predicted connection between electricity and light. The
ultimate cause is that we begin to feel inklings and foretastes of
theories, wider than that of gravitation, more fundamental than any
theories which have yet been advanced; theories which if successfully
worked out will carry the banner of physical science far into the dark
continent of metaphysics, and will illuminate with a clear philosophy
much that is at present only dimly guessed. More explicitly, we begin
to perceive chinks of insight into the natures of electricity, of
ether, of elasticity, and even of matter itself. We begin to have a
kinetic theory of the physical universe.

We are living, not in a Newtonian, but at the beginning of a perhaps
still greater Thomsonian era. Greater, not because any one man is
probably greater than Newton,[2] but because of the stupendousness of
the problems now waiting to be solved. There are a dozen men of great
magnitude, either now living or but recently deceased, to whom what we
now know toward these generalizations is in some measure due, and the
epoch of complete development may hardly be seen by those now alive.
It is proverbially rash to attempt prediction, but it seems to me that
it may well take a period of fifty years for these great strides to be
fully accomplished. If it does, and if progress goes on at anything
like its present rate, the aspect of physical science bequeathed to
the latter half of the twentieth century will indeed excite
admiration, and when the populace are sufficiently educated to
appreciate it, will form a worthy theme for poetry, for oratorios, and
for great works of art.

    [Footnote 2: Though, indeed, a century hence it may be premature
    to offer an opinion on such a point.]

To attempt to give any idea of the drift of progress in all the
directions which I have hastily mentioned, to attempt to explain the
beginnings of the theories of elasticity and of matter, would take too
long, and might only result in confusion. I will limit myself chiefly
to giving some notion of what we have gained in knowledge concerning
electricity, ether, and light. Even that is far too much. I find I
must confine myself principally to light, and only treat of the others
as incidental to that.

For now well nigh a century we have had a wave theory of light; and a
wave theory of light is quite certainly true. It is directly
demonstrable that light consists of waves of some kind or other, and
that these waves travel at a certain well-known velocity, seven times
the circumference of the earth per second, taking eight minutes on the
journey from the sun to the earth. This propagation in time of an
undulatory disturbance necessarily involves a medium. If waves setting
out from the sun exist in space eight minutes before striking our
eyes, there must necessarily be in space some medium in which they
exist and which conveys them. Waves we cannot have unless they be
waves in something.

No ordinary medium is competent to transmit waves at anything like the
speed of light; hence the luminiferous medium must be a special kind
of substance, and it is called the ether. The _luminiferous_ ether it
used to be called, because the conveyance of light was all it was then
known to be capable of; but now that it is known to do a variety of
other things also, the qualifying adjective may be dropped.

Wave motion in ether, light certainly is; but what does one mean by
the term wave? The popular notion is, I suppose, of something heaving
up and down, or, perhaps, of something breaking on the shore in which
it is possible to bathe. But if you ask a mathematician what he means
by a wave, he will probably reply that the simplest wave is

  y = a sin (p t - n x),

and he might possibly refuse to give any other answer.

And in refusing to give any other answer than this, or its equivalent
in ordinary words, he is entirely justified; that is what is meant by
the term wave, and nothing less general would be all-inclusive.

Translated into ordinary English the phrase signifies "a disturbance
periodic both in space and time." Anything thus doubly periodic is a
wave; and all waves, whether in air as sound waves, or in ether as
light waves, or on the surface of water as ocean waves, are
comprehended in the definition.

What properties are essential to a medium capable of transmitting wave
motion? Roughly we may say two--_elasticity_ and _inertia_. Elasticity
in some form, or some equivalent of it, in order to be able to store
up energy and effect recoil; inertia, in order to enable the disturbed
substance to overshoot the mark and oscillate beyond its place of
equilibrium to and fro. Any medium possessing these two properties can
transmit waves, and unless a medium possesses these properties in some
form or other, or some equivalent for them, it may be said with
moderate security to be incompetent to transmit waves. But if we make
this latter statement, one must be prepared to extend to the terms
elasticity and inertia their very largest and broadest signification,
so as to include any possible kind of restoring force and any possible
kind of persistence of motion respectively.

These matters may be illustrated in many ways, but perhaps a simple
loaded lath or spring in a vise will serve well enough. Pull aside one
end, and its elasticity tends to make it recoil; let it go, and its
inertia causes it to overshoot its normal position; both causes
together cause it to swing to and fro till its energy is exhausted. A
regular series of such springs at equal intervals in space, set going
at regular intervals of time one after the other, gives you at once a
wave motion and appearance which the most casual observer must
recognize as such. A series of pendulums will do just as well. Any
wave-transmitting medium must similarly possess some form of
elasticity and of inertia.

But now proceed to ask what is this ether which in the case of light
is thus vibrating? What corresponds to the elastic displacement and
recoil of the spring or pendulum? What corresponds to the inertia
whereby it overshoots its mark? Do we know these properties in the
ether in any other way?

The answer, given first by Clerk Maxwell, and now reiterated and
insisted on by experiments performed in every important laboratory in
the world, is:

The elastic displacement corresponds to electrostatic charge (roughly
speaking, to electricity).

The inertia corresponds to magnetism.

This is the basis of the modern electro-magnetic theory of light. Now
let me illustrate electrically how this can be.

The old and familiar operation of charging a Leyden jar--the storing
up of energy in a strained dielectric, any electrostatic charging
whatever--is quite analogous to the drawing aside of our flexible
spring. It is making use of the elasticity of the ether to produce a
tendency to recoil. Letting go the spring is analogous to permitting a
discharge of the jar--permitting the strained dielectric to recover
itself, the electrostatic disturbance to subside.

In nearly all the experiments of electrostatics, ethereal elasticity
is manifest.

Next consider inertia. How would one illustrate the fact that water,
for instance, possesses inertia--the power of persisting in motion
against obstacles--the power of possessing kinetic energy? The most
direct way would be to take a stream of water and try suddenly to stop
it. Open a water tap freely and then suddenly shut it. The impetus or
momentum of the stopped water makes itself manifest by a violent shock
to the pipe, with which everybody must be familiar. The momentum of
water is utilized by engineers in the "water ram."

A precisely analogous experiment in electricity is what Faraday called
"the extra current." Send a current through a coil of wire round a
piece of iron, or take any other arrangement for developing powerful
magnetism, and then suddenly stop the current by breaking the circuit.
A violent flash occurs if the stoppage is sudden enough, a flash which
means the bursting of the insulating air partition by the accumulated
electro-magnetic momentum.

Briefly, we may say that nearly all electro-magnetic experiments
illustrate the fact of ethereal inertia.

Now return to consider what happens when a charged conductor (say a
Leyden jar) is discharged. The recoil of the strained dielectric
causes a current, the inertia of this current causes it to overshoot
the mark, and for an instant the charge of the jar is reversed; the
current now flows backward and charges the jar up as at first; back
again flows the current, and so on, charging and reversing the charge
with rapid oscillations until the energy is all dissipated into heat.
The operation is precisely analogous to the release of a strained
spring or to the plucking of a stretched string.

But the discharging body thus thrown into strong electrical vibration
is embedded in the all-pervading ether, and we have just seen that the
ether possesses the two properties requisite for the generation and
transmission of waves--viz., elasticity and inertia or density; hence,
just as a tuning fork vibrating in air excites aerial waves or sound,
so a discharging Leyden jar in ether excites ethereal waves or light.

Ethereal waves can therefore be actually produced by direct electrical
means. I discharge here a jar, and the room is for an instant filled
with light. With light, I say, though you can see nothing. You can see
and hear the spark indeed--but that is a mere secondary disturbance we
can for the present ignore--I do not mean any secondary disturbance. I
mean the true ethereal waves emitted by the electric oscillation going
on in the neighborhood of this recoiling dielectric. You pull aside
the prong of a tuning fork and let it go; vibration follows and sound
is produced. You charge a Leyden jar and let it discharge; vibration
follows and light is excited.

It is light just as good as any other light. It travels at the same
pace, it is reflected and refracted according to the same laws; every
experiment known to optics can be performed with this ethereal
radiation electrically produced, and yet you cannot see it. Why not?
For no fault of the light; the fault (if there be a fault) is in the
eye. The retina is incompetent to respond to these vibrations--they
are too slow. The vibrations set up when this large jar is discharged
are from a hundred thousand to a million per second, but that is too
slow for the retina. It responds only to vibrations between 4,000
billions and 7,000 billions per second. The vibrations are too quick
for the ear, which responds only to vibrations between 40 and 40,000
per second. Between the highest audible and the lowest visible
vibrations there has been hitherto a great gap, which these electric
oscillations go far to fill up. There has been a great gap simply
because we have no intermediate sense organ to detect rates of
vibration between 40,000 and 4,000,000,000,000,000 per second. It was,
therefore, an unexplored territory. Waves have been there all the time
in any quantity, but we have not thought about them nor attended to
