Sentinels lined up along the taxi's portal. Zolan
consulted a placard on the instrument panel and
punched in the coordinates for Air Lock 22. As
the flitter rose and headed toward the dome Brad
thought back as he weighed their chances.

The processes of intense physical training and
weapons drills, the concentrated telepathic loading
of Plutonian political history and its government's
despotic apparatus had been cleared from their
consciousness; the substance remained. Nor were
they aware of any new or altered neuro-muscular
capabilities or functions. They knew they had a job
to do, and what the job was. They were on their own:
no mercy from one side, no help from the other.

More than three-score sleeps had passed since
their choreographed escape; only the events flashed
through his mind; why they happened did not.

The Raven, on a lengthy umbilical-catwalk, had
been tethered to the Guardian Station, ostensibly
for maintenance after a servicing round of
nearby communications boosters. The ship was
skeleton-staffed. Brad and his companions had
been secretly transferred beforehand to a cubicle
adjacent access to the catwalk.

At Brad's signal, the Sentinels moved quickly.
Hodak, acting as clumsily as he could, slammed
and locked the passageway safety doors with the
loudest noises he could generate, broadcasting the
unusual activity to all within hearing range and for
electronic sensor pickup.

They had lurched and stumbled noisily along the
catwalk, Adari suppressing giggles. As the last
of the six cleared in through the Raven's air
lock, Hodak had hit "Emergency," on appropriate
switches and the ship-to-station servicing lines went
through quick-disconnect. Portals closed and locked.

Within seconds, Brad was on the bridge and his crew
at rehearsed departure stations. The caretaker
officer and his two aides stepped aside, silent,
businesslike. They were Ram's men.

Adari hit the tether-disconnect. Disengaged, the
catwalk coiled in toward the station as the ship
edged away. Signaling Hodak for minimal repulse and
acceleration to increase the drift, Brad ordered all
hands immediately into accelo-nets. He increased
thrusters to 'low' and, following a moment's pause
into 'intermediate'. As soon as he sensed they
could handle the acceleration he stepped the thrust
up to successive levels.

The old tub creaked, pitched, rolled and yawed;
lights flickered and dimmed; systems slipped
into yellow or borderline red on half a dozen
indicators, all recorded on the ship's log. The
Raven all but flapped wings, and true to her
name, took off. To the hundreds who watched
from the station's portholes, the escape was
real. The cover might hold.

The alarms went out from the Guardian Station to
Sector Space Guard, and from there to a patroller
conveniently distant.

Messages spunneled throughout the sector and
to Earth and Luna: "Escape of dangerous felons,",
"Sabotage of station surveillance system,",
"Station 15 unable to respond in time," or
"Immediate pursuit and capture essential" with
abundant 'Expedites' and 'ASAPs' scattered
throughout the text.

The scenario was exquisite. The word was out,
and within hours, had spread system-wide.

 ##

A couple of million kay out, Ram's men boarded
a well-stocked lifeboat and headed back to a
prearranged pick-up. The Raven settled into
outbound, Brad aware of an opportunity to merge
with traffic at a not too distant spunnel gate.

 ##

Brad brought his mind back to the present as
the flitter settled on the landing pad near air lock
22. Entering the pressure compartment and attaining
atmospheric balance the Sentinels removed their
suits and sealed them in wall lockers. The switch
of weapons and holsters to clips on their inner
coveralls completed, they strolled out of the
storage room and mingled with a throng of citizen
commuters. Moments later they were on a moving
transit strip on their way to beautiful downtown
Coldfield.

The strip cut across and through narrow streets
and alleys lined with huts fused from the gray
detritus of the planet.

Occasionally, a mall or square appeared along the
transit route, lined with workshops, playgrounds,
and colorful private houses or apartment complexes.
Occasionally, they passed a dwarf tree or a
flowering shrub in an earth-filled container.

Running and leaping alongside the moving strip as
it passed slowly through stations, hawkers waved
and shouted at the commuters and passers-by,
inviting them to examine and purchase the novelties
and artefacts they waved about or in nearby open
air stalls. From above, lighted globes, strung close
beneath the dome, cast a harsh, grotesque glare
across the city.

People swarmed, and a raucous clamor shrilled along
the tightly packed streets and alleys. Men, women
and children in all shapes and sizes: tall, short,
stocky, slender, organic, bionic, robotic, and
combinations thereof. Hairstyles ranged from
totally shaved skulls to elaborate hair-puffs, and
garments from dreary, simple shifts to flamboyant,
complex robes that twisted, circled, and knotted
around their wearers.

This was Planet Pluto post-secession: a mixture of
migrants from across the system. The tank town
took them all, for itself or for Slingshot, or both.
Those who stayed procreated, natural or clone,
according to their customs or inclinations. The
effect was a mixture of breeds whose interactions
had brought out a bewildering patchwork of hybrid
cults, philosophies and arts. Behavior ran the
gamut; newcomers accepted or were overwhelmed.

Kumiko pointed ahead. The Condor loomed,
a sprawling, multi-storied, down-at-the heels
apartment-hotel, its surface colors akin to the
low, drab rise on which it stood.

Disembarking the strip, the companions assembled,
slipped into an alley and entered a portal into the
crowded lobby. Joining the laughing, chattering
throng, they squeezed their way to the desk robot,
and registered as a group. Individual identicards
ejected from an aperture, assigning them to a small
apartment with sleeping cubicles off a common room.
The communal lavatory and electronic bio-shower
were down the hall.

Entering the apartment and tossing their gear into
a corner, they kept up a running chatter. Hodak's
main concern was where their next meal was coming
from.

"Gotta find jobs or we don't eat," he barked as he
hoisted his pack on to a sleep pad and tore at its
flaps.

Kumiko and Adari opened and slammed cabinets,
checked housekeeping supplies and "ooh-ed" and
"ah-ed" each discovery. Myra and Brad stomped
into a sleeping cubicle and heaved the sleeping
pads first one way, then the other.

"Look in the corners," Hodak bawled across the
narrow hall, "that's where the little buggers build
their nests."

Myra shrieked and drew her sidearm as Brad stepped
back. She set the ray-spread to conic and ran the
beam from one end of the pad to the other, into
the corners and along the walls. They inspected
the results, laughed loudly, and went on to the next
cubicle to repeat their exuberant performance.

Zolan strolled from one room to the next,
sharing the action with his noisy friends,
meanwhile scanning the walls, ceiling, floor,
lighting fixtures, visi-screens and cabinets.

He rounded toward Brad and brushed against
him. His fingers pressed their message. The
others, watching, drew the correct conclusion.

The rooms were bugged, sight and sound.





 Chapter NINE


Brad and Hodak pushed into the Charnel Pit,
Coldfield's popular tavern.

The bar-room was noisy, grimy and crowded.
Incense streamers slid and coiled along the
soil-fused floor, their dissipating pungency
unable to disguise the acrid stench of sweaty
bodies and unwashed garments.

The long bar was hidden by leaners. Narrow aisles
snaked among benches and clustered tables around
which boisterous, elbowing humanity teemed.

A coarsely seamed face along the bar turned,
observed Brad and Hodak as they glanced around
from inside the doorway. Whispers went down the
line, jumped to the tables and around the room.

The tumult ground down as necks craned. A hum
rose and fell as Brad and Hodak were inspected,
commented upon, and judged. It didn't take long
for the noise to return to its former level: the
amenities of bar-rooms everywhere.

From where he stood, Hodak failed to see a
table with a couple of empty chairs. They waited.
Shortly, nudging Brad's arm, he nodded toward
a table newly vacated against a wall.

They shoved and twisted through the narrow spaces
to the table in time for Hodak to slam his hand,
palm down, flat on the tabletop, glaring off a trio
of competitors.

They sat, and Hodak pressed the glow-disk in the
center of the table to summon the robo-dispenser.
Meanwhile, they surveyed the throng.

Some types were recognizable; others would
need to be guessed at. Mostly, they were familiar:
spacefarers and space tug cowboys in tight-fitting
foundation suits, construction stiffs in fitted
helmets and spacer harnesses, clerks and tradesmen
in business tunics, and street people in coarsely
woven, grimy open-necked shirts and shorts.
Slingshot technicians' jumpsuits were marked
by distinctive shoulder patches.

Scattered in knots, or leaning against walls and
supports, men and women, bare to the waist
and sporting sheer breechcloths or none at all,
flaunted their wares.

Brad recognized spoilsmen plying their trades.
They were the dandies attired in colorful, skin-tight
sports suits: thieves, pickpockets, high-tech gear
rustlers, black marketeers, professional gamblers,
and experts in all the scams that are or ever were.

Hand and shoulder weapons were everywhere: lashed
to thighs or slung across backs, flat on tables or
stacked along the bar. Churning and jostling, the
swarm shifted constantly: singly, in couples and
groups; from fledglings newly on the wing to old
timers diminished by adversity. Most were in their
prime: hard of face and body, wary, unbridled and
self-seeking. They mixed freely.

At a table further along the wall near to where
Brad and Hodak sat, Drummer gently swirled the
contents of his drinking goblet. He was gaunt, well
past middle years, with a high-boned countenance.
His head was capped by snow-white hair trimmed
straight across at his shoulders. Dressed simply,
Drummer wore a dark cloak over a white, open-necked
blouse tucked into loose breeches that ended a bit
below his knees. He did not bear a weapon.

Drummer stared about and searched for strangers
that might serve his purpose. When he heard that
the Raven was at planet-fall, he had called for
and reread all available newscasts and reports to
refresh his recollections of their crimes, personal
backgrounds, and escape.

Were they really escaped prisoners? Or were
they agents of the UIPS? If they were fugitives
they might be suckered into President Narval's
mercenaries where their spacer skills would help
fill the gaps. If they were revealed to be UIPS
agents, they would be quickly disposed of, or
manipulated and exploited through false leads
to Narval's benefit. When no longer useful they
would be terminated.

The newscasts and intelligence summaries on the
escape were insufficient. Drummer's position as
one of Narval's closest advisors, and his own private
and secret ambitions, compelled him to learn more
about the newcomers. How could they fit into his
schemes?

Drummer ordered a fresh drink from a passing
robo-dispenser. It arrived in a large snifter.
Cradling the rounded bottom in his palm, he swished
the gold-hued liquid with a gentle motion, eyes
moving from the drink to the crowd to Brad and
Hodak, and randomly round again.

A hard-muscled sledgehammer of a man barged
into the Charnel Pit, sullen anger knotting his beefy
face. His military uniform was skin-tight: a black
tunic belted over blood-red breeches. The military
helmet he wore was also halved black and red as
were his holster and the handgrip of the protruding
weapon. His black cavalier boots were made for
swaggering. Formidable.

Deep, red-rimmed eyes glared from under the
helmet's visor, searching for an open space along
the bar. The line was solid.

"Open ranks," he snarled, and leaned heavily into
the instant gap.

The barman rushed forward and raised his hand
in respectful greeting.

"Honored to see you, Major Scarf," he said,
"what'll it be?"

"Firehouse Red, and I don't mean the runny slops
you peddle to the bar flies."

The barman dashed off and returned with a
long-necked flagon and a large tumbler. He poured
a slow-flowing, crimson liquor that bubbled as it
settled. The barman set the brimming tumbler
close to the Major's massive, thick-fingered hand.

The Firehouse Red disappeared in a single,
spasmodic swallow, for all its slow-flowing nature.
The barman stood by. The instant the tumbler slammed
down, he refilled it, the ritual repeated in silence.

 ##

Finally, the sledgehammer hesitated, belched, and,
with a satisfied sneer, scratched his crotch. The
barman filled the tumbler a third time and turned
away. Instantly, the flagon was yanked from his
hand. The barman glanced back at the flagon, Major
Scarf's face, grinned sheepishly, and kept going.

Placing the flagon alongside on the bar, Scarf
raised the half-filled tumbler, fondled it, and
tossed a scornful glance up and down the line. Few
met his eyes, and those who did looked elsewhere as
soon as he fixed on them. With a snort of contempt
he wheeled to face the room. Removing his heavy
helmet and lowering it to the ground alongside his
leg, he leaned back to rest his elbows on the bar's
edge.

His eyes scanned the room, sectoring the crowd
and scrutinizing each person. Taking in the tables
along the wall, he paused at Brad and Hodak, and
scowled at them steadily through half-closed eyes.

Brad and Hodak returned Scarf's gaze with
expressions cold and closed. The Major's eyes
moved on and fixed on Drummer. His face twisted
into a malevolent grin.





 Chapter TEN


"Hey, everybody, quiet." Scarf's spit-and-phlegm
bellow tamped the bar-room noise. It ground down.

Pointing at the solitary figure seated at the wall
table, Scarf smirked and barked, "Give us the magic
words, Drummer."

The crowd's eyes went from Scarf to Drummer and
back. No one spoke.

"Drummer knows," Scarf added sarcasm to his
tone, raising his finger to tap his temple. "The future
is open to him."

Drummer sat, transfixed, staring at Scarf. His free
hand closed into a tense fist, then opened to cap
his knee.

"C'mon, Drummer," Scarf went on, derisively, "tell
us what you're going to do to make things right
for all of us, and how we'll all be prosperous after
Slingshot cuts away."

His voice became harsher, gibing.

"You've been sittin' on that Plutonian Council for
years, Drummer, pushing your pet ideas to loosen
up controls here and give more civil liberties there.
You call yourself a Progressive, whatever the
hell that's supposed to mean. To me, you're a
revolutionist, undermining Narval's government,
and trying to cram your politics down our throats."

Scarf moved away from the bar, drink in hand.
Taking a long noisy swallow, he fixed his eyes on
Drummer from above the rim.

Lowering his drink, he belched again and wiped his
mouth with his sleeve. Placing the tumbler on a
nearby table he took another step toward Drummer.

"Being on the Council saves your neck for now,
Drummer," he said with venom. "Soon as Narval
gets wise to you, and kicks your tail off, I'll be
coming after you."

He reached Drummer's table.

"On second thought, why wait that long," his voice
changed to a snarl. "Now's as good a time as any."

He grasped the front of Drummer's cloak and jerked
him to his feet.

"Tell me, old man, what can you do that Narval
can't?"

The onlookers' silence hung heavily. The stale
incense rose in eddies and diffused the shadows
cast by the glowing wall sconces.

"Show's over, Scarf," said Drummer in a low voice,
trying to twist away. "I've got to be on my way."

He placed his hand over Scarf's huge paw to loosen
its grip.

They were of equal height, but Scarf, more than
twice Drummer's mass and build, would have none
of it.

"The hell you do," he growled, tightening his hold.

Scarf began to shake Drummer, at first slowly, then
