the great mountain gateway, thrilled with anticipation which almost
amounted to foreboding. As I was about to set foot across the
imaginary frontier which divided the world from the unknown land,
Professor Smawl hailed me and I halted until she came up.

"As commander of this expedition," she said, somewhat out of breath,
"I desire to be the first living creature who has ever set foot
behind the Graham Glacier. Kindly step aside, young sir!"

"Madam," said I, rigid with disappointment, "my guide, William Spike,
entered that unknown land a year ago."

"He _says_ he did," sneered Professor Smawl.

"As you like," I replied; "but it is scarcely generous to forestall
the person whose stupidity gave you the clew to this unexplored
region."

"You mean yourself?" she asked, with a stony stare.

"I do," said I, firmly.

Her little, hard eyes grew harder, and she clutched her umbrella until
the steel ribs crackled.

"Young man," she said, insolently; "if I could have gotten rid of you
I should have done so the day I was appointed president. But Professor
Farrago refused to resign unless your position was assured, subject,
of course, to your good behavior. Frankly, I don't like you, and I
consider your views on science ridiculous, and if an opportunity
presents itself I will be most happy to request your resignation.
Kindly collect your mules and follow me."

Mortified beyond measure, I collected my mules and followed my
president into the strange country behind the Hudson Mountains--I who
had aspired to lead, compelled to follow in the rear, driving mules.

The journey was monotonous at first, but we shortly ascended a ridge
from which we could see, stretching out below us, the wilderness
where, save the feet of William Spike, no human feet had passed.

As for me, tingling with enthusiasm, I forgot my chagrin, I forgot the
gross injustice, I forgot my mules. "Excelsior!" I cried, running up
and down the ridge in uncontrollable excitement at the sublime
spectacle of forest, mountain, and valley all set with little lakes.

"Excelsior!" repeated an excited voice at my side, and Professor Van
Twiller sprang to the ridge beside me, her eyes bright as stars.

Exalted, inspired by the mysterious beauty of the view, we clasped
hands and ran up and down the grassy ridge.

"That will do," said Professor Smawl, coldly, as we raced about like a
pair of distracted kittens. The chilling voice broke the spell; I
dropped Professor Van Twiller's hand and sat down on a bowlder, aching
with wrath.

Late that afternoon we halted beside a tiny lake, deep in the unknown
wilderness, where purple and scarlet bergamot choked the shores and
the spruce-partridge strutted fearlessly under our very feet. Here we
pitched our two tents. The afternoon sun slanted through the pines;
the lake glittered; acres of golden brake perfumed the forest silence,
broken only at rare intervals by the distant thunder of a partridge
drumming.

Professor Smawl ate heavily and retired to her tent to lie torpid
until evening. William drove the unloaded mules into an intervale full
of sun-cured, fragrant grasses; I sat down beside Professor Van
Twiller.

The wilderness is electric. Once within the influence of its currents,
human beings become positively or negatively charged, violently
attracting or repelling each other.

"There is something the matter with this air," said Professor Van
Twiller. "It makes me feel as though I were desperately enamoured of
the entire human race."

She leaned back against a pine, smiling vaguely, and crossing one knee
over the other.

Now I am not bold by temperament, and, normally, I fear ladies.
Therefore it surprised me to hear myself begin a frivolous _causerie_,
replying to her pretty epigrams with epigrams of my own, advancing to
the borderland of badinage, fearlessly conducting her and myself over
that delicate frontier to meet upon the terrain of undisguised
flirtation.

It was clear that she was out for a holiday. The seriousness and
restraints of twenty-two years she had left behind her in the
civilized world, and now, with a shrug of her young shoulders, she
unloosened her burden of reticence, dignity, and responsibility and
let the whole load fall with a discreet thud.

"Even hares go mad in March," she said, seriously. "I know you intend
to flirt with me--and I don't care. Anyway, there's nothing else to
do, is there?"

"Suppose," said I, solemnly, "I should take you behind that big tree
and attempt to kiss you!"

The prospect did not appear to appall her, so I looked around with
that sneaking yet conciliatory caution peculiar to young men who are
novices in the art. Before I had satisfied myself that neither William
nor the mules were observing us, Professor Van Twiller rose to her
feet and took a short step backward.

"Let's set traps for a dingue," she said, "will you?"

I looked at the big tree, undecided. "Come on," she said; "I'll show
you how." And away we went into the woods, she leading, her kilts
flashing through the golden half-light.

Now I had not the faintest notion how to trap the dingue, but
Professor Van Twiller asserted that it formerly fed on the tender tips
of the spruce, quoting Darwin as her authority.

So we gathered a bushel of spruce-tips, piled them on the bank of a
little stream, then built a miniature stockade around the bait, a foot
high. I roofed this with hemlock, then laboriously whittled out and
adjusted a swinging shutter for the entrance, setting it on springy
twigs.

"The dingue, you know, was supposed to live in the water," she said,
kneeling beside me over our trap.

I took her little hand and thanked her for the information.

"Doubtless," she said, enthusiastically, "a dingue will come out of
the lake to-night to feed on our spruce-tips. Then," she added, "we've
got him."

"True!" I said, earnestly, and pressed her fingers very gently.

Her face was turned a little away; I don't remember what she said; I
don't remember that she said anything. A faint rose-tint stole over
her cheek. A few moments later she said: "You must not do that again."

It was quite late when we strolled back to camp. Long before we came
in sight of the twin tents we heard a deep voice bawling our names. It
was Professor Smawl, and she pounced upon Dorothy and drove her
ignominiously into the tent.

"As for you," she said, in hollow tones, "you may explain your
conduct at once, or place your resignation at my disposal."

But somehow or other I appeared to be temporarily lost to shame, and I
only smiled at my infuriated president, and entered my own tent with a
step that was distinctly frolicsome.

"Billy," said I to William Spike, who regarded me morosely from the
depths of the tent, "I'm going out to bag a mammoth to-morrow, so
kindly clean my elephant-gun and bring an axe to chop out the tusks."

That night Professor Smawl complained bitterly of the cooking, but as
neither Dorothy nor I knew how to improve it, she revenged herself on
us by eating everything on the table and retiring to bed, taking
Dorothy with her.

I could not sleep very well; the mosquitoes were intrusive, and
Professor Smawl dreamed she was a pack of wolves and yelped in her
sleep.

"Bird, ain't she?" said William, roused from slumber by her weird
noises.

Dorothy, much frightened, crawled out of her tent, where her
blanket-mate still dreamed dyspeptically, and William and I made her
comfortable by the camp-fire.

It takes a pretty girl to look pretty half asleep in a blanket.

"Are you sure you are quite well?" I asked her.

To make sure, I tested her pulse. For an hour it varied more or less,
but without alarming either of us. Then she went back to bed and I sat
alone by the camp-fire.

Towards midnight I suddenly began to feel that strange, distant
vibration that I had once before felt. As before, the vibration grew
on the still air, increasing in volume until it became a sound, then
died out into silence.

I rose and stole into my tent.

William, white as death, lay in his corner, weeping in his sleep.

I roused him remorselessly, and he sat up scowling, but refused to
tell me what he had been dreaming.

"Was it about that third thing you saw--" I began. But he snarled up
at me like a startled animal, and I was obliged to go to bed and toss
about and speculate.

The next morning it rained. Dorothy and I visited our dingue-trap but
found nothing in it. We were inclined, however, to stay out in the
rain behind a big tree, but Professor Smawl vetoed that proposition
and sent me off to supply the larder with fresh meat.

I returned, mad and wet, with a dozen partridges and a white
hare--brown at that season--and William cooked them vilely.

"I can taste the feathers!" said Professor Smawl, indignantly.

"There is no accounting for taste," I said, with a polite gesture of
deprecation; "personally, I find feathers unpalatable."

"You may hand in your resignation this evening!" cried Professor
Smawl, in hollow tones of passion.

I passed her the pancakes with a cheerful smile, and flippantly
pressed the hand next me. Unexpectedly it proved to be William's
sticky fist, and Dorothy and I laughed until her tears ran into
Professor Smawl's coffee-cup--an accident which kindled her wrath to
red heat, and she requested my resignation five times during the
evening.

The next day it rained again, more or less. Professor Smawl complained
of the cooking, demanded my resignation, and finally marched out to
explore, lugging the reluctant William with her. Dorothy and I sat
down behind the largest tree we could find.

I don't remember what we were saying when a peculiar sound interrupted
us, and we listened earnestly.

It was like a bell in the woods, ding-dong! ding-dong! ding-dong!--a
low, mellow, golden harmony, coming nearer, then stopping.

I clasped Dorothy in my arms in my excitement.

"It is the note of the dingue!" I whispered, "and that explains its
name, handed down from remote ages along with the names of the
behemoth and the coney. It was because of its bell-like cry that it
was named! Darling!" I cried, forgetting our short acquaintance, "we
have made a discovery that the whole world will ring with!"

Hand in hand we tiptoed through the forest to our trap. There was
something in it that took fright at our approach and rushed
panic-stricken round and round the interior of the trap, uttering its
alarm-note, which sounded like the jangling of a whole string of
bells.

I seized the strangely beautiful creature; it neither attempted to
bite nor scratch, but crouched in my arms, trembling and eying me.

Delighted with the lovely, tame animal, we bore it tenderly back to
the camp and placed it on my blanket. Hand in hand we stood before it,
awed by the sight of this beast, so long believed to be extinct.

"It is too good to be true," sighed Dorothy, clasping her white hands
under her chin and gazing at the dingue in rapture.

"Yes," said I, solemnly, "you and I, my child, are face to face with
the fabled dingue--_Dingus solitarius_! Let us continue to gaze at it,
reverently, prayerfully, humbly--"

Dorothy yawned--probably with excitement.

We were still mutely adoring the dingue when Professor Smawl burst
into the tent at a hand-gallop, bawling hoarsely for her kodak and
note-book.

Dorothy seized her triumphantly by the arm and pointed at the dingue,
which appeared to be frightened to death.

"What!" cried Professor Smawl, scornfully; "_that_ a dingue? Rubbish!"

"Madam," I said, firmly, "it is a dingue! It's a monodactyl! See! It
has but a single toe!"

"Bosh!" she retorted; "it's got four!"

"Four!" I repeated, blankly.

"Yes; one on each foot!"

"Of course," I said; "you didn't suppose a monodactyl meant a beast
with one leg and one toe!"

But she laughed hatefully and declared it was a woodchuck.

We squabbled for a while until I saw the significance of her attitude.
The unfortunate woman wished to find a dingue first and be accredited
with the discovery.

I lifted the dingue in both hands and shook the creature gently, until
the chiming ding-dong of its protestations filled our ears like sweet
bells jangled out of tune.

Pale with rage at this final proof of the dingue's identity, she
seized her camera and note-book.

"I haven't any time to waste over that musical woodchuck!" she
shouted, and bounced out of the tent.

"What have you discovered, dear?" cried Dorothy, running after her.

"A mammoth!" bawled Professor Smawl, triumphantly; "and I'm going to
photograph him!"

Neither Dorothy nor I believed her. We watched the flight of the
infatuated woman in silence.

And now, at last, the tragic shadow falls over my paper as I write. I
was never passionately attached to Professor Smawl, yet I would gladly
refrain from chronicling the episode that must follow if, as I have
hitherto attempted, I succeed in sticking to the unornamented truth.

I have said that neither Dorothy nor I believed her. I don't know why,
unless it was that we had not yet made up our minds to believe that
the mammoth still existed on earth. So, when Professor Smawl
disappeared in the forest, scuttling through the underbrush like a
demoralized hen, we viewed her flight with unconcern. There was a
large tree in the neighborhood--a pleasant shelter in case of rain. So
we sat down behind it, although the sun was shining fiercely.

It was one of those peaceful afternoons in the wilderness when the
whole forest dreams, and the shadows are asleep and every little
leaflet takes a nap. Under the still tree-tops the dappled sunlight,
motionless, soaked the sod; the forest-flies no longer whirled in
circles, but sat sunning their wings on slender twig-tips.

The heat was sweet and spicy; the sun drew out the delicate essence
of gum and sap, warming volatile juices until they exhaled through the
aromatic bark.

The sun went down into the wilderness; the forest stirred in its
sleep; a fish splashed in the lake. The spell was broken. Presently
the wind began to rise somewhere far away in the unknown land. I heard
it coming, nearer, nearer--a brisk wind that grew heavier and blew
harder as it neared us--a gale that swept distant branches--a furious
gale that set limbs clashing and cracking, nearer and nearer. Crack!
and the gale grew to a hurricane, trampling trees like dead twigs!
Crack! Crackle! Crash! Crash!

_Was it the wind?_

With the roaring in my ears I sprang up, staring into the forest
vista, and at the same instant, out of the crashing forest, sped
Professor Smawl, skirts tucked up, thin legs flying like
bicycle-spokes. I shouted, but the crashing drowned my voice. Then all
