

I.

Man is prone to idealization. He cannot accept as final the phenomena of
the sensible world, but looks behind that world into another which rules
the sensible one. From this tendency of the human mind, systems of
mythology and scientific theories have equally sprung. By the former the
experiences of volition, passion, power, and design, manifested among
ourselves, were transplanted, with the necessary modifications, into an
unseen universe from which the sway and potency of those magnified human
qualities were exerted. "In the roar of thunder and in the violence of
the storm was felt the presence of a shouter and furious strikers, and
out of the rain was created an Indra or giver of rain." It is
substantially the same with science, the principal force of which is
expended in endeavoring to rend the veil which separates the sensible
world from an ultra-sensible one. In both cases our materials, drawn
from the world of the senses, are modified by the imagination to suit
intellectual needs. The "first beginnings" of Lucretius were not objects
of sense, but they were suggested and illustrated by objects of sense.
The idea of atoms proved an early want on the part of minds in pursuit
of the knowledge of nature. It has never been relinquished, and in our
own day it is growing steadily in power and precision.

The union of bodies in fixed and multiple proportions constitutes the
basis of modern atomic theory. The same compound retains, for ever, the
same elements, in an unalterable ratio. We cannot produce pure water
containing one part, by weight, of hydrogen and nine of oxygen, nor can
we produce it when the ratio is one to ten; but we can produce it from
the ratio of one to eight, and from no other. So also when water is
decomposed by the electric current, the proportion, as regards volumes,
is as fixed as in the case of weights. Two volumes of hydrogen and one
of oxygen invariably go the formation of water. Number and harmony, as
in the Pythagorean system, are everywhere dominant in this under-world.

Following the discovery of fixed proportions we have that of _multiple_
proportions. For the same compound, as above stated, the elementary
factors are constant; but one elementary body often unites with another
so as to form different compounds. Water, for example, is an oxide of
hydrogen; but a peroxide of that substance also exists, containing
exactly double the quantity of oxygen. Nitrogen also unites with oxygen
in various ratios, but not in all. The union takes place, not gradually
and uniformly, but by steps, a definite weight of matter being added at
each step. The larger combining quantities of oxygen are thus multiples
of the smaller ones. It is the same with other combinations.

We remain thus far in the region of fact: why not rest there? It might
as well be asked why we do not, like our poor relations of the woods and
forests, rest content with the facts of the sensible world. In virtue of
our mental idiosyncrasy, we demand _why_ bodies should combine in
multiple proportions, and the outcome and answer of this question is the
atomic theory. The definite weights of matter, above referred to,
represent the weights of atoms, indivisible by any force which chemistry
has hitherto brought to bear upon them. If matter were a _continuum_--if
it were not rounded off, so to say, into these discrete atomic
masses--the impassable breaches of continuity which the law of multiple
proportions reveals, could not be accounted for. These atoms are what
Maxwell finely calls "the foundation stones of the material universe,"
which, amid the wreck of composite matter, "remain unbroken and unworn."

A group of atoms drawn and held together by what chemists term affinity
is called a molecule. The ultimate parts of all compound bodies are
molecules. A molecule of water, for example, consists of two atoms of
hydrogen, which grasp and are grasped by one atom of oxygen. When water
is converted into steam, the distances between the molecules are greatly
augmented, but the molecules themselves continue intact. We must not,
however, picture the constituent atoms of any molecule as held so
rigidly together as to render intestine motion impossible. The
interlocked atoms have still liberty of vibration, which may, under
certain circumstances, become so intense as to shake the molecule
asunder. Most molecules--probably all--are wrecked by intense heat, or
in other words by intense vibratory motion; and many are wrecked by a
very moderate heat of the proper quality. Indeed, a weak force, which
bears a suitable relation to the constitution of the molecule, can, by
timely savings and accumulations, accomplish what a strong force out of
relation fails to achieve.

We have here a glimpse of the world in which the physical philosopher
for the most part resides. Science has been defined as "organized common
sense;" by whom I have forgotten; but, unless we stretch unduly the
definition of common sense, I think it is hardly applicable to this
world of molecules. I should be inclined to ascribe the creation of that
world to inspiration rather than to what is currently known as common
sense. For the natural history sciences the definition may stand--hardly
for the physical and mathematical sciences.

The sensation of light is produced by a succession of waves which strike
the retina in periodic intervals; and such waves, impinging on the
molecules of bodies, agitate their constituent atoms. These atoms are so
small, and, when grouped to molecules, are so tightly clasped together,
that they are capable of tremors equal in rapidity to those of light and
radiant heat. To a mind coming freshly to these subjects, the numbers
with which scientific men here habitually deal must appear utterly
fantastical; and yet, to minds trained in the logic of science, they
express most sober and certain truth. The constituent atoms of molecules
can vibrate to and fro millions of millions of times in a second. The
waves of light and of radiant heat follow each other at similar rates
through the luminiferous ether. Further, the atoms of different
molecules are held together with varying degrees of tightness--they are
tuned, as it were, to notes of different pitch. Suppose, then,
light-waves, or heat-waves, to impinge upon an assemblage of such
molecules, what may be expected to occur? The same as what occurs when a
piano is opened and sung into. The waves of sound select the strings
which respectively respond to them--the strings, that is to say, whose
rates of vibration are the same as their own--and of the general series
of strings these only sound. The vibratory motion of the voice, imparted
first to the air, is here taken up by the strings. It may be regarded as
_absorbed_, each string constituting itself thereby a new center of
motion. Thus also, as regards the tightly locked atoms of molecules on
which waves of light or radiant heat impinge. Like the waves of sound
just adverted to, the waves of ether select those atoms whose periods of
vibration synchronize with their own periods of recurrence, and to such
atoms deliver up their motion. It is thus that light and radiant heat
are absorbed.

And here the statement, though elementary, must not be omitted, that the
colors of the prismatic spectrum, which are presented in an impure form
in the rainbow, are due to different rates of atomic vibration in their
source, the sun. From the extreme red to the extreme violet, between
which are embraced all colors visible to the human eye, the rapidity of
vibration steadily increases, the length of the waves of ether produced
by these vibrations diminishing in the same proportion. I say "visible
to the human eye," because there may be eyes capable of receiving visual
impression from waves which do not affect ours. There is a vast store of
rays, or more correctly waves, beyond the red, and also beyond the
violet, which are incompetent to excite our vision; so that could the
whole length of the spectrum, visible and invisible, be seen by the same
eye, its length would be vastly augmented.

I have spoken of molecules being wrecked by a moderate amount of heat of
the proper quality: let us examine this point for a moment. There is a
liquid called nitrite of amyl--frequently administered to patients
suffering from heart disease. The liquid is volatile, and its vapor is
usually inhaled by the patient. Let a quantity of this vapor be
introduced into a wide glass tube, and let a concentrated beam of solar
light be sent through the tube along its axis. Prior to the entry of the
beam, the vapor is as invisible as the purest air. When the light
enters, a bright cloud is immediately precipitated on the beam. This is
entirely due to the waves of light, which wreck the nitrite of amyl
molecules, the products of decomposition forming innumerable liquid
particles which constitute the cloud. Many other gases and vapors are
acted upon in a similar manner. Now the waves that produce this
decomposition are by no means the most powerful of those emitted by the
sun. It is, for example, possible to gather up the ultra-red waves into
a concentrated beam, and to send it through the vapor, like the beam of
light. But, though possessing vastly greater energy than the light
waves, they fail to produce decomposition. Hence the justification of
the statement already made, that a suitable relation must subsist
between the molecules and the waves of ether to render the latter
effectual.

A very impressive illustration of the decomposing power of the waves of
light is here purposely chosen; but the processes of photography
illustrate the same principle. The photographer, without fear,
illuminates his developing room with light transmitted through red or
yellow glass; but he dares not use blue glass, for blue light would
decompose his chemicals. And yet the waves of red light, measured by the
amount of energy which they carry, are immensely more powerful than the
waves of blue. The blue rays are usually called chemical rays--a
misleading term; for, as Draper and others have taught us, the rays that
produce the grandest chemical effects in nature, by decomposing the
carbonic acid and water which form the nutriment of plants, are not the
blue ones. In regard, however, to the salts of silver, and many other
compounds, the blue rays are the most effectual. How is it then that
weak waves can produce effects which strong waves are incompetent to
produce? This is a feature characteristic of periodic motion. In the
experiment of singing into an open piano already referred to, it is the
accord subsisting between the vibrations of the voice and those of the
string that causes the latter to sound. Were this accord absent, the
intensity of the voice might be quintupled, without producing any
response. But when voice and string are identical in pitch, the
successive impulses add themselves together, and this addition renders
them, in the aggregate, powerful, though individually they may be weak.
It some such fashion the periodic strokes of the smaller ether waves
accumulate, till the atoms on which their timed impulses impinge are
jerked asunder, and what we call chemical decomposition ensues.

Savart was the first to show the influence of musical sounds upon liquid
jets, and I have now to describe an experiment belonging to this class,
which bears upon the present question. From a screw-tap in my little
Alpine kitchen I permitted, an hour ago, a vein of water to descend into
a trough, so arranging the flow that the jet was steady and continuous
from top to bottom. A slight diminution of the orifice caused the
continuous portion of the vein to shorten, the part further down
resolving itself into drops. In my experiment, however, the vein, before
it broke, was intersected by the bottom of the trough. Shouting near the
descending jet produced no sensible effect upon it. The higher notes of
the voice, however powerful, were also ineffectual. But when the voice
was lowered to about 130 vibrations a second, the feeblest utterance of
this note sufficed to shorten, by one half, the continuous portion of
the jet. The responsive drops ran along the vein, pattered against the
trough, and scattered a copious spray round their place of impact. When
the note ceased, the continuity and steadiness of the vein were
immediately restored. The formation of the drops was here periodic; and
when the vibrations of the note accurately synchronized with the periods
of the drops, the waves of sound aided what Plateau has proved to be the
natural tendency of the liquid cylinder to resolve itself into
spherules, and virtually decomposed the vein.

I have stated, without proof, that where absorption occurs, the motion
of the ether-waves is taken up by the constituent atoms of molecules. It
is conceivable that the ether-waves, in passing through an assemblage of
molecules, might deliver up their motion to each molecule as a whole,
leaving the relative positions of the constituent atoms unchanged. But
the long series of reactions, represented by the deportment of nitrite
of amyl vapor, does not favor this conception; for, were the atoms
animated solely by a common motion, the molecules would not be
decomposed. The fact of decomposition, then, goes to prove the atoms to
be the seat of the absorption. They, in great part, take up the energy
of the ether-waves, whereby their union is severed, and the building
materials of the molecules are scattered abroad.

Molecules differ in stability; some of them, though hit by waves of
considerable force, and taking up the motions of these waves,
nevertheless hold their own with a tenacity which defies decomposition.
And here, in passing, I may say that it would give me extreme pleasure
to be able to point to my researches in confirmation of the solar theory
recently enunciated by my friend the President of the British
Association. But though the experiments which I have made on the
decomposition of vapors by light might be numbered by the thousand, I
have, to my regret, encountered no fact which prove that free aqueous
vapor is decomposed by the solar rays, or that the sun is reheated by
the combination of gases, in the severance of which it had previously
sacrificed its heat.


II.

The memorable investigations of Leslie and Rumford, and the subsequent
classical reasearches of Melloni, dealt, in the main, with the
properties of radiant heat; while in my investigations, radiant heat,
instead of being regarded as an end, was employed as a means of
exploring molecular condition. On this score little could be said until
the gaseous form of matter was brought under the dominion of experiment.
This was first effected in 1859, when it was proved that gases and
vapors, notwithstanding the open door which the distances between their
molecules might be supposed to offer to the heat waves, were, in many
cases, able effectually to bar their passage. It was then proved that
while the elementary gases and their mixtures, including among the
latter the earth's atmosphere, were almost as pervious as a vacuum to
ordinary radiant heat, the compound gases were one and all absorbers,
some of them taking up with intense avidity the motion of the
ether-waves.

A single illustration will here suffice. Let a mixture of hydrogen and
nitrogen, in the proportion of three to fourteen by weight, be inclosed
in a space through which are passing the heat rays from an ordinary
stove. The gaseous mixture offers no measurable impediment to the rays
of heat. Let the hydrogen and nitrogen now unite to form the compound
ammonia. A magical change instantly occurs. The number of atoms present
remains unchanged. The transparency of the compound is quite equal to
that of the mixture prior to combination. No change is perceptible to
the eye, but the keen vision of experiment soon detects the fact that
the perfectly transparent and highly attenuated ammonia resembles pitch
or lampblack in its behavior to the rays of heat.

There is probably boldness, if not rashness, in the attempt to make
these ultra-sensible actions generally intelligible, and I may have
already transgressed the limits beyond which the writer of a familiar
article cannot profitably go. There may, however, be a remnant of
readers willing to accompany me, and for their sakes I proceed. A
hundred compounds might be named which, like the ammonia, are
transparent to light, but more or less opaque--often, indeed, intensely
opaque--to the rays of heat from obscure sources. Now the difference
between these latter rays and the light rays is purely a difference of
period of vibration. The vibrations in the case of light are more rapid,
and the ether waves which they produce are shorter, than in the case of
obscure heat. Why, then, should the ultra-red waves be intercepted by
bodies like ammonia, while the more rapidly recurrent waves of the whole
visible spectrum are allowed free transmission? The answer I hold to be
that, by the act of chemical combination, the vibrations of the
constituent atoms of the molecules are rendered so sluggish as to
synchronize with the motions of the longer waves. They resemble loaded
piano strings, or slowly descending water jets, requiring notes of low
pitch to set them in motion.

The influence of synchronism between the "radiant" and the "absorbent"
is well shown by the behavior of carbonic acid gas. To the complex
emission from our heated stove, carbonic acid would be one of the most
transparent of gases. For such waves olefiant gas, for example, would
vastly transcend it in absorbing power. But when we select a radiant
with whose waves the atoms of carbonic acid are in accord, the case is
entirely altered. Such a radiant is found in a carbonic oxide flame,
where the radiating body is really hot carbonic acid. To this special
radiation carbonic acid is the most opaque of gases.

And here we find ourselves face to face with a question of great
delicacy and importance. Both as a radiator and as an absorber, carbonic
acid is, in general, a feeble gas. It is beaten in this respect by
chloride of methyl, ethylene, ammonia, sulphurous acid, nitrous oxide,
and marsh gas. Compared with some of these gases, its behavior, in fact,
approaches that of elementary bodies. May it not help to explain their
neutrality? The doctrine is now very generally accepted that atoms of
the same kind may, like atoms of different kinds, group themselves to
molecules. Affinity exists between hydrogen and hydrogen and between
chlorine and chlorine, as well as between hydrogen and chlorine. We have
thus homogeneous molecules as well as heterogeneous molecules, and the
neutrality so strikingly exhibited by the elements may be due to a
quality of which carbonic acid furnishes a partial illustration. The
paired atoms of the elementary molecules may be so out of accord with
the periods of the ultra red waves--the vibrating periods of these atoms
may, for example, be so rapid--as to disqualify them both from emitting
those waves, and from accepting their energy. This would practically
destroy their power, both as radiators and absorbers. I have reason to
know that a distinguished authority has for some time entertained this
hypothesis.

We must, however, refresh ourselves by occasional contact with the solid
ground of experiment, and an interesting problem now lies before us
awaiting experimental solution. Suppose two hundred men to be scattered
equably throughout the length of Pall Mall. By timely swerving now and
then, a runner from St. James's Palace to the Athenaeum Club might be
able to get through such a crowd without much hinderance. But supposing
the men to close up so as to form a dense file crossing Pall Mall from
north to south; such a barrier might seriously impede, or entirely stop,
the runner. Instead of a crowd of men, let us imagine a column of
molecules under small pressure, thus resembling the sparsely distributed
crowd. Let us suppose the column to shorten, without change in the
quantity of matter, until the molecules are so squeezed together as to
resemble the closed file across Pall Mall. During these changes of
density, would the action of the molecules upon a beam of heat passing
among them at all resemble the action of the crowd upon the runner?

We must answer this question by direct experiment. To form our molecular
crowd we place, in the first instance, a gas or vapor in a tube 38
inches long, the ends of which are closed with circular windows,
air-tight, but formed of a substance which offers little or no
obstruction to the calorific waves. Calling the measured value of a heat
beam passing through this tube 100, we carefully determine the
proportionate part of this total absorbed by the molecules in the tube.
We then gather precisely the same number of molecules into a column 10.8
inches long, the one column being thus three and a half times the length
of the other. In this case also we determine the quantity of radiant
heat absorbed. By the depression of a barometric column, we can easily
and exactly measure out the proper quantities of the gaseous body. It is
obvious that one mercury inch of vapor, in the long tube, would
represent precisely the same amount of matter--or, in other words, the
same number of molecules--as 31/2 inches in the short one; while 2
inches of vapor in the long tube would be equivalent to 7 inches in the
short one.

The experiments have been made with the vapors of two very volatile
liquids, namely, sulphuric ether and hydride of amyl. The sources of
radiant heat were, in some cases, an incandescent lime cylinder, and in
others a spiral of platinum wire, heated to bright redness by an
electric current. One or two of the measurements will suffice for the
purposes of illustration. First, then, as regards the lime light; for 1
inch of pressure in the long tube, the absorption was 18.4 per cent. of
the total beam; while for 3.5 inches of pressure in the short tube, the
absorption was 18.8 per cent., or almost exactly the same as the former.
For 2 inches pressure, moreover, in the long tube, the absorption was
25.7 per cent.; while for 7 inches in the short tube it was 25.6 per
cent. of the total beam. Thus closely do the absorptions in the two
cases run together--thus emphatically do the molecules assert their
individuality. As long as their number is unaltered, their action on
radiant heat is unchanged. Passing from the lime light to the
incandescent spiral, the absorptions of the smaller equivalent
quantities, in the two tubes, were 23.5 and 23.4 per cent.; while the
absorptions of the larger equivalent quantities were 32.1 and 32.6 per
cent., respectively. This constancy of absorption, when the density of a
gas or vapor is varied, I have called "the conservation of molecular
action."

But it may be urged that the change of density, in these experiments,
has not been carried far enough to justify the enunciation of a law of
molecular physics. The condensation into less than one-third of the
space does not, it may be said, quite represent the close file of men
across Pall Mall. Let us therefore push matters to extremes, and
continue the condensation till the vapor has been squeezed into a
liquid. To the pure change of density we shall then have added the
change in the state of aggregation. The experiments here are more easily
described than executed; nevertheless, by sufficient training,
scrupulous accuracy, and minute attention to details, success may be
insured. Knowing the respective specific gravities, it is easy, by
calculation, to determine the condensation requisite to reduce a column
of vapor of definite density and length to a layer of liquid of definite
thickness. Let the vapor, for example, be that of sulphuric ether, and
let it be introduced into our 38 inch tube till a pressure of 7.2 inches
of mercury is obtained. Or let it be hydride of amyl, of the same
length, and at a pressure of 6.6 inches. Supposing the column to
shorten, the vapor would become proportionally denser, and would, in
each case, end in the production of a layer of liquid exactly one
millimeter in thickness.[1] Conversely, a layer of liquid ether or of
