
"What do you mean?" Suzanne Maillard demanded. "He's found the traitor
and stopped the leak."

"Yes, but we're still responsible, as a team, for this betrayal," the
Israeli pointed out. "This Nayland is only a symptom of the enmity which
politicians and militarists feel toward the Free Scientists, and of
their opposition to the research-contract system. Now they have a
scandal to use. Our part in stopping the leak will be ignored; the
publicity will be about the treason of a Free Scientist."

"That's right," Sir Neville Lawton agreed. "And that brings up another
point. We simply can't hand this fellow over to the authorities. If we
do, we establish a precedent that may wreck the whole system under which
we operate."

"Yes: it would be a fine thing if governments start putting Free
Scientists on trial and shooting them," Farida Khouroglu supported him.
"In a few years, none of us would be safe."

"But," Suzanne cried, "you are not arguing that this species of an
animal be allowed to betray us unpunished?"

"Look," Rudolf von Heldenfeld said. "Let us give him his pistol, and one
cartridge, and let him remove himself like a gentleman. He will spare
himself the humiliation of trial and execution, and us all the
embarrassment of having a fellow scientist pilloried as a traitor."

"Now there's a typical Prussian suggestion," Lowiewski said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Kato Sugihara, returning alone, looked around the table. "Did I miss
something interesting?" he asked.

"Oh, very," Lowiewski told him. "Your Junker friend thinks I should
perform _seppuku_."

Kato nodded quickly. "Excellent idea!" he congratulated von Heldenfeld.
"If he does, he'll save everybody a lot of trouble. Himself included."
He nodded again. "If he does that, we can protect his reputation, after
he's dead."

"I don't really see how," Sir Neville objected. "When the Counter
Espionage people were brought into this, the thing went out of our
control."

"Why, this chauffeur was the spy, as well as the spy-courier," MacLeod
said. "The information he transmitted was picked up piecemeal from
different indiscreet lab-workers and students attached to our team. Of
course, we are investigating, mumble-mumble. Naturally, no one will
admit, mumble-mumble. No stone will be left unturned, mumble-mumble.
Disciplinary action, mumble-mumble."

"And I suppose he got that microfilm piecemeal, too?" Lowiewski asked.

"Oh, that?" MacLeod shrugged. "That was planted on him. One of our girls
arranged an opportunity for him to steal it from her, after we began to
suspect him. Of course, Kato falsified everything he put into that
report. As information, it's worthless."

"Worthless? It's better than that," Kato grinned. "I'm really sorry the
Komintern won't get it. They'd try some of that stuff out with the big
betatron at Smolensk, and a microsecond after they'd throw the switch,
Smolensk would look worse than Hiroshima did."

"Well, why would our esteemed colleague commit suicide, just at this
time?" Karen Hilquist asked.

"Maybe plutonium poisoning." Farida suggested. "He was doing something
in the radiation-lab and got some Pu in him, and of course, shooting's
not as painful as that. So--"

"Oh, my dear!" Suzanne protested. "That but stinks! The great Adam
Lowiewski, descending from his pinnacle of pure mathematics, to perform
a vulgar experiment? With actual _things_?" The Frenchwoman gave an
exaggerated shudder. "Horrors!"

"Besides, if our people began getting radioactive, somebody would be
sure to claim we were endangering the safely of the whole establishment,
and the national-security clause would be invoked, and some nosy person
would put a geiger on the dear departed," Sir Neville added.

"Nervous collapse." Karen said. "According to the laity, all scientists
are crazy. Crazy people kill themselves. Adam Lowiewski was a scientist.
Ergo Adam Lowiewski killed himself. Besides, a nervous collapse isn't
instrumentally detectable."

Heym ben-Hillel looked at MacLeod, his eyes troubled.

"But, Dunc; have we the right to put him to death, either by his own
hand or by an Army firing squad?" he asked. "Remember he is not only a
traitor; he is one of the world's greatest mathematical minds. Have we a
right to destroy that mind?"

Von Heldenfeld shouted, banging his fist on the table: "I don't care if
he's Gauss and Riemann and Lorenz and Poincare and Minkowski and
Whitehead and Einstein, all collapsed into one! The man is a stinking
traitor, not only to us, but to all scientists and all sciences! If he
doesn't shoot himself, hand him over to the United States, and let them
shoot him! Why do we go on arguing?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Lowiewski was smiling, now. The panic that had seized him in the hallway
below, and the desperation when the cigarette pack had been opened, had
left him.

"Now I have a modest proposal, which will solve your difficulties," he
said. "I have money, papers, clothing, everything I will need, outside
the reservation. Suppose you just let me leave here. Then, if there is
any trouble, you can use this fiction about the indiscreet underlings,
without the unnecessary embellishment of my suicide--"

Rudolf von Heldenfeld let out an inarticulate roar of fury. For an
instant he was beyond words. Then he sprang to his feet.

"Look at him!" he cried. "Look at him, laughing in our faces, for the
dupes and fools he thinks we are!" He thrust out his hand toward
MacLeod. "Give me the pistol! He won't shoot himself; I'll do it for
him!"

"It would work, Dunc. Really, it would," Heym ben-Hillel urged.

"No," Karen Hilquist contradicted. "If he left here, everybody would
know what had happened, and we'd be accused of protecting him. If he
kills himself, we can get things hushed up: dead traitors are good
traitors. But if he remains alive, we must disassociate ourselves from
him by handing him over."

"And wreck the prestige of the Team?" Lowiewski asked.

"At least you will not live to see that!" Suzanne retorted.

Heym ben-Hillel put his elbows on the table and his head in his hands.
"Is there no solution to this?" he almost wailed.

"Certainly: an obvious solution," MacLeod said, rising. "Rudolf has just
stated it. Only I'm leader of this Team, and there are, of course, jobs
a team-leader simply doesn't delegate." The safety catch of the Beretta
clicked a period to his words.

"No!" The word was wrenched almost physically out of Lowiewski. He, too,
was on his feet, a sudden desperate fear in his face. "No! You wouldn't
