"Very pleased, Tenant, gentlemen. I met all you young men last
evening; I remember you," Altamont said. "Now, if you'll all crowd in
here, I'll explain what we're going to try to do."

He showed them the old picture. "You see where the shadow of a tall
building falls?" he asked. "We know the location and height of this
building. Dr. Loudons will hold this helicopter at exactly the
position of the top of the building, and aim through the sights of the
rifle, there. One of you will have this flag in his hand, and will
move it back and forth; Dr. Loudons will tell us when the flag is in
the sight of the rifle."

"He'll need a good pair of lungs to do that," Verner Hughes commented.

"We'll use radio. A portable set on the ground, and the helicopter's
radio set." He was met, to his surprise, with looks of incomprehension.
He had not supposed that these people would have lost all memory of
radio communication.

"Why, that's wonderful!" the Reader exclaimed, when he explained. "You
can talk directly; how much better than just sending a telegram!"

"But, finding the crypt by the shadow; that's exactly like the--"
Murray Hughes began, then stopped short. Immediately, he began talking
loudly about the rifle that was to be used as a surveying transit,
comparing it with the ones in the big first-floor room at the
Aitch-Cue House.

       *       *       *       *       *

Locating the point on which the shadow of the old Cathedral of
Learning had fallen proved easier than either Altamont or Loudons had
expected. The towering building was now a tumbled mass of slagged
rubble, but it was quite possible to determine its original center,
and with the old data from the excellent reference library at Fort
Ridgeway, its height above sea level was known. After a little
jockeying, the helicopter came to a hovering stop, and the slanting
barrel of the rifle in the vise pointed downward along the line of the
shadow that had been cast on that afternoon in June, 1993, the cross
hairs of the scope-sight centered almost exactly on the spot Altamont
had estimated on the map. While he peered through the sight, Loudons
brought the helicopter slanting down to land on the sheet of fused
glass that had once been a grassy campus.

"Well, this is probably it," Altamont said. "We didn't have to bother
fussing around with that flag, after all. That hump, over there, looks
as though it had been a small building, and there's nothing
corresponding to it on the city map. That may be the bunker over the
stair-head to the crypt."

[Illustration: ]

They began unloading equipment--a small portable nuclear-electric
conversion unit, a powerful solenoid-hammer, crowbars and intrenching
tools, tins of blasting-plastic. They took out the two hunting rifles,
and the auto-carbines, and Altamont showed the young men of Murray
Hughes' detail how to use them.

"If you'll pardon me, sir," the Tenant said to Altamont, "I think it
would be a good idea if your companion went up in the flying machine
and circled around over us, to keep watch for Scowrers. There are
quite a few of them, particularly farther up the rivers, to the east,
where the damage was not so great and they can find cellars and
shelters and buildings to live in."

"Good idea; that way, we won't have to put out guards," Altamont said.
"From the looks of this, we'll need everybody to help dig into that
thing. Hand out one of the portable radios, Jim, and go up to about a
thousand feet. If you see anything suspicious, give us a yell, and
then spray it with bullets, and find out what it is afterward."

They waited until the helicopter had climbed to position and was
circling above, and then turned their attention to the place where the
sheet of fused earth and stone bulged upward. It must have been almost
ground-zero of one of the hydrogen-bombs; the wreckage of the
Cathedral of Learning had fallen predominantly to the north, and the
Carnegie Library was tumbled to the east.

"I think the entrance would be on this side, toward the Library,"
Altamont said. "Let's try it, to begin with."

He used the solenoid-hammer, slowly pounding a hole into the glaze,
and placed a small charge of the plastic explosive. Chunks of the
lavalike stuff pelted down between the little mound and the huge one
of the old library, blowing a hole six feet in diameter and two and a
half deep, revealing concrete bonded with crushed steel-mill slag.

"We missed the door," he said. "That means we'll have to tunnel in
through who knows how much concrete. Well--"

       *       *       *       *       *

He used a second and larger charge, after digging a hole a foot deep.
When he and his helpers came up to look, they found a large mass of
concrete blown out, and solid steel behind it. Altamont cut two more
holes sidewise, one on either side of the blown-out place, and fired a
charge in each of them, bringing down more concrete. He found that he
hadn't missed the door, after all. It had merely been concreted over.

A few more shots cleared it, and after some work, they got it open.
There was a room inside, concrete-floored and entirely empty. With the
others crowding behind him, Altamont stood in the doorway and
inspected the interior with his flashlight; he heard somebody back of
him say something about a most peculiar sort of a dark-lantern. Across
the small room, on the opposite wall, was a bronze plaque.

It carried quite a lengthy inscription, including the names of all the
persons and institutions participating in the microfilm project. The
History Department at the Fort would be most interested in that, but
the only thing that interested Altamont was the statement that the
floor had been laid over the trapdoor leading to the vaults where the
microfilms were stored. He went outside to the radio.

"Hello, Jim. We're inside, but the films are stored in an underground
vault, and we have to tear up a concrete floor," he said. "Go back to
the village and gather up all the men you can carry, and tools.
Hammers and picks and short steel bars. I don't want to use explosives
inside. The interior of the crypt oughtn't to be damaged, and I don't
know what a blast in here might do to the film, and I don't want to
take chances."

"No, of course not. How thick do you think this floor is?"

"Haven't the least idea. Plenty thick, I'd say. Those films would have
to be well buried, to shield them from radioactivity. We can expect
that it'll take some time."

"All right. I'll be back as soon as I can."

The helicopter turned and went windmilling away, over what had been
the Golden Triangle, down the Ohio.

Altamont went back to the little concrete bunker and sat down,
lighting his pipe. Murray Hughes and his four riflemen spread out, one
circling around the glazed butte that had been the Cathedral of
Learning, another climbing to the top of the old library, and the
others taking positions to the south and east.

Altamont sat in silence, smoking his pipe and trying to form some
conception of the wealth under that concrete floor. It was no use.
Jim Loudons probably understood a little more nearly what those books
would mean to the world of today, and what they could do toward
shaping the world of the future. There was a library at Fort Ridgeway,
and it was an excellent one--for its purpose. In 1996, when the
rockets had come crashing down, it had contained the cream of the
world's technological knowledge--and very little else. There was a
little fiction, a few books of ideas, just enough to give the
survivors a tantalizing glimpse of the world of their fathers. But
now--

       *       *       *       *       *

A rifle banged to the south and east, and banged again. Either Murray
Hughes or Birdy Edwards--it was one of the two hunting rifles from the
helicopter. On the heels of the reports, they heard a voice shouting:
"Scowrers! A lot of them, coming from up the river!" A moment later,
there was a light whip-crack of one of the long muzzle-loaders, from
the top of the old Carnegie Library, and Altamont could see a wisp of
gray-white smoke drifting away from where it had been fired. He jumped
to his feet and raced for the radio, picking it up and bringing it to
the bunker.

Tenant Jones, old Reader Rawson, and Verner Hughes had caught up their
rifles. The Tenant was shouting, "Come on in! Everybody, come in!" The
boy on top of the library began scrambling down. Another came running
from the direction of the half-demolished Cathedral of Learning, a
third from the baseball field that had served as Altamont's point of
reference the afternoon before. The fourth, Murray Hughes, was running
in from the ruins of the old Carnegie Tech buildings, and Birdy
Edwards sped up the main road from Shenley Park. Once or twice, as he
