clear.

"There are four Assassins of the family of Starpha, and six
menservants, and an upper-servant named Tarnod, the gamekeeper. The
Starpha Assassins and I have been keeping the rest under observation.
I left one of the Starpha Assassins guarding the Lady Dallona when I
came for you, under brotherly oath to protect her in my name till I
returned."

The airboat was skimming rapidly above the treetops, toward the
northern part of the city.

"What's known about that package bomb?" Verkan Vall asked. "Who sent
it?"

Dirzed shrugged. "The Statisticalists, of course. The wrapper was
stolen from the Reincarnation Research Institute; so was the case. The
Constabulary are working on it." Dirzed shrugged again.

The dome, about a hundred and fifty feet in width and some fifty in
height, stood among the trees ahead. It was almost invisible from any
distance; the concrete dome was of mottled green and gray concrete,
trees grew so close as to brush it with their branches, and the little
pavilion on the flattened top was roofed with translucent green
plastic. As the airboat came in, a couple of men in Assassins' garb
emerged from the pavilion to meet them.

"Marnik, stay at the controls," Verkan Vall directed. "I'll send
Olirzon up for you if I want you. If there's any trouble, take off for
Assassins' Hall and give the code word, then come back with twice as
many men as you think you'll need."

Dirzed raised his eyebrows over this. "I hadn't known the
Assassin-President had given you a code word, Lord Virzal," he
commented. "That doesn't happen very often."

"The Assassin-President has honored me with his friendship," Verkan
Vall replied noncommittally, as he, Dirzed and Olirzon climbed out of
the airboat. Marnik was holding it an unobtrusive inch or so above the
flat top of the dome, away from the edge of the pavilion roof.

The two Assassins greeted him, and a man in upper-servants' garb and
wearing a hunting knife and a long hunting pistol approached.

"Lord Virzal of Verkan? Welcome to Starpha Dome. The Lady Dallona
awaits you below."

Verkan Vall had never been in an Akor-Neb dwelling dome, but a
description of such structures had been included in his hypno-mech
indoctrination. Originally, they had been the standard structure for
all purposes; about two thousand elapsed years ago, when nationalism
had still existed on the Akor-Neb Sector, the cities had been almost
entirely under ground, as protection from air attack. Even now, the
design had been retained by those who wished to live apart from the
towering city units, to preserve the natural appearance of the
landscape. The Starpha hunting lodge was typical of such domes. Under
it was a circular well, eighty feet in depth and fifty in width, with
a fountain and a shallow circular pool at the bottom. The storerooms,
kitchens and servants' quarters were at the top, the living quarters
at the bottom, in segments of a wide circle around the well, back of
balconies.

"Tarnod, the gamekeeper," Dirzed performed the introductions. "And
Erarno and Kirzol, Assassins."

Verkan Vall hooked fingers and clapped shoulders with them. Tarnod
accompanied them to the lifter tubes--two percent positive gravitation
for descent and two percent negative for ascent--and they all floated
down the former, like air-filled balloons, to the bottom level.

"The Lady Dallona is in the gun room," Tarnod informed Verkan Vall,
making as though to guide him.

"Thanks, Tarnod; we know the way," Dirzed told him shortly, turning
his back on the upper-servant and walking toward a closed door on the
other side of the fountain. Verkan Vall and Olirzon followed; for a
moment, Tarnod stood looking after them, then he followed the other
two Assassins into the ascent tube.

"I don't relish that fellow," Dirzed explained. "The family of Starpha
use him for work they couldn't hire an Assassin to do at any price.
I've been here often, when I was with the Lord Garnon; I've always
thought he had something on Prince Jirzyn."

He knocked sharply on the closed door with the butt of his pistol. In
a moment, it slid open, and a young Assassin with a narrow mustache
and a tuft of chin beard looked out.

"Ah, Dirzed." He stepped outside. "The Lady Dallona is within; I
return her to your care."

Verkan Vall entered, followed by Dirzed and Olirzon. The big room was
fitted with reclining chairs and couches and low tables; its walls
were hung with the heads of deer and boar and wolves, and with racks
holding rifles and hunting pistols and fowling pieces. It was filled
with the soft glow of indirect cold light. At the far side of the
room, a young woman was seated at a desk, speaking softly into a sound
transcriber. As they entered, she snapped it off and rose.

Hadron Dalla wore the same costume Verkan Vall had seen on the
visiplate: he recognized her instantly. It took her a second or two to
perceive Verkan Vall under the brown skin and black hair of the Lord
Virzal of Verkan. Then her face lighted with a happy smile.

"Why, Va-a-a-ll!" she whooped, running across the room and tossing
herself into his not particularly reluctant arms. After all, it had
been twenty years--"I didn't know you, at first!"

"You mean, in these clothes?" he asked, seeing that she had forgotten,
for the moment, the presence of the two Assassins. She had even
called him by his First Level name, but that was unimportant--the
Akor-Neb affectionate diminutive was formed by omitting the -_irz_- or
-_arn_-. "Well, they're not exactly what I generally wear on the
plantation." He kissed her again, then turned to his companions. "Your
pardon, Gentlemen-Assassins; it's been something over a year since
we've seen each other."

Olirzon was smiling at the affectionate reunion; Dirzed wore a look of
amused resignation, as though he might have expected something like
this to happen. Verkan Vall and Dalla sat down on a couch near the
desk.

"That was really sweet of you, Vall, fighting those men for talking
about me," she began. "You took an awful chance, though. But if you
hadn't, I'd never have known you were in Darsh--Oh-oh! That was why
you did it, wasn't it?"

"Well, I had to do something. Everybody either didn't know or weren't
saying where you were. I assumed, from the circumstances, that you
were hiding somewhere. Tell me, Dalla; do you really have scientific
proof of reincarnation? I mean, as an established fact?"

"Oh, yes; these people on this sector have had that for over ten
centuries. They have hypnotic techniques for getting back into a part
of the subconscious mind that we've never been able to reach. And
after I found out how they did it, I was able to adapt some of our
hypno-epistemological techniques to it, and--"

"All right; that's what I wanted to know," he cut her off. "We're
getting out of here, right away."

"But where?"

"Ghamma, in an airboat I have outside, and then back to the First
Level. Unless there's a paratime-transposition conveyor somewhere
nearer."

"But why, Vall? I'm not ready to go back; I have a lot of work to do here,
yet. They're getting ready to set up a series of control-experiments at the
Institute, and then, I'm in the middle of an experiment, a
two-hundred-subject memory-recall experiment. See, I distributed two
hundred sets of equipment for my new technique--injection-ampoules of this
_zerfa_-derivative drug, and sound records of the hypnotic suggestion
formula, which can be played on an ordinary reproducer. It's just a crude
variant of our hypno-mech process, except that instead of implanting
information in the subconscious mind, to be brought at will to the level of
consciousness, it works the other way, and draws into conscious knowledge
information already in the subconscious mind. The way these people have
always done has been to put the subject in an hypnotic trance and then
record verbal statements made in the trance state; when the subject comes
out of the trance, the record is all there is, because the memories of past
reincarnations have never been in the conscious mind. But with my process,
the subject can consciously remember everything about his last
reincarnation, and as many reincarnations before that as he wishes to. I
haven't heard from any of the people who received these auto-recall kits,
and I really must--"

"Dalla, I don't want to have to pull Paratime Police authority on you,
but, so help me, if you don't come back voluntarily with me, I will.
Security of the secret of paratime transposition."

"Oh, my eye!" Dalla exclaimed. "Don't give me that, Vall!"

"Look, Dalla. Suppose you get discarnated here," Verkan Vall said.
"You say reincarnation is a scientific fact. Well, you'd reincarnate
on this sector, and then you'd take a memory-recall, under hypnosis.
And when you did, the paratime secret wouldn't be a secret any more."

"Oh!" Dalla's hand went to her mouth in consternation. Like every
paratimer, she was conditioned to shrink with all her being from the
mere thought of revealing to any out-time dweller the secret ability
of her race to pass to other time-lines, or even the existence of
alternate lines of probability. "And if I took one of the
old-fashioned trance-recalls, I'd blat out everything; I wouldn't be
able to keep a thing back. And I even know the principles of
transposition!" She looked at him, aghast.

"When I get back, I'm going to put a recommendation through department
channels that this whole sector be declared out of bounds for all
paratime-transposition, until you people at Rhogom Foundation work
out the problem of discarnate return to the First Level," he told her.
"Now, have you any notes or anything you want to take back with you?"

She rose. "Yes; just what's on the desk. Find me something to put the
tape spools and notebooks in, while I'm getting them in order."

He secured a large game bag from under a rack of fowling pieces, and
held it while she sorted the material rapidly, stuffing spools of
record tape and notebooks into it. They had barely begun when the door
slid open and Olirzon, who had gone outside, sprang into the room, his
pistol drawn, swearing vilely.

"They've double-crossed us!" he cried. "The servants of Starpha have
turned on us." He holstered his pistol and snatched up his
submachine-gun, taking cover behind the edge of the door and letting
go with a burst in the direction of the lifter tubes. "Got that one!"
he grunted.

"What happened, Olirzon?" Verkan Vall asked, dropping the game bag on
the table and hurrying across the room.

"I went up to see how Marnik was making out. As I came out of the
lifter tube, one of the obscenities took a shot at me with a hunting
pistol. He missed me; I didn't miss him. Then a couple more of them
were coming up, with fowling pieces; I shot one of them before they
could fire, and jumped into the descent tube and came down heels over
ears. I don't know what's happened to Marnik." He fired another burst,
and swore. "Missed him!"

"Assassins' Truce! Assassins' Truce!" a voice howled out of the
descent tube. "Hold your fire, we want to parley."

"Who is it?" Dirzed shouted, over Olirzon's shoulder. "You, Sarnax?
Come on out; we won't shoot."

The young Assassin with the mustache and chin beard emerged from the
descent tube, his weapons sheathed and his clasped hands extended in
front of him in a peculiarly ecclesiastical-looking manner. Dirzed and
Olirzon stepped out of the gun room, followed by Verkan Vall and
Hadron Dalla. Olirzon had left his submachine-gun behind. They met the
other Assassin by the rim of the fountain pool.

"Lady Dallona of Hadron," the Starpha Assassin began. "I and my
colleagues, in the employ of the family of Starpha, have received
orders from our clients to withdraw our protection from you, and to
discarnate you, and all with you who undertake to protect or support
you." That much sounded like a recitation of some established formula;
then his voice became more conversational. "I and my colleagues,
Erarno and Kirzol and Harnif, offer our apologies for the barbarity of
the servants of the family of Starpha, in attacking without
declaration of cessation of friendship. Was anybody hurt or
discarnated?"

"None of us," Olirzon said. "How about Marnik?"

"He was warned before hostilities were begun against him," Sarnax
replied. "We will allow five minutes until--"

Olirzon, who had been looking up the well, suddenly sprang at Dalla,
knocking her flat, and at the same time jerking out his pistol. Before
he could raise it, a shot banged from above and he fell on his face.
Dirzed, Verkan Vall, and Sarnax, all drew their pistols, but whoever
had fired the shot had vanished. There was an outburst of shouting
above.

"Get to cover," Sarnax told the others. "We'll let you know when we're
ready to attack; we'll have to deal with whoever fired that shot,
first." He looked at the dead body on the floor, exclaimed angrily,
and hurried to the ascent tube, springing upward.

Verkan Vall replaced the small pistol in his shoulder holster and took
Olirzon's belt, with his knife and heavier pistol.

"Well, there you see," Dirzed said, as they went back to the gun room.
"So much for political expediency."

"I think I understand why your picture and the Lady Dallona's were
exhibited so widely," Verkan Vall said. "Now, anybody would recognize
your bodies, and blame the Statisticalists for discarnating you."

"That thought had occurred to me, Lord Virzal," Dirzed said. "I
suppose our bodies will be atrociously but not unidentifiably
mutilated, to further enrage the public," he added placidly. "If I get
out of this carnate, I'm going to pay somebody off for it."

After a few minutes, there was more shouting of: "Assassins' Truce!"
from the descent tube. The two Assassins, Erarno and Kirzol, emerged,
dragging the gamekeeper, Tarnod, between them. The upper-servant's
face was bloody, and his jaw seemed to be broken. Sarnax followed,
carrying a long hunting pistol in his hand.

"Here he is!" he announced. "He fired during Assassins' Truce; he's
subject to Assassins' Justice!"

He nodded to the others. They threw the gamekeeper forward on the
floor, and Sarnax shot him through the head, then tossed the pistol
down beside him. "Any more of these people who violate the decencies
will be treated similarly," he promised.

"Thank you, Sarnax," Dirzed spoke up. "But we lost an Assassin:
discarnating this lackey won't equalize that. We think you should
retire one of your number."

"That at least, Dirzed; wait a moment."

The three Assassins conferred at some length. Then Sarnax hooked
fingers and clapped shoulders with his companions.

"See you in the next reincarnation, brothers," he told them, walking
toward the gun-room door, where Verkan Vall, Dalla and Dirzed stood.
"I'm joining you people. You had two Assassins when the parley began,
you'll have two when the shooting starts."

Verkan Vall looked at Dirzed in some surprise. Hadron Dalla's Assassin
nodded.

"He's entitled to do that, Lord Virzal; the Assassins' code provides
for such changes of allegiance."

"Welcome, Sarnax," Verkan Vall said, hooking fingers with him. "I hope
we'll all be together when this is over."

"We will be," Sarnax assured him cheerfully. "Discarnate. We won't get
out of this in the body, Lord Virzal."

A submachine-gun hammered from above, the bullets lashing the fountain
pool; the water actually steamed, so great was their velocity.

"All right!" a voice called down. "Assassins' Truce is over!"
