In the _Boston Journal_, of April 21st, 1852, is an article from
Dr. Cartwright, entitled "Confirmation of the Willardian, or Important
American Discovery," in which the author endeavors to remove what
doubtless has been one cause of the delay in acknowledging its truth.
"Those members of the profession," he says, "whom science has only
_perfumed_, are the most apt 'to look down with proud disdain' on any
discovery originating 'with individuals not indoctrinated.' They do not
make the proper distinction between selfish quacks who seek publicity
'to line the pocket,' and those 'who, prompted by some mysterious
power,' come forward against their interest, and at the risk of their
reputation. 'Rather than to contemn and ridicule, it were better to
study the manifestations of that mysterious power.' They do not consider
that the truth thus brought to light, while they fail to acknowledge it,
is affording 'to selfish quackery' a capital to trade on."

To the same effect is the advice given to the profession by Dr. B. F.
Washington, of Hannibal, Mo. He says, in the Nashville _Journal of
Medicine_, July, 1854, "it is time for us to be acting; the honor of the
profession is in danger. The theory of respiration is a truth which will
cut its way; and if we do not take it up and teach it, in a few years we
may see the mortifying spectacle of the community teaching the
profession scientific truths. Quacks have already taken it up, and we
have inhalers and air cures of various kinds."[9]

The first appearance of Dr. Washington as the advocate of my theory was
in the _Nashville Journal_, March, 1854; and his fertile genius had
there brought a new illustration of its truth. It had, he said, opened
his eyes to the explanation of a fact which had puzzled him from his
boyhood. "In slaughtering animals, if the trachea was cut, scarcely any
haemorrhage resulted; while, if that was left untouched, full haemorrhage
occurred. By the Willardian theory, the fact is readily susceptible of
explanation. The blood, filling the trachea, suspended respiration, and
of course the impelling power of the blood was suspended, and the
haemorrhage ceased. The engine could not work without steam. When the
trachea was not cut, respiration went on, and kept up the circulation,
until the animal was nearly exsanguineous, and the powers of life gave
way." This fact was clearly ascertained by Dr. W. K. Bowling, the
well-known editor of the _Nashville Journal_, and able professor of the
theory and practice of medicine in the university of that place. He sent
me the Journal containing this welcome endorsement of my theory from one
who was, as Dr. Bowling assured me, "an observer of superior tact and
learning," known by his medical compositions as well in Europe as
America. Since that time (March, 1854), that Journal, though not
excluding articles which oppose, has been understood to be in favor of
the theory. Dr. Washington has written repeatedly, answering all
objections;[10] and he has, in the Journal (as I have been assured by
one of the Editors), "crushed out all that would take up his glove, and
is left in undisputed possession of the field--looking in vain for an
opponent."

In the meantime, in 1856, Dr. J. N. Draper, Professor of Chemistry and
Physiology in the University of New-York, in an elaborate work on "Human
Physiology," has agreed that Harvey's theory of the paramount power of
the heart's action in the circulation must be abandoned; and that to
respiration must be assigned "the great duty of originating the blood's
circulation."[11]

Dr. Washington has not only defended me in every important position
which I have taken, and added new illustrations--but he has made the
theory available to showing new proofs of the wisdom of God in the
creation of man. Thus--steam is formed in the vacuum of the lungs at the
low temperature of 67 deg., while, if there were no vacuum, 212 deg. of heat
would be required to produce it,--an impossible quantity, since it would
coagulate the albumen of the blood. But form the vacuum, and the boiling
of the blood with any degree of heat less than 101 deg. could not cause any
such disaster, while the steam going off from the lungs through the
arterial system to the capillaries, gradually condenses, warming the
body by giving off its latent heat; and the latent heat of vapor is the
same however it is formed, and is always 1,114 deg.. What divine wisdom and
economy are thus displayed!

Homoeopathy has, we believe, never found any difficulty in receiving this
theory. We know that, at one of its conventions held in Providence, it
was ably supported; and Dr. Marcy, whom I have the honor to address,
was, as we have seen, one of its earliest defenders. He has never,
whether allopathist or homoeopathist, been known to hesitate when his own
mind brought him clear conclusions;--the distinguishing mark, according
to Dugald Stewart, of intrepidity of character.

                                    With profound respect,
                                            EMMA WILLARD.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] It is here seen what an important work this theory does for the
venous circulation, and why the blood moves into the lungs. We have read
of a theory which maintains that it goes there because there is a mutual
attraction between it and the capillaries of the lungs. But there is
none between the water in our tube and that in the tin vessel where
water is boiling; but it goes into it with a rush notwithstanding.
Because there is a strong suction power produced by expansion, no other
attraction is needed. The apparatus, as here described, goes no farther
than to represent the circulation in single-hearted animals. But in my
work is a drawing which shows the left heart on the opposite of the
mimic lungs from the right; and then how the same tube, by being folded
in the form of a figure eight (8), shows the two hearts united into one,
and both ventricles working by the same contractions to perform their
different tasks.

[2] Mrs. B. Ogle Taylor, of Washington, formerly Miss Julia Dickinson,
of Troy, was thus found dead; and the late Mrs. Cass thus lost her life.
"She was seized," says a newspaper account, "in a hot bath, which she
had taken soon after eating." She lived an hour, unconscious, and the
physician said she died of congestion of the brain. How easily could
these highly intelligent ladies have kept themselves from danger, or
saved themselves when they felt it approaching, had they known and
understood these principles. For two reasons, in case of the failure of
the motive power from keeping the body too long in hot water, the blood
would be congested in the head. First, the head would not be immersed,
and, second, the last blood which the lungs sent forth would go to it.

[3] What can the Smithsonian Institute do better to carry out the views
with which the benevolent Smithson gave his fortune, than thus to teach
mankind when life may, by free circulation, be made to confer
enjoyment--how it may be inadvertently destroyed--and how it may be
restored, when, by drowning or otherwise, it is suspended? Sudden deaths
often occur by mal-position. That of the late Secretary Marcy is
doubtless an example. After his blood was heated and his circulation
quickened, he laid himself down on his back, his head not raised.
Attention to the workings of such a piece of apparatus as might be made,
would have shown the fatal effects of such a position at such a time.

[4] A young physician, whom I paid for correcting the proofs, was not
successful in preventing mistakes, especially in regard to numbers.

[5] I had just been reading Cuvier, to see whether he believed in the
Harveian theory of the circulation. I found he did not. "The circulation
vortex," says he, "is sometimes simple, sometimes double and even triple
(including that of the vena porta); the rapidity of its movements is
often _aided_ by the contraction of a certain fleshy apparatus
denominated hearts." Thus showing that my theory gave to the heart all
the prominence that was given to it by this great philosopher, who had
