out the storm."

"You'd have to wait long after the rain stops," replied Astro. "There is
one thing in this place nothing ever gets enough of, and that's water.
Animals know it and hang around all the water holes. If a small animal
tries to get a drink, he more than likely winds up in something's
stomach. When it rains like this, hollows fill up like the one we just
left, and everything within running, hopping, and crawling distance
heads for it to get a bellyful of water. In another hour our camp will
be like something out of a nightmare, with every animal in the jungle
coming down for a drink and starting to fight one another."

"Then if we stayed there--" Roger stopped.

"We'd be in the middle of it," said Astro grimly. "We wouldn't last two
minutes."

Walking single file, with Astro in the lead, followed by Roger and then
Tom, they stumbled through the pitch-black darkness. Astro refused to
shine a light, for fear of being attacked by a desperate animal, more
eager for water than afraid of the light. They carried their shock
blasters cocked and ready to fire. The rain continued, increasing in
fury until they were enveloped in a nearly solid wall of water. In a
little while the floor of the jungle became one continuous mudhole, with
each step taking them ankle-deep into the sucking mud. Their climb was
uphill, and the water from above increased, washing down around them in
torrents. More than once one of the cadets fell, gasping for breath,
into the dirty water, only to be jerked back to more solid footing by
the other two. Stumbling, their hands groping wildly in the dark, they
pushed forward.

They were reaching higher ground when Astro stopped suddenly.

"Listen!" he whispered hoarsely.

The boys stood still, the rain pounding down on their plastic headgear,
holding rifles ready and straining their ears for some sound other than
the drumming of rain.

"I don't hear anything," said Roger.

"_Shhh!_" hissed Astro.

They waited, and then from a distance they heard the faint crashing of
underbrush. Gradually it became more distinct until there was no
mistaking its source. A large monster was moving through the jungle near
them!

"What is it?" asked Tom, trying to keep his voice calm.

"A big one," said Astro. "A real big one. And I think it's heading this
way!"

"By the craters of Luna!" gasped Roger. "What do we do?"

"We either run, or stay here and try to blast it."

"Whatever you say, Astro," said Roger. "You're the boss."

"Same here," said Tom. "Call it."

Astro did not answer right away. He strained his ears, listening to the
movements of the advancing monster, trying to ascertain the exact
direction the beast was taking. The noise became more violent, the
crashing more sharply defined as small trees were crushed to the ground.

"If only I knew exactly what it is!" said Astro desperately. "If it's a
tyranno, it walks on its hind legs and has its head way up in the trees,
and could pass within ten feet of us and not see us. But if it's a
bronto, it has a long snakelike neck that he pokes all around and he
wouldn't miss us at a hundred feet!"

"Make up your mind quick, big boy," said Roger. "If that thing gets any
closer, I'm opening up with this blaster. He might eat me, but I'll sure
make his teeth rattle first!"

The ground began to shake as the approaching monster came nearer. Astro
remained still, ears straining for some sound to indicate exactly what
was crashing down on them.

Above them, the shrill scream of an anthropoid suddenly pierced the dark
night as its tree home was sent crashing to the ground. There was a
growing roar and the crashing stopped momentarily.

"Let's get out of here," said Astro tensely. "That's a tyranno, but he's
down on all fours now, looking for that monkey! Keep together and make
as little noise as you can. No talking. Keep your blasters and emergency
lights ready. If he discovers us, you shine the light on his face Roger,
and Tom and I will shoot. O.K.?"

Tom and Roger agreed.

"All right," said Astro, "let's go--and spaceman's luck!"




CHAPTER 7


"What can I do for you, Officer?"

Connel heaved his bulk out of the jet launch and looked hard at the man
standing in front of him. "You Rex Sinclair?"

Sinclair nodded. "That's right."

Connel offered his hand. "Major Connel, Solar Guard."

"Glad to meet you," replied the planter, gripping the spaceman's hand.
"Have something to cool you off."

"Thanks," said Connel. "I can use it. Whew! Must be at least one twenty
in the shade."

Sinclair chuckled. "This way, Major."

They didn't say anything more until Connel was resting comfortably in a
deep chair, admiring the crystal roof of Sinclair's house. After a
pleasant exchange about crops and problems of farming on Venus, the
gruff spaceman squared his back and stared straight at his host. "Mr.
James, the Solar Delegate, told me you've resisted pressure to join the
Venusian Nationalists."

Sinclair's expression changed slightly. His eyebrows lifting
quizzically. "Why--yes, that's true."

"I'd like you to tell me what you know about the organization."

"I see," mused Sinclair. "Is that an order?" he added, chuckling.

"That's a request. I'd like to learn as much about the Nationalists as
possible."

"For what purpose?"

Connel paused and then said casually, "A spot check. The Solar Guard
likes to keep its eyes open for trouble."

"Trouble?" exclaimed Sinclair. "You're not serious!"

Connel nodded his head. "It's probably nothing but a club. However, I'd
like to get some facts on it."

"Have you spoken to anyone else?" asked Sinclair.

"I just came from the Sharkey plantation. It's deserted. Not a soul
around. I'll drop back by there before I return to Venusport." Connel
paused and looked squarely at Sinclair. "Well?"

"I don't know much about them, Major," replied the planter. "It always
seemed to me nothing more than a group of planters getting together--"

Connel cut him off. "Possibly, but why didn't you join?"

"Well--"

"Aren't all your friends in it?"

"Yes, but I just don't have time. I have a big place, and there's only
me and my foreman and housekeeper now. All the field hands left some
time ago."

"Where'd they go?"

"Venusport, I guess. Can't get people to farm these days."

"All right, Mr. Sinclair," declared Connel, "let's lay our cards on the
table. I know how you must feel talking about your friends, but this is
really important. Vitally important to every citizen in the Solar
Alliance. Suppose the Nationalists were really a tight organization with
a purpose--a purpose of making Venus independent of the Solar Alliance.
If they succeeded, if Venus did break away, Mercury might follow, then
Mars--the whole system fall apart--break up into independent states. And
when that happens, there's trouble--customs barriers, jealousies,
individual armies and navies, and then, ultimately, a space war. It's
more than just friendship, Sinclair, it's the smallest crack in the
solid front of the Solar Alliance, but it's a crack that _can_ be opened
further if we don't stop it now."

Sinclair was impressed. "Very well, Major, I'll tell you everything I
know about them. And you're right, it is hard to talk about your
friends. I've grown up here in the Venusian jungle. I helped my father
clear this land where the house is built. Most of the men in the
Nationalists are friends of mine, but"--he sighed--"you're right, I
can't allow this to happen to the Solar Alliance."

"Allow what to happen?" asked Connel.

"Just what you said, about Venus becoming an independent state."

"Tell me all you know," said Connel.

"The group began to form about three years ago. Al Sharkey came over
here one night and said a group of the planters were getting together
every so often to exchange information about crops and farming
conditions. I went a few times, we all did, on this part of Venus. At
first it was fun. We even had picnics and barn dances every three or
four weeks. Then one night someone suggested we come dressed in old
costumes--the type worn by our forefathers who founded Venus."

Connel nodded.

"Well, one thing led to another," continued Sinclair. "They started
talking about the great history of our planet, and complaining about
paying taxes to support the Solar Alliance. Instead of opening up new
colonies like the one out on Pluto, we should develop our own planet.
We stopped dancing, the women stopped coming, and then one night we
elected a president. Al Sharkey. The first thing he did was order all
members to attend meetings in the dress of our forefathers. He gave the
organization a name, the Venusian Nationalists. Right after that, I
stopped going. I got tired of listening to speeches about the wonderful
planet we live on, and how terrible it was to be governed by men on
Earth, millions of miles away."

"Didn't they consider that they had equal representation in the Solar
Alliance Chamber?" asked Connel.

"No, Major. There wasn't anything you could say to any of them. If you
tried to reason with them, they called you a--a--" Sinclair stopped and
turned away.

"What did they call you?" demanded Connel, getting madder by the minute.

"Anyone that disagreed with them was called an Earthling."

"And you disagreed?" asked Connel.

"I quit," said Sinclair stoutly. "And right after that, I started losing
livestock. I found them dead in the pens, poisoned. And some of my crops
were burned."

"Did you protest to the Solar Guard?"

"Of course, but there wasn't any proof any one of my neighbors had done
it. They don't bother me any more, but they don't speak to me either.
It's as though I had a horrible disease. There hasn't been a guest in
this house in nearly two years. Three space cadets are the first
visitors here since I quit the organization."

"Space Cadets?" Connel looked at the planter quizzically.

"Yes, nice young chaps. Corbett, Manning, and a big fellow named Astro.
They're out in the jungle now hunting for tyrannosaurus. I met them
through a friend in Venusport and invited them to use my house as a base
of operations. Do you know them?"

Connel nodded. "Very well. Finest cadet unit at the Academy. How long
have they been in the jungle?"

"About four and a half days now."

"Hope they get themselves a tyranno. But at the same time"--Connel
couldn't help chuckling--"if they do, Space Academy will never hear the
end of it!"

Suddenly the hot wilting silence around the house was shattered by a
thunderous roar. Connel jumped up, followed Sinclair to the window, and
stared out over the clearing. They saw what appeared to be a
well-organized squadron of jet boats come in for a landing with near
military precision. The doors opened quickly and men poured out onto the
dusty field. They were dressed alike in coveralls with short
quarter-length space boots and round plastic crash helmets. Each man
carried a paralo-ray gun strapped to his hips. The uniforms were a
brilliant green, with a white band across the chest. The men formed
ranks, waited for a command from a man dressed in darker green, and then
marched up toward the house.

"By the craters of Luna!" roared Connel. "Who are they?"

"The Nationalists!" cried Sinclair. "They threatened to burn down my
house and destroy my farm if I wrote that letter to the delegate.
They've come to carry out their threat!"

Connel pulled the paralo-ray gun from his hip and gripped it firmly. "Do
you want those men in your house?" he asked Sinclair.

"No--no, of course not!"

"Then you have Solar Guard protection."

"How--?" Sinclair asked. "There are no Solar Guardsmen around here!"

"What in blazes do you think I am, man!" roared Connel as he lunged for
the door and stepped out onto the porch. The men were within a hundred
feet of the porch when they saw Connel. The Solar Guard officer spread
his legs and stuck out his jaw, his paralo-ray gun leveled. "The first
one of you tin soldiers that puts a foot on these steps gets frozen
stiffer than a snowball on Pluto! Now stand where you are, state your
business, and then _blast off_!"

"Halt!" The leader of the column of men held up his hand. Connel saw
that the plastic helmets were frosted over, except for a clear band
across the eye level. All of the faces were hidden. The leader stepped
forward, his hand on his paralo-ray gun. "Greetings, Major Connel."

Connel snorted. "If you'd take off that Halloween mask, I might know who
I'm talking to!"

"My name is Hilmarc."

"Hilmarc?"

"Yes. I am the leader of this detachment."

"Leader, huh?" grunted Connel. "Leader of what? A bunch of little tin
soldiers?"

"You shall see, Major." Hilmarc's voice was low and threatening.

"I'm going to count to five," announced Connel grimly, lifting his
paralo-ray gun, "and if you and your playmates aren't back in your
ships, I start blasting."

"That would be unwise," replied Hilmarc. "Your one gun against all of
ours."

Connel grinned. "I know. It's going to be a whale of a fight, isn't it?"
Then, without pause, he shouted, "_One--two--three--four--five!_"

He opened fire, squeezing the trigger rapidly. The first row of
green-clad men were immediately frozen. Dropping to one knee, the
spaceman again opened fire, and men in the second row stiffened as they
tried to return the fire.

"Fire! Cut him down!" roared Hilmarc frantically.

[Illustration]

The men broke ranks and the area in front of Sinclair's house crackled
with paralo-ray gunfire. Darting behind a chair, Connel dropped to the
floor, his gun growing hot under the continuous discharge of paralyzing
energy. In a matter of moments the Solar Guard officer had frozen nearly
half of the attacking troop, their bodies scattered in various
positions. Suddenly his gun spit fire and began to smoke. The energy
charge was exhausted. Connel jumped to his feet and snapped to
attention. He knew from experience that if being hit was inevitable, the
best way to receive the charge was by standing at attention, taking the
strain off the heart. He faced the clearing and a dozen shots of
paralyzing energy hit him simultaneously. He became rigid and the short
furious battle was over.

[Illustration]

One of the green-clad men released Hilmarc from the effects of Connel's
ninth shot and he stepped forward to stare straight into Connel's eyes.
"I know you can hear me, Major. I want to compliment you on your
shooting. But your brave resistance now is as futile as the resistance
of the entire Solar Guard in the near future." Hilmarc smiled
arrogantly and stepped back. "Now, if you'll excuse me, I will attend to
the business I came here for--to take care of a weakling and an
informer!" He turned and shouted to his men. "You have your orders! Get
Sinclair and then burn everything in sight."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Astro, Tom," gasped Roger. "I--I can't go on."

The blond-haired cadet fell headlong to the ground, almost burying
himself in the mud. Tom and Astro turned without a word, and gripping
Roger under each arm, helped him to his feet. Behind them, the thunder
of the stalking tyrannosaurus came closer, and they forced themselves to
greater effort. For two days they had been running before the monster.
It was a wild flight through a wild jungle that offered them little
protection. And while their fears were centered on the brute behind
them, their sleepy, weary eyes sought out other dangers that lay ahead.
More than once they stopped to blast a hungry, frightened beast that
barred their path, leaving it for the tyrannosaurus and giving
themselves a momentary respite in their flight.

Astro led the way, tirelessly slashing at the vines and creepers with
his jungle knife, opening the path for Roger and Tom. The Venusian cadet
