have to stay. But now, if it turned out that she would be no help but
a liability, she'd go back with the _Hubert Penrose_. Paul wouldn't
keep a linguist who offended the natives' every sensibility with
every word she spoke. He didn't want that to happen. Lillian and he
had come to mean a little too much to each other to be parted now.

       *       *       *       *       *

Paul Meillard and Karl Dorver had considerable difficulty with Mom,
that afternoon. They wanted her to go with them and help trade for
cattle. Mom didn't want to; she was afraid. They had to do a lot of
play-acting, with half a dozen Marines pretending to guard her with
fixed bayonets from some of Dave Questell's Navy construction men
who had red bandannas on their heads to simulate combs before she
got the idea. Then she was afraid to get into the contragravity
lorry that was to carry the hoes and the wagon wheels. Sonny managed
to reassure her, and insisted on going along, and he insisted on
taking his ax with him. That meant doubling the guard, to make sure
Sonny didn't lose his self-control when he saw his former
persecutors within chopping distance.

It went off much better than either Paul Meillard or Luis Gofredo
expected. After the first shock of being air-borne had worn off,
Mom found that she liked contragravity-riding; Sonny was wildly
delighted with it from the start. The natives showed neither of them
any hostility. Mom's lavender bathrobe and Sonny's green coveralls
and big ax seemed to be symbols of a new and exalted status; even
the Lord Mayor was extremely polite to them.

The Lord Mayor and half a dozen others got a contragravity ride,
too, to the meadows to pick out cattle. A dozen animals, including
a pair of the two-ton draft beasts, were driven to the Terran camp.
A couple of lorry-loads of assorted vegetables were brought in, too.
Everybody seemed very happy about the deal, especially Bennet Fayon.
He wanted to slaughter one of the sheep-sized meat-and-milk animals
at once and get to work on it. Gofredo advised him to put it off
till the next morning. He wanted a large native audience to see
the animal being shot with a rifle.

The water tower was finished, and the big spherical tank hoisted on
top of it and made fast. A pump, and a filter-system were installed.
There was no water for hot showers that evening, though. They would
have to run a pipeline to the river, and that would entail a ditch
that would cut through several cultivated fields, which, in turn,
would provoke an uproar. Paul Meillard didn't want that happening
until he'd concluded the cattle-trade.

Charley Loughran and Willi Schallenmacher had gone up to the ship on
one of the landing craft; they accompanied the landing party that went
down into the mountains. Ayesha Keithley arrived late in the afternoon
on another landing craft, with five or six tons of instruments and
parts and equipment, and a male Navy warrant-officer helper.

They looked around the lab Lillian had been using at one end of
the headquarters hut.

"This won't do," the girl Navy officer said. "We can't get a quarter
of the apparatus we're going to need in here. We'll have to build
something."

Dave Questell was drawn into the discussion. Yes, he could put
up something big enough for everything the girls would need to
install, and soundproof it. Concrete, he decided; they'd have to
wait till he got the water line down and the pump going, though.

There was a crowd of natives in the fields, gaping at the Terran
camp, the next morning, and Gofredo decided to kill the
animal--until they learned the native name, they were calling it
Domesticated Type C. It was herded out where everyone could watch,
and a Marine stepped forward unslung his rifle took a kneeling
position, and aimed at it. It was a hundred and fifty yards away.
Mom had come out to see what was going on; Sonny and Howell, who
had been consulting by signs over the construction of a wagon, were
standing side by side. The Marine squeezed his trigger. The rifle
banged, and the Domesticated-C bounded into the air, dropped, and
kicked a few times and was still. The natives, however, missed that
part of it; they were howling piteously and rubbing their heads.
All but Sonny. He was just mildly surprised at what had happened
to the Dom.-C.

Sonny, it would appear, was stone deaf.

       *       *       *       *       *

As anticipated, there was another uproar later in the morning when
the ditching machine started north across the meadow. A mob of
Svants, seeing its relentless progress toward a field of something
like turnips, gathered in front of it, twittering and brandishing
implements of agriculture, many of them Terran-made.

Paul Meillard was ready for this. Two lorries went out; one loaded
with Marines, who jumped off with their rifles ready. By this
time, all the Svants knew what rifles would do beside make a
noise. Meillard, Dorver, Gofredo and a few others got out of the
other vehicle, and unloaded presents. Gofredo did all the talking.
The Svants couldn't understand him, but they liked it. They also
liked the presents, which included a dozen empty half-gallon rum
demijohns, tarpaulins, and a lot of assorted knickknacks. The
pipeline went through.

He and Sonny got the forge set up. There was no fuel for it.
A party of Marines had gone out to the woods to the east to cut
wood; when they got back, they'd burn some charcoal in the pit
that had been dug beside the camp. Until then, he and Sonny were
drawing plans for a wooden wheel with a metal tire when Lillian
came out of the headquarters hut with a clipboard under her arm.
She motioned to him.

"Come on over," he told her. "You can talk in front of Sonny;
he won't mind. He can't hear."

"Can't hear?" she echoed. "You mean--?"

"That's right. Sonny's stone deaf. He didn't even hear that rifle
going off. The only one of this gang that has brains enough to pour
sand out of a boot with directions on the bottom of the heel, and
he's a total linguistic loss."

"So he isn't a half-wit, after all."

"He's got an IQ close to genius level. Look at this; he never saw
a wheel before yesterday; now he's designing one."

[Illustration: _It's killing us it's so nice...._]

Lillian's eyes widened. "So that's why Mom's so sharp about
sign-talk. She's been doing it all his life." Then she remembered
what she had come out to show him, and held out the clipboard. "You
know how that analyzer of mine works? Well, here's what Ayesha's
going to do. After breaking a sound into frequency bands instead of
being photographed and projected, each band goes to an analyzer of
its own, and is projected on its own screen. There'll be forty of
them, each for a band of a hundred cycles, from zero to four
thousand. That seems to be the Svant vocal range."

The diagram passed from hand to hand during cocktail time, before
dinner. Bennet Fayon had been working all day dissecting the animal
they were all calling a _domsee_, a name which would stick even if
and when they learned the native name. He glanced disinterestedly at
the drawing, then looked again, more closely. Then he set down the
drink he was holding in his other hand and studied it intently.

"You know what you have here?" he asked. "This is a very close analogy
to the hearing organs of that animal I was working on. The comb, as
we've assumed, is the external organ. It's covered with small flaps
and fissures. Back of each fissure is a long, narrow membrane; they're
paired, one on each side of the comb, and from them nerves lead to
clusters of small round membranes. Nerves lead from them to a complex
nerve-cable at the bottom of the comb and into the brain at the base
of the skull. I couldn't understand how the system functioned, but now
I see it. Each of the larger membranes on the outside responds to a
sound-frequency band, and the small ones on the inside break the bands
down to individual frequencies."

"How many of the little ones are there?" Ayesha asked.

"Thousands of them; the inner comb is simply packed with them. Wait;
I'll show you."

He rose and went away, returning with a sheaf of photo-enlargements
and a number of blocks of lucite in which specimens were mounted.
Everybody examined them. Anna de Jong, as a practicing psychologist,
had an M.D. and to get that she'd had to know a modicum of anatomy;
she was puzzled.

"I can't understand how they hear with those things. I'll grant
that the membranes will respond to sound, but I can't see how
they transmit it."

"But they do hear," Meillard said. "Their musical instruments,
their reactions to our voices, the way they are affected by sounds
like gunfire--"

"They hear, but they don't hear in the same way we do," Fayon replied.
"If you can't be convinced by anything else, look at these things,
and compare them with the structure of the human ear, or the ear
of any member of any other sapient race we're ever contacted.
That's what I've been saying from the beginning."

"They have sound-perception to an extent that makes ours look
almost like deafness," Ayesha Keithley said. "I wish I could design
a sound-detector one-tenth as good as this must be."

Yes. The way the Lord Mayor said _fwoonk_ and the way Paul Meillard
said it sounded entirely different to them. Of course, _fwoonk_ and
_pwink_ and _tweelt_ and _kroosh_ sounded alike to them, but let's
don't be too picky about things.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were no hot showers that evening; Dave Questell's gang had
trouble with the pump and needed some new parts made up aboard the
ship. They were still working on it the next morning. He had meant
to start teaching Sonny blacksmithing, but during the evening
Lillian and Anna had decided to try teaching Mom a nonphonetic,
ideographic, alphabet, and in the morning they co-opted Sonny to
help. Deprived of his disciple, he strolled over to watch the work
on the pump. About twenty Svants had come in from the fields and
were also watching, from the meadow.

After a while, the job was finished. The petty officer in charge
of the work pushed in the switch, and the pump started, sucking
dry with a harsh racket. The natives twittered in surprise. Then
the water came, and the pump settled down to a steady _thugg-thugg,
thugg-thugg_.

The Svants seemed to like the new sound; they grimaced in pleasure
and moved closer; within forty or fifty feet, they all squatted on
the ground and sat entranced. Others came in from the fields, drawn
by the sound. They, too, came up and squatted, until there was a
semicircle of them. The tank took a long time to fill; until it did,
they all sat immobile and fascinated. Even after it stopped, many
remained, hoping that it would start again. Paul Meillard began
wondering, a trifle uneasily, if that would happen every time
the pump went on.

"They get a positive pleasure from it. It affects them the same way
Luis' voice does."

"Mean I have a voice like a pump?" Gofredo demanded.

"Well, I'm going to find out," Ayesha Keithley said. "The next time
that starts, I'm going to make a recording, and compare it with your
voice-recording. I'll give five to one there'll be a similarity."

Questell got the foundation for the sonics lab dug, and began
pouring concrete. That took water, and the pump ran continuously
that afternoon. Concrete-mixing took more water the next day, and
by noon the whole village population, down to the smallest child,
was massed at the pumphouse, enthralled. Mom was snared by the sound
like any of the rest; only Sonny was unaffected. Lillian and Ayesha
compared recordings of the voices of the team with the pump-sound;
in Gofredo's they found an identical frequency-pattern.

"We'll need the new apparatus to be positive about it, but it's there,
all right," Ayesha said. "That's why Luis' voice pleases them."

"That tags me; Old Pump-Mouth," Gofredo said. "It'll get all through
the Corps, and they'll be calling me that when I'm a four-star general,
if I live that long."

Meillard was really worried, now. So was Bennet Fayon. He said so
that afternoon at cocktail time.

"It's an addiction," he declared. "Once they hear it, they have no
will to resist; they just squat and listen. I don't know what it's
