faster crossover. Now Martin followed the movement of the car almost
constantly. The moving blip had made the cut-over across the half-mile
wide green lane in the span of one crossover and was now whipping into
the merger lane that would take it over the top of the police lane
and drop down into the one hundred fifty to two hundred mile an hour
blue. If the object of his scrutiny straightened out in the blue, he'd
let it go. The driver had been bordered on violation in his fast
crossover in the face of heavy traffic. If he kept it up in the
now-crowded high-speed lane, he was asking for sudden death. The
monitors flicked to the next block and Ben waited just long enough to
see the speeding car make a move to the left, cutting in front of a
speeding cargo carrier. Ben slammed Beulah into high. Once again the
bull horn blared as the cocoons slammed shut, this time locking both
Clay and Kelly into their bunks, sealing Ben into the control seat.

Beulah lifted on her air cushion and the twin jets roared as she
accelerated down the police lane at three hundred miles an hour. Ben
closed the gap on the speeder in less than a minute and then edged
over to the south side of the police lane to make the jump into the
blue lane. The red emergency lights and the radio siren had already
cleared a hole for him in the traffic pattern and he eased back on the
finger throttles as the patrol car sailed over the divider and into
the blue traffic lane. Now he had eyeball contact with the speeding
car, still edging over towards the ultra-high lane. On either side of
the patrol car traffic gave way, falling back or moving to the left
and right. Car 56 was now directly behind the speeding passenger
vehicle. Ben fingered the cut-in switch that put his voice signal onto
the standard vehicular emergency frequency--the band that carried the
automatic siren-warning to all vehicles.

       *       *       *       *       *

The patrol car was still hitting above the two-hundred-mile-an-hour
mark and was five hundred feet behind the speeder. The headlamp bathed
the other car in a white glare, punctuated with angry red flashes from
the emergency lights.

"You are directed to halt or be fired upon," Ben's voice roared out
over the emergency frequency. Almost without warning, the speeding car
began braking down with such deceleration that the gargantuan patrol
car with its greater mass came close to smashing over it and crushing
the small passenger vehicle like an insect. Ben cut all forward power,
punched up full retrojet and at the instant he felt Beulah's tracks
touch the pavement as the air cushion blew, he slammed on the brakes.
Only the safety cocoon kept Martin from being hurled against the
instrument panel and in their bunks, Kelly Lightfoot and Clay Ferguson
felt their insides dragging down into their legs.

The safety cocoons snapped open and Clay jumped into his boots and
leaped for the cab. "Speeder," Ben snapped as he jumped down the steps
to the side hatch. Ferguson snatched up his helmet from the rack
beside his seat and leaped down to join his partner. Ben ran up to the
stopped car through a thick haze of smoke from the retrojets of the
patrol car and the friction-burning braking of both vehicles.
Ferguson circled to the other side of the car. As they flashed their
handlights into the car, they saw the driver of the car kneeling on
the floor beside the reclined passenger seat. A woman lay stretched
out on the seat, twisting in pain. The man raised an agonized face to
the officers. "My wife's going to have her baby right here!"

"Kelly," Ben yelled into his helmet transmitter. "Maternity!"

The dispensary ramp was halfway down before Ben had finished calling.
Kelly jumped to the ground and sprinted around the corner of the
patrol car, medical bag in hand.

She shoved Clay out of the way and opened the door on the passenger
side. On the seat, the woman moaned and then muffled a scream. The
patrol doctor laid her palm on the distended belly. "How fast are your
pains coming?" she asked. Clay and Ben had moved away from the car a
few feet.

"Litter," Kelly snapped over her shoulder. Clay raced for the patrol
car while Ben unshipped a portable warning light and rolled it down
the lane behind the patrol car. He flipped it to amber "caution" and
"pass." Blinking amber arrows pointed to the left and right of the
halted passenger vehicle and traffic in the blue lane began picking up
speed and parting around the obstructions.

By the time he returned to the patrol car, Kelly had the expectant
mother in the dispensary. She slammed the door in the faces of the
three men and then she went to work.

The woman's husband slumped against the side of the patrol vehicle.

Ben dug out his pack of cigarettes and handed one to the shaking
driver.

He waited until the man had taken a few drags before speaking.

"Mister, I don't know if you realize it or not but you came close to
killing your wife, your baby and yourself," Ben said softly, "to say
nothing of the possibility of killing several other families. Just
what did you think you were doing?"

The driver's shoulders sagged and his hand shook as he took the
cigarette from his mouth. "Honestly, officer, I don't know. I just got
frightened to death," he said. He peered up at Martin. "This is our
first baby, you see, and Ellen wasn't due for another week. We thought
it would be all right to visit my folks in Cleveland and Ellen was
feeling just fine. Well, anyway, we started home tonight--we live in
Jefferson City--and just about the time I got on the thruway, Ellen
started having pains. I was never so scared in my life. She screamed
once and then tried to muffle them but I knew what was happening and
all I could think of was to get her to a hospital. I guess I went out
of my head, what with her moaning and the traffic and everything. The
only place I could think of that had a hospital was Evansville, and I
was going to get her there come hell or high water." The young man
tossed away the half-smoked cigarette and looked up at the closed
dispensary door. "Do you think she's all right?"

Ben sighed resignedly and put his hand on the man's shoulder. "Don't
you worry a bit. She's got one of the best doctors in the continent in
there with her. Come on." He took the husband by the arm and led him
around to the patrol car cab hatch. "You climb up there and sit down.
I'll be with you in a second."

The senior officer signaled to Ferguson. "Let's get his car out of the
traffic, Clay," he directed. "You drive it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ben went back and retrieved the caution blinker and re-racked it in
the side of the patrol car, then climbed up into the cab. He took his
seat at the controls and indicated the jump seat next to him. "Sit
down, son. We're going to get us and your car out of this mess before
we all get clobbered."

He flicked the headlamp at Ferguson in the control seat of the
passenger car and the two vehicles moved out. Ben kept the emergency
lights on while they eased carefully cross-stream to the north and the
safety of the police lane. Clay picked up speed at the outer edge of
the blue lane and rolled along until he reached the first "patrol
only" entrance through the divider to the service strip. Ben followed
him in and then turned off the red blinkers and brought the patrol car
to a halt behind the other vehicle.

The worried husband stood up and looked to the rear of the car.
"What's making it so long?" he asked anxiously. "They've been in there
a long time."

Ben smiled. "Sit down, son. These things take time. Don't you worry.
If there were anything wrong, Kelly would let us know. She can talk to
us on the intercom anytime she wants anything."

The man sat back down. "What's your name?" Ben inquired.

"Haverstraw," the husband replied distractedly, "George Haverstraw.
I'm an accountant. That's my wife back there," he cried, pointing to
the closed galley door. "That's Ellen."

"I know," Ben said gently. "You told us that."

Clay had come back to the patrol car and dropped into his seat across
from the young husband. "Got a name picked out for the baby?" he
asked.

Haverstraw's face lighted. "Oh, yes," he exclaimed. "If it's a boy,
we're going to call him Harmon Pierce Haverstraw. That was my
grandfather's name. And if she's a girl, it's going to be Caroline May
after Ellen's mother and grandmother."

The intercom came to life. "Anyone up there?" Kelly's voice asked.
Before they could answer, the wail of a baby sounded over the system.
Haverstraw yelled.

"Congratulations, Mr. Haverstraw," Kelly said, "you've got a
fine-looking son."

"Hey," the happy young father yelped, "hey, how about that? I've got a
son." He pounded the two grinning troopers on the back. Suddenly he
froze. "What about Ellen? How's Ellen?" he called out.

"She's just fine," Kelly replied. "We'll let you in here in a couple
of minutes but we've got to get us gals and your new son looking
pretty for papa. Just relax."

Haverstraw sank down onto the jump seat with a happy dazed look on his
face.

Ben smiled and reached for the radio. "I guess our newest citizen
deserves a ride in style," he said. "We're going to have to transfer
Mrs. Haverstraw and er, oh yes, Master Harmon Pierce to an ambulance
and then to a hospital now, George. You have any preference on where
they go?"

"Gosh, no," the man replied. "I guess the closest one to wherever we
are." He paused thoughtfully. "Just where are we? I've lost all sense
of distance or time or anything else."

Ben looked at the radiodometer. "We're just about due south of
Indianapolis. How would that be?"

"Oh, that's fine," Haverstraw replied.

"You can come back now, Mr. Haverstraw," Kelly called out. Haverstraw
jumped up. Clay got up with him. "Come on, papa," he grinned, "I'll
show you the way."

Ben smiled and then called into Indianapolis Control for an ambulance.

"Ambulance on the way," Control replied. "Don't you need a wrecker,
too, Five Six?"

Ben grinned. "Not this time. We didn't lose one. We gained one."

He got up and went back to have a look at Harmon Pierce Haverstraw,
age five minutes, temporary address, North American Continental
Thruway 26-West, Mile Marker 632.

Fifteen minutes later, mother and baby were in the ambulance heading
north to the hospital. Haverstraw, calmed down with a sedative
administered by Kelly, had nearly wrung their hands off in gratitude
as he said good-by.

"I'll mail you all cigars when I get home," he shouted as he waved and
climbed into his car.

Beulah's trio watched the new father ease carefully into the traffic
as the ambulance headed down the police-way. Haverstraw would have to
cut over to the next exchange and then go north to Indianapolis. He'd
arrive later than his family. This time, he was the very picture of
careful driving and caution as he threaded his way across the green.

"I wonder if he knows what brand of cigars I smoke?" Kelly mused.

       *       *       *       *       *

The chrono clicked up to 2335 as Car 56 resumed patrol. Kelly plumped
down onto the jump seat beside Ben. Clay was fiddling in the galley.
"Why don't you go back to the sack?" Ben called.

"What, for a lousy twenty-five minutes," Clay replied. "I had a good
nap before you turned the burners up to high. Besides, I'm hungry.
Anyone else want a snack?"

Ben shook his head. "No, thanks," Kelly said. Ferguson finished
slapping together a sandwich. Munching on it, he headed into the
engine room to make the midnight check. Car 56 had now been on patrol
eight hours. Only two hundred thirty-two hours and two thousand miles
to go.

Kelly looked around at the departing back of the younger trooper.
"I'll bet this is the only car in NorCon that has to stock twenty days
of groceries for a ten-day patrol," she said.

Ben chuckled. "He's still a growing boy."

"Well, if he is, it's all between the ears," the girl replied. "You'd
think that after a year I would have realized that nothing could
penetrate that thick Canuck's skull. He gets me so mad sometimes that
I want to forget I'm a lady." She paused thoughtfully. "Come to think
of it. No one ever accused me of being a lady in the first place."

"Sounds like love," Ben smiled.

Hunched over on the jump seat with her elbows on her knees and her
chin cupped in both hands, Kelly gave the senior officer a quizzical
sideways look.

Ben was watching his monitors and missed the glance. Kelly sighed and
stared out into the light streaked night of the thruway. The heavy
surge of football traffic had distributed itself into the general flow
on the road and while all lanes were busy, there were no indications
of any overcrowding or jam-ups. Much of the pattern was shifting from
passenger to cargo vehicle as it neared midnight. The football crowds
were filtering off at each exchange and exit and the California fans
had worked into the blue and yellow--mostly the yellow--for the long
trip home. The fewer passenger cars on the thruway and the increase in
cargo carriers gave the troopers a breathing spell. The men in the
control buckets of the three hundred and four hundred-ton cargo
vehicles were the real pro's of the thruways; careful, courteous and
fast. The NorCon patrol cars could settle down to watch out for the
occasional nuts and drunks that might bring disaster.

Once again, Martin had the patrol car on auto drive in the center of
the police lane and he steeled back in his seat. Beside him, Kelly
stared moodily into the night.

"How come you've never married, Ben?" she asked. The senior trooper
gave her a startled look. "Why, I guess for the same reason you're
still a maiden," he answered. "This just doesn't seem to be the right
kind of a job for a married man."

Kelly shook her head. "No, it's not the same thing with me," she said.
"At least, not entirely the same thing. If I got married, I'd have to
quit the Patrol and you wouldn't. And secondly, if you must know the
truth, I've never been asked."

Ben looked thoughtfully at the copper-haired Irish-Indian girl. All of
a sudden she seemed to have changed in his eyes. He shook his head and
turned back to the road monitors.

"I just don't think that a patrol trooper has any business getting
married and trying to keep a marriage happy and make a home for a
family thirty days out of every three hundred sixty, with an
