kinde, we have no reason then to thinke it necessary that both these
worlds should be altogether alike, but it may suffice if they bee
correspondent in something onely, however it may be questioned whether
it doth not seeme to be against the wisedome of providence, to make the
night of so great a length, when they have such a long time unfit for
worke? I answere no, since tis so, and more with us also under the
poles; and besides, the generall length of their night is somewhat
abated in the bignesse of their Moone which is our earth. For this
returnes as great a light unto that Planet, as it receives from it. But
for the better proofe of this, I shall first free the way from such
opinions as might otherwise hinder the speede of a clearer progresse.

_Plutarch_[1] one of the chiefe patrons of this world in the Moone, doth
directly contradict this proposition; affirming, that those who live
there may discerne our world as the dregges and sediment of all other
creatures, appearing to them through clouds and foggy mists, and that
altogether devoid of light, being base and unmoveable, so that they
might well imagine the darke place of damnation to be here situate, and
that they onely were the inhabiters of the world, as being in the midst
betwixt Heaven and Hell.

  [Sidenote 1: _Plut. de fac. lunae._]

To this I may answere, 'tis probable that _Plutarch_ spake this
inconsiderately, and without a reason, which makes him likewise fall
into another absurditie, when he sayes our earth would appeare
immoveable, whereas questionlesse though it did not, yet would it seeme
to move, and theirs to stand still, as the Land doth to a man in a
Shippe; according to that of the Poet:

  _Provehimur portu, terraeque urbesque recedunt._

And I doubt not but that ingenuous Authour would easily have recanted if
hee had beene but acquainted with those experiences which men of latter
times have found out, for the confirmation of this truth.

2. Unto him assents _Macrobius_, whose words are these;

  _Terra accepto solis lumine clarescit, tantummodo, non relucet._

  "The earth is by the Sunne-beames made bright, but not able to
  enlighten any thing so farre."

And his reason is, because this being of a thicke and grosse matter, the
light is terminated in its superficies, and cannot penetrate into the
substance; whereas the moone doth therefore seeme so bright to us,
because it receives the beames within it selfe. But the weaknesse of
this assertion, may bee easily manifest by a common experience, for
polished steele (whose opacity will not give any admittance to the
rayes) reflects a stronger heate then glasse, and so consequently a
greater light.

3. 'Tis the generall consent of Philosophers, that the reflection of the
Sunne-beames from the earth doth not reach much above halfe a mile high,
where they terminate the first region, so that to affirme they might
ascend to the moone, were to say, there were but one region of aier,
which contradicts the proved and received opinion.

Unto this it may be answered:

That it is indeed the common consent, that the reflexion of the
Sunne-beames reach onely to the second region, but yet some there are,
and those too Philosophers of good note, who thought otherwise. Thus
_Plotinus_ is cited by _Caelius_,[1]

  _Si concipias te in sublimi quopiam mundi loco, unde oculis
  subjiciatur terrae moles aquis circumfusa, & solis syderumque radiis
  illustrata, non aliam profecto visam iri probabile est, quam qualis
  modo visatur lunaris globi species._

  "If you did conceive your selfe to bee in some such high place,
  where you might discerne the whole Globe of the earth and water,
  when it was enlightned by the Sunnes rayes, 'tis probable it would
  then appeare to you in the same shape as the moone doth now unto us."

Thus also _Carolus Malapertius_, whose words are these,[2]

  _Terra haec nostra si in luna constituti essemus, splendida prorsus
  quasi non ignobilis planeta, nobis appareret._

  "If wee were placed in the moone, and from thence beheld this our
  earth, it would appeare unto us very bright, like one of the nobler
  Planets."

Unto these doth _Fromondus_ assent, when he sayes,[3]

  _Credo equidem quod si oculus quispiam in orbe lunari foret, globum
  terrae & aquae instar ingentis syderis a sole illustrem conspiceret._

  "I believe that this globe of earth and water would appeare like
  some great Starre to any one, who should looke upon it from the
  moone."

Now this could not be, nor could it shine so remarkably, unlesse the
beames of light, were reflected from it. And therefore the same
_Fromondus_ expresly holds, that the first region of ayre is there
terminated, where the heate caused by reflexion begins to languish,
whereas the beames themselves doe passe a great way further. The chiefe
argument which doth most plainely manifest this truth, is taken from a
common observation which may be easily tryed.

  [Sidenote 1: _Ant. lect. l. 1. c. 4._]

  [Sidenote 2: _Praefat. ad Austrica syd._]

  [Sidenote 3: _Meteor. l. 1. c. 2. Art. 2._]

If you behold the Moone a little before or after the conjunction, when
she is in a sextile with the Sunne, you may discerne not onely the part
which is enlightned, but the rest also to have in it a kind of a duskish
light, but if you chuse out such a scituation, where some house or
chimney (being some 70 or 80 paces distant from you) may hide from your
eye the enlightned hornes, you may then discerne a greater and more
remarkeable shining in those parts unto which the Sunne beames cannot
reach; nay there is so great a light, that by the helpe of a good
perspective you may discerne its spots. Inso much that _Blancanus_ the
Jesuite speaking of it sayes[1]

  _Haec experientia ita me aliquando fefellit, ut in hunc fulgorem
  casu ac repente incidens, existimarim novo quodam miraculo tempore
  adolescentis lunae factum esse plenilunium._

  "This experiment did once so deceive mee, that happening upon the
  sight of this brightnesse upon a sudden, I thought that by some new
  miracle the Moone had beene got into her full a little after her
  change."

  [Sidenote 1: _De mundi fab. p. 3ª. c. 3._]

But now this light is not proper to the Moone, it doth not proceed from
the rayes of the Sunne which doth penetrate her body, nor is it caused
by any other of the Planets and Starres. Therefore it must necessarily
follow, that it comes from the earth. The two first of these I have
already proved, and as for the last, it is confidently affirmed by
_Caelius_,[1]

  _Quod si in disquisitionem evocet quia, an lunari syderi lucem
  foenerent planetae item alii, asseveranter astruendum non foenerare_.

"If any should aske whether the other Planets lend any light to the
Moone; I answer they doe not." True indeed, the noble _Tycho_[2]
discussing the reason of this light attributes it to the Planet _Uenus_,
and I grant that this may convey some light to the Moone; but that it is
not the cause of this whereof wee now discourse, is of itselfe
sufficiently plaine, because _Uenus_ is sometimes over the Moone, when
as shee cannot convey any light to that part which is turned from her.

  [Sidenote 1: _Progym. 1._]

  [Sidenote 2: _l. 20. c. 5._]

It doth not proceede from the fixed starres, for then it would retaine
the same light in eclipses, whereas the light at such times is more
ruddy and dull. Then also the light of the Moone would not be greater or
lesser, according to its distance from the edge of the earths shadow,
since it did at all times equally participate this light of the starres.

Now because there is no other body in the whole Universe, save the
earth, it remaines that this light must necessarily be caused by that
which with a just gratitude repaies to the Moone, such illumination as
it receives from her.

And as loving friends equally participate of the same joy and griefe, so
doe these mutually partake of the same light from the Sunne, and the
same darkenesse from the eclipses, being also severally helped by one
another in their greatest wants: For when the Moone is in conjunction
with the Sunne, and her upper part receives all the light, then her
lower Hemispheare (which would otherwise be altogether darke) is
enlightened by the reflexion of the Sunne beames from the earth. When
these two planets are in opposition, then that part of the earth which
could not receive any light from the Sunne beames, is most enlightened
by the Moone, being then in her full; and as she doth most illuminate
the earth when the Sunne beames cannot, so the gratefull earth returnes
to her as great, nay greater light when shee most wants it; so that
alwaies that visible part of the Moone which receives nothing from the
Sunne, is enlightened by the earth, as is proved by _Galilaeus_, with
many more arguments, in that Treatise which he calls _Systema mundi_.
True indeed, when the Moone comes to a quartile, then you can neither
discerne this light, nor yet the darker part of her body, but the reason
is, because of the exuperancy of the light in the other parts. _Quippe
illustratum medium speciem recipit valentiorem_,[1] the clearer
brightnesse involves the weaker, it being with the species of sight, as
it is with those of sound, and as the greater noise drownes the lesse,
so the brighter object hides that which is more obscure. But they doe
alwaies in their mutuall vicissitudes participate of one anothers light;
so also doe they partake of the same defects and darknings, for when our
Moone is eclipsed, then is their Sunne darkened, and when our Sunne is
eclipsed, then is their Moone deprived of its light, as you may see
affirmed by _Maeslin_.[2]

  _Quod si terram nobis ex alto liceret intueri, quemadmodum
  deficientem lunam ex longinquo spectare possumus, videremus tempore
  eclipsis solis terrae aliquam partem lumine solis deficere, eodem
  plane modo sicut ex opposito luna deficit_,

  "If wee might behold this globe of earth at the same distance as we
  doe the Moone in her defects, wee might discerne some part of it
  darkened in the Sunnes eclipses, just so as the Moone is in hers."

For as our Moone is eclipsed by the interposition of our earth, so is
their Moone eclipsed by the interposition of theirs. The manner of this
mutuall illumination betwixt these two you may plainly discerne in this
Figure following.

  [Sidenote 1: _Scal. exerc. 62._]

  [Sidenote 2: _Epit. Astro. l. 4. part. 2._]

  [Illustration as described in text:
  sun, crescent moon and gibbous earth]

Where A represents the Sun, B the Earth, and C the Moone; Now suppose
the Moone C to be in a sextile of increase, when there is onely one
small part of her body enlightened, then the earth B will have such a
part of its visible Hemispheare darkened, as is proportionable to that
part of the Moone which is enlightened; and as for so much of the Moone,
as the Sun beames cannot reach unto, it receives light from a
proportionall part of the earth which shines upon it, as you may plainly
perceive by the Figure.

You see then that agreement and similitude which there is betwixt our
earth and the Moone. Now the greatest difference which makes them
unlike, is this, that the Moone enlightens our earth round about,
whereas our earth gives light onely to that Hemispheare of the Moone
which is visible unto us, as may be certainly gathered from the constant
appearance of the same spots, which could not thus come to passe, if the
Moone had such a diurnall motion about its own axis, as perhaps our
earth hath. And though some suppose her to move in an epicycle, yet this
doth not so turne her body round, that we may discerne both
Hemispheares, for according to that hypothesis, the motion of her
eccentrick, doth turne her face towards us, as much as the other doth
from us.

But now if any question what they doe for a Moone who live in the upper
part of her body? I answer, the solving of this is the most uncertaine
and difficult thing that I know of concerning this whole matter. But yet
I will give you two probable conjectures.

1. Perhaps, the upper Hemispheare of the Moone doth receive a sufficient
light from those planets about it, and amongst these _Venus_ (it may be)
bestowes a more especiall brightnesse, since _Galilaeus_ hath plainly
discerned that she suffers the same increase and decreases, as the Moone
hath, and 'tis probable that this may be perceived there without the
help of a glasse, because they are farre neerer it than wee. When
_Venus_ (saith _Keplar_) lies downe in the Perige or lower part of her
supposed Epicycle, then is she in conjunction with her husband the
Sunne, from whom after she hath departed for the space of ten moneths,
shee gets _plenum uterum_, and is in the full.

But you'll reply, though _Venus_ may bestow some light when she is over
the Moone, and in conjunction, yet being in opposition, she is not
visible to them, and what shall they then doe for light?

I answer, then they have none: nor doth this make so great a difference
betwixt those two Hemispheares as there is with us, betwixt the places
under the poles, and the line, but if this bee not sufficient, then I
say in the second place that

2. Perhaps there may be some other enlightened body above the Moone
which we cannot discerne, nor is this altogether improbable because
there is almost the like observed in Saturne, who appeares through this
glasse with two lesser bodies on each side, which may supply the office
of Moones, unto each hemispheare thus:

    o O o

So in this world also there may be some such body, though wee cannot
discerne it, because the Moone is alwaies in a streight line, betwixt
our eye and that. Nor is it altogether unlikely that there should bee
more moones to one Orbe, because _Jupiter_ also is observed to have
foure such bodies that move round about him.

But it may seeme a very difficult thing to conceive, how so grosse and
darke a body as our earth, should yeeld such cleare light as proceedes
from the Moone, and therefore the Cardinall _de Cusa_[1] (who thinkes
every Starre to be a severall world) is of opinion that the light of the
Sunne is not able to make them appeare so bright, but the reason of
their shining is, because wee behold them at a great distance through
their regions of fire which doe set a shining lustre upon those bodies
that of themselves are darke.

  _Vnde si quis esset extra regionem ignis, terra ista in
  circumferentia suae regionis per medium ignis lucida stella
  appareret._

  "So that if man were beyond the region of fire, this earth would
  appear through that as a bright Starre."

But if this were the onely reason then would the Moone bee freed from
such increases and decreases as shee is now lyable unto.

  [Sidenote 1: _De doct. ig. l. 2. c. 12._]

_Keplar_ thinkes that our earth receives that light whereby it shines
from the Sunne, but this (saith he) is not such an intended cleare
brightnesse as the Moone is capable of, and therefore hee guesses, that
the earth there is of a more chokie soyle like the Ile of _Creete_, and
so is better able to reflect a stronger light, whereas our earth must
supply this intention with the quantity of its body, but this I conceive
to be a needlesse conjecture, since our earth if all things were well
considered, will be found able enough to reflect as great a light. For

1. Consider its opacity, if you marke these sublunary things, you shall
perceive that amongst them, those that are most perspicuous, are not so
well able to reverberate the Sunne beames as the thicker bodies. The
rayes passe singly through a diaphanous matter, but in an opacous
substance they are doubled in their returne and multiplyed by reflexion.
Now if the moone and the other Planets can shine so clearely by beating
backe the Sunne beames, why may not the earth also shine as well, which
agrees with them in the cause of this brightnesse their opacity?

2. Consider what a cleare light wee may discerne reflected from the
earth in the middest of Summer, and withall conceive how much greater
that must bee which is under the line, where the rayes are more directly
and strongly reverberated.

3. Consider the great distance at which wee behold the Planets, for this
must needs adde much to their shining and therefore _Cusanus_ (in the
above cited place) thinkes that if a man were in the Sunne, that Planet
would not appeare so bright to him, as now it doth to us, because then
his eye could discerne but little, whereas here wee may comprehend the
beames as they are contracted in a narrow body. _Keplar_ beholding the
earth from a high mountaine when it was enlightned by the Sunne
confesses that it appeared unto him of an incredible brightnesse,
whereas then the reflected rayes entered into his sight obliquely; but
how much brighter would it have appeared if hee might in a direct line
behold the whole globe of earth and these rayes gathered together? So
that if wee consider that great light which the earth receives from the
Sunne in the Summer, and then suppose wee were in the Moone, where wee
might see the whole earth hanging in those vast spaces where there is
nothing to terminate the sight, but those beames which are there
contracted into a little compasse; I say, if wee doe well consider this,
wee may easily conceive, that our earth appeares as bright to those
other inhabitants in the Moone, as theirs doth to us.




Proposition 12.

_That tis probable there may bee such Meteors belonging to that world
  in the Moone, as there are with us._


_Plutarch_ discussing this point affirmes that it is not necessary there
should be the same meanes of growth and fructifying in both these
worlds, since nature might in her policy finde out more waies then one
how to bring about the same effect. But however he thinks its probable
that the Moone her selfe sendeth forth warme winds, and by the
swiftnesse of her motion there should breathe out a sweet and
comfortable ayer, pleasant dewes and gentle moysture, which might serve
for the refreshing and nourishment of the inhabitants and plants in that
other world.

But since they have all things alike with us, as sea and land, and
vaporous ayer encompassing both, I should rather therefore thinke that
nature there should use the same way of producing meteors as she doth
with us (and not by a motion as _Plutarch_ supposes) because shee doth
not love to vary from her usuall operations without some extraordinary
impediment, but still keepes her beaten path unlesse she be driven
thence.

One argument whereby I shall manifest this truth, may be taken from
those new Starres which have appeared in divers ages of the world, and
by their parallax have beene discerned to have been above the _M_oone,
such as was that in _Cassiopeia_, that in _Sagittarius_, with many
others betwixt the Planets. _Hipparchus_ in his time tooke especiall
notice of such as these,[1] and therefore fancied out such
constellations in which to place the Starres, shewing how many there
were in every asterisme, that so afterwards posterity might know,
whether there were any new Starre produced or any old one missing. Now
the nature of these Comets may probably manifest, that in this other
world there are other meteors also; for these in all likelihood are
nothing else but such evaporations caused by the Sunne, from the bodies
of the Planets. I shall prove this by shewing the improbabilities and
inconveniences of any other opinion.

  [Sidenote 1: _Plin. nat. hist. l. 2. c. 26._]

For the better pursuite of this 'tis in the first place requisite that I
deale with our chiefe adversary, _Caesar la Galla_, who doth most
directly oppose that truth which is here to bee proved. Hee endeavouring
to confirme the incorruptibility of the Heavens, and being there to
satisfie the argument which is taken from these comets, He answers it
thus:

  _Aut argumentum desumptum ex paralaxi non est efficax, aut si est
  efficax, eorum instrumentorum usum decipere, vel ratione astri vel
  medii, vel distantiae, aut ergo erat in suprema parte aeris, aut si
  in coelo, tum forsan factum erat ex reflectione radiorum Saturni &
  Jovis, qui tunc in conjunctione fuerant._

  "Either the argument from the paralax is not efficacious, or if it
  be, yet the use of the instruments might deceive either in regard of
  the starre or the _medium_, or the distance, and so this comet might
  be in the upper regions of the aire, or if it were in the heavens,
  there it might be produced by the reflexion of the rayes from
  _Saturne_ and _Jupiter_, who were then in conjunction."

You see what shifts hee is driven to, how he runnes up and downe to many
starting holes, that hee may find some shelter, and in stead of the
strength of reason, he answers with a multitude of words, thinking (as
the Proverbe is) that hee may use haile, when hee hath no thunder,
_Nihil turpius_ (saith [1]*_Seneca_)

  _dubio est incerto, pedem modo referente, modo producente._

  "What can there bee more unseemely in one that should be a faire
  disputant, then to be now here, now there, and so uncertaine, that
  one cannot tell where to find him."

He thinkes that there are not Comets in the heavens, because there may
be many other reasons of such appearances, but what he knowes not,
perhaps (he saies) that argument from the parallax is not sufficient, or
if it be, then there may be some deceit in the observation. To this I
may safely say, that hee may justly be accounted a weake Mathematician
who mistrusts the strength of this argument, nor can hee know much in
Astronomy, who understands not the parallax, which is the foundation of
that Science, and I am sure that hee is a timorous man, who dares not
believe the frequent experience of his senses, or trust to a
demonstration.

  [Sidenote 1*: _Epist. 95._]

True indeed, I grant tis possible, that the eye, the _medium_, and the
distance may al deceive the beholder, but I would have him shew which of
all these was likely to cause an error in this observation? Meerely to
say they might be deceived is no sufficient answer, for by this I might
confute the positions of all Astronomers, and affirme the starres are
hard by us, because 'tis possible they may be deceived in their
observing that distance. But I forbeare any further reply; my opinion is
of that Treatise, that either it was set forth purposely to tempt a
confutation, that hee might see the opinion of _Galilaeus_ confirmed by
others, or else it was invented with as much haste and negligence as it
was printed, there being in it almost as many faults as lines.

Others thinke that these are not any new Comets, but some ancient
starres that were there before, which now shine with that unusuall
brightnesse, by reason of the interposition of such vapors which doe
multiply their light, and so the alteration will be here onely, and not
in the heavens. Thus _Aristotle_ thought the appearance of the milkie
way was produced, for he held that there were many little starres, which
