semi-automatic functions going.

It was the most weird sensation imaginable, having portions of his mind
in nine places at once--having nine different and distinct viewpoints!

He found he could do, although not too well at first, nine different
things at once and the same time, or could make all the bodies he was
controlling do the same thing at the same time.

He "drilled" the dogs, making them line up, walk left or right or back
up, all in unison. He found that while his mind was divided and
controlling different bodies, there was a thread of connecting thought
between them all, so that he knew what each of the others was doing. Yet
it was not a central command--each individual mind-portion could and did
do its own deciding and commanding.

For hours Hanlon practiced with the dogs until he had worked out the
procedure to the point where he knew he could make them perform--singly,
as a group, or each doing a different thing--almost any task of which
their body muscles were capable, whether they had previously known how
to do it or not.

Bringing his mind-portions back from seven of the dogs into his own
brain, after commanding them to sleep, he went over to the cage of the
Airedale he was still controlling. Squatting down before the bars, he
took a pencil-stub and piece of paper from his pocket. These he passed
through the bars and laid at her feet.

Then, while he watched with his own mind through his own eyes, he used
only the portion of his mind that was inside her brain, and made the
Airedale pick up the pencil in her teeth, blunt end inside her mouth.
Holding it thus, she attempted to write on the paper, which she held
steady with her two front paws.

Anxious minutes passed while Hanlon sweatingly experimented. At last the
dog managed to print, very roughly and clumsily, a few letters. They
were large and very crude. It wasn't that he couldn't control her
muscles--it was, simply that the muscles were not built to do such
things without infinite training.

When it finally became so near "morning" that he knew he had to quit,
Hanlon left the kennels and went to bed. He was still amazed, excited
and thrilled about this strange and weird ability, but he was also well
content with his studies. If a time came when he might wish or need to
use animals in his work, he felt capable of managing them. Yet again he
realized how much there was to learn; that he must continue practicing
and studying at every opportunity.

Did cats or horses--or birds or insects--have brains that worked the
same as the dogs? He would have to experiment to find that out, first
chance he got.

But now there was another very serious problem demanding his attention.
He had made a wonderful start at getting an "in" with Panek, the
Simonidean thug. Now, how could he best turn that to his advantage?

It was some time before he fell asleep from sheer weariness, nor had he
solved the problem before he did so.

The moment he awoke, late the next morning, he knew he had the answer.
His sub-conscious must have solved it for him while he slept.

At brunch he kept his eyes open, and before too long Panek came into the
dining room for his lunch. Hanlon signalled, and his new-found
acquaintance came to his table. Their orders given and the waiter on his
way, Hanlon opened up.

"Look, Pard, I don't want to butt into your business, but if you want
this Abrams out of your way, I'll be glad to take a crack at it for
you."

The Simonidean looked at him scornfully. "Think you're that good, eh?
Better'n me at bumping off a man, huh? Better'n me?"

"Oh, no," Hanlon made his face seem very apologetic, and his tone the
same. "I'm not setting myself even one notch ahead of you, nor
criticizing your way of working ..."

"Better not, neither!"

"... but every man has his own techniques. Look, in this case, aboard a
ship in space where you can't run or hide, I think my way would work
best."

The other was becoming interested in spite of himself, and his
truculence melted a bit, although his tone was still sneering. "All
right, Master Mind, how'd you handle it, how would you?"

"A gun or knife is all right on some jobs," Hanlon leaned closer and
spoke in a semi-whisper, but earnestly. "But there are times when it's
plain foolish to sneak up behind a man and hit him on the head with a
club."

"Yeah, you got something there, got something."

"In such a case, I figure it's a lot better to make friends with the
guy, take him to dinner, then sneak a little cyanide in his
coffee--something like that."

Panek was impressed. Hanlon read the swift thoughts racing across the
other's mind. He hadn't liked the idea of using his knife, here on this
ship. But neither did he dare report back to that feared "boss" that he
hadn't succeeded in killing Abrams.

Panek spoke doubtfully. "Yeah, that may be all right, but not when the
guy knows you, then you can't get away with a thing like that, not when
he knows you."

"Exactly what I'm getting at," Hanlon said eagerly. "Me, I'm the Unknown
Quantity. Nobody knows me. I can get to old Abrams and make it all seem
natural."

"He ain't easy to fool, no, he ain't."

"I'm sure he isn't. But since I've got to make a start somewhere if I
want to get into things on Simonides, I figure giving you an assist is
worth the trial."

"Well," Panek hesitated and his cold eyes bored into those of this
enigmatic young man. "I still don't quite trust you, can't be sure I
trust you. I still figure you're some kind of a cop ..."

Hanlon half-rose, his face dark with intense anger. "Don't ever call me
a cop!" he blazed, though still in a whisper. "I hate 'em. As a kid I
thought they were tops, and did everything I could to get into their
school. But I mighty quick found out how wrong I was. I was good and
sick of 'em, and about ready to quit when they threw me out on that lie
about cheating ... say, I knew more'n their knuckle-headed instructors,
so why'd I need to cheat?"

"Easy, Pal, take it easy."

"They just want to use their high and mighty authority," Hanlon ignored
Panek's shushing. "They just like to push people around 'cause they got
on a pretty uniform."

His voice had risen in pitch until Panek had to grab his arm and shake
him to make him keep still. People at the nearer table were beginning to
look at them. But Panek was impressed now with Hanlon's sincerity--the
SS man could read that in his mind.

"All right, Pal, all right. Don't bust a gut. You bump off old Abrams
without getting caught, and I'll get you in with a gang on Sime where
you can really do yourself some good, really some good."

Hanlon nodded shortly and rose. "I'll keep in touch. And your man's as
good as dead right now."

His heart was singing--his plan was working smoothly. Now if that
government man had any brains, and would play along ...

Hanlon found Abrams in the library, and slipped into the seat next to
him. Opening a magazine and holding it fairly high before his face while
apparently reading it, Hanlon started talking in low but penetrant
tones.

"Don't look up, Mr. Abrams, but listen to me. You may or may not know
it, but there's a plot against your life. I managed to delay it
yesterday, but they intended getting you before we reach port. Now I
have a plan. I earnestly beg you to listen and work with me."

The Simonidean had given a slight start when he heard Hanlon's first
words, but he had been well-trained in a hard school, and in no other
way had even shown that he heard. Now, however, he spoke as guardedly as
Hanlon. "Who is trying to kill me?"

"A man named Panek, but someone's behind him that I don't know. But the
question is: will you work with me?"

"Yes, if I can."

Abandoning his attempts at secrecy, Hanlon started laughing out loud, as
though at something he was reading. As Abrams looked up in surprise,
Hanlon leaned over and held out his magazine in front of the Simonidean,
pointing at it.

"Play up now," he said softly, and the diplomat, quick on the up-take,
pretended to look at what Hanlon was showing him, then began laughing in
turn. Thereafter, the ice broken as far as any on-lookers might know,
the two talked naturally as shipboard acquaintances might do.

"Why," Abrams really looked at Hanlon for the first time, "you're the
young man who saved my life on Terra, aren't you?"

"Yes, but keep it quiet. I want us to stick together more or less the
rest of the day, as though we'd just met and liked each other. Then have
dinner together. Do you have your own servant?"

"My valet, yes, and he is absolutely trustworthy. Why?"

"While we're eating I'll appear to put something into your drink while
you're not looking. A few moments later you'll act as though you were
suddenly taken ill, and go to your room. Have your valet later let the
word out that you're very ill, and send word by space-video for an
ambulance to meet the ship. Just before landing, let him say you've
died. The ambulance can take you wherever it's natural your body would
be taken, and you keep under cover for some time, until I notify you.
Can do?"

"Hmmm." The other thought rapidly but cogently for some minutes. "With a
few minor variations, yes. But why? ... oh, I see. You want to get in
with the gang, is that it?" When Hanlon nodded Abrams continued, "you're
playing a dangerous game, but that's what we've learned to expect of
your Corpsmen. A wonderful group!"

"Thanks." Hanlon did not want to explain anything, so let it go at that,
and the two talked companionably of many things as they moved naturally
about the ship. They listened for a while to a concert in the music
room, then played a few games of cards. Each time the diplomat tried to
ask questions, Hanlon side-stepped.

The SS man had seen Panek cautiously spying on them from time to time,
and when the two went in to dinner the thug took a seat nearby, but
where Abrams could not see him.

Hanlon had been probing Abrams' mind all this time, but had been unable
to get any clue as to a plot that might upset the peace of his world, or
the Federation. Hanlon realized the man was an intense patriot, and he
came to the conclusion that Abrams did not particularly like the Prime
Minister. But the "why" of that dislike eluded him.

The two were about finished with dinner and their coffee had been
served. Hanlon called his companion's attention to something behind him.
As the latter turned to look, Hanlon's hand flashed out and hovered an
instant over the other's cup.

A few moments later the Simonidean played his part to perfection. He
took a drink, then another, and almost before he had set his cup down,
gave a groan, and clutched at his stomach and throat.

He rose shakily, and tottered away heavily on the arm of an anxious
steward who had come running up.

Hanlon, although he rose quickly and made his face seem concerned and
sympathetic, resumed his seat and finished his coffee. When the steward
returned, he called him over, and seemed reassured when the latter
reported that Mr. Abrams had said it was apparently only an attack of
indigestion, to which he was prone, and that his man could take care of
him.

But the next day word ran about the ship that Abrams was very ill, and
not expected to live the day out.

Panek sauntered past where Hanlon was sitting, reading, and stopped to
ask for a light.

"Nice work, Pal, nice work," he whispered as he was lighting his cigaro.
"See me at the Bacchus."

But his thoughts, as Hanlon scanned them, were muttering viciously,
"I'll cut out his guts if he's planning to louse up 'his' plans, I'll
sure carve him!"

And a bit later, as Hanlon reviewed the entire episode, he thanked his
stars that Panek was a lot less than an intellectual giant. A brighter
man would have wondered about the source of Hanlon's knowledge of his
homicidal plans; and how it happened that Hanlon carried a supply of
poison. There had been no indication that either question had occurred
to Panek.




Chapter 10


The moment he got off the ship and went into the city of New Athens he
could feel it. There was an air of mystery, of secretiveness, of
intrigue, that could not help but be noticed by one as sensitive to
emotion-impressions as SS Man George Hanlon.

He got out of his ground-cab at the entrance of a great park in the
center of the city, but directed the driver to take his luggage on to
the hotel. Then Hanlon went in to sit on a bench beneath a beautiful,
flowering ba'amba tree.

Once there, he opened his mind to its fullest extent, and let all the
impressions and sensations of this new world soak in. He could not, of
course, get any factual details in this way, nor did he expect to. What
he wanted, and began to get, was the "feel" of the city. And the longer
he sat the less he liked it.

For he could sense so clearly that there most certainly was "a Mercutian
in the fuel pit" here somewhere. But what it was; what this strange
feeling portended, he could not quite make out.

He noticed, casually, that there were the usual idlers in this park, and
hundreds of children with their nurses or parents. But there were none
of the derelicts one sees in so many large-city parks. Most of the
people seemed well-dressed and not too poor. He could catch occasional
bits of thought about big business deals.

After a time Hanlon noticed that here, as in most parks, hundreds of
native, pigeon-like birds were flying and hopping about, seeking what
crumbs they could scrounge from picnickers' lunches, or nuts fed them by
interested idlers.

He wondered if he could get into a bird's mind, and sent his out to
contact one. His ability was, he found, much the same as it had been
with the dogs--he could not only "read" what mind the pigeon had, but
could control it ... could actually project part of his mind into the
bird's brain.

The brain-texture, was different, but as he sat there for another hour,
he learned the difference. For now he knew what to look for, and it did
not take long until he knew it well. Finally he got so he could see and
understand what the people around him were doing--not through his own
direct observation, but through the pigeon's senses. He sent several
winging high into the air, and got a good perspective of the entire
city.

At last he brought his mind back into his own brain, and gave a mental
shrug, then rose from the bench.

"You're just stalling, you know," he scolded himself. "Get to the hotel,
check in, then go look in the bank vault. You've got a job to do, so get
doing it!"

From the hotel he went to the bank and signed up for a box. There was
nothing yet for him in box 1044, so he left a note addressed "To Any SS
Man," stating he was here and ready to begin his work.

Back at the hotel he unpacked, took a shower, and then a short nap.
There was no telling what the night might bring forth, and he wanted all
his strength and powers.

New Athens was a beautiful city, as befitted the capitol of the richest
planet in the Federation. For Simonides Four had become just that, even
outstripping Terra in the wealth from her manufacturers and exports. Her
shipments of ores, jewels, unusual furs, manufactured goods, precision
tools and art products, as well as foodstuffs raw and processed, ran
into trillions of credits every year.

The great square showed plainly that some architect or city planner with
a love of classic lines had been in charge here. The buildings were all
modern representations of the great temples and public buildings of the
Golden Age of Greece on Terra. They were widely spaced, with magnificent
lawns and gardens surrounding each.

Thousands of lights artfully concealed accentuated the beauty of those
wonderful buildings, and Hanlon caught his breath in pleasure at his
first sight of the marvelous square by night. He had thought it
wonderful by day--now he admitted without reservation that it was the
most magnificent sight he had ever seen.

He finally signalled a ground-cab--New Athens had no slideways--to go to
the Bacchus. It was several blocks from the square, but each of the
streets he travelled were almost as beautiful.

The tavern was housed in a large though one-storied building with a
pillared facade. The main room was level with a gardened terrace five
steps above the street.

Inside, the tavern was tastefully decorated in subdued colors. It was
dimly lighted by representations of flambeaus, stuck at angles in the
walls. The center of the room was occupied by dozens of tables of
varying sizes, while along one side and part of the back were curtained
booths. Along the other side ran an ornate bar.

Hanlon made his way to the latter, and sat on one of the upholstered
stools. The bar girls, he noted with interest, were revealingly costumed
in pseudo-peplos of a purplish, cob-webby, silkish material. They wore
no blouses, but long sashes that passed behind the neck, crossed the
breasts and tied about the waist to hold up the short skirt. One of the
girls came up to get his order.

"I'm new on the planet," he smiled. "Let me have your best native light
wine."

She brought him a glass filled with a sparkling, golden liquid, and
waited while he took his first appreciative sip. "We call it 'Golden
Nectar'," she smiled.

He smacked his lips. "Wonderful!" Then, as she started away he called
her back. "Do you know a Mr. Panek? I was to meet him here, but I don't
see him."

Her eyes widened a bit at that name. "I'll see if I can locate him for
you, sir," and she moved away.

Some minutes later, while he was still pretending to sip his drink,
Hanlon felt a hearty clap on the shoulder.

"Well, well, it's my pal from the ship. Welcome to Sime, Pal, welcome to
Sime."

"Hi, Panek! Hope you meant that about looking you up, 'cause here I am."

Hanlon flipped a credit note on the bar and followed Panek. He was led
toward a back corner, but there, instead of going into one of the
booths, Panek pushed through an almost hidden alcove. He knocked
peculiarly on a door, and a peephole was opened. When the guardian saw
who it was, the door was opened enough so the two could slide through.

Hanlon, in a quick, comprehensive glance, saw that it was a fairly large
office, at present occupied by four men.

"This is George Hanlon," Panek introduced him, "the guy who did that job
on old Abrams, the same guy."

Hanlon noticed that Panek did not name the men there, but he could see
they appeared to know all about him, and were giving him a close
once-over. Hanlon scanned back in return, his mind quickly touching one
after another of the three sitting in large, easy chairs. Only their
surface thoughts were readable, and he knew at first touch they were but
underlings, the same as Panek. He read a favorable impression of
himself, but with reservations.

He turned his attention to the well-dressed, impressive-looking man
behind the plasticene desk, nor had his other probings taken more than a
few seconds. He noted with interest the round, smooth face, the slightly
over-large greenish eyes, the silver hair that seemed finer and silkier
than any Hanlon had ever seen on a human being. It was almost like fine
fur, he thought suddenly.

Then he got a shock! This man was different ... Hanlon could not touch
that mind at all! There was a sort of an ... an alien feeling there he
could not quite fathom. It was like no other mind he had ever tried to
read.

But he was careful not to let his face show anything of his inner
thoughts as he saluted them gravely after that first brief pause.

Then suddenly he made his face show a boyish enthusiasm ... almost a
naivete. "Maybe Mr. Panek has already told you about me. I'm looking for
a chance to make a flock of credits ... and I'm not too particular how I
get 'em."

But his mind was tense and anxious. What was their game? And this fellow
behind the desk, this leader. Who was he? Hanlon knew he would have a
real job finding out those answers ... but knew he must!

The leader nodded suavely. "That is a very ... uh ... commendable
