"No. Your job's done."

The conversation closed. Perkins pressed the switch which reduced the
interior of the spy's wireless instrument to a fused mass of metal, and
Brookings called DuQuesne on the telephone.

"I would like to talk to you," he said. "Shall I come there or would you
rather come to my office?"

"I'll come there. They're watching this house. They have one man in
front and one in back, a couple of detectaphones in my rooms here, and
have coupled onto this telephone.

"Don't worry," he continued calmly as the other made an exclamation of
dismay. "Talk ahead as loud as you please--they can't hear you. Do you
think that those poor, ignorant flat feet can show me anything about
electricity? I'd shoot a jolt along their wires that would burn their
ears off if it weren't my cue to act the innocent and absorbed
scientist. As it is, their instruments are all registering dense
silence. I am deep in study right now, and can't be disturbed!"

"Can you get out?"

"Certainly. I have that same private entrance down beside the house wall
and the same tunnel I used before. I'll see you in about fifteen
minutes."

       *       *       *       *       *

In Brookings' office, DuQuesne told of the constant surveillance over
him.

"They suspect me on general principles, I think," he continued. "They
are apparently trying to connect me with somebody. I don't think they
suspect you at all, and they won't unless they get some better methods.
I have devices fitted up to turn the lights off and on, raise and lower
the windows, and even cast shadows at certain times. The housekeeper
knows that when I go to my library after dinner, I have retired to
study, and that it is as much as anyone's life is worth to disturb me.
Also, I am well known to be firmly fixed in my habits, so it's easy to
fool those detectives. Last night I went out and watched them. They hung
around a couple of hours after my lights went out, then walked off
together. I can dodge them any time and have all my nights free without
their ever suspecting anything."

"Are you free tonight?"

"Yes. The time-switches are all set, and as long as I get back before
daylight, so they can see me get up and go to work, it will be all
right."

Brookings told him briefly of the failures to secure the solution and
the plans, of the death of the three men sent to silence Shiro, and of
all the other developments. DuQuesne listened, his face impassive.

"Well," he said as Brookings ceased. "I thought you would bull it, but
not quite so badly. But there's no use whining now. I can't use my
original plan of attack in force, as they are prepared and might be able
to stand us off until the police could arrive."

He thought deeply for a time, then said, intensely:

"If I go into this thing, Brookings, I am in absolute command.
Everything goes as I say. Understand?"

"Yes. It's up to you, now."

"All right, I think I've got it. Can you get me a Curtiss biplane in an
hour, and a man about six feet tall who weighs about a hundred and sixty
pounds? I want to drive the plane myself, and have the man, dressed in
full leathers and hood, in the passenger's seat, shot so full of
chloroform or dope that he will be completely unconscious for at least
two hours."

"Easy. We can get you any kind of plane you want in an hour, and Perkins
can find a man of that description who would be glad to have a dream at
that price. But what's the idea?... Pardon me, I shouldn't have asked
that," he added, as the saturnine chemist shot him a black look from
beneath his heavy brows.

Well, within the hour, DuQuesne drove up to a private aviation field and
found awaiting him a Curtiss biplane, whose attendant jumped into an
automobile and sped away as he approached. He quickly donned a heavy
leather suit, similar to the one Seaton always wore in the air, and drew
the hood over his face. Then, after a searching look at the lean form of
the unconscious man in the other seat, he was off, the plane climbing
swiftly under his expert hand. He took a wide circle to the west and
north.

Soon Shiro and the two guards, hearing the roar of an approaching
airplane, looked out and saw what they supposed to be Crane's biplane
coming down with terrific speed in an almost vertical nose-dive, as
though the driver were in an extremity of haste. Flattening out just in
time to avert destruction it taxied up the field almost to the house.
The watchers saw a man recognizable as Seaton by his suit and his
unmistakable physique stand up and wave both arms frantically, heard him
shout hoarsely "... all of you ... out here," saw him point to Crane's
apparently lifeless form and slump down in his seat. All three ran out
to help the unconscious aviators, but just as they reached the machine
there were three silenced reports and the three men fell to the ground.
DuQuesne leaped lightly out of the machine and looked narrowly at the
bodies at his feet. He saw that the two detectives were dead, but found
with some chagrin that the Japanese still showed faint signs of life. He
half drew his pistol to finish the job, but observing that the victim
was probably fatally wounded he thrust it back into its holster and
went on into the house. Drawing on rubber gloves he rapidly blew the
door off the safe with nitro-glycerin and took out everything it
contained. He set aside a roll of blueprints, numerous notebooks, some
money and other valuables, and a small vial of solution--but of the
larger bottle there was no trace. He then ransacked the entire house,
from cellar to attic, with no better success. So cleverly was the
entrance to the vault concealed in the basement wall that he failed to
discover it.

"I might have expected this of Crane," he thought, half aloud, "after
all the warning that fool Brookings persisted in giving him. This is the
natural result of his nonsense. The rest of the solution is probably in
the safest safe-deposit vault in the United States. But I've got their
plans and notes, and enough solution for the present. I'll get the rest
of it when I want it--there's more than one way to kill any cat that
ever lived!"

Returning to the machine, DuQuesne calmly stepped over the bodies of the
detectives and the unconscious form of the dying Japanese, who was
uttering an occasional groan. He started the engine and took his seat.
There was an increasing roar as he opened the throttle, and soon he
descended upon the field from which he had set out. He noted that there
was a man in an automobile at some distance from the hangar, evidently
waiting to take care of the plane and his still unconscious passenger.
Rapidly resuming his ordinary clothing, he stepped into his automobile
and was soon back in his own rooms, poring over the blueprints and
notebooks.

       *       *       *       *       *

Seaton and Crane both felt that something was wrong when they approached
the landing field and saw that the landing-lights were not burning, as
they always were kept lighted whenever the plane was abroad after dark.
By the dim light of the old moon Crane made a bumpy landing and they
sprang from their seats and hastened toward the house. As they neared it
they heard a faint moan and turned toward the sound, Seaton whipping out
his electric torch with one hand and his automatic pistol with the
other. At the sight that met their eyes, however, he hastily replaced
the weapon and bent over Shiro, a touch assuring him that the other two
were beyond the reach of help. Silently they picked up the injured man
and carried him gently into his own room, barely glancing at the wrecked
safe on the way. Seaton applied first-aid treatment to the ghastly wound
in Shiro's head, which both men supposed to be certainly fatal, while
Crane called a noted surgeon, asking him to come at once. He then
telephoned the coroner, the police, and finally Prescott, with whom he
held a long conversation.

Having done all in their power for the unfortunate man, they stood at
his bedside, their anger all the more terrible for the fact that it was
silent. Seaton stood with every muscle tense. He was seething with rage,
his face purple and his eyes almost emitting sparks, his teeth clenched
until the muscles of his jaws stood out in bands and lumps. His right
hand, white-knuckled, gripped the butt of his pistol, while under his
left the brass rail of the bed slowly bent under the intensity of his
unconscious muscular effort. Crane stood still, apparently impassive,
but with his face perfectly white and with every feature stern and cold
as though cut from marble. Seaton was the first to speak.

"Mart," he gritted, his voice husky with fury, "a man who would leave
another man alone to die after giving him that, ain't a man--he's a
thing. If Shiro dies and we can ever find out who did it I'll shoot him
with the biggest explosive charge I've got. No, I won't either, that'd
be too sudden. I'll take him apart with my bare hands."

"We will find him, Dick," Crane replied in a level, deadly voice
entirely unlike his usual tone. "That is one thing money can do. We will
get him if money, influence, and detectives can do it."

The tension was relieved by the arrival of the surgeon and his two
nurses, who set to work with the machine-like rapidity and precision of
their highly-specialized craft. After a few minutes, the work completed,
the surgeon turned to the two men who had been watching him so intently,
with a smile upon his clean-shaven face.

"Merely a scalp wound, Mr. Crane," he stated. "He should recover
consciousness in an hour or so." Then, breaking in upon Seaton's
exclamation, "It looks much worse than it really is. The bullet glanced
off the skull instead of penetrating it, stunning him by the force of the
blow. There are no indications that the brain is affected in any way,
and while the affected area of the scalp is large, it is a clean wound
and should heal rapidly. He will probably be up and around in a couple
of days, and by the time his hair grows again, he will not be able to
find a scar."

As he took his leave, the police and coroner arrived. After making a
thorough investigation, in which they learned what had been stolen and
shrewdly deduced the manner in which the robbery had been accomplished,
they departed, taking with them the bodies. They were authorized by
Crane to offer a reward of one million dollars for information leading
to the arrest and conviction of the murderer. After everyone except the
nurses had gone, Crane showed them the rooms they were to occupy while
caring for the wounded man. As the surgeon had foretold, Shiro soon
recovered consciousness. After telling his story he dropped into a deep
sleep, and Seaton and Crane, after another telephonic conference with
Prescott, retired for the rest of the night.




CHAPTER VI

The Object-Compass at Work


Prescott, after a sleepless night, joined Seaton and Crane at breakfast.

"What do you make of it, Mr. Prescott?" asked Crane. "Seaton here thinks
it was DuQuesne, possibly acting for some foreign power, after our
flying-machine to use in war. I think it was some big industrial concern
after our power-plant. What is your opinion?"

"I haven't any," replied the great detective after a moment. "Either
guess may be true, although I am almost positive that Dr. DuQuesne had
nothing to do with it, either way. It was no ordinary burglary, that is
certain from Shiro's story. It was done by someone who had exact
information of your movements and habits. He chose a time when you were
away, probably not so much from fear of you as because it was only in
your absence that he could succeed as he did in getting all the guards
out at once where he could handle them. He was a man with one accomplice
or who worked alone, and who was almost exactly Seaton's size and build.
He was undoubtedly an expert, as he blew the safe and searched the whole
house without leaving a finger-print or any other clue, however slight,
that I can find--a thing I have never before seen done in all my
experience."

"His size should help in locating him," declared Crane. "While there are
undoubtedly thousands of men of Dick's six-feet-one and two-fifths, they
are fairly well scattered, are they not?"

"Yes, they are, but his very size only makes it worse. I have gone over
all the records I could, in the short time I have had, and can't find an
expert of that class with anywhere near that description."

"How about the third guard, the one who escaped?" asked Seaton.

"He wasn't here. It was his afternoon off, you know, and he said that he
wouldn't come back into this job on a bet--that he wasn't afraid of
anything ordinary, but he didn't like the looks of things out here. That
sounded fishy to me, and I fired him. He may have been the leak, of
course, though I have always found him reliable before. If he did leak,
he must have got a whale of a slice for it. He is under constant watch,
and if we can ever get anything on him, I will nail him to the cross.
But that doesn't help get this affair straightened out. I haven't given
up, of course, there are lots of things not tried yet, but I must admit
that temporarily, at least, I am up a stump."

"Well," remarked Seaton, "that million-dollar reward will bring him in,
sure. No honor that ever existed among thieves, or even among
free-lances of diplomacy, could stand that strain."

"I'm not so sure of that, Dick," said Crane. "If either one of our ideas
is the right one, very few men would know enough about the affair to
give pertinent information, and they probably would not live long enough
to enjoy the reward very thoroughly. Even a million dollars fails in
that case."

"I rather agree with Mr. Crane, Seaton. If it were an ordinary
affair--and I am as sure it is not as the police are that it is--a
reward of that size would get us our man within two days. As it is, I
doubt very much that the reward will do us any good. I'm afraid that it
will never be claimed."

"Wonder if the Secret Service could help us out? They'd be interested if
it should turn out to be some foreign power."

"I took it up with the Chief himself, just after it happened last night.
He doesn't think that it can be a foreign country. He has their agents
pretty well spotted, and the only one that could fill the bill--you know
a man with that description and with the cold nerve to do the job would
be apt to be known--was in San Francisco, the time this job was pulled
off."

       *       *       *       *       *

"The more you talk, the more I am convinced that it was DuQuesne
himself," declared Seaton, positively. "He is almost exactly my size and
build, is the only man I know of who could do anything with the solution
after he got it, and he has nerve enough to do anything."

"I would like to think it was DuQuesne," replied the detective,
thoughtfully, "but I'm afraid we'll have to count him out of it
entirely. He has been under the constant surveillance of my best men
ever since you mentioned him. We have detectaphones in his rooms, wires
on his telephone, and are watching him night and day. He never goes out
except to work, never has any except unimportant telephone calls, and
the instruments register only the occasional scratching of a match, the
rustle of papers, and other noises of a man studying. He's innocent."

"That may be true," assented Seaton doubtfully, "but you want to
remember that he knows more about electricity than the guy that invented
it, and I'm not sure that he can't talk to a detectaphone and make it
say anything he wants it to. Anyway, we can soon settle it. Yesterday I
made a special trip down to the Bureau, with some notes as an excuse, to
set this object-compass on him," taking one of the small instruments
from his pocket as he spoke. "I watched him a while last night, then
fixed an alarm to wake me if the needle moved much, but it pointed
steady all night. See! It's moving now. That means that he is going to
work early, as usual. Now I'm morally certain that he's mixed up in this
thing somewhere, and I'm not convinced that he isn't slipping one over
on your men some way--he's a clever devil. I wonder if you wouldn't take
this compass and watch him yourself tonight, just on general principles?
Or let me do it. I'd be glad to. I say 'tonight' because if he did get
the stuff here he didn't deliver it anywhere last night. It's just a
chance, of course, but he may do it tonight."

After the compass had been explained to the detective he gladly
consented to the plan, declaring that he would willingly spend the time
just to watch such an unheard-of instrument work. After another hour of
fruitless discussion Prescott took his leave, saying that he would mount
an impregnable guard from that time on.

Late that evening Prescott joined the two men who were watching
DuQuesne's house. They reported that all was perfectly quiet, as usual.
The scientist was in his library, the instruments registering only the
usual occasional faint sounds of a man absorbed in study. But after an
hour of waiting, and while the microphones made a noise as of rustling
papers, the needle of the compass moved. It dipped slowly toward the
earth as though DuQuesne were descending into the cellar, but at the
same time the shadow of his unmistakable profile was thrown upon the
window shade as he apparently crossed the room.

"Can't you hear him walk?" demanded Prescott.

"No. He has heavy Turkish rugs all over the library, and he always walks
very lightly, besides."

       *       *       *       *       *

Prescott watched the needle in amazement as it dipped deeper and deeper,
pointing down into the earth almost under his feet and then behind him,
as though DuQuesne had walked beneath him. He did not, could not,
believe it. He was certain that something had gone wrong with the
strange instrument in his hand, nevertheless he followed the pointing
needle. It led him beside Park Road, down the hill, straight toward the
long bridge which forms one entrance to Rock Creek Park. Though
skeptical, Prescott took no chances, and as he approached the bridge he
left the road and concealed himself behind a clump of trees, from which
point of vantage he could see the ground beneath the bridge as well as
the roadway. Soon the bridge trembled under the weight of a heavy
automobile going toward the city at a high rate of speed. He saw
