traffic and travel to and in it must increase. That increase will be
shared in considerable degree by the "underground" companies, and as
they have shown that their capabilities of traffic are almost boundless,
it may be expected that the oldest and the chief of these will in the
early future know a growth as continuous if less rapid than in the past.

We take the above from the _Engineer_, London. In this city there are
now existing 27 miles of elevated steam railways for local passenger
traffic. These roads have carried during the past year 61,000,000 of
passengers. In this service they employ 175 locomotives and 500
passenger cars. It is a terrible nuisance to have these locomotives and
cars constantly whizzing through the public streets; still the roads are
a great accommodation. The only underground railway in this city is that
of the New York Central and Hudson River, 4 miles in length, extending
under Fourth avenue from Forty-second street to Harlem River. Over this
road the enormous traffic of the Central, Harlem, and the New Haven
roads, with their connections, passes. But so removed from public sight
are the cars and locomotives that the existence of this underground
railway is almost forgotten.

       *       *       *       *       *




TEMPERING CHISELS.


A practical mechanic communicates to the Scientific American the
following: In hardening and tempering a cold chisel care should be taken
to have a gradual shading of temper. If there is a distinct boundary
line of temper color between the hard cutting edge and softer shank
portion, it will be very apt to break at or near that line. The cutting
edge portion of the chisel should be supported by a backing of steel
gradually diminishing in hardness; and so with all metal cutting tools
that are subjected to heavy strain. Not every workman becomes uniformly
successful in this direction, for, in addition to dexterity, it requires
a nice perception of degree of heat and of color in order to obtain the
best result.

       *       *       *       *       *


MR. A. A. KNUDSON, of Brooklyn, N. Y., has lately perfected and patented
a system of protecting oil tanks from lightning, which is approved by
several prominent electricians. The invention includes a device for
distributing a spray of water over the top of the tank for condensing
the rising vapor and cooling the tank; a system of lightning conductors
connected with a gutter surrounding the tank, and a hollow earth
terminal connected with the gutter by a pipe, and designed to moisten
the earth, and at the same time prevent the earth around the terminal
from becoming saturated with oil.

       *       *       *       *       *


A correspondant of the _Christian Union_, writing from Constantinople,
says that Abd ul-Hamid, the Sultan of Turkey, reads the Scientific
American, the engravings in which seem to specially interest him. The
writer adds that whatever in literature the Sultan may chance to hear of
which he thinks may interest him, he has translated into Turkish.

       *       *       *       *       *




AMATEUR MECHANICS.


A SIMPLE SINGLE-ACTING STEAM ENGINE.

The great bugbear staring the amateur mechanic in the face when he
contemplates making a small steam engine is the matter of boring the
cylinder. To bore an iron cylinder on a foot lathe is difficult even
when the lathe is provided with automatic feed gear, and it is almost
impossible with the ordinary light lathe possessed by most amateurs. To
bore a brass cylinder is easier, but even this is difficult, and the
cylinder, when done, is unsatisfactory on account of the difficulty of
adapting a durable piston to it.

The engravings show a simple steam engine, which requires no difficult
lathe work; in fact the whole of the work may be done on a very ordinary
foot lathe. The engine is necessarily single-acting, but it is effective
nevertheless, being about 1-20 H. P., with suitable steam supply. It is
of sufficient size to run a foot lathe, scroll saw, or two or three
sewing machines.

The cylinder and piston are made from mandrel drawn brass tubing, which
may be purchased in any desired quantity in New York city. The fittings
are mostly of brass, that being an easy metal to work.

The principal dimensions of the engine are as follows:


Cylinder.--Internal diameter, 11/2 in.; thickness, 1/8 in.;
length, 3-3/8 in.

Piston.--External diameter, 11/2 in.; thickness, 3-32 in.; length,
33/4 in.

Length of stroke. 2 in.

Crank pin.--Diameter, 1/4 in.; length of bearing surface, 1/2 in.

Connecting rod.--Diameter, 5/16 in.; length between centers, 51/2
in.

Shaft.--Diameter, 5/8 in.; diameter of bearings, 1/2 in.; length. 6
in.; distance from bed to center of shaft, 11/2 in.

Flywheel.--Diameter, 8 in.; weight, 10 lb.

Valve.--Diameter of chamber, 9-16 in.; length, 11/4 in.; width of
valve face working over supply port, 3/32 in.; width of space under
valve, 3/8 in.; length of the same, 1 in.; distance from center of
valve spindle to center of eccentric rod pin, 3/4 in.

Ports, supply--Width, 1/16 inch.; length, 1 in. Exhaust.--Width,
1/8 in.; length, 1 in.; space between ports, 5-16 in.

Pipes.--Steam supply, 1/4 in.; exhaust, 3/8 in.

Eccentric.--Stroke, 3/4 in.; diameter, 1-5/16 in. length of
eccentric rod between centers, 8-3/8 in.

Cut off, 5/8

Thickness of base plate, 1/4 in.

Wooden base, 61/4 in x 8 in.: 2-3/8 in. thick.

Thickness of plate supporting cylinder, 3/8 in.

Total height of engine, 131/4 in.

Distance from base plate to under side of cylinder head. 91/4 in.

Diameter of vertical posts, 9-16 in.; distance apart, 31/2 in.;
length between shoulders 61/4 in.

Base plate fastened to base with 1/4 in. bolts.

The connecting rod, eccentric rod, crank pin, and shaft, are of
steel. The eccentric-strap and flywheel are cast iron, and the other
portions of the engine are of brass. The screw threads are all
chased, and the flange, a, and head of the piston, F, in addition to
being screwed, are further secured by soft solder.

Fig. 1 shows the engine in perspective. Fig 2 is a side elevation,
with parts broken away. Fig. 3 is a vertical transverse section.
Fig. 4 is a partial plan view. Fig. 5 is a detail view of the upper
end of the connecting rod and its connections; and Fig. 6 is a
horizontal section taken through the middle of the valve chamber.

The cylinder, A, is threaded externally for 1 inch from its lower
end, and the collar, a, 1/4 inch thick, is screwed on and soldered.
The face of the collar is afterward turned true. The same thread
answers for the nut which clamps the cylinder in the plate, B, and
for the gland, b, of the stuffing box, which screws over the beveled
end of the cylinder, and contains fibrous packing filled with
asbestos or graphite. The posts, C, are shouldered at the ends and
secured in their places by nuts. Their bearing surface on the plate,
D, is increased by the addition of a collar screwed on. The posts
are made from drawn rods of brass, and need no turning except at the
ends.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--SIMPLE SINGLE-ACTING STEAM ENGINE]

The cylinder head, E, which is a casting containing the valve
chamber, is screwed in. The piston, F, fits the cylinder closely,
but not necessarily steam tight. The head is screwed in and
soldered, and the yoke, G, which receives the connecting rod pin, is
screwed into the head. The connecting rod, H, is of steel with brass
ends. The lower end, which receives the crank pin, is split, and
provided with a tangent screw for taking up wear. The crank pin is
secured in the crank disk, I, by a nut on the back. The eccentric
rod, J, is of steel, screwed at its lower end into an eccentric
strap of cast or wrought iron, which surrounds the eccentric, K. The
valve, L, is slotted in the back to receive the valve spindle, by
which it is oscillated. The ports are formed by drilling from the
outside, and afterward forming the slot, with a graver or small
sharp chisel. The supply port, for convenience, may be somewhat
enlarged below. The holes for the exhaust port will be drilled
through the hole into which the exhaust pipe is screwed. The chamber
communicating with the exhaust is cored out in the casting.

The easiest way to make the valve is to cut it out of a solid
cylinder turned to fit the valve chamber.

An engine of this kind will work well under a steam pressure of 50
lb., and it may be run at the rate of 200 to 250 revolutions per
minute.

[Illustration: SIDE ELEVATION. SECTIONAL, AND DETAIL VIEWS OF
SIMPLE STEAM ENGINE]

It is desirable to construct a flat pasteboard model to verify
measurements and to get the proper adjustment of the valve before
beginning the engine. M.

       *       *       *       *       *




MISCELLANEOUS INVENTIONS.


An improved finger ring has been patented by Mr. David Untermeyer,
of New York city. The object of this invention is to furnish finger
rings so constructed that they can be opened out to represent
serpents, and which, when being worn, will give no indication of
being anything more than rings.

An improved heel skate-fastener has been patented by Mr. Elijah S.
Coon, of Watertown, N.Y. This invention consists, essentially, of a
screw threaded hollow plug or thimble, a dirt plate for covering the
opening in the plug, and a spring for holding the dirt plate in
place. This fastener possesses several advantages over one that is
permanently attached to the heel. Being cylindrical, it is more
easily connected, because the hole for its reception can be made
with a common auger or bit without the necessity for lasting the
boot or shoe or using a knife or chisel. Being screw threaded it can
be readily screwed into place with a common screwdriver; this also
enables it to be screwed either in or out, in order to make it fit
the heel key. The screw thread permits of screwing it in beyond the
surface of the heel, so as to prevent it from wearing out by the
ordinary wearing of the shoe.

An improved velocipede has been patented by Messrs. Charles E.
Tripler and William H. Roff, of New York city. The object of this
invention is to obtain a more advantageous application of the
propelling power than the ordinary cranks, to avoid the noise of
pawls and ratchets, and to guard the velocipedes against being
overturned should one of the rear wheels pass over an obstruction.

Mr. Philip H. Pax on, of Camden, N. J., has patented a machine that
will cut lozenges in a perfect manner, and will not be clogged by
the gum and sugar of the lozenge dough.

Mr. John H. Robertson, of New York city, has patented an improved
mat, which consists of longitudinal metal bars provided with
alternate mortised and tenoned ends, and composed of series of
sockets united by webs and of wooden transverse rods entered through
said sockets and held therein by vertical pins.

Mr. Charles F. Clapp, of Ripon, Wis, has patented a novel
arrangement of a desk attachment for trunks. The desk and tray may
be lifted from the trunk when the desk is either raised or lowered.

A combined scraper, chopper, and dirter has been patented by Messrs.
Francis A. Hall and Nathaniel B. Milton, of Monroe, La. The object
of this invention is to furnish an implement so constructed as to
bar off a row of plants, chop the plants to a stand, and dirt the
plants at one passage along the row, and which shall be simple,
convenient, and reliable.

Mr. Hermann H. Cammann, of New York city, has patented a basket so
constructed that it can be compactly folded for transportation or
storage.

Messrs. David H. Seymour and Henry R. A. Boys, of Barrie, Ontario,
Canada, have patented an improvement in that class of devices that
are designed to be applied to steam cylinders for introducing oil or
tallow into the cylinder and upon the cylinder valves. It consists
of an oil cup provided with a gas escape, a scum breaker, an
interior gauge, and an adjustable feed pipe extension.

Mr. John H. Conrad, of Charlotte, Mich., has patented a portable
sliding gate which will dispense with hinges and which can be used
in any width of opening. It may be readily connected with a
temporary opening or gap made in the fence.

An improved reversible pole and shaft for vehicles has been
patented by Mr. Francis M. Heuett, of Jug Tavern, Ga. The object of
this invention is to so combine the parts of shafts for vehicles
that they may be readily transposed and re-employed to form the
tongue without removing the thill arms or hounds from the Mr.
William Jones, of Kalamazoo, Mich., has patented an improved box
which is useful for various purposes, but is particularly intended
for shipping fourth class mail matter. The feature of special
novelty is the means of fastening the hinged cover.

Mr. Louis J. Halbert, of Brooklyn, N. Y., has patented an improved
slate cleaner, which is simple, convenient, and effective.

An improved boot, which is simple in its make, fits well, and is
convenient to put on and take off, has been patented by Ellene A.
Bailey, of St. Charles, Mo. The boot is provided with side seams,
one of which is open at its lower end, and is provided with lacing,
buttons, or a like device, so that it can be closed when the boot is
on the wearer's foot.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HERCULES BEETLE.
