Mantelish frowned. "The message was faked!" he boomed.

"Not only that," said Holati. "The actual report Doctor Fayle had
transmitted the day before to the League was revised to the extent that
it omitted any reference to 112-113." He glanced thoughtfully at
Mantelish. "As a matter of fact, it was almost a month and a half before
League Headquarters became aware of the importance of the unit."

The professor snorted. "Azol," he explained to Trigger, "had become a
victim of his scientific zeal. And I--"

"Doctor Azol," said the Commissioner, "as you may remember, had his
little mishap with the plasmoid just two days after Fayle departed."

"And I," Mantelish went on, "was involved in other urgent research. How
was I to know what that villain Fayle had been up to? A vice president
of the University League!"

"Well," Trigger said, "what had Doctor Fayle been up to?"

"We don't know yet," Holati told her. "Obviously he had something in
mind with the faked order and the alteration of the report. But the only
thing we can say definitely is that he disappeared on the League ship he
had requisitioned, along with its personnel and the 112-113 plasmoid,
and hasn't shown up again.

"And that plasmoid unit now appears to have been almost certainly the
key unit of the entire Old Galactic Station--the unit that kept
everything running along automatically there for thirty thousand years."

He glanced at Quillan. "Someone at the door. We'll hold it while you
see what they want."




7


The burly character who had appeared at the door said diffidently that
Professor Mantelish had wanted to be present while his lab equipment was
stowed aboard. If the professor didn't mind, things were about that far
along.

Mantelish excused himself and went off with the messenger. The door
closed. Quillan came back to his chair.

"We're moving the outfit later tonight," the Commissioner explained.
"Mantelish is coming along--plus around eight tons of his lab equipment.
Plus his special U-League guards."

"Oh?" Trigger picked up the Puya glass. She looked into it. It was
empty. "Moving where?" she asked.

"Manon," said the Commissioner. "Tell you about that later."

Every last muscle in Trigger's body seemed to go limp simultaneously.
She settled back slightly in the chair, surprised by the force of the
reaction. She hadn't realized by now how keyed up she was! She sighed a
small sigh. Then she smiled at Quillan.

"Major," she said, "how about a tiny little refill on that Puya--about
half?"

Quillan took care of the tiny little refill.

Commissioner Tate said, "By the way, Quillan does have a degree in
subspace engineering and gets assigned to the Engineers now and then.
But his real job's Space Scout Intelligence."

Trigger nodded. "I'd almost guessed it!" She gave Quillan another smile.
She nearly gave 113-A a smile.

"And now," said the Commissioner, "we'll talk more freely. We tell
Mantelish just as little as we can. To tell you the truth, Trigger, the
professor is a terrible handicap on an operation like this. I understand
he was a great friend of your father's."

"Yes," she said. "Going over for visits to Mantelish's garden with my
father is one of the earliest things I remember. I can imagine he's a
problem!" She shifted her gaze curiously from one to the other of the
two men. "What are you people doing? Looking for Gess Fayle and the key
unit?"

Holati Tate said, "That's about it. We're one of a few thousand
Federation groups assigned to the same general job. Each group works at
its specialties, and the information gets correlated." He paused. "The
Federation Council--they're the ones we're working for directly--the
Council's biggest concern is the very delicate political situation
that's involved. They feel it could develop suddenly into a dangerous
one. They may be right."

"In what way?" Trigger asked.

"Well, suppose that key unit is lost and stays lost. Suppose all the
other plasmoids put together don't contain enough information to show
how the Old Galactics produced the things and got them to operate."

"Somebody would get that worked out pretty soon, wouldn't they?"

"Not necessarily, or even probably, according to Mantelish and some
other people who know what's happened. There seem to be too many basic
factors missing. It might be necessary to develop a whole new class of
sciences first. And that could take a few centuries."

"Well," Trigger admitted, "I could get along without the things
indefinitely."

"Same here," the plasmoid nabob agreed ungratefully. "Weird beasties!
But--let's see. At present there are twelve hundred and fifty-eight
member worlds to the Federation, aren't there?"

"More or less."

"And the number of planetary confederacies, subplanetary governments,
industrial, financial and commercial combines, assorted power groups,
etc. and so on, is something I'd hate to have to calculate."

"What are you driving at?" she asked.

"They've all been told we're heading for a new golden age, courtesy of
the plasmoid science. Practically everybody has believed it. Now there's
considerable doubt."

"Oh," she said. "Of course--practically everybody is going to get very
unhappy, eh?"

"That," said Commissioner Tate, "is only a little of it."

"Yes, the thing isn't just lost. Somebody's got it."

"Very likely."

Trigger nodded. "Fayle's ship might have got wrecked accidentally, of
course. But the way he took off shows he planned to disappear--a
crack-up on top of that would be too much of a coincidence. So any one
of umpteen thousands of organizations in the Hub might be the one that
has that plasmoid now!"

"Including," said Holati, "any one of the two hundred and fourteen
restricted worlds. Their treaties of limitation wouldn't have let them
get into the plasmoid pie until the others had been at it a decade or
so. They would have been quite eager...."

There was a little pause. Then Trigger said, "Lordy! The thing could
even set off another string of wars--"

"That's a point the Council is nervous about," he said.

"Well, it certainly is a mess. You would have thought the Federation
might have had a Security Chief in on that first operation. Right there
on Harvest Moon!"

"They did," he said. "It was Fayle."

"Oh! Pretty embarrassing." Trigger was silent a moment. "Holati, could
those things ever become as valuable as people keep saying? It's all
sounded a little exaggerated to me."

The Commissioner said he'd wondered about it too. "I'm not enough of a
biologist to make an educated guess. What it seems to boil down to is
that they might. Which would be enough to tempt a lot of people to
gamble very high for a chance to get control of the plasmoid
process--and we know definitely that some people are gambling for it."

"How do you know?"

"We've been working a couple of leads here. Pretty short leads so far,
but you work with what you can get." He nodded at the table. "We picked
up the first lead through 113-A."

Trigger glanced down. The plasmoid lay there some inches from the side
of her hand. "You know," she said uncomfortably, "old Repulsive moved
again while we were talking! Towards my hand." She drew the hand away.

"I was watching it," Major Quillan said reassuringly from the end of the
table. "I would have warned you, but it stopped when it got as far as it
is now. That was around five minutes ago."

Trigger reached back and gave old Repulsive a cautious pat. "Very lively
character! He does feel pleasant to touch. Kitty-cat pleasant! How did
you get a lead through him?"

"Mantelish brought it back to Maccadon with him, mainly because of its
similarity to 113. He was curious because he couldn't even guess at what
its function was. It was just lying there in a cubicle. So he did
considerable experimenting with it while he waited for Gess Fayle to
show up--and League Headquarters fidgeted around, hoping to get the
kind of report from Mantelish and Fayle that Mantelish thought they'd
already received. They were wondering where Fayle was, too. But they
knew Fayle was Security, so they didn't like to get too nosy."

Trigger shook her head. "Wonderful! So what happened with 113-A?"

"Mantelish began to get results with it," the Commissioner said. "One
experiment was rather startling. He'd been trying that electrical
stimulation business. Nothing happened until he had finished. Then he
touched the plasmoid, and it fed the whole charge back to him.
Apparently it was a fairly hefty dose."

She laughed delightedly. "Good for Repulsive! Stood up for his rights,
eh?"

"Mantelish gained some such impression anyway. He became more cautious
with it after that. And then he learned something that should be
important. He was visiting another lab where they had a couple of
plasmoids which actually moved now and then. He had 113-A in his coat
pocket. The two lab plasmoids stopped moving while he was there. They
haven't moved since."

"Like the Harvest Moon plasmoids when they stimulated 113?"

"Right. He thought about that, and then located another moving plasmoid.
He dropped in to look it over, with 113-A in his pocket again, and it
stopped. He did the same thing in one more place and then quit. There
aren't that many moving plasmoids around. Those three labs are still
wondering what hit their specimens."

She studied 113-A curiously. "A mighty mite! What does Mantelish make of
it?"

"He thinks the 112-113 unit forms a kind of self-regulating system. The
big one induces plasmoid activity, the little one modifies it. This
113-A might be a spare regulator. But it seems to be more than a
spare--which brings us to that first lead we got. A gang of raiders
crashed Mantelish's lab one night."

"When was that?"

"Some months ago. Before you and I left Manon. The professor was out,
and 113-A had gone along in his pocket as usual. But his two lab guards
and one of the raiders were killed. The others got away. Gess Fayle's
defection was a certainty by then, and everybody was very nervous. The
Feds got there, fast, and dead-brained the raider. They learned just two
things. One, he'd been mind-blocked and couldn't have spilled any
significant information even if they had got him alive. The other item
they drew from his brain was a clear impression of the target of the
raid--the professor's pal here."

"Uh-huh," Trigger said, lost in thought. She poked Repulsive lightly.
"That would be Fayle and his associates then. Or somebody who knew about
them. Did they want to kill it or grab it?"

The Commissioner looked at her. "Grab it, was the dead-brain report.
Why?"

"Just wondering. Would make a difference, wouldn't it? Did they try
again?"

"There've been five more attempts," he said.

"And what's everybody concluded from that?"

"They want 113-A in a very bad way. So they need it."

"In connection with the key unit?" Trigger asked.

"Probably."

"That makes everything look very much better, doesn't it?"

"Quite a little," he said. "The unit may not work, or may not work
satisfactorily, unless 113-A is in the area. Mantelish talks of
something he calls proximity influence. Whatever that is, 113-A has
demonstrated it has it."

"So," Trigger said, "they might have two thirds of what everybody wants,
and you might have one third. Right here on the table. How many of the
later raiders did you catch?"

"All of them," said the Commissioner. "Around forty. We got them dead,
we got them alive. It didn't make much difference. They were hired
hands. Very expensive hired hands, but still just that. Most of them
didn't know a thing we could use. The ones that did know something were
mind-blocked again."

"I thought," Trigger said reflectively, "you could _un_block someone
like that."

"You can, sometimes. If you're very good at it and if you have time
enough. We couldn't afford to wait a year. They died before they could
tell us anything."

There was a pause. Then Trigger asked, "How did you get involved in
this, personally?"

"More or less by accident," the Commissioner said. "It was in connection
with our second lead."

"That's me, huh?" she said unhappily.

"Yes."

"Why would anyone want to grab me? I don't know anything."

He shook his head. "We haven't found out yet. We're hoping we will, in a
very few days."

"Is that one of the things you can't tell me about?"

"I can tell you most of what I know at the moment," said the
Commissioner. "Remember the night we stopped off at Evalee on the way in
from Manon?"

"Yes," she said. "That big hotel!"




8


"About an hour after you'd decided to hit the bunk," Holati said, "I
portaled back to your rooms to pick up some Precol reports we'd been
setting up."

Trigger nodded. "I remember the reports."

"A couple of characters were working on your doors when I got there.
They went for their guns, unfortunately. But I called the nearest Scout
Intelligence office and had them dead-brained."

"Why that?" she asked.

"It could have been an accident--a couple of ordinary thugs. But their
equipment looked a little too good for ordinary thugs. I didn't know
just what to be suspicious of, but I got suspicious anyway."

"That's you, all right," Trigger acknowledged. "What were they?"

"They had an Evalee record which told us more than the brains did. They
were high-priced boys. Their brains told us they'd allowed themselves to
be mind-blocked on this particular job. High-priced boys won't do that
unless they can set their standard price very much higher. It didn't
look at all any more as if they'd come to your door by accident."

"No," she admitted.

"The Feds got in on it then. There'd been that business in Mantelish's
lab. There were similarities in the pattern. You knew Mantelish. You'd
been on Harvest Moon with him. They thought there could be a
connection."

"But what connection?" she protested. "I _know_ I don't know anything
that could do anybody any good!"

He shrugged. "I can't figure it either, Trigger girl. But the upshot of
it was that I was put in charge of this phase of the general
investigation. If there is a connection, it'll come out eventually. In
any case, we want to know who's been trying to have you picked up and
why."

She studied his face with troubled eyes.

"That's quite definite, is it?" she asked. "There couldn't possibly
still be a mistake?"

"No. It's definite."

"So that's what the grabber business in the Colonial School yesterday
was about...."

He nodded. "It was their first try since the Evalee matter."

"Why do you think they waited so long?"

"Because they suspected you were being guarded. It's difficult to keep
an adequate number of men around without arousing doubts in interested
observers."

