
The startling truth burst upon the minds of all. Here upon this little
planetoid were several of the gigantic inhabitants of the world that we
were going to attack. There was more than one man in the flagship who
recognized them well, and who shuddered at the recognition,
instinctively recalling the recent terrible experience of the earth.

Was this an outpost of the warlike Mars?

Around these monstrous enemies we saw several of their engines of war.
Some of these appeared to have been wrecked, but at least one, as far as
we could see, was still in a proper condition for use.

How had these creatures got there?

"Why, that is easy enough to account for," I said, as a sudden
recollection flashed into my mind. "Don't you remember the report of the
astronomers more than six months ago, at the end of the conference in
Washington, that something would seem to indicate the departure of a new
expedition from Mars had been noticed by them? We have heard nothing of
that expedition since. We know that it did not reach the earth. It must
have fallen foul of this asteroid, run upon this rock in the ocean of
space and been wrecked here."

"We've got 'em, then," shouted our electric steersman, who had been a
workman in Mr. Edison's laboratory and had unlimited confidence in his
chief.

The electrical ships were immediately instructed by signal to slow down,
an operation that was easily affected through the electrical repulsion
of the asteroid.

The nearer we got the more terrifying was the appearance of the gigantic
creatures who were riding upon the little world before us like castaway
sailors upon a block of ice. Like men, and yet not like men, combining
the human and the beast in their appearance, it required a steady nerve
to look at them. If we had not known their malignity and their power to
work evil, it would have been different, but in our eyes their moral
character shone through their physical aspect and thus rendered them
more terrible than they would otherwise have been.

When we first saw them their appearance was most forlorn, and their
attitudes indicated only despair and desperation, but as they caught
sight of us their malign power of intellect instantly penetrated the
mystery, and they recognized us for what we were.

Their despair immediately gave place to reawakened malevolence. On the
instant they were astir, with such heart-chilling movements as those
that characterize a venomous serpent preparing to strike.

Not imagining that they would be in a position to make serious
resistance, we had been somewhat incautious in approaching.

Suddenly there was a quicker movement than usual among the Martians, a
swift adjustment of that one of their engines of war which, as already
noticed, seemed to be practically uninjured, then there darted from it
and alighted upon one of the foremost ships, a dazzling lightning stroke
a mile in length, at whose touch the metallic sides of the car curled
and withered and, licked for a moment by what seemed lambent flames,
collapsed into a mere cinder.

For an instant not a word was spoken, so sudden and unexpected was the
blow.

We knew that every soul in the stricken car had perished.

"Back! Back!" was the signal instantly flashed from the flagship, and
reversing their polarities the members of the squadron sprang away from
the little planet as rapidly as the electrical impulse could drive them.

But before we were out of reach a second flaming tongue of death shot
from the fearful engine, and another of our ships, with all its crew,
was destroyed.

[Illustration: _"Back! Back!" was the signal instantaneously flashed
from the flag ship, and the members of the squadron sprang away from the
little planet. But before we were out of reach a second tongue of death
shot from the fearful engine, and another of our ships, with all its
crew, was destroyed._]

It was an inauspicious beginning for us. Two of our electrical ships,
with their entire crews, had been wiped out of existence, and this
appalling blow had been dealt by a few stranded and disabled enemies
floating on an asteroid.

What hope would there be for us when we came to encounter the millions
of Mars itself on their own ground and prepared for war?

However, it would not do to despond. We had been incautious, and we
should take good care not to commit the same fault again.

The first thing to do was to avenge the death of our comrades. The
question whether we were able to meet these Martians and overcome them
might as well be settled right here and now. They had proved what they
could do, even when disabled and at a disadvantage. Now it was our turn.




CHAPTER SEVEN

_A PLANET OF GOLD_


The squadron had been rapidly withdrawn to a very considerable distance
from the asteroid. The range of the mysterious artillery employed by the
Martians was unknown to us. We did not even know the limit of the
effective range of our own disintegrators. If it should prove that the
Martians were able to deal their strokes at a distance greater than any
we could reach, then they would of course have an insuperable advantage.

On the other hand, if it should turn out that our range was greater than
theirs, the advantage would be on our side. Or--which was perhaps most
probable--there might be practically no difference in the effective
range of the engines.

Anyhow, we were going to find out how the case stood, and that without
delay.

Everything being in readiness, the disintegrators all in working order,
and the men who were able to handle them, most of whom were experienced
marksmen, chosen from among the officers of the regular army of the
United States, and accustomed to the straight shooting and the sure hits
of the West, standing at their posts, the squadron again advanced.

In order to distract the attention of the Martians, the electrical ships
had been distributed over a wide space. Some dropped straight down
toward the asteroid; others approached it by flank attack, from this
side and that. The flagship moved straight in toward the point where the
first disaster occurred. Its intrepid commander felt that his post
should be that of the greatest danger, and where the severest blows
would be given and received.

The approach of the ships was made with great caution. Watching the
Martians with our telescopes we could clearly see that they were
disconcerted by the scattered order of our attack. Even if all of their
engines of war had been in proper condition for use it would have been
impossible for them to meet the simultaneous assault of so many enemies
dropping down upon them from the sky.

But they were made of fighting mettle, as we knew from old experience.
It was no question of surrender. They did not know how to surrender, and
we did not know how to demand their surrender. Besides, the destruction
of the two electrical ships with the forty men, many of whom bore names
widely known upon the earth, had excited a kind of fury among the
members of the squadron which called for vengeance.

Suddenly a repetition of the quick movement by the Martians, which had
been the forerunner of the former coup, was observed; again a blinding
flash burst from their war engines and instantaneously a shiver ran
through the frame of the flagship; the air within quivered with strange
pulsations and seemed suddenly to have assumed the temperature of a
blast furnace.

We all gasped for breath. Our throats and lungs seemed scorched in the
act of breathing. Some fell unconscious upon the floor. The marksmen,
carrying the disintegrators ready for use, staggered, and one of them
dropped his instrument.

But we had not been destroyed like our comrades before us. In a moment
the wave of heat passed; those who had fallen recovered from their
momentary stupor and staggered to their feet.

The electrical steersman stood hesitating at his post.

"Move on," said Mr. Edison sternly, his features set with determination
and his eyes afire.

"We are still beyond their effective range. Let us get closer in order
to make sure work when we strike."

The ship moved on. One could hear the heartbeats of its inmates. The
other members of the squadron, thinking for the moment that disaster had
overtaken the flagship, had paused and seemed to be meditating flight.

"Signal them to move on," said Mr. Edison.

The signal was given, and the circle of electrical ships closed in upon
the asteroid.

In the meantime Mr. Edison had been donning his air-tight suit. Before
we could clearly comprehend his intention he had passed through the
double trapped door which gave access to the exterior of the car without
permitting the loss of air, and was standing upon what served as the
deck of the ship.

In his hand he carried a disintegrator. With a quick motion he sighted
it.

As quickly as possible I sprang to his side. I was just in time to note
the familiar blue gleam about the instrument, which indicated that its
terrific energies were at work. The whirring sound was absent, because
here, in open space, where there was no atmosphere, there could be no
sound.

My eyes were fixed upon the Martian's engine, which had just dealt us a
staggering, but not fatal, blow, and particularly I noticed a polished
knob projecting from it which seemed to have been the focus from which
its destructive bolt emanated.

A moment later the knob disappeared. The irresistible vibrations darted
from the electrical disintegrator and had fallen upon it and
instantaneously shattered it into atoms.

"That fixes them," said Mr. Edison, turning to me with a smile.

And indeed it did fix them. We had most effectually spiked their gun. It
would deal no more death blows.

The doings of the flagship had been closely watched throughout the
squadron. The effect of its blow had been evident to all, and a moment
later we saw, on some of the nearer ships, men dressed in their air
suits, appearing upon the deck, swinging their arms and sending forth
soundless cheers into empty space.

The stroke that we had dealt was taken by several of the electrical
ships as a signal for a common assault, and we saw two of the Martians
fall beside the ruins of their engine, their heads having been blown
from their bodies.

"Signal them to stop firing," commanded Mr. Edison. "We have got them
down, and we are not going to murder them without necessity."

"Besides," he added, "I want to capture some of them alive."

The signal was given as he had ordered. The flagship then alone dropped
slowly toward the place on the asteroid where the prostrate Martians
were.

As we got near them a terrible scene unfolded itself to our eyes. There
had evidentially been not more than a half dozen of the monsters in the
beginning. Two of these were stretched headless upon the ground. Three
others had suffered horrible injuries where the invisible vibratory
beams from the disintegrators had grazed them, and they could not long
survive. One only remained apparently uninjured.

[Illustration: _As we got near them a terrible scene unfolded itself.
Two of the Martians were stretched headless upon the ground. Three
others had suffered horrible injuries, and only one remained apparently
unhurt._]

It is impossible for me to describe the appearance of this creature in
terms that would be readily understood. Was he like a man? Yes and no.
He possessed many human characteristics, but they were exaggerated and
monstrous in scale and in detail. His head was of enormous size, and his
huge projecting eyes gleamed with a strange fire of intelligence. His
face was like a caricature, but not one to make the beholder laugh.
Drawing himself up, he towered to a height of at least fifteen feet.

But let the reader not suppose from this inadequate description that the
Martians stirred in the beholder precisely the sensation that would be
caused by the sight of a gorilla, or other repulsive inhabitant of our
terrestrial jungles, suddenly confronting him in its native wilds.

With all his horrible characteristics, and all his suggestions of beast
and monster, nevertheless the Martian produced the impression of being a
person and not a mere animal.

I have already referred to the enormous size of his head, and to the
fact that his countenance bore considerable resemblance to that of a
man. There was something in his face that sent a shiver through the soul
of the beholder. One could feel in looking upon it that here was
intellect, intelligence developed to the highest degree, but in the
direction of evil instead of good.

The sensations of one who had stood face to face with Satan, when he was
driven from the battlements of heaven by the swords of his fellow
archangels, and had beheld him transformed from Lucifer, the Son of the
Morning, into the Prince of Night and Hell, might not have been unlike
those which we now experienced as we gazed upon this dreadful personage,
who seemed to combine the intellectual powers of a man, raised to their
highest pitch, with some of the physical features of a beast, and all
the moral depravity of a fiend.

The appearance of the Martian was indeed so threatening and repellent
that we paused at the height of fifty feet above the ground, hesitating
to approach nearer. A grin of rage and hate overspread his face. If he
had been a man I should say he shook his fist at us. What he did was to
express in even more telling pantomime his hatred and defiance, and his
determination to grind us to shreds if he could once get us within his
clutches.

Mr. Edison and I still stood upon the deck of the ship, where several
others had gathered around us. The atmosphere of the little asteroid was
so rare that it practically amounted to nothing, and we could not
possibly have survived if we had not continued to wear our air tight
suits. How the Martians contrived to live here was a mystery to us. It
was another of their secrets which we were yet to learn.

Mr. Edison retained his disintegrator in his hand.

"Kill him," said someone. "He is too horrible to live."

"If we do not kill him we shall never be able to land upon the
asteroid," said another.

"No," said Mr. Edison. "I shall not kill him. We have got another use
for him. Tom," he continued, turning to one of his assistants, whom he
had brought from his laboratory, "bring me the anaesthetic."

This was something entirely new to nearly all the members of the
expedition. Mr. Edison, however, had confided to me before we left the
earth the fact that he had invented a little instrument by means of
which a bubble, strongly charged with a powerful anaesthetic agent,
could be driven to a considerable distance into the face of an enemy,
where exploding without other damage, it would instantly put him to
sleep.

When Tom had placed the instrument in his hands Mr. Edison ordered the
electrical ship to forge slightly ahead and drop a little lower toward
the Martian, who, with watchful eyes and threatening gestures, noted our
approach in the attitude of a wild beast on the spring. Suddenly Mr.
Edison discharged from the instrument in his hand a little gaseous
globe, which glittered like a ball of tangled rainbows in the sunshine,
and darted with astonishing velocity straight into the upturned face of
the Martian. It burst as it touched and the monster fell back senseless
upon the ground.

"You have killed him!" exclaimed all.

"No," said Mr. Edison. "He is not dead, only asleep. Now we shall drop
down and bind him tight before he can awake."

When we came to bind our prisoner with strong ropes we were more than
ever impressed with his gigantic stature and strength. Evidentially in
single combat with equal weapons he would have been a match for twenty
of us.

[Illustration: _"When we came to bind our prisoner with strong ropes
we were more than ever impressed with his gigantic stature and strength.
He might have been a match for twenty of us."_]

All that I had read of giants had failed to produce upon my mind the
impression of enormous size and tremendous physical energy which the
sleeping body of this immense Martian produced. He had fallen on his
back, and was in a most profound slumber. All his features were relaxed,
and yet even in that condition there was a devilishness about him that
made the beholders instinctively shudder.

So powerful was the effect of the anaesthetic which Mr. Edison had
discharged into his face that he remained perfectly unconscious while we
turned him half over in order the more securely to bind his muscular
limbs.

In the meantime the other electrical ships approached, and several of
them made a landing upon the asteroid. Everybody was eager to see this
wonderful little world, which, as I have already remarked, was only five
miles in diameter.

Several of us from the flagship started out hastily to explore the
miniature planet. And now our attention was recalled to an intensely
interesting phenomenon which had engaged our thoughts not only when we
were upon the moon, but during our flight through space. This was the
almost entire absence of weight.

On the moon, where the force of gravitation is one-sixths as great as
upon the earth, we had found ourselves astonishingly light. Five-sixths
of our own weight, and of the weight of the air-tight suits in which we
were encased, had magically dropped from us. It was therefore
comparatively easy for us, encumbered, as we were, to make our way about
on the moon.

But when we were far from both the earth and the moon, the loss of
weight was more astonishing still--not astonishing because we had not
known that it would be so, but nevertheless a surprising phenomenon in
contrast with our lifelong experience on the earth.

In open space we were practically without weight. Only the mass of the
electrical car in which we were enclosed attracted us, and inside that
we could place ourselves in any position without falling. We could float
in the air. There was no up and no down, no top and no bottom for us.
Stepping outside the car, it would have been easy for us to spring away
from it and leave it forever.

One of the most startling experiences that I have ever had was one day
when we were navigating space about half way between the earth and Mars.
I had stepped outside the car with Lord Kelvin, both of us, of course,
wearing our air-tight suits. We were perfectly well aware what would be
the consequence of detaching ourselves from the car as we moved along.
We should still retain the forward motion of the car, and of course
accompany it in its flight. There would be no falling one way or the
other. The car would have a tendency to draw us back again by its
attraction, but this tendency would be very slight, and practically
inappreciable at a distance.

"I am going to step off," I suddenly said to Lord Kelvin. "Of course I
shall keep right along with the car, and step aboard again when I am
ready."

"Quite right on general principles, young man," replied the great
savant, "but beware in what manner you step off. Remember, if you give
your body an impulse sufficient to carry it away from the car to any
considerable distance, you will be unable to get back again, unless we
can catch you with a boathook or a fishline. Out there in empty space
you will have nothing to kick against, and you will be unable to propel
yourself in the direction of the car, and its attraction is so feeble
that we should probably arrive at Mars before it had drawn you back
again."

All this was, of course, perfectly self-evident, yet I believe that but
for the warning words of Lord Kelvin I should have been rash enough to
step out into empty space, with sufficient force to have separated
myself hopelessly from the electrical ship.

As it was, I took good care to retain a hold upon a projecting portion
of the car. Occasionally cautiously releasing my grip, I experienced for
a few minutes the delicious, indescribable pleasure of being a little
planet swinging through space, with nothing to hold me up and nothing to
interfere with my motion.

Mr. Edison, happening to come upon the deck of the ship at this time,
and seeing what we were about at once said:

"I must provide against this danger. If I do not, there is a chance that
we shall arrive at Mars with the ships half empty and the crews floating
helplessly around us."

Mr. Edison's way of guarding against the danger was by contriving a
little apparatus, modeled after that which was the governing force of
the electrical ships themselves, and which, being enclosed in the
air-tight suits, enabled their wearers to manipulate the electrical
