
A buzz came as he ended, with only the click of the tape continuing as
it printed his words. A period of silence, then again his voice:

_"Official 2:32 A. M. Inter-Allied News: Tarrano rejects Ultimatum. His
note to Earth Council complete defiance. Official text follows...."_

We listened, dumb with amazement and awe. Tarrano's note was indeed,
complete defiance. He would not yield up the Brende light. Nor would he
deliver himself in Washington for trial. In the suave, courteous
language of diplomacy, he deplored the unreasonable attitude of the
Earth leaders. Ironically, he suggested that they declare war. He would
be overwhelmed in Venia, of course. He had no means of defending himself
against their aggression. But at the first flash of hostile rays, the
Brende model would be destroyed forever. And Georg Brende--the only
living person who had the knowledge to replace the model--would die
instantly. The Brende secret would be lost irrevocably. It was
unfortunate that humanity on Earth, Venus and Mars, should be denied
their chance for immortality. Unfortunate that the Earth leaders were so
headstrong. They were enemies, in reality, of their own people--and
enemies of the peoples of Venus and Mars. But if the Earth Council
wished war with Tarrano--then war let it be.

"A bluff," I exclaimed. "He would lose everything himself. It's
suicide--"

"Not suicide," Georg said soberly. "Propaganda. Can't you see it? He
knows the Earth Council will make no move until the ultimatum time has
expired. Hours yet. And in those hours, he is working upon the publics
of the three worlds."

The announcer was silent again. Below us, in our tower, we heard a
footstep. The barrage had been lifted to admit someone, then thrown on
again. Measured footsteps were coming up our incline. We stood
motionless, breathless. A moment; then into the room came Wolfgar. He
did not speak. Advancing close to us as we stood transfixed, he jerked
an instrument from his belt. It whirred and hummed in his hand. The room
around us went black--a barrage of blackness and silence, with ourselves
and Wolfgar in a pale glow standing within it as in a cylinder. The
isolation-barrage. I had never been within one before, though upon
drastic occasion they were in official use.

Wolfgar said swiftly: "We cannot be seen or heard. I have been in charge
of the mirror observing you--I have thrown it out of use. The Princess
Maida--"

"You are--the friend?" Georg whispered tensely. Elza was trembling and I
put my arm about her.

Wolfgar's face lightened with a brief smile; then went intensely
serious. "Yes. A spy, trusted by Tarrano for years--but my heart is with
the Princess Maida. We must escape--all of us--now, or it will be too
late."

He stopped abruptly, and a look of consternation came to him. The black
silence enveloping us had without warning begun to crackle. The metal
cone in Wolfgar's hand glowed red with interference-heat--but he clung
to it, though it burned him. Sparks were snapping in the blackness
around us. Our isolation was dissolving. Someone--something--was
breaking it down, struggling to get at us!




CHAPTER IX

_Paralyzed!_


The isolation barrage which Wolfgar had flung around us was dissolving.
Someone--something--was in the room, breaking down the barrage,
struggling to get at us. We stood huddled together; Elza clinging to me,
Georg beside us, and Wolfgar, gripping the small cylinder which was
glowing red in his hand from intense heat.

Georg muttered something; the snapping sparks of the barrage blurred his
words. But I heard Wolfgar say swiftly:

"We're trapped! _You_, of all of us--you Georg Brende, must escape."

The rest of his words to Georg I did not catch. He was thrusting a
weapon into Georg's hands; and giving hurried advice and explanations.

"Princess Maida ... she ... in that other tower ... you, so much more
important than the rest of us...." Phrases I heard; but only phrases,
for in those few seconds I stood dumbly confused, fascinated by watching
the blackness in which we had enveloped ourselves now breaking into
lurid, angry sparks.

A distant corner of the room became visible; outlines of the wall-beams;
the growing glare of a wall-light in a tube over there. And through the
brightening gloom--the figure of a lone man standing. Tarrano!

I heard Georg mutter: "Jac! Make a show of fight! Hold him! But
careful--careful of Elza!"

Behind me there came an electrical flash; the pungent smell of burning
cloth. Georg was no longer beside us!

Elza was still clinging to me in fright. I shook her off. Wolfgar flung
his smoking, useless cylinder to the floor. The blackness at once sprang
into light; the sparks died. Tarrano was standing in the room, quietly,
before us. Standing with a grim, cynical smile, regarding us.

But only for an instant did he stand quiet. Across the room, creeping
for the balcony doorway, I was aware of the figure of Georg. Tarrano saw
him also; and with a swift gesture snapped back to his belt the
interference cylinder with which he had uncovered us; then plucked at
another weapon, gripped it to turn it upon Georg.

Everything was happening too swiftly for coherent thought. I leaped
toward Tarrano, with Wolfgar rushing beside me. Elza screamed. Tarrano's
hand was leaving his belt. I reached him; flung out my fist for his
face.

But in that instant the weapon in Tarrano's hand was brought upon me. My
paralyzed muscles made my arm and fist go wide. My blow missed him; he
stepped aside; and like a man drunk with baro-wine, I stumbled past him,
halted, swayed and struggled to keep my footing.

Wolfgar had felt it also; he was reeling near me, holding himself from
falling with difficulty. I was unarmed; but there were weapons hanging
from Wolfgar's belt. His numbed fingers were groping for them. But the
effort was too great. The blood, driven back from his arms, left them
powerless; they fell dangling to his sides.

A few seconds; but we had occupied Tarrano during them. Georg was
through the balcony doorway and beyond our sight. Elza was standing
motionless, too frightened to move. I felt myself growing numb, weighted
to the floor as though my feet had taken root. My arms were hanging like
wood; fingers tingling, then growing cold, dead to sensation. And a
numbness creeping up my legs; and spreading inward from my arms and
shoulders. In a few moments more, I knew the numbness would reach my
heart.

Tarrano had not moved, save that single step side-wise to avoid my
onslaught. As I stood there now with my face like fire and my brain
whirling with the blood congested in it, I heard his quiet voice:

"Do not fear, Lady Elza. This Jac Hallen--as I promised you--is quite
safe with me."

His gesture waved her aside, that she should not come within those
deadly vibrations he was flinging at us. And I saw his other hand lift a
tiny mouthpiece from his belt; heard his voice say into it: "Argo? Argo!
That Georg Brende----"

He stopped; a look of annoyance came over his face. Argo did not answer!
Dimly to my fading senses came the triumphant thought, the realization
that Argo outside, upon whom Tarrano depended to seize Georg--had
failed.

Action had come to Tarrano. He snapped off his weapon. Released from it,
Wolfgar and I wilted to the floor--lay inert. The returning blood in my
limbs made them prick as with a million needles. To my sight and
hearing, the room was whirling and roaring. I felt Tarrano bending
swiftly over me; felt the forcible insertion of a branched metal tube in
my nostrils; a hand over my mouth. I struggled to hold my
breath--failed. Then inhaled with a gasp, a pungent, sickening-sweet
gas. Roaring, clanging gongs sounded in my ears--roaring and clattering
louder, then fading into silence. A wild, tumbling phantasmagoria of
dreams. Then complete unconsciousness.




CHAPTER X

_Georg Escapes_


I come now to recount events at which I was not present, and the details
of which I did not learn until later. Fronted by Tarrano, in those few
seconds of confusion, Georg made his decision to escape even at the cost
of leaving Elza and me. He murmured his hurried good-bye. The moment had
arrived. He could see Tarrano dimly through the sparks. He leaped
backward, through that wall of electrical disturbance which surrounded
us. The sparks tore at him; burned his clothing and flesh; the shock of
it gripped his heart. But he went through; crept for the balcony. It was
dark out there. He would have rushed for Tarrano instead of the balcony,
but as he came through the sparks he had seen that the barrier
surrounding our tower was momentarily lifted. Argo had cut it off to
admit Tarrano a few moments before. He had not yet replaced
it--absorbed, doubtless, in watching in his finder what Tarrano was
doing with us. He must have seen Georg reach the balcony; and jumped
then to replace the barrier. But too late. Georg was over the balcony
rail with a leap. The insulated tubes were there--upright gleaming tubes
of metal extending downward to the platform below. Tubes smooth, and as
thick as a woman's waist.

Georg slid down them. The barrage, above him on the balcony, had been
replaced. He saw below him the figure of Argo come running out. A weapon
in each hand. The burning pencil-ray swung at Georg, but missed him as
he came down. Had it struck, it would have drilled him clean with its
tiny hole of fire. Then Argo must have realized that Georg should be
taken alive. He ran forward, swung up at Georg the paralyzing vibrations
which Tarrano at that instant was using upon Wolfgar and me.

Georg felt them. He was ten feet, perhaps, above the lower platform; and
as he felt the numbness strike him, he lost his hold upon the tube-pipe.
But he had presence of mind enough to kick himself outward with a last
effort. His body fell upon the onrushing Argo. They went down together.

Argo lay inert. The impact had knocked him senseless, and had struck his
weapon from his hand. Georg sat up, and for a moment chafed his
tingling, prickling arms and legs. He was bruised and shaken by the
fall, but uninjured.

Within our tower, Tarrano was still occupied with us. Georg leaped to
his feet. He left Argo lying there--ran over the spider-bridge; down a
spiral metal stairway, across another bridge, and came upon the small
park-like platform which stood at the bottom of the other tower. He had
passed within sight of a few pedestrians. One of them shouted at him;
another had tried mildly to stop him. A crowd on a distant terrace saw
him. A few of their personal flashes were turned his way. Murmurs arose.
Someone at the head of one of the escalators, in a panic pulled an
alarm-switch. It flared green into the sky, flashing its warning.

The interior-guards--seated at their instrument tables in the lower
rooms of the official buildings--had seen Georg in their finders. The
alarm was spreading. Lights were appearing everywhere.... The murmurs of
gathering people ... excited crowds ... an absurd woman leaning down
over a far-away parapet and screaming ... an ignorant, flustered
street-guard on a nearby upper terrace swinging his pencil-ray down at
Georg.... Fortunately it fell short.

For a moment Georg stood there, with the gathering tumult around
him--stood there gazing up at that small tower. The tower wherein the
Princess Maida was confined. It was dark and silent. Black rectangles of
doors and casements, all open--but barred by the glow of the electrical
barrage surrounding it.

Georg jerked from his belt the cylinder Wolfgar had given him. Metallic.
Short, squat and ugly, with a thick, insulated handle. He feared to use
it. Yet Wolfgar had assured him the Princess Maida was prepared. He
hesitated, with his finger upon the switch-button of the weapon. But he
knew that in a moment he would be too late. A searchlight from an aerial
mast high overhead swung down upon him, bathing him in its glare of
white.

His finger pressed the trigger. A soundless flash of purple enveloped
the tower. Sparks mounted into the air--a cloud of vivid electrical
sparks; but mingled with them in a moment were sparks also of burning
wood and fibre. Smoke began to roll upward; the purple flash was gone,
and dull red took its place. The hum and angry buzz of outraged
electricity was stilled. Flames appeared at all the tower casements--red
flames, then yellow with their greater heat.

The trim and interior of the tower was burning. The protons Georg had
flung at it with his weapon had broken the electrical barrage. The
interference heat had burned out the connections and fired everything
combustible within the tower. A terrific heat. It began to melt and burn
the _blenite_.[10] The upper portion of the tower walls began to
crumble. Huge blocks of stone were shifting, tottering; and they began
to fall through the glare of mounting flames and the thick black smoke.

[Footnote 10: A cement or mortar used in stone constructions--evidently
partially combustible.]

Georg had tossed away his now useless weapon--emptied of its charge. He
was crouching in the shadow of a parapet. The city was now in turmoil.
Alarm lights everywhere. The shrilling of sirens; roaring of megaphoned
commands ... women screaming hysterically....

A chaos, out of which, for a few moments, Georg knew no order could
come. But his heart was in his mouth. The Princess Maida, within that
burning building....

He had located the tiny postern gate at the bottom of the tower where
Wolfgar had told him she would appear. The barrage was gone; and in a
moment she came--a white figure appearing there amid the smoke that was
rolling out.

He rushed to her. A figure wholly encased in white _itan_[11] fabric
with head-mask, and tubes from its generator to supply her with air.
Wolfgar had smuggled the equipment in to her for just this emergency.
She stood awkwardly beside Georg--a grotesque figure hampered by the
heavy costume. Its crescent panes of _itanoid_ begoggled her.

[Footnote 11: A universal insulating fabric, as rubber insulates
electricity and asbestos bars heat.]

Behind him, Georg could hear people advancing. A guard picked them out
with a white flash. The mounting flames of the tower bathed everything
in red. A block of stone fell near at hand, crashing through the
metallic platform upon which they were standing. Broken, it sagged
beneath their feet.

Georg tore at the girl's head-piece, lifted it off. Her face was pale,
frightened, yet she seemed calm. Her glorious white hair tumbled down in
waves over her shoulders.

"Wolfgar--he----" She choked a little in the smoke that swirled around
them. Georg cut in: "He sent me--Georg Brende. Don't talk now--get this
off."

He pulled the heavy costume from her. She emerged from it--slim and
beautiful in the shimmering blue kirtle, with long grey stockings
beneath.

A spider incline was nearby. But a dozen guards were coming up it at a
run. With the girl's hand in his, Georg turned the other way. People
were closing in all around them--an excited crowd held back by the heat
of the burning tower, the smoke and the falling blocks of stone. Someone
swung a pencil-ray wildly. It seared Georg like a branding-iron on the
flesh of his arm as it swung past. He pulled Maida toward the head of an
escalator a dozen feet away. Its steps were coming upward from the plaza
at the ground level. Half way up, the first of an up-coming throng were
mounting it.

But Georg again turned aside. He found Maida quick of wit to catch his
plans; and agile of body to follow him. They climbed down the metal
frame-work of the escalator sides; down under it to where the inverted
steps were passing downward on the endless belts. Maida slid into one of
them, with Georg after her, his arms holding her in place.

They huddled there. No one had seen them enter. Smoothly the escalator
drew them downward. Above them in a moment the tramp of feet sounded
close above their heads as the crowd rushed upward.

They approached the bottom, slid out upon a swinging bridge which
chanced at the moment to be empty of people. Down it at a run; into the
palm-lined plaza at the bottom of the city.

Down here it was comparatively dim and silent. The alarm lights of the
plaza section had not yet come on; the excitement was concentrated upon
the burning tower above. The crowd, rushing up there, left the plaza
momentarily deserted. Georg and Maida crossed it at a run, scurried like
frightened rabbits through a tunnel arcade, down a lower cross-street,
and came at last unmolested to the outskirts of the city.

The buildings here were almost all at the ground level. Georg and Maida
ran onward, hardly noticed, for everyone was gazing upward at the
distant, burning tower. Georg was heading for where Wolfgar had an aero
secreted. A mile or more. They reached the spot--but the aero was not
there. They were in the open country now--Venia is small.
Plantations--an agricultural region. Most of the houses were deserted,
the occupants having fled into the city as refugees when threats and
orders came from Washington the day before. Georg and Maida came upon a
little conical house; it lay silent, heavy-shadowed in the starlight
with the glow of the city edging its side and circular roof. Beside it
was an incline with a helicopter standing up there on a private landing
stage.... Georg and Maida rushed up the incline.

A small helicopter; its dangling basket was barely large enough for
two--a basket with a tiny safety 'plane fastened to its outrigger.

In a moment Georg and the girl had boarded the helicopter. She was
silent; she had hardly said a word throughout it all.... The helicopter
mounted straight up; its whirling propellers above sent a rush of air
downward.

"These batteries," said Georg. "The guards in Venia can't stop us. An
aero--even if we had it--I doubt if we could get power for it. They've
shut off general power by now, I'm sure."

She nodded. "Yes--no doubt."

As they mounted upward, the city dwindled beneath them--dwindled to an
area of red and green and purple lights. It was silent up here in the
starlight; a calm, windless night--cloudless, save for a gray bank which
obscured the moon.

Ten thousand feet up. Then fifteen. The city was a tiny patch of blended
colors. Light rockets occasionally mounted now. But their glare fell
short. Georg's mind was busy with his plans. Had the helicopter been
seen? It seemed not. No rocket-light had reached it; and there was no
sign of pursuit from below.

Maida crouched beside him. He felt her hand timidly upon his arm; felt
her shy, sidelong glance upon him. And suddenly he was conscious of her
beauty. His heart leaped, and as he turned to her, she smiled--a smile
of eager trust which lighted her face like a torch of faith in the spire
of a house of worship.

"You are planning?" she said. "You know what it is we must do?"

He said: "I think so. The _volan_[12] out there is large enough for two.
You'll trust yourself to it with me? You're not afraid, are you?"

[Footnote 12: A small winged board without power, used for emergency
descents by volplaning down from disabled aeros.]

"Oh, no," she said. "What you say we must do, we will do."

"We must go higher, Maida. Then, you see...."

He told her his plans. And mounting up there into the silent canopy of
stars, his fingers wound themselves into the soft strands of her hair
which lay upon him; and his heart beat fast with the nearness of
her.... Told her his plans, and she acquiesced.

Twenty thousand feet. The cold was upon them. Shivering himself, he
wrapped her in a fur which the basket contained. At 25,000, they took to
the _vol plan_. It was a padded board a dozen feet long and half as
wide. Released, it shot downward; a hundred feet or more, with the
heavens whirling soundlessly. Then Georg got the wings open; the descent
was checked; the stars righted themselves above, and once again the
earth was beneath.

They had strapped themselves to the board, and now Georg undid the
thongs. Together they lay prone, side by side, with the narrow,
double-banked wings beneath the line of their shoulders, and the
rudder-tail behind them. Flexible 'planes and tail, responding to
Georg's grip on the controls.

Fluttering, uncertain at first, like a huge bird of quivering wings,
they began their incline descent. A spiral, then Georg opened it to a
straight glide northward--rushing downward and onward through the
starlight, in a wind of their own making which fluttered the light
fabric of Maida's robe and tossed her waves of hair about her.

A long, silent glide, with only the rush of wind. It seemed hours, while
the girl did not speak and Georg anxiously searched the sky ahead.
Underneath them, the dark forests were slipping past; but inexorably
coming upward. They were down to 5,000 feet; then Georg saw at last what
he had hoped, prayed for, but almost despaired of. A beam of light to
the northward--the spreading beam of an oncoming patrol. It was high
overhead; but it came forward fast. A sweeping, keenly searching beam,
and finally it struck them. Clung to them.

And presently the big patrol vessel was almost above them. It hung
