she put the totalized and concentrated power of her whole body behind
the knee she drove into his groin.

That ended it. The big man could very well have been dying on his feet.
To make sure, however--or to keep the girl from knowing that she had
killed a man?--Deston and Jones each put a bullet through the falling
head before it struck the rug.

Both girls flung themselves, sobbing, into their husband's arms.

The whole battle had lasted only a few seconds. Adams, although he had
seen almost everything, had been concentrating so deeply that it took
those few seconds for him actually to realize what was going on. He got
up, felt[2] of Newman's head, then looked casually at the three other
bodies.

    [2] Transcriber's note: As in original.

"Oh, I _killed_ him, Carl!" Barbara sobbed, convulsively. "And the worst
of it is, I really _meant_ to! I _never_ did anything like that before
in my whole life!"

"You didn't kill him, Barbara," Adams said.

"Huh?" She raised her head from Deston's shoulder; the contrast between
her streaming eyes and the relief dawning over her whole face was almost
funny. "Why, I did the foulest things possible, and as hard as I
possibly could. I'm _sure_ I killed him."

"By no means, my dear. Judo techniques, however skillfully and
powerfully applied, do not and can not kill instantly. Bullets through
the brain do. I will photograph the cadavers, of course, and perform the
customary post-mortem examinations for the record; but I know already
what the findings will be. These four men died instantly of gunshot
wounds."

       *       *       *       *       *

With the four gangsters gone, life aboardship settled down quickly into
a routine. That routine, however, was in no sense dull. The officers had
plenty to do; operating the whole ship and rebuilding the mechanisms
that were operating on jury rigging or on straight "bread-board"
hookups. And in their "spare" time they enjoyed themselves tremendously
in becoming better and better acquainted with their wives. For Bernice
and Jones, like Barbara and Deston, had for each other an infinite
number of endless vistas of personality; the exploration of which was
sheerest delight.

The girls--each of whom became joyously pregnant as soon as she
could--kept house and helped their husbands whenever need or opportunity
arose. Their biggest chore, however, was to see to it that Adams got
sleep, food, and exercise. For, if left to his own devices, he would
never have exercised at all, would have grabbed a bite now and then, and
would have slept only when he could no longer stay awake.

"Uncle Andy, why don't you _use_ that Big Brain of yours?" Barbara
snapped at him one day. "For a man that's actually as smart as you are,
I swear you've got the least sense of anybody I know!"

"But it's necessary, my dear child," Adams explained, unmoved. "This
material is new. There are many extremely difficult problems involved,
and I have less than a year to work on them. Less than _one year_; and
it is a task for a team of specialists and all the resources of a
research center."

To the officers, however, Adams went into more detail. "Considering the
enormous amounts of supplies carried; the scope, quantity, and quality
of the safety devices employed; it is improbable that we are the first
survivors of a subspace catastrophe to set course for a planet."

After some argument, the officers agreed.

[Illustration]

"While I cannot as yet detect it, classify it, or evaluate it, we are
carrying an extremely heavy charge of an unknown nature; the residuum of
a field of force which is possibly more or less analogous to the
electromagnetic field. This residuum either is or is not dischargeable
to an object of planetary mass; and I'm virtually certain that it is.
The discharge may be anything from an imperceptible flow up to one of
such violence as to volatilize the craft carrying it. From the facts:
One, that in the absence of that field the subspace radio will function
normally; and Two, that no subspace-radio messages have ever been
received from survivors; the conclusion seems inescapable that the
discharge of this unknown field is in fact of extreme violence."

"Good God!" Deston exclaimed. "Oh ... _that_ was what you meant by
'fantastic precautions,' back there?"

"Precisely."

"But what can we _do_ about it?"

"I don't know. I ... simply ... do ... not ... know." Adams lost himself
in thought for over a minute. "This is all _so_ new ... I know _so_
little ... and am working with such _pitifully_ inadequate
instrumentation--However, we have months of time yet, and if I am unable
to arrive at a conclusion before arrival--I don't mean a rigorous
analysis, of course, but merely a stop-gap, empirical, pragmatic
solution--we will simply remain in orbit around that sun until I do."


IV.

The _Procyon_ bored on through space, at one unchanging gravity of
acceleration. It may not seem, at first glance, that one gravity would
result in any very high velocity; but when it is maintained steadily for
days and weeks and months, it builds up to a very respectable speed. Nor
was there any question of power, for the _Procyon_'s atomics did not
drive the ship, but merely energized the "Chaytors"--the Chaytor Effect
engines that tapped the energy of the expanding universe itself.

Thus, in less than six months, the _Procyon_ had attained a velocity
almost half that of light. At the estimated mid-point of the flight the
spaceship, still at one gravity of drive, was turned end-for-end; so
that for the ensuing five-and-a-fraction months she would be slowing
down.

A few weeks after the turnover, Adams seemed to have more time. At
least, he devoted more time to the expectant mothers, even to the point
of supervising Deston and Jones in the construction of a weirdly-wired
device by means of which he studied and photographed the unborn child
each woman bore. He said nothing, however, until Barbara made him talk.

"Listen, you egregious clam," she said, firmly, "I know darn well I've
been pregnant for at _least_ seven months, and I ought to be twice this
big. Our clock isn't _that_ far off; Carl said that by wave lengths or
something it's only about three per cent fast. And you've been
pussyfooting and hem-hawing around all this time. Now, Uncle Andy, I
want the _truth_. _Are_ we in for a lot of trouble?"

"Trouble? Of course not. _Certainly_ not. No trouble at all, my dear.
Why, you've seen the pictures--here, look at them again ... see?
Absolutely normal fetus--yours, too, Bernice. _Perfect_! No
malformations of any kind."

"Yes, but for what _age_?" Bernice asked, pointedly. "Four months, say?
I see, I was exposed to a course in embryology myself, once."

"But _that's_ the interesting part of it!" Adams enthused. "Fascinating!
And, indubitably, supremely important. In fact, it may point out the key
datum underlying the solution of our entire problem. If this zeta field
is causing this seemingly peculiar biological effect, that gives us a
tremendously powerful new tool, for certain time vectors in the
generalized matrix become parameters. Thus, certain determinants,
notably the all-important delta-prime-sub-mu, become manipulable by ...
but you aren't _listening_!"

"I'm listening, pops, but nothing is coming through. But thanks much,
anyway. I feel a lot better, knowing I'm not going to give birth to a
monster. Or _are_ you sure, really?"

"Of _course_ I'm sure!" Adams snapped, testily, and Barbara led Deston
aside.

"Have you got the _slightest_ idea of what he was talking about?" she
asked.

"Just the slightest, if any. Either that time is relative--no, that's so
elementary he wouldn't mention it. Maybe he's figured out a _variable_
time of some kind or other. Anyway, you girls' slowness in producing has
given the old boy a big lift, and I'm mighty glad of it."

"But aren't you _worried_, sweetheart? Not even the least little bit?"

"Of course not," and Deston very evidently meant just that.

"I am. I can't help but be. Why aren't you?"

"Because Doc isn't, and he knows his stuff, believe me. He can't lie any
better than a three-year-old, and he's _sure_ that all four of you are
just as safe as though you were in God's lefthand hip pocket."

"Oh--that's right. I never thought of it that way. So I _don't_ have
anything to worry about, do I?" She lifted her lips to be kissed; and
the kiss was long and sweet.

       *       *       *       *       *

Time flew past until, one day a couple of weeks short of arrival, Adams
rushed up to Deston and Jones. "I have it!" he shouted, and began to
spout a torrent of higher--very _much_ higher--mathematics.

"Hold it, Doc!" Deston held up an expostulatory hand. "I read you zero
and ten. Can't you delouse your signal? Whittle the stuff down to our
size?"

"W-e-l-l-," the scientist looked hurt, but did consent to forego the
high math. "The discharge _is_ catastrophic; in energy equivalent
something of the order of magnitude of ten thousand discharges of
lightning. And, unfortunately, I do _not_ know what it is. It is
virtually certain, however, that we will be able to dissipate it in
successive decrements by the use of long, thin leads extending downward
toward a high point of the planet."

"Wire, you mean? What kind?"

"The material is not important except in that it should have sufficient
tensile strength to support as many miles as possible of its own
length."

"We've got dozens of coils of hook-up wire," Deston said, "but not too
many _miles_ and it's soft stuff."

"_Graham_ wire!" Jones snapped his finger.

"Of course," Deston agreed. "Hundreds of miles of it. Float the senser
down on a Hotchkiss----"

"Tear-out." Jones objected.

