premeditation.

On impulse he suddenly turned, crossed the room and opened the
connecting door to the bedroom. He stopped on the threshold and a
sob forced its way to his lips.

There was no bedroom. Where his stolid four poster and dresser
had been there was greyish nothingness.

Like an automaton he turned again and paced to the hall door.
Here, too, he found what he had expected. There was no hall, no
familiar hat rack and umbrella stand.

Nothing....

Weakly Mr. Chambers moved back to his chair in the corner.

"So here I am," he said, half aloud.

So there he was. Embattled in the last corner of the world that
was left to him.

Perhaps there were other men like him, he thought. Men who stood
at bay against the emptiness that marked the transition from one
dimension to another. Men who had lived close to the things they
loved, who had endowed those things with such substantial form by
power of mind alone that they now stood out alone against the
power of some greater mind.

The street was gone. The rest of his house was gone. This room
still retained its form.

This room, he knew, would stay the longest. And when the rest of
the room was gone, this corner with his favorite chair would
remain. For this was the spot where he had lived for twenty
years. The bedroom was for sleeping, the kitchen for eating. This
room was for living. This was his last stand.

These were the walls and floors and prints and lamps that had
soaked up his will to make them walls and prints and lamps.

He looked out the window into a blank world. His neighbors'
houses already were gone. They had not lived with them as he had
lived with this room. Their interests had been divided, thinly
spread; their thoughts had not been concentrated as his upon an
area four blocks by three, or a room fourteen by twelve.

       *       *       *       *       *

Staring through the window, he saw it again. The same vision he
had looked upon before and yet different in an indescribable way.
There was the city illumined in the sky. There were the
elliptical towers and turrets, the cube-shaped domes and
battlements. He could see with stereoscopic clarity the aerial
bridges, the gleaming avenues sweeping on into infinitude. The
vision was nearer this time, but the depth and proportion had
changed ... as if he were viewing it from two concentric angles
at the same time.

And the face ... the face of magnitude ... of power of cosmic
craft and evil....

Mr. Chambers turned his eyes back into the room. The clock was
ticking slowly, steadily. The greyness was stealing into the
room.

The table and radio were the first to go. They simply faded away
and with them went one corner of the room.

And then the elephant ash tray.

"Oh, well," said Mr. Chambers, "I never did like that very well."

Now as he sat there it didn't seem queer to be without the table
or the radio. It was as if it were something quite normal.
Something one could expect to happen.

Perhaps, if he thought hard enough, he could bring them back.

But, after all, what was the use? One man, alone, could not stand
off the irresistible march of nothingness. One man, all alone,
simply couldn't do it.

He wondered what the elephant ash tray looked like in that other
dimension. It certainly wouldn't be an elephant ash tray nor
would the radio be a radio, for perhaps they didn't have ash
trays or radios or elephants in the invading dimension.

He wondered, as a matter of fact, what he himself would look like
when he finally slipped into the unknown. For he was matter, too,
just as the ash tray and radio were matter.

He wondered if he would retain his individuality ... if he still
would be a person. Or would he merely be a thing?

There was one answer to all of that. He simply didn't know.

Nothingness advanced upon him, ate its way across the room,
stalking him as he sat in the chair underneath the lamp. And he
waited for it.

The room, or what was left of it, plunged into dreadful silence.

Mr. Chambers started. The clock had stopped. Funny ... the first
time in twenty years.

He leaped from his chair and then sat down again.

The clock hadn't stopped.

It wasn't there.

There was a tingling sensation in his feet.

       *       *       *       *       *





