that death never occurs from these causes. Such cases, unless far more
numerous than I imagine them, can only be regarded as exceptions to the
general rule; and, consequently, do not lessen its authority, there
being no rule without an exception.

Some practitioners, with whom I have conversed on the subject, though
willing to allow that protracted suckling, by depraving the milk, may be
the means of occasioning Meningitis in infants during or shortly after
the time they are supplied with this improper food, yet could not
conceive how it can act as a cause of that disease at some future
period; I do not myself, while attempting to account for it, discover
any pathological difficulty.

In these cases it is very probable, that although the protracted
suckling was not sufficient to produce actual Meningitis at its
conclusion, yet that it so weakened the system in general, and the brain
in particular, as to render the latter especially predisposed to
inflammatory action; and that we have reason to suppose this not only
possible, but probable, from analogy, cannot be denied, since it is
known that scrofulous children, in whom there is great laxity and
debility of habit, are inordinately liable to be affected with
Hydrocephalus, or Water in the Brain.

'Dr. Perceval observes, that of twenty-two cases of which he kept notes,
_eleven were certainly strumous children_, and _four were probably so_.'
'From my own observations,' remarks Dr. Cheyne, 'I should think this
proportion a very moderate one. When a whole family is swept away by
Hydrocephalus, I suspect _it is intimately connected with this strumous
taint_.' The testimony of Sauvages may also be adduced, who says, 'Novi
familiam cujus infantes circa sextum aetatis annum omnes periere ex hoc
morbo, _Scrofula huic effusioni ansam praebente_.' The brain, in
consequence of this local debility, may become affected from causes
which otherwise would, perhaps, have produced no injurious consequences
whatever; and hence it is, that when labouring under other diseases, and
especially Hooping-cough, those children who have been suckled too long
appear so very liable to have the head secondarily affected. It is
worthy of notice, that among the cases which have been detailed in the
foregoing pages, were fourteen in whom affection of the head supervened
during the progress of other diseases, and in ten of them the disease
was Hooping-cough.

The treatment of Meningitis arising from protracted suckling will not
differ from what is proper when it has been produced by other causes;
except that the depletory measures should not be carried to so great an
extent, as it must be remembered that the disease is existing in
constitutions _already debilitated_.

It should consist generally in the application of leeches to the
temples--cold lotions to the head--purgatives, and blisters placed
behind the ears, the discharge from which is to be kept up by means of
irritating dressings--these afford the surest chance of subduing the
malady, and in many instances, if employed sufficiently early, will have
the desired effect. It is, of course, almost superfluous to observe,
that weaning, if the child be above nine months old, must be
immediately enforced; or, if considerably younger, the diseased or
debilitated nurse ought to be exchanged for one who has a supply of
healthy milk of a corresponding age. If such cannot be procured, the
child must be brought up by hand; for, so long as it is allowed to
imbibe the noxious milk, there is little hope, in my mind, of the
medical treatment being of any great service; while on the contrary, it
is encouraging to know that many infants previously manifesting symptoms
of incipient Meningitis have completely recovered _soon after they were
weaned_[M].

When my attention first became directed to the subject, I was chiefly
struck with the ill effects resulting to the child from _protracted_
lactation, and hence supposed that cases of disease from suckling, when
continued for only a moderate period, were rarely if ever met with. More
enlarged experience, however, has now convinced me, that not only are
ill effects occasioned in children when lactation is protracted to a
very unusual extent, but that they occur sometimes, when its duration
has been merely a few months beyond what I conceive is right. Besides
which, we shall find that when from any cause whatever the nurse's milk
becomes impoverished and deteriorated, even if this take place at an
early period after delivery, the injurious effects already referred to
may be produced in the child: for improper food, whether it be bad milk
or any other inappropriate article of diet, is always calculated to
derange the functions of the stomach, bowels, and other chylopoietic
viscera, and in consequence to occasion disease.

It matters not whether the mother be originally unhealthy, and thus her
milk possess bad qualities; or whether from accidental circumstances, or
her continuing to give suck too long it becomes so: in either case the
same effect, namely, _deteriorated milk_, is produced, with the
concomitant evils to which I have alluded. This view of the matter is
corroborated by Case LII., in which true Meningitis attacked a child,
aged only nine months, who, therefore, was not suckled _too long_,--but
then the nurse of that child had been delivered _twenty-one months_,
having suckled another infant previously:--hence we may reasonably
conclude that her milk being from the beginning deteriorated, and
unadapted to the age of the child, the ill effects in this case were
produced at a much earlier period than usual.

It will be observed that I have only given _one_ instance of this latter
description; but, on considering how very rare it must be to find any
mother capable of abandoning her newly-born infant to the breast of a
woman who has already suckled another child one year, any surprise that
might be felt at the circumstance will, I am sure, immediately cease. It
must also be noticed that only among the lowest grades of society do we
find women so long after delivery performing the office of wet-nurse at
all, and those who entrust their infants to the latter are often so
peculiarly situated as to feel no interest whatever in the preservation
of their offspring: indeed I cannot but suspect that, among such,
criminal motives frequently lead to the adoption of the unnatural and
baneful practice in question.

I do not recollect to have seen a case of Meningitis from suckling
except when this process had been _protracted_, either as respects the
child or the nurse; though I by no means doubt the possibility of its
occurrence under other circumstances: but I have met with numerous
instances of other diseases produced by the palpable deterioration of
the mother's or nurse's milk at various periods after delivery; in by
far the greater number, however, of such cases, lactation had been
continued for an unusual length of time.

Vomiting, griping, and diarrh[oe]a, are so common among infants, and
arise in general from causes apparently so evident, that, unless severe
or of long duration, they rarely form the subject of minute inquiry.
Hence these complaints are, perhaps, not so often attributed to
deteriorated milk as they ought to be, although the fact of their
occasionally originating from a morbid condition of this fluid, (and
therefore from protracted lactation as one cause of the latter effect,)
is too well established to be questioned. Dr. Underwood observes, 'has
not every Physician of experience seen infants frequently thrown into
tormina immediately after coming from the _breast of an unhealthy
mother, or one who has but little milk_?'[N] and Mr. Burns states, that
if the usual periodical appearance should return, 'the milk is liable to
disagree with the child, and produce vomiting or purging;' while Dr.
Hamilton expressly mentions that diarrh[oe]a is 'not unfrequently
_occasioned by the depraved quality of the nurse's milk_.'

The two former authors merely testify to the fact of diseases being
produced by the milk, while the latter more explicitly mentions the
cause from which they proceed.

Debility, Tabes Mesenterica, and Scrofula, may also be traced to the
same origin, as every practitioner of experience must have repeatedly
observed: so may that intractable disease, termed Rickets; and it is
worthy of notice, that among the worst instances of this malady I have
seen, were two sisters, _who had been suckled for a very unusual
period_. Neither do I doubt the probability of Epilepsy being similarly
occasioned; and although, I must candidly own, I cannot produce numerous
cases in proof of the correctness of such hypothesis, yet I recollect
that of a girl affected with this complaint, respecting whom the mother
stated (and I recorded the fact at the time) that she had been '_suckled
for two years_;' and, to use her own expression, had 'never been well
since.'[O]

Convulsions arising from protracted suckling, or simply from the nurse's
milk becoming deteriorated at any period, are very common, and I have
kept notes of many such cases that have occurred in the course of my own
practice; which, however, I abstain from here inserting, being anxious
to prevent the present publication from swelling into a volume. Indeed,
the occurrence of convulsions from this cause (diseased milk) has been
mentioned by several of the best authors. Mr. North, in particular,
(whose excellent work on Convulsions should be in the hands of every
practitioner) observes--'It cannot be doubted that children suffer, that
their health is destroyed, and the foundation laid for convulsive
diseases, by _sucking unhealthy nurses_.' 'A predisposition to
convulsive affections in children may be originally produced in
consequence of their being suckled by a nurse addicted to the frequent
use of spirituous liquors. In several instances I have known children
rapidly recover their health when the nurse was changed, who had
exhibited most of the premonitory symptoms of convulsions while they
were suckled by a woman who indulged in the common vice of
gin-drinking.' And Mr. Burns also makes the following remark--'Violent
passions of the mind affect the milk still more;--it often becomes thin
and yellowish, and _causes_ colic, or even _fits_.' It is needless,
however, to say more on this topic, since it is one which no longer
admits of discussion.

The reader may now, perhaps, expect that I shall introduce a series of
practical deductions from the foregoing facts and observations; but
such is not my object upon the present occasion. I merely wish to call
the attention of practitioners and the public to the subject of these
pages, and shall thus discharge, as I conceive, an imperative duty to
society. Having mentioned what I am induced to consider a frequent cause
of inflammation of the investing membranes of the brain in children, my
undertaking is completed. The Profession does not require, and the
public would not be benefited, by the addition of lengthened
therapeutical rules; for I am convinced, there is not a greater
imposition to be found than the doctrine that non-medical persons can
treat diseases with success by means of popular systems of medicine,
'_practical_' treatises, &c. Such books have often done irreparable
mischief--certainly much more harm than good; and so far from injuring
the profits of medical practitioners (as some appear to suppose), have
