mind at all. It went down as smoothly as milk.

Boyd glanced at it momentarily as Malone screwed the top back on.

"No," Malone said in answer to the unspoken question. "You're
driving." Then he settled back again and tipped his hat forward.

He didn't sleep a wink. He was perfectly sure of that. But it wasn't
over two seconds later that Boyd said: "We're here, Ken. Wake up."

"Whadyamean, wakeup," Malone said. "I wasn't asleep." He thumbed his
hat back and sat up rapidly. "Where's 'here?'"

"Bayview Neuropsychiatric Hospital," Boyd said. "This is where Dr.
Harman works, you know."

"No," Malone said. "As a matter of fact, I don't know. You didn't tell
me--remember? And who is Dr. Harman, anyhow?"

The car was moving up a long, curving driveway toward a large, lawn-
surrounded building. Boyd spoke without looking away from the road.

"Well," he said, "this Dr. Wilson Harman is the man who phoned us
yesterday. One of my field agents was out here asking around about
imbeciles and so on. Found nothing, by the way. And then this Dr.
Harman called, later. Said he had someone here I might be interested
in. So I came on out myself for a look, yesterday afternoon--after
all, we had instructions to follow up every possible lead."

"I know," Malone said. "I wrote them."

"Oh," Boyd said. "Sure. Well, anyhow, I talked to this dame. Lady."

"And?"

"And I talked to her," Boyd said. "I'm not entirely sure of anything
myself. But--well, hell. You take a look at her."

He pulled the car up to a parking space, slid nonchalantly into a slot
marked _Reserved_--_Executive Director Sutton_, and slid out from
under the wheel while Malone got out the other side.

They marched up the broad steps, through the doorway and into the
glass-fronted office of the receptionist.

Boyd showed her his little golden badge, and got an appropriate gasp.
"FBI," he said. "Dr. Harman's expecting us."

The wait wasn't over fifteen seconds. Boyd and Malone marched down the
hall and around a couple of corners, and came to the doctor's office.
The door was opaqued glass with nothing but a room number stenciled
on it. Without ceremony, Boyd pushed the door open. Malone followed
him inside.

The office was small but sunny. Dr. Wilson Harman sat behind a blond-
wood desk, a little man with crew-cut blond hair and rimless
eyeglasses, who looked about thirty-two and couldn't possibly, Malone
thought, have been anywhere near that young. On a second look, Malone
noticed a better age indication in the eyes and forehead, and revised
his first guess upward between ten and fifteen years.

"Come in, gentlemen," Dr. Harman called. His voice was that rarity, a
really loud high tenor.

"Dr. Harman," Boyd said, "this is my superior, Mr. Malone. We'd like
to have a talk with Miss Thompson, if we might."

"I anticipated that, sir," Dr. Harman said. "Miss Thompson is in the
next room. Have you explained to Mr. Malone that--"

"I haven't explained a thing," Boyd said quickly, and added in what
was obviously intended to be a casual tone: "Mr. Malone wants to get a
picture of Miss Thompson directly--without any preconceptions."

"I see," Dr. Harman said. "Very well, gentlemen. Through this door."

He opened the door in the right-hand wall of the room, and Malone took
one look. It was a long, long look. Standing framed in the doorway,
dressed in the starched white of a nurse's uniform, was the most
beautiful blonde he had ever seen.

She had curves. She definitely had curves. As a matter of fact, Malone
didn't really think he had ever seen curves before. These were
something new and different and truly three-dimensional. But it wasn't
the curves, or the long straight lines of her legs, or the quiet
beauty of her face, that made her so special. After all, Malone had
seen legs and bodies and faces before.

At least, he thought he had. Offhand, he couldn't remember where.
Looking at the girl, Malone was ready to write brand-new definitions
for every anatomical term. Even a term like "hands." Malone had never
seen anything especially arousing in the human hand before--anyway,
not when the hand was just lying around, so to speak, attached to its
wrist but not doing anything in particular. But these hands, long,
slender and tapering, white and cool-looking....

And yet, it wasn't just the sheer physical beauty of the girl. She had
something else, something more and something different. _(Something
borrowed_, Malone thought in a semidelirious haze, _and something
blue.)_ Personality? Character? Soul?

Whatever it was, Malone decided, this girl had it. She had enough of
it to supply the entire human race, and any others that might exist in
the Universe. Malone smiled at the girl and she smiled back.

After seeing the smile, Malone wasn't sure he could still walk evenly.
Somehow, though, he managed to go over to her and extend his hand. The
notion that a telepath would turn out to be this mind-searing Epitome
had never crossed his mind, but now, somehow, it seemed perfectly
fitting and proper.

"Good morning, Miss Thompson," he said in what he hoped was a winning
voice.

The smile disappeared. It was like the sun going out.

The vision appeared to be troubled. Malone was about to volunteer his
help--if necessary, for the next seventy years--when she spoke.

"I'm not Miss Thompson," she said.

"This is one of our nurses," Dr. Harman put in. "Miss Wilson, Mr.
Malone. And Mr. Boyd. Miss Thompson, gentlemen, is over there."

Malone turned.

There, in a corner of the room, an old lady sat. She was a small old
lady, with apple-red cheeks and twinkling eyes. She held some knitting
in her hands, and she smiled up at the FBI men as if they were her
grandsons come for tea and cookies, of a Sunday afternoon.

She had snow-white hair that shone like a crown around her old head in
the lights of the room. Malone blinked at her. She didn't disappear.

"You're Miss Thompson?" he said.

She smiled sweetly. "Oh, my, no," she said.

There was a long silence. Malone looked at her. Then he looked at the
unbelievably beautiful Miss Wilson. Then he looked at Dr. Harman. And,
at last, he looked at Boyd.

"All right," he said. "I get it. _You're_ Miss Thompson."

"Now, wait a minute, Malone," Boyd began.

"Wait a minute?" Malone said. "There are four people here, not
counting me. I know I'm not Miss Thompson. I never was, not even as a
child. And Dr. Harman isn't, and Miss Wilson isn't, and Whistler's
Great-Grandmother isn't, either. So you must be. Unless she isn't
here. Or unless she's invisible. Or unless I'm crazy."

"It isn't _you_, Malone," Boyd said. "What isn't me?"

"That's crazy," Boyd said.

"Okay," Malone said. "I'm not crazy. Then will somebody please tell
me--"

The little old lady cleared her throat. A silence fell. When it was
complete she spoke, and her voice was as sweet and kindly as anything
Malone had ever heard.

"You may call me Miss Thompson," she said. "For the present, at any
rate. They all do here. It's a pseudonym I have to use."

"A pseudonym?" Malone said.

"You see, Mr. Malone," Miss Wilson began.

Malone stopped her. "Don't talk," he said. "I have to concentrate and
if you talk I can barely think." He took off his hat suddenly, and
began twisting the brim in his hands. "You understand, don't you?"

The trace of a smile appeared on her face. "I think I do," she said.

"Now," Malone said. "You're Miss Thompson, but not really, because you
have to use a pseudonym." He blinked at the little old lady. "Why?"

"Well," she said, "otherwise people would find out about my little
secret."

"Your little secret," Malone said.

"That's right," the little old lady said. "I'm immortal, you see."

Malone said: "Oh." Then he kept quiet for a long time. It didn't seem
to him that anyone in the room was breathing.

He said: "Oh," again, but it didn't sound any better than it had the
first time. He tried another phrase. "You're immortal," he said.

"That's right," the little old lady agreed sweetly.

There was only one other question to ask, and Malone set his teeth
grimly and asked it. It came out just a trifle indistinct, but the
little old lady nodded.

"My real name?" she said. "Elizabeth. Elizabeth Tudor, of course. I
used to be Queen."

"Of England," Malone said faintly. "Malone, look--" Boyd began.

"Let me get it all at once," Malone told him. "I'm strong. I can take
it." He twisted his hat again and turned back to the little old lady.

"You're immortal, and you're not really Miss Thompson, but Queen
Elizabeth I?" he said slowly.

"That's right," she said. "How clever of you. Of course, after little
Jimmy--cousin Mary's boy, I mean--said I was dead and claimed the
Throne, I decided to change my name and all. And that's what I did.
But I am Elizabeth Regina." She smiled, and her eyes twinkled merrily.
Malone stared at her for a long minute.

_Burris_, he thought, _is going to love this._

"Oh, I'm so glad," the little old lady said. "Do your really think he
will? Because I'm sure I'll like your Mr. Burris, too. All of you FBI
men are so charming. Just like poor, poor Essex."

Well, Malone told himself, that was that. He'd found himself a
telepath.

And she wasn't an imbecile.

Oh, no. That would have been simple.

Instead, she was battier than a cathedral spire.

                              * * * * *

The long silence was broken by the voice of Miss Wilson.

"Mr. Malone," she said. "You've been thinking." She stopped. "I mean,
you've been so quiet."

"I like being quiet," Malone said patiently. "Besides--" He stopped
and turned to the little old lady. _Can you really read my mind?_ he
thought deliberately. After a second he added: ... _your Majesty?_

"How sweet of you, Mr. Malone," she said. "Nobody's called me that for
centuries. But of course I can. Although it's not reading, really.
After all, that would be like asking if I can read your voice. Of
course I can, Mr. Malone."

"That does it," Malone said. "I'm not a hard man to convince. And when
I see the truth, I'm the first one to admit it, even if it makes me
look like a nut." He turned back to the little old lady. "Begging your
pardon," he said.

"Oh, my," the little old lady said. "I really don't mind at all.
Sticks and stones, you know, can break my bones. But being called
nuts, Mr. Malone, can never hurt me. After all, it's been so many
years--so many hundreds of years--"

"Sure," Malone said easily.

Boyd broke in. "Listen, Malone," he said. "Do you mind telling me what
the hell is going on?"

"It's very simple," Malone said. "Miss Thompson here--pardon me; I
mean Queen Elizabeth I--really is a telepath. That's all. I think I
want to lie down somewhere until it goes away."

"Until what goes away?" Miss Wilson said.

Malone stared at her almost without seeing her, if not quite.
"Everything," he said. He closed his eyes.

"My goodness," the little old lady said after a second. "Everything's
so confused. Poor Mr. Malone is terribly shaken up by everything." She
stood up, still holding her knitting, and went across the room. Before
the astonished eyes of the doctor and nurse, and Tom Boyd, she patted
the FBI agent on the shoulder. "There, there, Mr. Malone," she said.
"It will all be perfectly all right. You'll see." Then she returned to
her seat.

Malone opened his eyes. "My God," he said. He closed them again but
they flew open as if of their own accord. He turned to Dr. Harman.
"You called up Boyd here," he said, "and told him that--er--Miss
Thompson was a telepath. How'd you know?"

"It's all right," the little old lady put in from her chair. "I don't
mind your calling me Miss Thompson, not right now, anyhow."

"Thanks," Malone said faintly.

Dr. Harman was blinking in a kind of befuddled astonishment. "You mean
she really _is_ a--" He stopped and brought his tenor voice to a
squeaking halt, regained his professional poise, and began again. "I'd
rather not discuss the patient in her presence, Mr. Malone," he said.
"If you'll just come into my office--"

"Oh, _bosh_, Dr. Harman," the little old lady said primly. "I do wish
you'd give your own Queen credit for some ability. Goodness knows you
think _you're_ smart enough."

"Now, now, Miss Thompson," he said in what was obviously his best
Grade A Choice Government Inspected couchside manner. "Don't--"

"--upset yourself," she finished for him. "Now, really, Doctor. I know
what you're going to tell them."

"But Miss Thompson, I--"

"You didn't honestly think I _was_ a telepath," the little old lady
said. "Heavens, we know that. And you're going to tell them how I used
to say I could read minds--oh, years and years ago. And because of
that you thought it might be worthwhile to tell the FBI about me--
