rattled me, and I got into a p-panic."

"I see," said Jordan, frustrated, not really seeing at all. He sat back
and thought for a moment. "Let me put it this way. Why do you stutter?"

Hall smiled a wry smile. "Th-that used to be a m-military secret," he
said. "It's our one weakness--the one Achilles heel in a m-machine that
was meant to be invulnerable."

He struggled to a sitting position. "You see, we were m-made as
s-soldiers and had to have a certain loyalty to the country that m-made
us. Only living things are loyal--machines are not. We had to think like
human beings."

Jordan's brows contracted as he tried to understand the robot.

"You mean you have a transplanted human brain?" he asked incredulously.

"In a way," Hall said. "Our b-brains are permallium strips on which the
mind of some human donor was m-magnetically imprinted. My mind was
copied f-from a man who stuttered and who got panicky when the going got
rough, and who couldn't kill a child no matter what was at s-stake."

Jordan felt physically ill. Hall was human and he was immortal. And
according to galactic decree, he, like his fellows, was to be manacled
in permallium and fixed in a great block of cement, and that block was
to be dropped into the deep silent depths of the Grismet ocean, to be
slowly covered by the blue sediment that gradually filters down through
the miles of ocean water to stay immobile and blind for countless
millions of years.

Jordan arose to his feet. He could think of nothing further to say.

He stopped, however, with the door half open, and asked: "One more
question--what did you want with the electrical generator plants on
Earth?"

[Illustration]

Slowly and without emotion Hall told him, and when he understood, he
became even sicker.

       *       *       *       *       *

He went across to his cabin and stood for a while looking out the
window. Then he lit a cigarette and lay down on his bunk thinking. After
a time, he put out the cigarette and walked into the hall where he paced
up and down.

As he passed the cell door for about the tenth time, he suddenly swung
around and lifted the latch and entered. He went over to the robot, and
with a key that he took from his pocket, he unlocked the greaves and
chains.

"There's no point in keeping you bound up like this," he said. "I don't
think you're very dangerous." He put the key back in his pocket.

"I suppose you know that this ship runs on an atomic pile," he said in a
conversational tone of voice. "The cables are just under the floor in
the control room and they can be reached through a little trap door."

Jordan looked directly into Hall's face. The robot was listening with
great intentness.

"Well," the agent said, "we'll probably be leaving Earth's atmosphere in
about fifteen minutes. I think I'll go play pinochle with the pilot."

He carefully left the door of the cell unlatched as he left. He walked
to the control room and found Wilkins, a dry cigar butt clenched between
his teeth, absorbed in a magazine.

"Let's have another game," Jordan said. "I want some of that
seventy-six dollars back."

Wilkins shook his head. "I'm in the middle of a good story here. Real
sexy. I'll play you after we take off."

"Nothing doing," Jordan said sharply. "Let's play right now."

Wilkins kept reading. "We got an eighteen-hour flight in front of us.
You have lots of time."

The agent snatched the magazine out of his hands. "We're going to play
right now in my cabin," he said.

"You quit when I have aces and a flush, and now you come back and want
to play again. That's not sportsmanlike," Wilkins complained, but he
allowed himself to be led back to Jordan's cabin. "I never saw anybody
so upset about losing a miserable seventy-six bucks," was his final
comment.

       *       *       *       *       *

The robot lay perfectly still until he heard the door to Jordan's cabin
slam shut, and then he arose as quietly as he could and stole out into
the hall. The steel of the hall floor groaned, but bore his weight, and
carefully, trembling with excitement inside of his ponderous metallic
body, he made his way to the control room. He knelt and lifted the
little trap door and found the naked power cable, pulsating with
electrical current.

In a locker under the panel board he found a length of copper wire. It
was all he needed for the necessary connection.

Since his capture, his fellows on Grismet had been silent with despair,
but as he knelt to close the circuit, their minds flooded in on him and
he realized with a tremendous horror that there were now nineteen, that
all except he had been bound and fixed in their eternal cement prisons.

"We are going to have our chance," he told them. "We won't have much
time, but we will have our chance."

He closed the circuit and a tremendous tide of electric power flowed
into his head. Inside that two-inch shell of permallium was a small
strip of metal tape on whose electrons and atoms were written the
borrowed mind of a man. Connected to the tape was a minute instrument
for receiving and sending electromagnetic impulses--the chain by which
the mind of one robot was tied to that of another.

The current surged in and the tiny impulses swelled in strength and
poured out through the hull of the ship in a great cone that penetrated
Earth's atmosphere in a quadrant that extended from Baffin land to
Omaha, and from Hawaii to Labrador. The waves swept through skin and
bone and entered the sluggish gelatinous brain of sentient beings,
setting up in those organs the same thoughts and pictures that played
among the electrons of the permallium strip that constituted Jon Hall's
mind.

All nineteen clamored to be heard, for Hall to relay their voices to
Earth, but he held them off and first he told his story.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Casseiopeian delegate to the Galactic Senate was at the moment
finishing his breakfast. He was small and furry, not unlike a very large
squirrel, and he sat perched on a high chair eating salted roast almonds
of which he was very fond.

Suddenly a voice started talking inside of his head, just as it did at
that very second inside the heads of thirteen billion other inhabitants
of the northwest corner of Earth. The Casseiopeian delegate was so
startled that he dropped the dish of almonds, his mouth popping open,
his tiny red tongue inside flickering nervously. He listened spellbound.

The voice told him of the war on Grismet and of the permallium
constructed robots, and of the cement blocks. This, however, he already
knew, because he had been one of the delegates to the Peace Conference
who had decided to dispose of the robots. The voice, however, also told
him things he did not know, such as the inability of the robots to
commit any crime that any other sane human being would not commit, of
their very simple desire to be allowed to live in peace, and most of all
of their utter horror for the fate a civilized galaxy had decreed for
them.

When the voice stopped, the Casseiopeian delegate was a greatly shaken
little being.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back on the ship, Hall opened the circuit to the nineteen, and they
spoke in words, in memory pictures and in sensations.

       *       *       *       *       *

A copter cab driver was hurrying with his fare from Manhattan to Oyster
Bay. Suddenly, in his mind, he became a permallium robot. He was bound
with cables of the heavy metal, and was suspended upside down in a huge
cement block. The stone pressed firmly on his eyes, his ears, and his
chest. He was completely immobile, and worst of all, he knew that above
his head for six miles lay the great Grismet Ocean, with the blue mud
slowly settling down encasing the cement in a stony stratum that would
last till the planet broke apart.

