
"That's right," Forrester said blankly.

"Now listen to me carefully," the High Priestess said. "You're not
to ask his name, or mention anything about this visit to
anyone--understand?"

The priest blinked. "Oh, certainly. Absolutely. Without doubt. I've
already been told that, you might say. Already. Certainly. Wouldn't
think of such a thing." He moved over and stood near Forrester, peering
down at him. "My goodness," he said. "Let me see that eye, young man."

Forrester turned his head wordlessly.

"Oh, my, yes," the priest said. "Black indeed. Very black. A fight. My,
yes. An altercation, disagreement, discussion, battle--"

"Yes," Forrester cut in.

"Certainly you have," the priest said. "And what'd the other fellow look
like, eh? Beaten, I'll bet. You look a strong type."

Forrester relaxed. It was the only thing to do while the priest babbled
on, touching his wounds gently as he did so with various parts of his
caduceus. The pain vanished with a touch of the left wingtip, and the
lacerations healed instantly as they were caressed with first one and
then another of the various coils of the snakes.

But Forrester now was free to worry. Arrest was out of the question. As
the High Priestess had said, on the evidence it was clear that Aphrodite
intended to honor him in some way. And there was nothing at all, he
thought, wrong with an honor from the Goddess of Love.

But another sacrifice? After the sacrifice to Aphrodite he'd made
earlier, and the fight he'd gotten into, he just didn't quite feel up to
it. It wouldn't do to refuse, but ...

"Well," the priest said, stepping back. "Well, well. You ought to be all
right now, young fellow--right as rain."

Forrester said: "Thanks."

"Might feel a little soreness--tenderness, you might say--for a day or
so. Only a day or so, tenderness," the priest said. "After that, right
as rain. Right as you'll ever be. _All_ right, as a matter of fact: all
right."

Forrester said: "Thanks."

The priest went to the door, turned, and said to the High Priestess:
"Hermes' blessing on you both, as a matter of fact, as they say.
Blessings from Hermes on you both."

The High Priestess nodded regally.

"And," the priest said, "merely by the way, as it might be, without
meaning harm, if you would ask a blessing for me--Aphrodite's blessing?
Easy for you. Of course, it would be nice curing--curing, as they
say--stupidity, plain dumbness, as they call such things--curing
stupidity as easily as I can cure small ills. Nice."

"Indeed," the High Priestess said.

"But there," the priest went on. "Only the Gods can cure that. Only the
Gods and no one else. Yes. Hm. And not often. They don't do anything
like that in the--ah--regular course of things. As a matter of fact, you
might say, I've never heard of--never heard of such a case. Never. Not
one. Yet ..." He opened the door, spat: "Myrmidons!" and disappeared
into the hallway.

The door banged shut.

Forrester sighed heavily. The High Priestess turned to him.

"Feel better?" she asked.

"Much," Forrester said, dreading the ordeal to come.

The High Priestess came over to the couch and sat down next to him. She
put a hand on his shoulder. "Shall we prepare for the--sacrifice?"

Forrester sighed again. "Sure," he said. "Naturally."

       *       *       *       *       *

When she was locked in his arms, it was as if time had started all over
again. Forrester responded to the eagerness of the woman as he'd never
dreamed he could respond; all his tiredness dropped away as if it had
never been, and he was a new man. He touched her bare flesh and felt the
heat of her through his fingers and hands; with his arms around her
nakedness he rolled, locked to her, feeling the friction of skin against
skin and the magnificence of her.

The sacrifice went on ... and on ... and on into endless time and
endless space. Forrester thrust and gasped at the woman and her head
went back, her mouth pulled open as she shivered and responded to
him....

Forever....

Until finally they lay, panting, in the magnificent room. Forrester rose
first, vaguely surprised at himself. He found a towel in a closet at the
far end of the room and wiped his damp forehead slowly.

"Well," he said. "That was quite a sacrifice. What next?"

The High Priestess raised herself on one elbow and stared across the
room at him. "There is no need for such familiarity, Forrester," she
said. "Not from a lay acolyte."

Forrester tossed the towel onto a couch. "My apologies, Your
Concupiscence. I'm a little--light-headed. But what happens next?"

The High Priestess reached into the diaphanous pile of her clothing and
came up with a small diamond-encrusted watch she wore, usually, on her
wrist. "Our timing was almost perfect," she said. "It is now
twenty-hundred hours. The Goddess expects you at twenty-oh-one exactly."

A hurried half-minute passed. Then, fully dressed, Forrester went with
the High Priestess to a golden door half-hidden in the hangings at the
side of the room. She made a series of mystical signs: the circle, the
serpent and others Forrester couldn't quite follow.

She opened the door, genuflecting as she did so, and Forrester dropped
to one knee behind her, looking at the doorway.

It was filled with a pale blue haze that looked like the clear summer
sky on a hot day. Except that it wasn't sky, but a curtain that wavered
and shimmered before his eyes. Beyond it, he could see nothing.

The High Priestess rose from her genuflection and Forrester followed
suit. There was a sole second of silence.

Then the High Priestess said: "You are to step through the Veil of
Heaven, William Forrester."

Forrester said: "_Me?_ Through the _Veil of Heaven_?"

"Don't be afraid," she said. "And don't try to touch the Veil. Just walk
through as if nothing at all were there."

Forrester filled his lungs as though he were going to take a very high
dive. He thought: _Here goes nothing_. That was all; there wasn't time
for anything else.

He stepped into the blue haze, and had a sudden sensation of falling.




CHAPTER FIVE


There was a tingle like a mild electric shock. Forrester opened his
mouth and then closed it again as the tingle stopped, and the sense of
falling simply died away. He had closed his eyes on the way into the
curtain, and now he opened them again.

He closed them very quickly, counted to ten, and took a deep breath.
Then he opened them to look at the room he was in.

It was unlike any room he had ever seen before. It didn't have the
opulence of the High Priestess's rooms. I am a room, it seemed to say,
and a room is what I was meant to be. I don't have to draw attention to
myself like my poorer sisters. I am content merely to exist as the room
of rooms, the very type and image of the Ideal Enclosure.

The floors and walk of the place seemed to blend into each other at odd
angles. Forrester's eyes couldn't quite follow them or understand them,
and judging the size of the room was out of the question. There was a
golden wash of light filling the room, though it didn't seem to come
from anywhere in particular. It was, in fact, as if the room itself were
shining. Forrester blinked and rubbed his eyes. The light, or whatever
it was, was changing color.

Gradually, he realized that it went on doing that. He wasn't sure that
he liked it, but it was certainly different. The colors went from gold
to pale rose to violet to blue, and so on, back to gold again, while
little eddies and swirls of light sparkled into rainbows here and there.

Forrester began to feel dizzy again.

There were various objects standing around here and there in the room,
but Forrester couldn't quite tell what they were. Even their sizes were
difficult to judge, because of the shifting light and shape of the room
itself. There was only one thing that seemed reasonably certain.

He was alone in the room.

Set in one wall was a square of light that didn't change color quite as
much as everything else. Forrester judged it to be a window and headed
for it. With his first step, he discovered something else about the
place.

The carpeting was completely unique. Instead of fiber, the floor seemed
to have been covered a foot deep with foam rubber. Forrester didn't
exactly walk to the window; he bounced there. The sensation was almost
enjoyable, he thought, when you got used to it. He wondered just how
long it took to get used to it and settled on eighty years as a good
first guess.

He stood in front of the window. He looked out.

He saw nothing but clouds and sky.

It took a long while for him to decide what to do next, and when he
finally did come to a decision, it was the wrong one.

He looked down.

Below him there were tumbled rocks, ledges of ice and snow, clouds
and--far, far below--the flat land of the Earth. He wanted to shut his
eyes, but he couldn't. The whole vast stomach-churning panorama spread
out beneath him endlessly. The people below, if there were any, weren't
even big enough to be ants. They were completely invisible. Forrester
took a deep breath and gripped the side ledges of the window.

And a voice behind him said: "Welcome, Mortal."

Forrester almost went through the window. But he managed to regain his
balance and turn around, saying angrily: "Don't _do_ that!" As the last
of the words left his lips, he became aware of the smiling figure facing
him.

She was standing in a spotlight, Forrester thought at first. Then he saw
that the light was coming from the woman herself--or from her clothing.
The dress she wore was a satinlike sheath that glowed with an aura even
brighter than the room. Her blonde hair picked up the radiance and
glowed, too, illuminating a face that was at once regal, inviting and
passionate. It was, Forrester thought, a hell of a disturbing
combination.

The cloth of the dress clung to her figure as if it wanted to. Forrester
didn't blame it a bit; the dress showed off a figure that was not only
beyond his wildest dreams, but a long way beyond what he had hitherto
regarded as the bounds of possibility. From shoulder to toe, she was
perfection.

This was also true of the woman from shoulder to crown.

Forrester gulped and, automatically, went on one knee.

"Please," he murmured. "Pardon me. I didn't mean--"

"Quite all right," the Goddess murmured. "I understand perfectly."

"But I--"

"Never mind all that now," Venus said, with just a hint of impatience.
"Rise, William Forrester--or you who were William Forrester."

Forrester rose. Sweat was pouring down his face. He made no effort to
wipe it away. "Were?" he asked, dazed. "But that's my name!"

"It _was_," Venus said, in the same calm tone. "Henceforth, your name is
Dionysus."

Forrester took a while to remember to swallow. "Dionysus?" he said at
last.

There was another silence.

Forrester, feeling that perhaps his first question could use some
amplification, said: "Dionysus? Bacchus? You mean me?"

"Quite right," Venus said. "That will be your name, and you'd better
begin getting used to it."

"Now wait a minute!" he said. "I don't mean to be disrespectful, but
something occurs to me. I mean, it's the first thing I thought of, and
I'm probably wrong, but just let me ask the questions, if you don't
mind, and maybe some of this will make some sense. Because just a few
hours ago I was doing very nicely on my own and I--"

"What are your questions?" Venus said.

Forrester swayed. "Dionysus/Bacchus himself," he said. "Won't he mind
my--"

Venus laughed. "Mind your using his name? My goodness, no."

"But--"

"It's all because of the orgies," Venus said.

Everything, he told himself, was getting just a little too much for him.
"Orgies?" he said.

Venus nodded. "You see, there are all those orgies held in his honor.
You know about those, of course."

"Sure I do," Forrester said, watching everything narrowly. In just a few
seconds, he told himself hopefully, the whole room would vanish and he
would be in a nice, peaceful insane asylum.

"Well, it isn't impossible for a God to be at all the orgies held in his
honor," Venus said. "Naturally not. But, at the same time, they are all
rather boring--for a God, I mean. And that's why you're here," she
finished.

Forrester said: "Oh." And then he said: "Oh?" The room hadn't
disappeared yet, but he was willing to give it time.

"Dionysus," Venus said patiently, as if she were explaining the matter
to a small and rather ugly child, "gets tired of appearing at the
orgies. He wants someone to take his place."

The silence after that sentence was a very long one. Forrester could
think of nothing to say but: "_Me?_"

"You will be raised to the status of Godling," Venus said. "You remember
Hercules and Achilles, don't you?"

"Never met them," Forrester said vacantly.

"Naturally," Venus said. "They were, however, ancient heroes, raised to
the status of Godling, just as you yourself will be. However, you will
not be honored or worshipped under your own name."

Forrester nodded. "Naturally," he said, wondering what he was talking
about. There was, he realized, the possibility that he was not insane
after all, but he didn't want to think about that. It was much too
