
For all answer Mr. Whittier handed to Mr. Wheatcroft the thin slip of
paper.

No sooner had the junior partner read the paper than he seemed angrier
than was usual with him.

"Strange!" he cried. "I should think it was strange! confoundedly
strange--and deuced unpleasant, too."

"May I see what it is that's so very strange?" asked Paul, picking up
the despatch.

"Of course you may see it," growled Mr. Wheatcroft; "and let us see
what you can make of it."

The young man read the message aloud: "Deal off. Can get quarter cent
better terms. Carkendale."

Then he read it again to himself. At last he said, "I confess I don't
see anything so very mysterious in that. We've lost a contract, I
suppose; but that must have happened lots of times before, hasn't it?"

"It's happened twice before, this fall," returned Mr. Wheatcroft,
fiercely, "after our bid had been practically accepted and just before
the signing of the final contract!"

"Let me explain, Wheatcroft," interrupted the elder Whittier, gently.
"You must not expect my son to understand the ins and outs of this
business as we do. Besides, he has only been in the office ten days."

"I don't expect him to understand," growled Wheatcroft. "How could he?
I don't understand it myself!"

"Close that door, Paul," said Mr. Whittier. "I don't want any of the
clerks to know what we are talking about. Here are the facts in the
case, and I think you will admit that they are certainly curious: Twice
this fall, and now a third time, we have been the lowest bidders for
important orders, and yet, just before our bid was formally accepted,
somebody has cut under us by a fraction of a cent and got the job.
First we thought we were going to get the building of the Barataria
Central's bridge over the Little Makintosh River, but in the end it was
the Tuxedo Steel Company that got the contract. Then there was the
order for the fifty thousand miles of wire for the Trans-continental
Telegraph; we made an extraordinarily low estimate on that. We wanted
the contract, and we threw off, not only our profit, but even
allowances for office expenses; and yet five minutes before the last
bid had to be in, the Tuxedo Company put in an offer only a hundred and
twenty-five dollars less than ours. Now comes the telegram to-day. The
Methuselah Life Insurance Company is going to put up a big building; we
were asked to estimate on the steel framework. We wanted that
work--times are hard and there is little doing, as you know, and we
must get work for our men if we can. We meant to have this contract if
we could. We offered to do it at what was really actual cost of
manufacture--without profit, first of all, and then without any charge
at all for office expenses, for interest on capital, for depreciation
of plant. The vice-president of the Methuselah, the one who attends to
all their real estate, is Mr. Carkendale. He told me yesterday that our
bid was very low, and that we were certain to get the contract. And now
he sends me this." Mr. Whittier picked up the telegram again.

"But if we were going to do it at actual cost of manufacture," said the
young man, "and somebody else underbids us, isn't somebody else losing
money on the job?"

"That's no sort of satisfaction to our men," retorted Mr. Wheatcroft,
cooking himself before the fire. "Somebody else--confound him!--will be
able to keep his men together and to give them the wages we want for
our men. Do you think somebody else is the Tuxedo Company again?"

"What of it?" asked Mr. Whittier. "Surely you don't suppose----"

"Yes, I do," interrupted Mr. Wheatcroft, swiftly. "I do, indeed. I
haven't been in this business thirty years for nothing. I know how
hungry we get at all times for a big, fat contract; and I know we would
any of us give a hundred dollars to the man who could tell us what our
chief rival has bid. It would be the cheapest purchase of the year,
too."

"Come, come, Wheatcroft," said the elder Whittier; "you know we've
never done anything of that sort yet, and I think you and I are too old
to be tempted now."

"Nothing of the sort," snorted the fiery little man; "I'm open to
temptation this very moment. If I could know what the Tuxedo people are
going to bid on the new steel rails of the Springfield and Athens, I'd
give a thousand dollars."

"If I understand you, Mr. Wheatcroft," Paul Whittier asked, "you are
suggesting that there has been something done that is not fair?"

"That's just what I mean," Mr. Wheatcroft declared, vehemently.

"Do you mean to say that the Tuxedo people have somehow been made
acquainted with our bids?" asked the young man.

"That's what I'm thinking now," was the sharp answer. "I can't think of
anything else. For two months we haven't been successful in getting a
single one of the big contracts. We've had our share of the little
things, of course, but they don't amount to much. The big things that
we really wanted have slipped through our fingers. We've lost them by
the skin of our teeth every time. That isn't accident, is it? Of course
not! Then there's only one explanation--there's a leak in this office
somewhere."

"You don't suspect any of the clerks, do you, Mr. Wheatcroft?" asked
the elder Whittier, sadly.

"I don't suspect anybody in particular," returned the junior partner,
brushing his hair up the wrong way; "and I suspect everybody in
general. I haven't an idea who it is, but it's somebody! It must be
somebody--and if it is somebody, I'll do my best to get that somebody
into the clutches of the law."

"Who makes up the bids on these important contracts?" asked Paul.

"Wheatcroft and I," answered his father. "The specifications are
forwarded to the works, and the engineers make their estimates of the
actual cost of labor and material. These estimates are sent to us here,
and we add whatever we think best for interest, and for expenses, for
wear and tear, and for profit."

"Who writes the letters making the offer--the one with actual figures I
mean?" the son continued.

"I do," the elder Whittier explained; "I have always done it."

"You don't dictate them to a typewriter?" Paul pursued.

"Certainly not," the father responded; "I write them with my own hand,
and, what's more, I take the press-copy myself, and there is a special
letter-book for such things. This letter-book is always kept in the
safe in this office; in fact, I can say that this particular
letter-book never leaves my hands except to go into that safe. And, as
you know, nobody has access to that safe except Wheatcroft and me."

"And the Major," corrected the junior partner.

"No," Mr. Whittier explained, "Van Zandt has no need to go there now."

"But he used to," Mr. Wheatcroft persisted.

"He did once," the senior partner returned; "but when we bought those
new safes outside there in the main office, there was no longer any
need for the chief book-keeper to go to this smaller safe; and so, last
month--it was while you were away, Wheatcroft--Van Zandt came in here
one afternoon, and said that, as he never had occasion to go to this
safe, he would rather not have the responsibility of knowing the
combination. I told him we had perfect confidence in him."

"I should think so!" broke in the explosive Wheatcroft. "The Major has
been with us for thirty years now. I'd suspect myself of petty larceny
as soon as him."

"As I said," continued the elder Whittier; "I told him that we trusted
him perfectly, of course. But he urged me, and to please him I changed
the combination of this safe that afternoon. You will remember,
Wheatcroft, that I gave you the new word the day you came back."

"Yes, I remember," said Mr. Wheatcroft. "But I don't see why the Major
did not want to know how to open that safe. Perhaps he is beginning to
feel his years now. He must be sixty, the Major; and I've been thinking
for some time that he looks worn."

"I noticed the change in him," Paul remarked, "the first day I came
into the office. He seemed ten years older than he was last winter."

"Perhaps his wound troubles him again," suggested Mr. Whittier.
"Whatever the reason, it is at his own request that he is now ignorant
of the combination. No one knows that but Wheatcroft and I. The letters
themselves I wrote myself, and copied myself, and put them myself in
the envelopes I directed myself. I don't recall mailing them myself,
but I may have done that too. So you see that there can't be any
foundation for your belief, Wheatcroft, that somebody had access to our
bids."

"I can't believe anything else!" cried Wheatcroft, impulsively. "I
don't know how it was done--I'm not a detective--but it was done
somehow. And if it was done, it was done by somebody! And what I'd like
to do is to catch that somebody in the act--that's all! I'd make it hot
for him!"

"You would like to have him out at the Ramapo Works," said Paul,
smiling at the little man's violence, "and put him under the
steam-hammer?"

"Yes, I would," responded Mr. Wheatcroft. "I would indeed! Putting a
man under a steam-hammer may seem a cruel punishment, but I think it
would cure the fellow of any taste for prying into our business in the
future."

"I think it would get him out of the habit of living," the elder
Whittier said, as the tall clock in the corner struck one. "But don't
let's be so brutal. Let's go to lunch and talk the matter over quietly.
I don't agree with your suspicion, Wheatcroft, but there may be
something in it."

Five minutes later Mr. Whittier, Mr. Wheatcroft, and the only son of
the senior partner left the glass-framed private office, and, walking
leisurely through the long store, passed into the street.

They did not notice that the old book-keeper, Major Van Zandt, whose
high desk was so placed that he could overlook the private office, had
been watching them ever since the messenger had delivered the despatch.
He could not read the telegram, he could not hear the comments, but he
could see every movement and every gesture and every expression. He
gazed from one speaker to the other almost as though he were able to
follow the course of the discussion; and when the three members of the
firm walked past his desk, he found himself staring at them as if in a
vain effort to read on their faces the secret of the course of action
they had resolved upon.


II

After luncheon, as it happened, both the senior and the junior partner
of Whittier, Wheatcroft & Co. had to attend meetings, and they went
their several ways, leaving Paul to return to the office alone.

When he came opposite to the house which bore the weather-beaten sign
of the firm he stood still for a moment, and looked across with mingled
pride and affection. The building was old-fashioned--so old-fashioned,
indeed, that only a long-established firm could afford to occupy it. It
was Paul Whittier's great-grandfather who had founded the Ramapo Works.
There had been cast the cannon for many of the ships of the little
American navy that gave so good an account of itself in the war of
1812. Again, in 1848, had the house of Whittier, Wheatcroft & Co.--the
present Mr. Wheatcroft's father having been taken into partnership by
Paul's grandfather--been able to be of service to the government of the
United States. All through the four years that followed the firing on
the flag in 1861 the Ramapo Works had been run day and night. When
peace came at last and the people had leisure to expand, a large share
of the rails needed by the new overland roads which were to bind the
East and West together in iron bonds had been rolled by Whittier,
Wheatcroft & Co. Of late years, as Paul knew, the old firm seemed to
have lost some of its early energy, and, having young and vigorous
competitors, it had barely held its own.

That the Ramapo Works should once more take the lead was Paul Whittier's
solemn purpose, and to this end he had been carefully trained. He was
now a young man of twenty-five, a tall, handsome fellow, with a full
mustache over his firm mouth, and with clear, quick eyes below his
curly brown hair. He had spent four years in college, carrying off
honors in mathematics, was popular with his classmates, who made him
class poet, and in his senior year he was elected president of the
college photographic society. He had gone to a technological institute,
where he had made himself master of the theory and practice of
metallurgy. After a year of travel in Europe, where he had investigated
all the important steel and iron works he could get into, he had come
home to take a desk in the office.

It was only for a moment that he stood on the sidewalk opposite,
looking at the old building. Then he threw away his cigarette and went
over. Instead of entering the long store he walked down the alleyway
left open for the heavy wagons. When he came opposite to the private
office in the rear of the store he examined the doors and the windows
carefully, to see if he could detect any means of ingress other than
those open to everybody.

There was no door from the private office into the alleyway or into the
yard. There was a door from the alleyway into the store, opposite to
the desks of the clerks, and within a few feet of the door leading from
the store into the private office.

Paul passed through this entrance, and found himself face to face with
the old book-keeper, Van Zandt, who was following all his movements
with a questioning gaze.

"Good-afternoon, Major," said Paul, pleasantly. "Have you been out for
your lunch yet?"

"I always get my dinner at noon," the book-keeper gruffly answered,
returning to his books.

As Paul walked on he could not but think that the Major's manner was
ungracious. And the young man remembered how cheerful the old man had
been, and how courteous always, when the son of the senior partner,
while still a school-boy, used to come to the office on Saturdays.

Paul had always delighted in the office, and the store, and the yard
behind, and he had spent many a holiday there, and Major Van Zandt had
always been glad to see him, and had willingly answered his myriad
questions.

Paul wondered why the book-keeper's manner was now so different. Van
Zandt was older, but he was not so very old, not more than sixty, and
old age in itself is not sufficient to make a man surly and to sour his
temper. That the Major had had trouble in his family was well known.
His wife had been flighty and foolish, and it was believed that she had
run away from him; and his only son was a wild lad, who had been
employed by Whittier, Wheatcroft & Co., out of regard for the father,
and who had disgraced himself beyond forgiveness. Paul recalled vaguely
that the young fellow had gone West somewhere, and had been shot in a
mining-camp after a drunken brawl in a gambling-house.

As Paul entered the private office he found the porter there, putting
coal on the fire.

Stepping back to close the glass door behind him, that they might be
alone, he said:

"Mike, who shuts up the office at night?"

"Sure I do, Mr. Paul," was the prompt reply.

"And you open it in the morning?" the young man asked.

"I do that!" Mike responded.

"Do you see that these windows are always fastened on the inside?" was
the next query.

"Yes, Mr. Paul," the porter replied.

"Well," and the inquirer hesitated briefly before putting this
question, "have you found any of these windows unfastened any morning
lately when you came here?"

"And how did you know that?" Mike returned, in surprise.

"What morning was it?" asked Paul, pushing his advantage.

"It was last Monday mornin', Mr. Paul," the porter explained, "an' how
it was I dunno, for I had every wan of them windows tight on Saturday
night, an' Monday mornin' one of them was unfastened whin I wint to
open it to let a bit of air into the office here."

"You sleep here always, don't you?" Paul proceeded.

"I've slept here ivery night for three years now come Thanksgivin',"
Mike replied. "I've the whole top of the house to myself. It's an
illigant apartment I have there, Mr. Paul."

"Who was here Sunday?" was the next question.

"Sure nobody was here at all," responded the porter, "barrin' they came
while I took me a bit of a walk after dinner. An' they couldn't have
got in anyway, for I lock up always, and I wasn't gone for an hour, or
maybe an hour an' a half."

"I hope you will be very careful hereafter," said Paul.

"I will that," promised Mike, "an' I am careful now always."

The porter took up the coal-scuttle, and then he turned to Paul.

"How was it ye knew that the winder was not fastened that mornin'?" he
asked.

"How did I know?" repeated the young man. "Oh, a little bird told me."

When Mike had left the office Paul took a chair before the fire and
lighted a cigar. For half an hour he sat silently thinking.

He came to the conclusion that Mr. Wheatcroft was right in his
suspicion. Whittier, Wheatcroft & Co. had lost important contracts
because of underbidding, due to knowledge surreptitiously obtained. He
believed that some one had got into the store on Sunday while Mike was
taking a walk, and that this somebody had somehow opened the safe.
There never was any money in that private safe; it was intended to
contain only important papers. It did contain the letter-book of the
firm's bids, and this is what was wanted by the man who had got into
the office, and who had let himself in by the window, leaving it
unfastened behind him. How this man had got in, and why he did not get
out by the way he entered, how he came to be able to open the private
safe, the combination of which was known only to the two
partners--these were questions for which Paul Whittier had no answer.

What grieved him when he had come to the conclusion was that the
thief--for such the house-breaker was in reality--was probably one of
the men in the employ of the firm. It seemed to him almost certain that
the man who had broken in knew all the ins and outs of the office. And
how could this knowledge have been obtained except by an employee? Paul
was well acquainted with the clerks in the outer office. There were
five of them, including the old book-keeper, and although none of them
had been with the firm as long as the Major, no one of them had been
there less than ten years. Paul did not know which one to suspect.
There was, in fact, no reason to suspect any particular clerk. And yet
that one of the five men in the main office on the other side of the
glass partition within twenty feet of him--that one of those was the
guilty man Paul did not doubt.

And therefore it seemed to him not so important to prevent the thing
from happening again as it was to catch the man who had done it. The
thief once caught, it would be easy thereafter for the firm to take
unusual precautions. But the first thing to do was to catch the thief.
He had come and gone, and left no trail. But he must have visited the
office at least three times in the past few weeks, since the firm had
lost three important contracts. Probably he had been there oftener than
three times. Certainly he would come again. Sooner or later he would
come once too often. All that needed to be done was to set a trap for
him.

While Paul was sitting quietly in the private office, smoking a cigar
with all his mental faculties at their highest tension, the clock in
the corner suddenly struck three.

Paul swiftly swung around in his chair and looked at it. An old
eight-day clock it was, which not only told the time of the day, but
pretended, also, to supply miscellaneous astronomical information. It
stood by itself in the corner.

For a moment after it struck Paul stared at it with a fixed gaze, as
though he did not see what he was looking at. Then a light came into
his eyes and a smile flitted across his lips.

He turned around slowly and measured with his eye the proportions of
the room, the distance between the desks and the safe and the clock. He
glanced up at the sloping glass roof above him. Then he smiled again,
and again sat silent for a minute. He rose to his feet and stood with
his back to the fire. Almost in front of him was the clock in the
corner.

He took out his watch and compared its time with that of the clock.
Apparently he found that the clock was too fast, for he walked over to
it and turned the minute-hand back. It seemed that this was a more
difficult feat than he supposed or that he went about it carelessly,
for the minute-hand broke off short in his fingers. A spasmodic
movement of his, as the thin metal snapped, pulled the chain off its
cylinder, and the weight fell with a crash.

All the clerks looked up; and the red-headed office-boy was prompt in
answer to the bell Paul rang a moment after.

"Bobby," said the young man to the boy, as he took his hat and
overcoat, "I've just broken the clock. I know a shop where they make a
specialty of repairing timepieces like that. I'm going to tell them to
send for it at once. Give it to the man who will come this afternoon
with my card. Do you understand?"

"Cert," the boy answered. "If he 'ain't got your card, he don't get the
clock."

"That's what I mean," Paul responded, as he left the office.

Before he reached the door he met Mr. Wheatcroft.

"Paul," cried the junior partner, explosively, "I've been thinking
about that--about that--you know what I mean! And I have decided that
we had better put a detective on this thing at once!"

"Yes," said Paul, "that's a good idea. In fact, I had just come to the
same conclusion. I----"

Then he checked himself. He had turned round slightly to speak to Mr.
Wheatcroft; he saw that Major Van Zandt was standing within ten feet of
them, and he noticed that the old book-keeper's face was strangely
pale.


III

During the next week the office of Whittier, Wheatcroft & Co. had its
usual aspect of prosperous placidity. The routine work was done in the
routine way; the porter opened the office every morning, and the
office-boy arrived a few minutes after it was opened; the clerks came
at nine, and a little later the partners were to be seen in the inner
office reading the morning's correspondence.

The Whittiers, father and son, had had a discussion with Mr. Wheatcroft
as to the most advisable course to adopt to prevent the future leakage
