
Bending sat down, and the others sat with him. "May I say something
before we go any further?" Sam Bending asked. "May I say that I think
this is a rather irregular method of doing things and that I think I
ought to see my lawyer."

Secretary Condley's eyes narrowed just the slightest. He was a heavy,
jowl-faced, graying man who was known for his firmness in his official
capacity. "At this stage of the game, Mr. Bending, there is no need for
a lawyer. We merely want to explain something to you--we want you to get
all the data. If, afterwards, you still want your lawyer, you'll be
perfectly free to call him. Right now, we want you to listen with an
open mind."

Bending thought it over. "All right. Go ahead."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Very well. First, I'll agree that all this may seem a bit high-handed.
But time was--and is--getting short." He glanced at Olcott, and the
glance was not all friendliness. "The Government was notified about this
almost too late; we have had to act fast. Almost _too_ fast."

"I notified the Government as soon as I was sure of my facts," Olcott
said, completely unflustered.

"That's as may be," Condley said. "The point is that we now have the
problem on our hands, and we must find an equitable solution." He took a
gold fountain pen from his pocket, and his strong, thick fingers began
toying with it while his eyes remained on Sam Bending. "The fact that
you have applied for a patent makes it imperative that we get the
situation under control immediately."

Before Sam could answer, there was a knock on the outer door that came
clearly into the rear room. Secretary Condley rose without saying a word
and went out.

Dr. Larchmont, the Power Utilities physicist, decided to make small talk
to bridge the hiatus. "That's a really beautiful piece of machinery
you've built, Mr. Bending. Really remarkable." He was a small,
flat-faced man with a fringe of dark hair around his otherwise naked
scalp.

Sam looked a little startled. "You mean you opened a Converter up?"

Larchmont nodded. "I presume you are referring to the fusing device. We
X-rayed the thing thoroughly before we opened it. These days, many
devices are rigged to be self-destroying, but that, in itself is a
specialized field. Most of them are traps that are rather easy to get
around if one is expecting them and knows how to handle them. But the
Converter itself, if I may say so, is one of the most original and
elegant devices I have seen in many a day."

"Thanks," said Bending, with a touch of bitterness in his voice. "I--"

The door opened at that moment, and Secretary Condley came in followed
by a tall, round-faced man with dark wavy hair and clear brown eyes.

"Jim!" Sam said in surprise.

The man was James Luckman, Sam Bending's business manager. "Hello, Sam.
What's this all about? The FBI men who picked me up said I wasn't under
arrest, but I had a hunch it was about as close as you can come without
actual arrest."

Sam nodded. "Funny--I had that impression, too." He looked at Condley.
"What's the idea, Condley? Jim doesn't know anything about this."

The Secretary managed to look unoffended at Bending's tone. "Possibly
not. We can't be sure, of course, but--frankly, I'd be willing to accept
your word." He paused. "But--you're not a businessman, Mr. Bending?" He
made it only half a question.

"No. I leave that sort of thing up to Jim. Oh, I don't say I'm
completely ignorant of the field; it's just that I'm not particularly
interested, that's all. Why should I be?" He went on, half
belligerently. "I've known and trusted Jim for years. He knows his
business; I know my science. I know enough to be able to check the
account books, and he knows enough to be able to understand a technical
report. Right, Jim?"

Luckman looked bewildered. "Sure, Sam. But what's all this leading up
to? I don't get it." He frowned suddenly. "Has someone accused me of
cheating you?"

"No, no, no," Condley said rapidly. "Of course not. Nothing like that."
He looked sharply at Luckman. "Do you know anything about the
Converter?"

Jim Luckman glanced at Bending before replying. Bending's face remained
expressionless. "Go ahead, Jim," he said, "square with him."

Luckman spread his hands. "I know that Sam was working on something he
called a Converter. I don't know anything more about it than that. Sam
keeps his ideas secret until he gets them to a marketable stage, which
is all right with me. I have enough work to do, handling the stuff he's
already patented, without worrying about anything that isn't salable
yet. So?"

Condley nodded, then gestured toward a chair. "Sit down, Mr. Luckman. Do
you know these other gentlemen?" he asked rhetorically. He proceeded to
introduce the others. Sam Bending noted with satisfaction that Luckman
looked rather puzzled when the Russian was introduced.

Condley himself sat down again, and said: "Well, we're all here. We're
not going to make this formal, gentlemen, but I hope it won't develop
into a heated argument, either. Let's try to keep our tempers."

       *       *       *       *       *

"First, as to the Converter itself. We all know, with the possible
exception of Mr. Luckman, what it does, but for his benefit, we'll go
over that. The Converter, by means of what Dr. Larchmont has been wont
to call 'a very elegant method', produces electrical power directly from
the fusion of hydrogen into helium. A pilot model, with a total volume
of a little more than one and one-quarter cubic feet, is capable of
turning out up to five hundred horsepower, either DC or AC in a wide
range of frequencies. The voltage can be regulated from zero to one
thousand volts by simply setting a dial.

"The device is powered by using ordinary water as fuel. At full
capacity, the Converter consumes approximately four hundred milligrams
of water per hour, which can easily be drawn from the moisture of the
air. The machine is thus self-fueling.

"Since the nuclear energy released is converted almost one hundred per
cent into electrical current, there is no danger from radiation; since
the process is, by its very nature, self-limiting, there is no danger of
explosion. The worst that can happen is for the machine to burn out,
and, I understand, it won't do that unless it is purposely tampered
with to make it do so.

"Finally, the device is so inexpensive to produce that it could be sold
for about one-quarter of the price of an ordinary automobile." He
stopped, cleared his throat, and glanced at Larchmont and Vanderlin. "Am
I essentially correct, gentlemen?"

Larchmont nodded, and Vanderlin said, "That's about it."

Jim Luckman looked at Sam Bending in open admiration. "Wow," he said
softly. "You're quite a genius, Sam."

"Very well, gentlemen," Condley continued, "we know what this device
will do on a physical level. Now we must consider what it will do on an
economic level. Have you considered what would happen if you put the
Converter on the market, Mr. Bending?"

"Certainly," Bending said, with an angry glance at Olcott. "The Power
Utilities would lose their pants. So what? I figure that any company
which tries to steal and suppress inventions deserves a licking."

Secretary Condley glanced at Olcott as though he were trying to hold
back a smile, then returned his gaze to Bending. "We won't quibble over
the ethics of the situation, Mr. Bending. You are correct in saying that
Power Utilities would be bankrupt. They couldn't stand the competition
of what amounts to almost unlimited free power. And then what would
happen, with every power company in the United States suddenly put out
of business?"

Sam looked puzzled. "What difference would it make? People would just be
getting their power from another source, that's all."

Richard Olcott leaned forward earnestly. "May I interject something
here? I know you are angry with me, Mr. Bending--perhaps with good
reason. But I'd like to point out something that you might not have
recognized. Public Utilities and its co-operative independent companies
are not owned by individuals. Much of the stock is owned by small
share-holders who have only a few shares each. The several billion
dollars that these companies are worth is spread out over the nation,
not just centered with a few wealthy men. In addition, a great many
shares are held by insurance companies and banks. Literally millions of
people would lose money--just as surely as if it had been stolen from
them--if this device went on the market."

Bending frowned. He hadn't thought of it in exactly that way. "Still,"
he said tentatively, "didn't blacksmiths and buggy-whip manufacturers
and horse-breeders lose money after World War I?"

"Not to this extent," Olcott said, shaking his head. "This is not 1918,
Mr. Bending. Sixty years ago, our economy was based on gold, not, as it
is today on production and manpower, centered in the vast interlocking
web of American industry."

Condley said: "Mr. Olcott said a moment ago that millions of people
would lose money just as surely as if it had been stolen from them. I
think it would be more proper to say that the money will be destroyed,
not stolen. A thief, after all, does put money back into circulation
after he steals it. But when vast amounts of wealth are suddenly removed
from circulation completely, the economic balance is disastrously
upset."

       *       *       *       *       *

Sam Bending was still frowning. His grandfather had been a small
businessman in 1929--not fabulously wealthy, but certainly well off by
the social standards of the day. Two years later, in 1931, he was broke,
wiped out completely, happy and eager to accept any odd job he could get
to support his family.

Sam's father had had to leave school during the Thirties and go to work
in order to bring in enough money to keep the family going. Grandfather
Bending, weakened by long hours of labor that he was physically unfit
for, had become an invalid, and the entire support of the family had
devolved upon Sam's father.

He could remember his dad talking about the breadlines and the free-soup
kitchens. He could remember his grandmother, her hands crippled by
arthritis, aggravated by long hours at a commercial sewing machine in a
clothing center sweat-shop, just so she could bring in that little extra
money that meant so much to her children and her invalid husband.

Could one invention bring all that back again? Could his own
harmless-looking Converter plunge millions back into that kind of
misery? It seemed hardly possible, but Sam couldn't banish the specter
of the Great Depression from his mind.

"Just how far-reaching would this economic upset be?" he asked Condley.

Condley had taken out his gold fountain pen again and was rolling it
between his palms. "Well, that's a question with a long answer, Mr.
Bending. Let's begin small and watch it spread.

"Banks are pretty safe today, aren't they? The Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation insures all depositors for deposits up to twenty thousand
dollars now. A bank is hedged in by so many legal fences that it is
almost impossible for one to fail in the same way that they failed all
over the country in the early Thirties. Even if one does fail, through
the gross mismanagement or illegal activities of its governing board,
the depositors don't get excited; they know they're covered. There
hasn't been a really disastrous run on a bank for more than thirty
years.

"But banks don't just keep their money in vaults; they invest it. And a
significantly large percentage of that money is invested in power
companies all over the nation. In an attempt to keep their heads above
water, those banks would be forced to make up tremendous losses if Power
Utilities failed overnight. It would force them to draw in outstanding
loans for ready cash. It would mean turning in United States Savings
Bonds, which would put a tremendous strain on the Government.

"In spite of that, most banks won't be able to stay solvent because
their other capital investments will be dropping rapidly in value. As
Mr. Olcott said, our monetary system isn't based on gold, but on
production and goods. If Power Utilities and its members fail, you and
your machine will have destroyed--made worthless--several billion
