Stan was becoming a trifle impatient. He answered the questions on
Sornal, managing to furnish information for most of the blank spaces
on the sergeant's form.

The man dragged a still different form to him.

"All right, now what's this exact complaint?"

Stan went through Sornal's history, quoting figures and dates from the
Personnel files he had read. The sergeant listened noncommittally,
stopping him frequently to get repetitions.

At last, he looked up.

"Got any documents to back up this story?"

Stan coughed impatiently.

"No, of course not. I can't pull a file out of Personnel and just
carry it up here. It's on file, though. I just got through reading the
working file and there's a private file on the guy, too, that would
really bust things wide open."

The sergeant smiled sourly.

"Maybe it would. I suppose they'd pull it right out and hand it over,
too."

He spun his chair around and fished a book from a shelf behind his
desk.

"Here." He put the book on the corner of the desk. "Here is the
regulation on this sort of situation."

He pointed out words, one at a time.

It was a long regulation, filled with complex terminology. It forbade
seizure of records in any manner not definitely authorized by local
statute. The sergeant went through it, getting full value from each
word.

At last his finger came away from the page.

"Those are private records, you're talking about. On this planet, the
law protects corporate records to the fullest extent. We'd have to
have positive evidence that an incriminating document was in
existence. We'd have to define its location and content within fairly
narrow limits. Then we'd have to go before a local determinator and
request authority for an examination of that document."

He slammed the book shut.

"And if we failed to find the document in question, or if it wasn't
actually incriminating, the injured corporation could slap us with a
juicy damage claim." He looked at Stan coldly.

"If you want, I can get the local statute and let you look that over,
too." He paused briefly and non-expectantly.

"On the other hand, we are obligated to protect the interests of
galactic citizens." He looked pointedly at the insigne on Stan's
pocket, then held out a tablet.

"Here. Suppose you sit down over there at that table and write out the
complaint in your own handwriting. I'll pass it along."

Stan looked at the tablet for a moment.

"Oh--Suppose I manage to get copies of the records on this. Do you
think you could do anything then?"

"If you can bring in documentary evidence, that'll make a case; we'll
take action, of course. That's what we're here for." The sergeant
tapped impassively on the tablet.

"Want to make a written statement?"

"Skip it," Stan told him wearily, "I don't want to waste any more
time."

As he turned away, he thought he noticed a faint flicker of
disappointment on the sergeant's face before the man bent over his
desk.

       *       *       *       *       *

He hardly noticed his surroundings as he walked back into the
Personnel building.

At first, there was a dull resentment--a free-floating rage--which
failed to find focus, but sought for outlet in any direction.

The trouble was, he thought, in the formal way of doing things. It
didn't really matter, he told himself, whether anything really got
done or not--so long as an approved routine was followed.

Only the wrong people used direct, effective methods.

The anger remained nondirectional, simply swelling and surging in all
directions at once. There were too many targets and it was a torturing
pressure, rather than a dynamic force.

He thought of his brief explosion, then grunted in self-ridicule. He'd
implied he could just pick up Sornal's record file, bring it in, and
throw it before that sergeant. And for just a flash, he'd really
thought of it as a simple possibility.

"Maybe," he told himself, "one of those Special Corpsmen could do
something like that, but I don't see any of them around, trying it."

He looked around, startled. Somehow, he had passed the gate,
identified himself, parked the skip-about, and come inside--all
without remembering his actions.

"Well," he asked himself, "what do I do now? Just become some sort of
thing?"

He walked into the outer office and a clerk looked up at him.

"Oh, Mr. Graham. The chief wants to see you." She touched a button and
a gate opened.

"You know the way."

"Yes. I do. Wonder what he wants."

The woman shook her head and returned to her work.

"He didn't say. Just said to tell you to see him when you came in."

Stan walked through the short corridor, stopping in front of a door.
Down in the corner of the pebbled glass, neat, small letters spelled
out the name--H. R. Mauson.

He tapped on the glass.

"Come in." The Personnel chief glanced up as the door opened.

"Oh, Stanley. Sit down."

Stan lowered himself to the padded seat, then leaned back. It was one
of those deep armchairs which invite relaxation.

The official touched a button, then leaned forward.

"Tell me, Stanley," he said gently, "what were you doing in the
Federation Building a few minutes ago?"

Stan tried to lift a hand in a casual gesture, but it seemed stuck to
the chair. He exerted more force, then twisted his body. But his arms
and legs refused to move away from the upholstery. Mauson smiled.

"Just a little precaution, Stanley. A gravito unit, you see. It may be
unnecessary, but you do have a reputation for a certain--shall we say,
competence. Although you have never demonstrated your abilities here,
I see no reason for taking foolish chances." His smile faded.

"Now, suppose you tell me all about that visit you made to the
Federation Building."

Stan forced himself to relax. Have to be careful, he thought. He
forced a grin to his face.

"Lunch," he said casually. "The Interstellar Room has a reputation all
over Talburg, you know." He laughed easily.

"Truth is, I got sort of homesick. Got a sudden urge to have a good
dish of _delsau_. It's a sort of preserve we really enjoy at home."

"Now, now." Mauson closed his eyes. "Try again. You should be able to
do better than that." He tapped at some notes.

"You were assigned to straighten out that man, Sornal, weren't you?"

"Yes. I was, and I did." Stan found he had enough freedom to move his
head. "He was just suffering from--"

Mauson coughed dryly. "I have a report on that, too. You fed him some
tea, talked for a while, then left him."

Again, he tapped at his notes.

"Then you came here and demanded the man's Personnel file. You read
that and went directly to the Federation Building. Now, I'm not a
completely stupid man. Don't try to make me believe you just wanted
some exotic food."

He poked a switch.

"Wizow, will you step in here, please?"

"Yes, Mauson?" The blocky production chief loomed through a door.

He glanced at Stan.

"Oh. You got him in here, then?"

"Yes. Oh, he came in by himself. But now, he's trying to be a little
coy. Suppose you reason with him."

"Pleasure."

Wizow strode forward to stand over the chair. He struck one hand into
the palm of the other, twisting his wrist at each blow. For the first
time since Stan had known him, he had a faint smile on his face.

"I don't like you, Graham," he said. "I didn't like you the first time
I saw you, and you haven't done a thing to change that first
impression.

"Thought you had something funny about you, the way you've always
coddled the workmen. Looked as though you were running some sort of
popularity contest." Again, he punched his palm.

"And then, there were those suggestions of yours. Smart words--always
pushing the wrong people off balance, like other staffmen." The smile
became one-sided.

"You know, you haven't made yourself too popular around here. Not with
the people that count. I've been getting complaints.

"A good staffman doesn't act the way you do. Good man sees to it the
