Jack Ravenhurst, not you. I've lost her, and I'll find her. I'll
welcome your co-operation, and I'd hate to have to fight you, but if
you don't like the way I'm handling it, you can just tell your boys to
go back to their regular work and let me handle it alone, without
interference. Now, which'll it be?"

He opened his mouth, closed it, and blew out his breath from between
his lips. Then he said: "All right. The damage has been done, anyhow.
But don't think I won't report all this to Ravenhurst as soon as I can
get a beam to Raven's Rest."

"That's your job and your worry, not mine. Now, have you got any
leads?"

"None," he admitted.

"Then I'll go out and dig up some. I'll let you know if I need you."
And I cut off.

Dr. Perelson was sitting on his couch, with an expression that
indicated that the pH of his saliva was hovering around one point
five.

I said, "That will be all, Dr. Perelson. Thank you for your
co-operation." And I walked out into the corridor, leaving him with a
baffled look.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the next public phone, I dialed the BANning number again.

"Any news?"

"Not from her; she hasn't reported in at all."

"I didn't figure she would. What else?"

"Just as you said," he told me. "With some cute frills around the
edges. Ten minutes ago, a crowd of kids--sixteen to twenty-two age
range--about forty of 'em--started a songfest and football game in the
corridor outside Colonel Brock's place. The boys he had on duty there
recognized the Jack Ravenhurst touch, and tried to find her in the
crowd. Nothing doing. Not a sign of her."

"That girl's not only got power," I said, "but she's bright as a solar
flare."

"Agreed. She's headed up toward Dr. Midguard's place now. I don't know
what she has in mind, but it ought to be fun to watch."

"Where's Midguard now?" I asked.

"Hovering around Brock, as we figured. He's worried and feels
responsible because she disappeared from his apartment, as predicted."

"Well, I've stirred up enough fuss in this free-falling anthill to
give them all the worries they need. Tell me what's the overall
effect?"

"Close to perfect. It's slightly scandalous and very mysterious, so
everybody's keeping an eye peeled. If anyone sees Jaqueline
Ravenhurst, they'll run to a phone, and naturally she's been spotted
by a dozen different people in a dozen different places already.

"You've got both Brock's Company guards and the civil police tied up
for a while."

"Fine. But be sure you keep the boys who are on her tail shifting
around often enough so that she doesn't spot them."

"Don't worry your thick little head about that, Dan," he said. "They
know their business. Are you afraid they'll lose her?"

"No, I'm not, and you know it. I just don't want her to know she's
being followed. If she can't ditch her shadow, she's likely to try to
talk to him and pull out all the stops convincing him that he should
go away."

"You think she could? With _my_ boys?"

"No, but if she tries it, it'll mean she knows she's being followed.
That'll make it tougher to keep a man on her trail. Besides, I don't
want her to try to convince him and fail."

"_Ich graben Sie._ On the off chance that she does spot one and gives
him a good talking to, I'll pass along the word that the victim is to
walk away meekly and get lost."

"Good," I said, "but I'd rather she didn't know."

"She won't. You're getting touchy, Dan; 'pears to me you'd rather be
doing that job yourself, and think nobody can handle it but you."

I gave him my best grin. "You are closer than you know. O.K., I'll lay
off. You handle your end of it and I'll handle mine."

"A fair exchange is no bargain. Go, and sin no more."

"I'll buzz you back before I go in," I said, and hung up.

       *       *       *       *       *

Playing games inside a crowded asteroid is not the same as playing
games in, say, Honolulu or Vladivostok, especially when that game is a
combination of hide-and-seek and ring-around-the-Rosie. The trouble is
lack of communication. Radio contact is strictly line-of-sight inside
a hunk of metal. Radar beams can get a little farther, but a man has
to be an expert billiards player to bank a reflecting beam around very
many corners, and even that would depend upon the corridors being
empty, which they never are. To change the game analogy again, it
would be like trying to sink a ninety-foot putt across Times Square on
New Year's Eve.

Following somebody isn't anywhere near as easy as popular fiction
might lead you to believe. Putting a tail on someone whose spouse
wants divorce evidence is relatively easy, but even the best
detectives can lose a man by pure mischance. If the tailee, for
instance, walks into a crowded elevator and the automatic computer
decides that the car is filled to the limit, the man who's tailing him
will be left facing a closed door. Something like that can happen by
accident, without any design on the part of the tailee.

[Illustration]

If you use a large squad of agents, all in radio contact with one
another, that kind of loss can be reduced to near zero by simply
having a man covering every possible escape route.

But if the tailee knows, or even suspects, that he's being followed,
wants to get away from his tail, and has the ability to reason
moderately well, it requires an impossibly large team to keep him in
sight. And if that team has no fast medium of communication, they're
licked at the onset.

In this case, we were fairly certain of Jack Ravenhurst's future
actions, and so far our prophecies had been correct ... but if she
decided to shake her shadows, fun would be had by all.

And as long as I had to depend on someone else to do my work for me, I
was going to be just the teenchiest bit concerned about whether they
were doing it properly.

I decided it was time to do my best to imitate a cosmic-ray particle,
and put on a little speed through the corridors that ran through the
subsurface of Ceres.

My vac suit was in my hotel room. One of the other agents had picked
it up from my flitterboat and packed it carefully into a small attache
case. I'd planned my circuit so that I'd be near the hotel when things
came to the proper boil, so I did a lot of diving, breaking all kinds
of traffic regulations in the process.

I went to my room, grabbed the attache case, checked it over
quickly--never trust another man to check your vac suit for
you--and headed for the surface.

Nobody paid any attention to me when I walked out of the air lock onto
the spacefield. There were plenty of people moving in and out, going
to and from their ships and boats. It wasn't until I reached the edge
of the field that I realized that I had over-played my hand with
Colonel Brock. It was only by the narrowest hair, but that had been
enough to foul up my plans. There were guards surrounding the
perimeter with radar search beams.

As I approached, one of the guards walked toward me and made a series
of gestures with his left hand--two fingers up, fist, two fingers up,
fist, three fingers up. I set my suit phone for 223; the guy's right
hand was on the butt of his stun gun.

"Sorry, sir," came his voice. "We can't allow anyone to cross the
field perimeter. Emergency."

"My name's Oak," I said tiredly. "Daniel Oak. What is going on here?"

He came closer and peered at me. Then: "Oh, yes, sir; I recognize you.
We're ... uh--" He waved an arm around. "Uh ... looking for Miss
Ravenhurst." His voice lowered conspiratorially. I could tell that he
was used to handling the Ravenhurst girl with silence and suede
gloves.

"Up _there_?" I asked.

"Well, Colonel Brock is a little worried. He says that Miss Ravenhurst
is being sent to a school on Luna and doesn't want to go. He got to
thinking about it, and he's afraid that she might try to leave
Ceres--sneak off you know."

I knew.

"We've got a guard posted at the airlocks leading to the field, but
Colonel Brock is afraid she might come up somewhere else and jump
overland."

"I see," I said. I hadn't realized that Brock was that close to panic.
What was eating him?

There must be something, but I couldn't figure it. Even the
Intelligence Corps of the Political Survey Division can't get complete
information every time.

After all, if he didn't want the girl to steal a flitterboat and go
scooting off into the diamond-studded velvet, all he'd have to do
would be to guard the flitterboats. I turned slowly and looked around.
It seemed as though he'd done that, too.

And then my estimation of Brock suddenly leaped up--way up. Just a
guard at each flitterboat wouldn't do. She could talk her way into the
boat and convince the guard that he really shouldn't tell anyone that
she had gone. By the time he realized he'd been conned, she'd be
thousands of miles away.

And since a boat guard would have to assume that any approaching
person _might_ be the boat's legitimate owner, he'd have to talk to
whomever it was that approached. _Kaput._

But a perimeter guard would be able to call out an alarm if anyone
came from the outside without having to talk to them.

And the guards watching the air locks undoubtedly had instructions to
watch for any female that even vaguely matched Jack's description. A
vac suit fits too tightly to let anyone wear more than a facial
disguise, and Brock probably--no, _definitely_--had his tried-and-true
men on duty there. The men who had already shown that they were fairly
resistant to Jack Ravenhurst's peculiar charm. There probably weren't
many with such resistance, and the number would become less as she
grew older.

That still left me with my own problem. I had already lost too much
time, and I had to go a long way. Ceres is irregular in shape, but
it's roughly four hundred and eighty miles in diameter and a little
over fifteen hundred miles in circumference.

Viking Test Field Four, where McGuire 7 was pointing his nose at the
sky, was about twenty-five miles away, as the crow flies. But of
course I couldn't go by crow.

By using a low, fairly flat, jackrabbit jump, a man in good condition
can make a twelve hundred foot leap on the surface of Ceres, and each
jump takes him about thirty seconds. At that rate, you can cover
twenty-five miles in less than an hour. That's what I'd intended on
doing, but I couldn't do it with all this radar around the field. I
wouldn't be stopped, of course, but I'd sure tip my hand to Colonel
Brock--the last thing I wanted to do.

But there was no help for it. I'd have to go back down and use the
corridors, which meant that I'd arrive late--_after_ Jack Ravenhurst
got there, instead of _before_.

There was no time to waste, so I got below as fast as possible,
repacked my vac suit, and began firing myself through the corridors as
fast as possible. It was illegal, of course; a collision at
