"Get yourself a cup of coffee, boy," Hetty ordered, "while I fix you
something to eat. How you like your eggs?"

"Over easy, Mrs. Thompson and thanks," he said wearily. "I think I've
got everything lined up, doctor. The eggs are all packed, ready to go
in your car and the car will be ready in about ten minutes. They're
still setting up down range but they should be all in order by the time
you get there.

"The bio men and the others should be assembled in the main briefing
room at range headquarters. I've ordered a double guard around the
barn, to be maintained until the animal boys have finished their
on-the-ground tests. And they're padding a device van to take Sally to
the labs when they're ready.

"And ... oh yeah, I almost forgot ... the commissioner called about ten
minutes ago and said to tell you that the Russians are going to make a
formal protest to the U.N. this morning. They say we're trying to wipe
out the People's Republic by contaminating their milk."

The sound of scuffling in the yard and loud yells of protest came
through the back porch window. The door swung open and a spluttering
and irate Barney was thrust into the room, still in the clutches of a
pair of armed security policemen.

"Get your hands offn me," Barney roared as he struggled and squirmed
impotently in their grip. "Doc, tell these pistol-packing bellhops to
turn me loose."

"We caught him trying to get into the barn, sir," one of the officers
told Peterson.

"Of course I was going into the barn," the indignant ranch hand
screamed. "Where'd you think I would go to milk a cow?"

Peterson smiled. "It's all right, Fred. It's my fault. I should have
told you Mr. Hatfield has free access."

The security men released Barney. He shook himself and glared at them.

"I'm terribly, sorry, Barney," Dr. Peterson said. "I forgot that you
would be going down to milk the cows and I'm glad you reminded me. Do
me a favor and milk Sally first, will you? I want to take that milk, or
whatever it is, with us when we leave in a few minutes."

                     *      *      *      *      *

The sun was crawling up the side of the mountains when Johnny and Dr.
Peterson swung out of the ranch yard between two armored scout cars for
the sixty-mile trip down the range road. Dew glistened in the early
rays of light and the clear, cool morning air held little hint of the
heat sure to come by midmorning. There was a rush of photographers
towards the gate as the little convoy left the ranch. A battery of
cameras grabbed shots of the vehicles heading south.

It was the beginning of a day that changed the entire foreign policy of
the United States. It was also the day that started a host of the
nation's finest nuclear physicists tottering towards psychiatrists'
couches.

In rapid order in the next few days, Peterson's crew reinforced by
hundreds of fellow scientists, technicians and military men, learned
what Johnny Culpepper already knew.

They learned that (1) Sally's milk, diluted by as much as four hundred
parts of pure water, made a better fuel than gasoline when ignited.

They also learned that (2) in reduced degrees of concentration, it
became a substitute for any explosive of known chemical composition;
(3) brought in contact with the compound inside one of the golden eggs,
it produced an explosive starting at the kiloton level of one egg to
two cups of milk and went up the scale but leveled off at a peak as the
recipe was increased; (4) could be controlled by mixing jets to produce
any desired stream of explosive power; and (5) they didn't have the
wildest idea what was causing the reaction.

In that same order it brought (1) Standard Oil stock down to the value
of wallpaper; (2) ditto for DuPont; (3) a new purge in the top level of
the Supreme Soviet; (4) delight to rocketeers at Holloman Air Force
Research Center, Cape Canaveral and Vandenburg Air Force Base; and (5)
agonizing fits of hair-tearing to every chemist, biologist and
physicist who had a part in the futile attempts to analyze the two
ingredients of what the press had labeled "Thompson's Eggnog."

While white-coated veterinarians, agricultural experts and chemists
prodded and poked Sally's Cloverdale Marathon III, others were giving a
similar going-over to Hetty's chicken flock. Solomon's outraged screams
of anger echoed across the desert as they subjected him to fowl
indignities never before endured by a rooster.

Weeks passed and with each one new experiments disclosed new uses for
the amazing Eggnog. While Sally placidly chewed her cuds and continued
to give a steady five gallons of concentrated fury at each milking,
Solomon's harem dutifully deposited from five to a dozen golden spheres
of packaged power every day. At the same time, rocket research
engineers completed their tests on the use of the Eggnog.

                     *      *      *      *      *

In the early hours of June 4th, a single-stage, two-egg, thirty-five
gallon Atlas rocket poised on the launching pads at Cape Canaveral.
From the loud-speaker atop the massive block-house came the countdown.

"X minus twenty seconds. X minus ten seconds. Nine ... eight ...
seven ... six ... five ... four ... three ... two ... FIRE!"

The control officer stabbed the firing button and deep within the Atlas
a relay clicked, activating a solenoid that pushed open a valve. A thin
stream of Sally's milk shot in from one side of the firing chamber to
blend with a fine spray of egg, batter coming from a jet in the
opposite wall.

Spewing a solid tail of purple fire, the Atlas leaped like a wasp-stung
heifer from the launching pads and thundered into space. The fuel
orifices continued to expand to maximum pre-set opening. In ten seconds
the nose cone turned from cherry-red to white heat and began sloughing
its outer ceramic coating. At slightly more than forty-three thousand
miles an hour, the great missile cleaved out of atmosphere into the
void of space, leaving a shock wave that cracked houses and shattered
glass for fifty miles from launching point.

A week later, America's newest rocket vessel, weighing more than thirty
tons and christened _The Egg Nog_, was launched from the opposite coast
at Vandenburg. Hastily modified to take the new fuel, the weight and
space originally designed for the common garden variety of rocket fuel
was filled with automatic camera and television equipment. In its stern
stood a six-egg, one-hundred-gallon engine, while in the nose was a
small, one-egg, fourteen-quart braking engine to slow it down for the
return trip through the atmosphere.

Its destination--Mars!

A week later, _The Eggnog_ braked down through the troposphere, skidded
to a piddling two-thousand miles, an hour through the stratosphere,
automatically sprouted gliding wing stubs in the atmosphere and planed
down to a spraying halt in the Pacific Ocean, fifty miles west of
Ensenada in Baja, California. Aboard were man's first views of the red
planet.

The world went mad with jubilation. From the capitals of the free
nations congratulations poured into Washington. From Moscow came word
of a one-hundred-ton spaceship to be launched in a few days, powered by
a mixture of vodka and orange juice discovered by a bartender in
Novorosk who was studying chemistry in night school. This announcement
was followed twenty-four hours later by a story in _Pravda_ proving
conclusively that Sally's Cloverdale Marathon III was a direct
descendant of Nikita's Mujik Droshky V, a prize Guernsey bull produced
in the barns of the Sopolov People's Collective twenty-six years ago.

Late in August, Air Force Major Clifton Wadsworth Quartermain climbed
out of the port of the two-hundred-ton, two dozen-egg, two-hundred-thirty
gallon space rocket _Icarus_, the first man into space and back. He had
circled Venus and returned. No longer limited by fuel weight factors,
scientists had been able to load enough shielding into the huge
_Icarus_ to protect a man from the deadly bombardment of the Van Allen
radiation belts.

On September 15th, Sally's Cloverdale Marathon III, having been milked
harder and faster than any Guernsey in history, went dry.

Less than half of the approximately twelve-hundred gallons of fuel she
had produced during her hay days, remained on hand in the AEC storage
vaults.

Three days later, Solomon, sprinting after one of his harem who was
playing hard to get, bee-lined into the path of a security police jeep.
There was an agonized squawk, a shower of feathers and mourning. A
short time later, the number of golden eggs dropped daily until one
morning, there were none. They never reappeared. The United States had
stockpiled twenty-six dozen in an underground cave deep in the Rockies.

Man, who had burst like a butterfly into space, crawled back into his
cocoon and pondered upon the stars from a worm's eye point of view.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Banging around in the back end of a common cattle truck, Sally's
Cloverdale Marathon III came home to the Circle T in disgrace. In a
corner of the truck, the late Solomon's harem cackled and voiced loud
cries of misery as they huddled in the rude, slatted shipping coop. The
truck turned off the county road and onto the dirt road leading to the
main buildings. It rattled across the cattle guard and through the
new-unprotected and open gate in the barbed wire fence. Life had
returned almost to normal at the Circle T.

But not for long.

Five days after Sally's ignominious dismissal from the armed forces, a
staff car came racing up to the ranch. It skidded to a halt at the
back-porch steps. Dr. Peterson jumped out and dashed up to the kitchen
door.

"Well, for heaven's sake," Hetty cried. "Come on in, sonny. I ain't
seen you for the longest spell."

Peterson entered and looked around.

"Where's Johnny, Mrs. Thompson?" he asked excitedly. "I've got some
wonderful news."

"Now ain't that nice," Hetty exclaimed. "Your wife have a new baby or
something? Johnny's down at the barn. I'll call him for you." She moved
towards the door.

"Never mind," Peterson said, darting out the door, "I'll go down to the
barn." He jumped from the porch and ran across the yard.

He found Johnny in the barn, rigging a new block and tackle for the
hayloft. Barney was helping thread the new, manila line from a coil on
the straw-littered floor.

"Johnny, we've found it," Peterson shouted jubilantly as he burst into
the barn.

"Why, Doc, good to see you again," Johnny said. "Found what?"

"The secret of Sally's milk," Peterson cried. He looked wildly around
the barn. "Where is she?"

"Who?"

"Sally, of course," the scientist yelped.

"Oh, she's down in the lower pasture with Queenie," Johnny replied.

"She's all right, isn't she?" Peterson asked anxiously.

"Oh, sure, she's fine, Doc. Why?"

"Listen," Peterson said hurriedly, "our people think they've stumbled
on something. Now we still don't know what's in those eggs or in
Sally's milk that make them react as they do. All we've been able to
find is some strange isotope but we don't know how to reproduce it or
synthesize it.

"But we do think we know what made Sally give that milk and made those
hens start laying the gold eggs."

Johnny and Barney laid down their work and motioned the excited
scientist to join them on a bench against the horse stalls.

"Do you remember the day Sally came fresh?" Peterson continued.

"Not exactly," Johnny replied, "but I could look it up in my journal. I
keep a good record of things like new registered stock births."

"Never mind," Peterson said. "I've already checked. It was May 9th."

He paused and smiled triumphantly.

"I guess that's right if you say so," Johnny said. "But what about it?"
