weedburners, reapers, bulldozers and the rest off the scene. The weed,
unhampered for the first time since Mrs Dinkman attacked it with her
lawnmower, responded by growing and growing until more and more
guardsmen had to be detached to the duty of keeping it back from the
excavation--by the very means they had scorned so recently. Even their
most frantic efforts could not prevent the grass from sending its most
advanced tendrils down into the gaping hole where the wires were being
laid to detonate the charge.

There was so much dashing to and fro, so many orders relayed, so many
dispatches delivered that I thought I might have been witnessing an
outofdate Civilwar play instead of a peacetime action of the California
National Guard. Captain Eltwiss--I kept wondering where I'd heard the
name--was constantly being interrupted in what was apparently a very
friendly conversation with Gootes by the arrival of officiallooking
envelopes which he immediately stuffed into his pocket with every
indication of vexation. "Silly old fools," he muttered, each time the
incident happened.

Quick inspections made, plans checked, an order was rasped to clear the
vicinity. Gootes' agonized protest that he had to report the occasion
for the _Intelligencer_'s readers was ignored. "Can't start making
exceptions," explained Captain Eltwiss. Everyone--workingpress, militia,
sightseers and all, had to move back a couple of blocks where
intervening trees and houses cut us off from any view of the green hill.

"This is terrible," exclaimed Gootes frantically. "Tragic. Howll I live
it down? Howm I going to face W R? Godlike wrath. 'What poolhall were
you dozing in, Gootes? Asleep on your bloody feet, ay, somnambulistic
offspring of a threetoed sloth?' Wait all night for a story and then not
get it, like the star legman on the Jackson Junior Highschool
_Jive-Jitterbug_. I'll never be able to hold my head up again. Say
something, say something, Weener--Ive _got_ to get this."

"We'll be able to hear the explosion from here," I remarked to console
him, for his distress was genuine.

"Oh," he groaned. "Hear the explosion. Albert, Albert ... you have a
fertile mind. Why didnt I hide myself before they told us to clear out?
Why didnt I get W R to hire a plane? Why didnt I foresee this and do any
of a hundred things? A microphone and automatic moviecamera ... Goony
Gootes, they called him, the man who missed all bets.... A captive
balloon, now.... Hay! What about a roof?"

"Trees," I objected, with a mental picture of him bursting into the
nearest house and demanding entrance to the roof.

"Bushwa. Zair's no tree in z' way of z' old box over zair--allons!"

It wasnt till he had urged me inside and up a flight of stairs that I
realized the "box" was Miss Francis' apartmenthouse. It had been a
logical choice, since its height and ugliness distinguished it even from
its unhandsome neighbors. Less than a week had gone by since I had come
here for the first time. As I followed Gootes' grasshopper leaps upward
at a more dignified pace, I reflected how strangely my circumstances had
changed.

The shoddily carpeted halls were musty and still as we climbed, except
for the unheeded squeaking of a radio someone had forgotten to turn off.
You could always tell when a radio was being listened to, for when
disregarded it sulkily gave off painfully listless noises in frustration
and loneliness.

I wasnt at all surprised to find Miss Francis among the spectators
crowded on the roof in evidence of having no more important occupation.
"I somehow expected you. Have you any new tricks?" she asked Gootes
coaxingly.

"Ecod, your worship, wot time ave I for legerdemain? Wif your elp, now,
I'd be a fine gentleman-journalist, stead of a noverworked ack."

"Ha," she said genially, busy with the toothpick, "youll find enough
respectable laboratory mechanics eager to cooperate. How long will it be
before they shoot, do you know?"

Gootes shook his head and I strained my eyes toward the grass.
Symmetrical and shimmeringly green, removed as it now was from all
connotations of danger by distance and the promise of immediate
destruction, it showed serenely beautiful and unaffected by the
machinations of its attackers. I could almost have wept as I traced its
sloping sides upward to the rounded peak on top. Reversing all previous
impressions, it now appeared to be the natural inhabitant and all the
houses, roadways, pavements, fences, automobiles, lightpoles and the
rest of the evidences of civilization the intruders.

But even as I looked at it so eagerly it moved and wavered and I heard
the muffled boom of explosion. The roof trembled and windows rattled
with diminishing echoes. The noise was neither a great nor terrifying
one and I distinctly remember thinking it quite inadequate to the
occasion.

I believe all of us there, when we heard the report, expected to see a
vast hole where the grass had been. I'm sure I did. When it was clear
this hadnt happened, I continued to stare hard, thinking, since my
highschool physics was so hazy, I had somehow reversed the relative
speed of sight and sound and we had heard the noise before seeing the
destruction.

But the green bulk was still there.

Oh, not unchanged, by any means. The smooth, picturebook slope had
become jagged and bruised while the regular, evenlyrounded apex had
turned into a sort of phrygian cap with its pinnacle woundedly askew.
The outlines which had been sharp were now blurred, its evenness had
become scraggly. The placid surface was vexed; the attempt on its being
had hurt. But not mortally, for even with outline altered, it remained;
defiant, certain, inexorable.

The air was filled with small green particles whirling and floating
downward. Feathery, yet clumsy, they refused to obey gravity and seek
the earth urgently, but instead shifted and changed direction, coyly
spiraling upward and sideways before yielding to the inevitable
attraction.

"At least there's less of it," observed Gootes. "This much anyway," he
added, holding a broken stolon in his fingers.

"_Cynodon dactylon_," said Miss Francis, "like most of the family
Gramineae, is propagated not only by seed, but by cuttings as well. That
is to say, any part of the plant (except the leaves or flowers)
separated from the parent whole, upon receiving water and nourishment
will root itself and become a new parent or entity. The dispersion of
the mass, far from making the whole less, as our literary friend so
ingenuously assumes, increases it to what mathematicians call the _n_th
power because each particle, finding a new restingplace unhampered by
the competition for food it encountered when integrated with the parent
mass, now becomes capable of spreading infinitely itself unless checked
by factors which deprive it of sustenance. These facts have been
repeated a hundred times in letters, telegrams and newspaper articles
since the project of attempting to blow up the inoculated batch was
known. In spite of warnings the authorities chose to go ahead. No, make
no mistake, this fiasco has not set _Cynodon dactylon_ back a
millimeter; rather it has advanced it tremendously."

There was silence while we absorbed this unpleasant bit of information.
Gootes was the first to regain his usual cockiness and he asked, "You
say fiasco, professor. O K--can you tell us just why it was a fiasco? I
know they stuck enough soup under it to blow the whole works and when it
went off it gave out with a good bang."

"Certainly. _Cynodon dactylon_ spreads in what may be called jumps. That
is, the stems are short and jointed. Those aboveground, the true stems,
are called stolons, and those below, from which the roots spread, are
rhizomes. Conceive if you will twoinch lengths of stiff wire--and this
plant is vulgarly called wiregrass in some regions just as it is called
devilgrass here--bent on either end at rightangles. Now take these bits
and weave them horizontally into a thick mass. Then add, vertically,
more of the wires, breaking the pattern occasionally and putting in more
in odd places, just to be sure there are no logical fracturepoints.
Cover this involved web--not forgetting it has three dimensions despite
my instructions treating it as a plane--with earth, eight, ten, or
twelve inches deep. Then try to blow it up with dynamite or
trinitrotoluene and see if you havent--in a much lesser
degree--duplicated and accounted for the situation in hand."

Everything now seemed unusually and, perhaps because of the contrast,
unreasonably quiet. Downstairs the radio, which had been monotonously
soothing a presumptive audience of unsatisfied housewives with languid
ballads, raised its pitch several tones as though for the first time it
had become interested in what it purveyed.

"... Yes, unseen friends, God is preparing His vengeance for wickedness
and sin, even as you are listening. You have been warned many times of
the wrath to come, but I say to you, the wrath is at hand. Even now God
is giving you a sign of His displeasure; a cloud no bigger than a man's
hand. But, O my unseen friends, that cloud has within it all the storms,
cyclones, typhoons, hurricanes and tornadoes necessary to destroy you
and yours. Unless you repent of your pride and sloth, Judgment will
surely come upon you. The Lord has taken a simple and despised weed and
caused it to multiply in defiance of all your puny powers and efforts. O
my friends, do not fight this grass, but cherish it; do not allow it to
be cut down for it is full of significance for you. Call off all your
minions and repent, lest if the holy messenger be injured a more
terrible one is sent. But now, my friends, I see my time is up; please
send your contributions so urgently needed to carry on the Divine Work
to Brother Paul care of the station to which you are listening."

"That's one way of looking at it," said Gootes. "Adios amigos."

He went down the stairs at an even more breakneck pace than he had come
up. Almost in front of the apartmenthouse door we nearly collided with
two officers in angry dispute.

"You mean to tell me, Captain, that not one of the urgent orders to
suspend operations came through to you?"

"Colonel, I havent seen a thing against the project except some fool
articles in a newspaper."

Suddenly I remembered where I'd seen the name Eltwiss. It was on the
financial page, not far away from the elusive quotation on Consolidated
Pemmican and Allied Concentrates for which I'd been idly searching.
"Eltwiss Explosives Cut Melon." Funny how things come back to you as
soon as you put them out of your mind.

Miss Francis, who had followed us down was busy collecting some of the
stolons which were still floating lazily downward.


_18._ An illiterate patchwork of lifeless and uninteresting scribbling
appeared under my byline day after day in the _Intelligencer_. Not a
word, not a thought of my own was left. I was not restrained from
protest by the absurd threats of Le ffacase, but prudence dictated not
throwing away dirty water before I got clean, and the money from the
paper, while negligible of course, yet provided my most pressing needs.

As I was being paid for my name while my talents went to waste, I was
free to go anywhere I pleased, but I had little desire to leave the
vicinity of the grass. It exerted upon me, more understandably, the same
fascination as on the merely curious.

But I was not permitted unmolested access to the phenomenon with which I
was so closely concerned. An officious young guardsman warned me away
brusquely and I was not allowed to come near until I swallowed my pride
and claimed connection with the _Intelligencer_. Even then it was
necessary for me to explain myself to several nervous soldiers on pain
of being ordered from the spot.

I was struck as I had not been before by the dynamic quality of the
grass; never the same for successive instants. Constant movement and
struggle as the expanding parts fought for room among themselves,
pushing upward and outward, seemed to indicate perceptible sentience
permeating the whole body. Preparing, brooding, it was disturbed,
searching, alert.

Its external aspect reflected the change. The proportions of height to
breadth had altered since the explosion. The peak had disappeared,
flattening out into an irregular plateau. Its progress across the
ground, however, had been vastly accelerated; it had crossed the streets
on all sides of the block and was spreading with great rapidity over the
whole district. For the moment no new effort was apparently being made
to halt its progress, the activities of the militia being confined to
patrolling the area and shooing decent citizens away. I wondered if a
new strategy contemplated allowing the thing to exhaust itself. Since it
looked more vigorous with each passing hour, I saw myself on the payroll
of the _Intelligencer_ for a long time to come.

Captain Eltwiss walked by and I asked him if this were so. "Don't
worry," he reassured me. "We're hep now, with the actual, unbeatable
mccoy. Park the body and watch what happens to old Mr Grass."

I had every intention of staying and I thought it advisable to remain
close to the captain in order, if his boast were wellfounded, to be in
on the kill. He was in excellent spirits and although I did not think it
tactful to refer to it, it was evident his little difference with the
colonel about the unreceived orders had not affected him. We chatted
amiably. I mentioned what Miss Francis had said about the weed springing
up in new places from each of the shreds dispersed by the explosion, but
he merely shrugged and laughed.

"I know these longbearded scientific nuts. They can find calamity around
the corner quicker than a drunk can find a bar."

"The discoverer of the Metamorphizer is a woman, so her long beard is
doubtful," I told him, just a little irritated by his cocksureness.

He laughed with as much ease at himself as at anything else. "A woman
scientist, ay? Funny things womenll do when they can't get a man. But
longbearded or flatchested it's all the same. Gruesome, that's what
they are, gruesome. Forget it. After we get this cleaned up we'll take
care of any others that start, but personally I don't think therell be
any. Sounds like a lot of theory to me."

I looked contemptuously at him, for he had that unimaginative approach
which disdains Science and so holds Civilization back on its upward
path. If the world's future rested with people like this, I thought, we
should never have had dynamite or germtheories or airplanes capable of
destroying whole cities at a blow.

But Captain Eltwiss was a servant to the Science he looked down on. The
answer he had bragged about now appeared and it was a scientific
contribution if ever there was one. A division of tanks, twenty or
thirty of them with what appeared to be sledrunners invertedly attached
to their fronts, rolled into sight. "Wirecutters," he explained with
pride. "Same equipment used for barbedwire on the Normandy beachhead. Go
through anything like cheese."

The tanks drew up in a semicircle and the drivers came out of their
vehicles for lastminute preparations. A final check was made of gas,
oil, and the positions of the wirecutters. Maps, showing the location of
each house now covered by the grass, were studied and compasspoints
checked against them. I admired the thoroughness and efficiency of the
arrangements. So did the captain.

"The idea is simple. These tanks are shocktroops. Theyll cut their way
into the middle of the stuff. This will give us entranceways and a
central operating point, besides hitting the grass where its strength is
greatest. From there--" he paused impressively--"from there we'll throw
everything in the book at it and a few that arent. All the stuff they
used before we came. Only we'll use it efficiently. And everything else.
Even hush-hush stuff. Just got the release from Washington. The minute
one of these stems shows we'll stamp it out. We'll fight it and fight it
until we beat it and we won't leave a bit of it, no, sir, not one bit of
it, alive."

He looked at me triumphantly. Behind his triumph was a hint of the vast
resources and the slowmoving but unassailable force his uniform
represented. It sounded as though he had been correct in his boast and
something drastic indeed would "happen to Mr. Grass."

The tanks were ready to go at last and the drivers climbed back into
them and disappeared, leaving the steel monsters looking as though theyd
swallowed the men. Like bubbles of air in a narrow glass tube they began
to jerk backward and forward, until at some signal--I presume given by
radio--they jumped ahead, their exhausts bellowing defiance of the grass
mauled and torn by their treads.

They went onward with careless scorn, leaving behind a bruised and
trampled pathway. The captain followed in the track and I after him,
though I must admit it was not without some trepidation I put my feet
upon the battered and now lifeless mass packed into a hard roadbed, for
I recalled clearly how the grass had wrenched the ladder from the
firemen and how it had impishly attacked the broadcaster's equipment.

The tanks moved ahead steadily until the slope of the mound began to
rise sharply and the runners of grass, instead of flattening obediently
behind, curled and twisted grotesquely as the tracks passed over them,
lightly slapping at the impervious steel sides. Small bunches, mutilated
and crushed, sprang back into erectness, larger ones flopped limply as
their props were pushed aside.

Then, suddenly, the tank we were trailing disappeared. There was no
warning; one second it was pursuing its way, an implacable executioner,
the next it had plunged into the weed and was lost to sight. The ends of
the grass came together spitefully behind it, weaving themselves
together, knitting, as we watched, an opaque blanket. It closed over and
around so that the smooth track ended abruptly, bitten by a wiry green
portcullis.

I was dismayed, but the captain seemed happy. "Now we're getting
somewhere," he exclaimed. "The little devils are eating right into the
heart of the old sonofabitch."

We stood there gaping stupidly after our lost champion, but the grass
mound was enigmatic and offered us no information as to its progress. A
survey of the other tracks showed their tanks, too, had burrowed into
the heart of the weed like so many hounds after a rabbit.

"Well," said the captain, who by now had apparently accepted me as his
confidant, "let's go and see what's coming in over the radio."

I was glad to be reminded the tanks werent lost, even temporarily, and
that we would soon learn of their advance. Field headquarters had been
set up in a house about two blocks away and there, after exchanging
salutes, passwords, and assorted badinage, the captain led. The men in
contact with the tanks, shoulders hunched, fingers rapid with pad and
pencil, were sitting in a row by a wall on which had been tacked a large
and detailed map of the district.

In addition to their earphones, a loudspeaker had also been thoughtfully
set up, apparently to take care of any such curious visitors as
ourselves. The disadvantage, soon manifest, was that no plan had been
devised to unscramble the reports from the various tanks. As a
consequence, whenever two or three came in together, the reports
overlapped, resulting in a jumble of unintelligible sounds from the
loudspeaker.

"Brf brf brm," it was saying as we entered the room. "Rrr rrr about
three hundred meters khorof khorof khorof north by northeast. Can you
hear me, FHQ? Come in, FHQ."

There was a further muddle of words, then, "I think my motor's going to
conk out. Shall I backtrack, FHQ? Come in, FHQ."

"Rugged place to stall," commented captain Eltwiss sympathetically, "but
we can pull him out in halfashake soons we get things under control."

The loudspeaker, after a great deal of gibberish, condescended to
clarity again. "... about five hundred meters. Supposed to join SMT5 at
this point. Can't raise him by radio. What do you have on SMT5, FHQ?
Come in, FHQ."

I was still speculating as to what had happened to SMT5 when the
loudspeaker once more became intelligible. "... and the going's getting
tougher all the time. I don't believe these goddamned wirecutters are
worth a pissinasnowhole. Just fouled up, that's what they are, just
fouled up. Got further if theyd been left off."

His grumbling was blotted out. For a moment there was complete babel,
then "... if I can guess, it's somehow got in the motor and shorted the
ignition. Ive got to take a chance and get out to look at it. This is
SMT3 reporting to FHQ. Now leaving the transmitter."

"... stalled so I turned on my lights. Can you hear me, FHQ? Come in
FHQ, O K, O K, don't get sore. So I turned on my lights. I'm not going
to do a Bob Trout, but I want to tell you it's pretty creepy. I guess
this stuff looks pretty and green enough on top, especially in daylight,
but from where I am now it's like an illustration out of Grimm's _Fairy
Tales_--something about the place where the wicked ogre lived. Not a bit
of green. Not a bit of light except from my own which penetrate about
two feet ahead and stop. Dead. Yellow and reddishbrown stems. Thick.
Interlaced. How the hell I ever got this far I'd like to know. But not
as much as how I'm going to get out.

"I'm sticking my head out of the turret now. As far as these stemsll let
me. Which isnt far. Theyre a solid mass on top of the machine. And
beside it. I'm going to take a few tools and make for the engine. Only
thing to do. Can't sit here and describe grassroots to you dogrobbers
all day long. See if I can't get her running and back out. Then I resign
from the state of California. Right then. This is SMT7 leaving the
transmitter for essential repairs and signing off."

For hours the reports kept coming in, all in identically the same vein:
rapid progress followed by a slowdown, then either engine trouble or a
failure to keep rendezvous by another tank, all messages concluding
alike: "Now leaving transmitter." It was no use for field headquarters
frantically to order them to stay in their tanks no matter what
happened. They were young, ablebodied, impatient men and when something
went wrong they crawled out to fight their way through a few feet of
grass to fix it. Afterall they were in the heart of a great city. Their
machines had burrowed straightforwardly into the grass and no threats of
courtmartial could make them sit and look silly till help arrived and
they were tamely rescued. So one by one they wormed their way out to fix
the ignition, adjust the carburetor, or hack free the cogs which moved
the tracks. And one by one their radios became silent and were not heard
again.

The captain went from cockiness to doubt, from doubt to anxiety, and
then to anguished fury. He had been so completely confident of the
maneuver's outcome that its failure drove him, not to despair, but to
anger. He knew most of the tankdrivers personally and the picture of
these friends trapped in their tiny, evernarrowing pockets of green sent
him into a frenzy. "SMT1--that's Lew Brown. Don't get out, Lew--stay
where you are, you jackass. Stay where you are, Lew," he bellowed into
the unresponsive loudspeaker.

"Jake White. Jake White's in four. Said I'd buy him a drink afterwards.
Joke. He's a cocacola boy. Why can't you stay inside, Jake? Why can't
you stay put?"

Unable to bear it longer, he rushed from field headquarters shouting,
"Let's get'm out, boys, let's get'm out," and would personally have led
a volunteer party charging on foot into the grass if he had not been
forcibly restrained and sympathetically led away, sobbing hysterically,
toward hospitalization and calming treatment.

The captain's impulse, though impractical, was shared by all his
comrades. For the moment the destruction of the grass became secondary
to the rescue of the trapped tankmen. If field headquarters had bustled
before, it now turned into a veritable beehive, with officers shouting,
exhorting, complaining, and men running backwards and forwards as though
there were no specific for the situation except unlimited quantities of
their own sweat.


_19._ It would be futile to relate, even if I could recall them, all the
various methods and devices which were suggested and rejected or tried
and proved failures in the attempt to rescue the tankdrivers. Press and
radio followed every daring essay and carefully planned endeavor until
the last vicarious quiver had been wrung from a fascinated public. For
twentyfour hours there was no room on the front pages of the newspapers
for anything but the latest on the "prisoners of the grass," as they
were at first called. Later, when hope for their rescue had diminished
and they were forced from the limelight to make way for later
developments, they were known simply as "heroes in the fight against the
weird enemy."

For the grass had not paused chivalrously during the interval. On the
contrary, it seemed to take renewed vigor from the victims it had
entombed. House after house, block after block were engulfed. The names
of those forced from their homes were no longer treated individually and
written up as separate stories, but listed in alphabetical order, like
battle casualties. Miss Francis, frantically trying to get all her
