"Yet all this was done to draw your attention, to fix it on what I have
to tell you," Jonas said, shifting his feet again. "I am no wizard, but
a man who may do certain things. And here is my proof: you may do the
same yourself."

The silence was a long one, and at the end of it Knupf rose. He walked
to the door of the room and opened it, and the bald-headed guard came
in. "He has tried to tempt me to pact with Satan," the Inquisitor said.

"But--"

"Take him away."

       *       *       *       *       *

Some day, Jonas thought, back in his cell, there would be a method of
controlling minds that did not require the willing co-operation of the
two parties. Some day the man who reads minds would be more than a
passive onlooker.

But the talent was new; it needed practice, it needed training.

The cell grew dark as night came, and the dampness seemed to increase.
Jonas heard squeaking and thought of the rats, but he couldn't even
summon up enough energy to try for them. He sat crosslegged in a corner
of the cell and closed his eyes.

He sighed once, deeply. This was what a hero came to, he told himself.
This was the end of heroics and playing a lone hand. Why, if he had it
to do over again, he would--

"You would do exactly the same thing," Claerten's voice said.

Jonas grinned suddenly, and sat straighter. "I should have known you'd
be getting into contact sooner or later," he thought.

"I try to keep track of all our men," Claerten thought. "In a case like
yours, I try harder."

"My foolishness," Jonas thought, "sometimes works to my benefit."

Claerten's thought was wry. "If you hadn't got impatient and tried to
hurry things," his voice said in Jonas' mind, "you wouldn't be back in
your cell now. There is a time and a place for your disclosure--"

"Another day in here would have driven me out of my wits," Jonas
thought.

"Better out of your wits than dead," Claerten thought.

Jonas sighed.

"However," Claerten went on, "there is still a way out for you. I have
read the situation in your mind, and your next move will have to be
rather more spectacular than usual."

"So long as it works," Jonas said, "I will be satisfied."

"It will work," Claerten said. "At least--I think it will."

Another day dragged by. Jonas put in his time alternately going over the
new plan and feeling more frightened than he had ever believed possible.
Claerten reached him once, but the contact was weak and fleeting; the
director hadn't enough strength to reach him again, at least not for a
day or so. Jonas was exactly where he'd wanted to be: on his own.

He hated the idea.

Time passed, somehow. When morning dawned, Jonas awoke to find the door
of his cell being unlocked. The bald man and the black-haired man were
both there. He looked up at them with distaste.

Then he saw what was in their minds, and the distaste changed to fear.

"You have confessed," the bald one said. "It is necessary that you
ratify your confession. Come with us."

Jonas knew what that meant: ratification of a free confession took place
under torture. He wiped his face with one hand, but he hardly thought of
escaping.

He had to go through with the plan.

The two guards came into the cell and gripped his arms. Jonas allowed
himself to be carried out into the corridor, and down it to a great
wooden door. The guards opened it, and dragged him through.

The torture chamber was brightly lit, with torches in brackets along the
walls that gave off, by a small fraction, more light than smoke. In one
corner the rack itself stood, and there were other tools of the trade
scattered around the room.

Jonas found that he was sweating.

The guards brought him to the center of the room. Knupf was standing
near him, a perfectly blank expression on his face. His voice was the
same rough rasp, but it seemed almost mechanical.

"You have confessed to me," he said, "your heresy. Now, you will be made
to ratify your confession. That done, your penalty will be exacted."

And the penalty, of course, would be death--death at the stake.

He forced himself to remain calm. Now was the time for his play. He took
a deep breath and felt the strength in him gather to a single point and
flow outward. The two men suddenly seemed to stagger; there was a second
of confusion and they had let him go. He stood alone in the room. He
turned and walked to the door, but he did not open it. Instead, he
leaned against it.

He forced his voice into the patterns of calmness and ease. "Your men
cannot touch me," he said.

"Wizard--"

"No," Jonas said. The confusion he was broadcasting kept the men from
doing anything that required even a simple plan, but he couldn't keep it
up for long. "A man like yourself, a man with a particular talent, given
by God."

"The name of God--"

"I can say that name," Jonas told the Inquisitor. "No wizard may say
it."

"It is a trick," Knupf said.

Jonas shook his head. "Not at all. I will ask you to do nothing against
the Faith; I will merely ask you to test for yourself what I say."

"You are a heretic," Knupf said stubbornly. "I can not--"

"You can pray," Jonas said.

Knupf blinked. "Pray?" he said.

"Meditate on a prayer," Jonas said. "Keep your mind open, keep yourself
ready for the gift of God. It will descend on you."

Knupf shook his head. "It is a trick--" he began.

"A trick?" Jonas said. "With the prayers of God and His Church?"
