his hand broke apart of its own weight: it was not too wet to work.
Festival-day though it was to his _Schwotzer_ neighbors, he was eager to
spear this virgin soil with his plow blade.

Aaron strode back to the barn. He hitched Rosina--the dappled mare,
named "Raisin" for her spots--to the plow and slapped her into motion.
Sleek with her winter's idleness, Rosina was at first unenthusiastic
about the plow; but the spring sun and honest exercise warmed her
quickly. Within half an hour she was earning her keep. Though Aaron was
plowing shallow, the compact soil broke hard. Rosina leaned into the
traces, leaving hoofprints three inches deep. No gasoline tractor, Aaron
mused, could ever pull itself through soil so rich and damp.
_Geilsgrefte_, horsepower, was best exerted by a horse, he thought.

The brown earth-smells were good. Aaron kicked apart the larger clods,
fat with a planet-life of weather and rich decay. This land would take a
good deal of disking to get it into shape. His neighbors, who'd done
their heavy plowing just after last fall's first frost, were already
well ahead of him. He stabled Rosina at sundown, and went in to sneak a
well-earned glass of hard cider past Martha's teetotaling eye.

       *       *       *       *       *

Musa the carpenter brought his son home well after dark. Waziri had had
adventures, the old man said; dancing, gambling on the Fool's Wheel,
sampling fonio-beer, celebrating his own young life's springtime with
the earth's. Both the old man and the boy were barefoot, Aaron noticed;
but said nothing: perhaps shoelessness was part of their
spring-festival.

Waziri a bit _geschwepst_ with the beer, tottered off to bed. "Thanks to
you, friend Haruna, that boy became a man today," the carpenter said. He
accepted a glass of Aaron's cider. "Today Waziri's wallet jingled with
bronze and copper earned by his own sweat, a manful sound to a lad of
fifteen summers. I ask pardon for having returned your laborer in so
damaged a condition, brother Haruna; but you may be consoled with the
thought that the Mother's festival comes but once in the twelve-month."

"No harm was done, brother Musa," Aaron said, offering his visitor
tobacco. "In my own youth, I sometimes danced with beer-light feet to
the music of worldly guitars; and yet I reached a man's estate."

Offered a refill for his pipe, Musa raised a hand in polite refusal.
"Tomorrow's sun will not wait on our conversation, and much must be
done, in the manner of racers waiting the signal, before the first blade
breaks the soil," he said. "Good night, brother Haruna; and may Mother
grant you light!"

"Mother keep you, brother Musa," Aaron murmured the heathen phrase
without embarrassment. "I'll guide your feet to your wagon, if I may."

Aaron, carrying the naphtha lantern, led the way across the strip of
new-plowed soil. Set by frost into plastic mounds and ridges, the earth
bent beneath his shoes and the carpenter's bare feet. Aaron swung Musa's
picket-iron, the little anchor to which his horse was tethered, into the
wagon, noticing that it had been curiously padded with layers of quilted
cloth. "May you journey home in good health, brother Musa," he said.

"_Uwaka!_" Musa shouted, staring at the plow-cuts.

Aaron Stoltzfoos dropped the lantern to his side, amazed that the
dignified old man could be guilty of such an obscenity. Perhaps he'd
misheard. "Haruna, you have damned yourself!" Musa bellowed. "Cursed be
this farm! Cursed be thy farming! May thy seedlings rot, may thy corn
sprout worms for tassles, may your cattle stink and make early bones!"

"Brother Musa!" Aaron said.

"I am no sib to you, O Bearded One," Musa said. "Nor will I help you
carry the curse you have brought upon yourself by today's ill-doing." He
darted back to the farmhouse, where he ordered half-wakened Waziri to
pad barefoot after him to the wagon, rubbing his eyes. "Come, son," Musa
said. "We must flee these ill-omened fields." Without another word to
his host, the carpenter hoisted his boy into the wagon, mounted, and set
off into the night. The hoofs of his horse padded softly against the
dirt road, unshod.

Martha met the bewildered Aaron at the door, wakened by Musa's shouting.
"_Wass gibt_, Stoltz?" she asked. "What for was all the carry-on?"

Aaron tugged at his beard. "I don't know, woman," he admitted. "Musa the
carpenter took one look at the plowing I did today, then cursed me as
though he'd caught me spitting in his well. He got Waziri up from bed
and took him home." He took his wife's hand. "I'm sorry he woke you up,
Liebchen."

"It was not so much the angry carpenter who waked me as the little jack
rabbit you're father to," Martha said. "As you say, a _Bun_ who can kick
so hard, and barefoot, too, will be a strong one once he's born."

Aaron was staring out the window onto the dark road. "_Farwas hot Musa
sell gehuh?_" he asked himself. "What for did Musa do such a thing? He
knows that our ways are different to his. If I did aught wrong, Musa
must know it was done not for want to harm. I will go to the village
tomorrow; Musa must forgive me and explain."

"He will, Stoltz." Martha said. "_Kuum, schloef._ You'll be getting up
early."

"How can I sleep, not knowing how I have hurt my friend?" Aaron asked.

"You must," Martha urged him. "Let your cares rest for the night,
Aaron."

In the morning, Stoltzfoos prepared for his trip into Datura by donning
his Sunday-best. He clipped a black patent-leather bow tie, a wedding
gift, onto his white shirt: and fastened up his best broadfall trousers
with his dress suspenders. Over this, Aaron put his _Mutzi_, the tailed
frock coat that fastened with hooks-and-eyes. When he'd exchanged his
broad-brimmed black felt working-hat for another just the same, but
unsweated, Aaron was dressed as he'd be on his way to a House-Amish
Sunday meeting back home. "I expect no trouble here, Martha," he said,
tucking a box of stogies under his arm as a little guest-gift for the
old carpenter.

"Hurry home, Stoltz; I feel wonderful busy about the middle," Martha
said. There was a noise out on the road. "Listen!" she said. "Go look
the window out, now; someone is coming the yard in!"

Aaron hastened to lift the green roller-blind over the parlor window.
"Ach; it is the _groesie Fisch_, Sarki Kazunzumi, with half the folk
from town," he said. "Stay here, woman. I will out and talk with them."

The Sarki sat astride his white pony, staring as Aaron approached him.
Behind their chief, on lesser beasts, sat Kazunzumi's retainers, each
with a bundle in his arms. "Welcome, O Sarki!" Aaron said, raising his
fist.

Kazunzumi did not return the Amishman's salute. "I return your gifts,
Lightless One," he announced. "They are tainted with your blasphemy." He
nodded, and his servants dismounted to stack at the side of the road
Aaron's guest-gifts of months before. The bale of tobacco was set down,
the bolt of scarlet silk, the chains of candy, the silver-filigreed
saddle. "Now that I owe you naught, Bearded One, we have no further
business with one another." He reined his horse around. "I go in
sadness, Haruna," he said.

"What did I do, Kazunzumi?" Aaron asked. "What am I to make of your
displeasure?"

"You have failed us, who was my friend," the Sarki said. "You will leave
this place, taking your woman and your beasts and your sharp-shod
horses."

"Sir, where am I to go?"

"Whence came you, Haruna?" the Sarki asked. "Return to your own
black-garbed folk, and injure the Mother no longer with your lack of
understanding."

"Sarki Kazunzumi, I know not how I erred," Stoltzfoos said. "As for
returning to my own country, that I cannot. The off-world vessel that
brought us here is star-far away; and it will not return until we are
all five summers older. My Martha is besides with child, and cannot
safely travel. My land is ripe for seeding. How can I go now?"

"There is wilderness to the south, where no son of the Mother lives,"
the Sarki said. "Go there. I care not for heathen who are out of my
sight."

"Sir, show us mercy," Aaron said.

Kazunzumi danced his shoeless horse around to face Aaron. "Haruna, who
was my friend, whom I thought to stand with me in Mother's light, I
would be merciful; but I cannot be weak. It is not me whom you must
beseech, but the Mother who feeds us all. Make amends to Her, then Sarki
Kazunzumi will give his ear to your pleas. Without amends, Haruna, you
must go from here within the week." Kazunzumi waved his arm and galloped
off toward Datura. His servants followed quickly. On the roadside lay
the gifts, dusted from the dirt raised by the horses.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Amishman turned toward the house. Martha's face was at the parlor
window, quizzical under her prayer-covering, impatient to hear what had
happened. Aaron plodded back to the house with the evil news, stumbling
over a clod of earth in the new-turned furrows near the road. Martha met
him at the door. "_Waas will er?_" she demanded.

"He says we must leave our farm."
