remained. He struggled against it, and it grew.

_Admit it. How did you do it? Where is the money?_

The pressure became a tearing force. Gerda swayed weakly.

"I don't know what happened," he insisted. "I told----"

The words stopped as the force became almost unbearably intense. A
sudden, sharp pain tore at Gerda's throat, and blinding light seemed to
strike back of his eyes. Through the glare, he dimly saw the Baron raise
a hand threateningly.

"You claim to have no idea at all how the money was taken, or which of
your men may have been the thief? This is not a sensible attitude."

_You know something. You must know something. Tell it!_

Gerda shook his head miserably, entirely unable to speak. Somehow,
nothing was clear. He remembered that something had gone wrong. Somehow,
he had failed his duty. But how? The room was hazy. Snatches of his last
tour of duty rose to his consciousness, then were abruptly blotted
out--gone. The faces of his clerk and of the men-at-arms came out of the
haze for an instant. Then, they, too, were gone.

The room seemed to spin and an irresistible force bore him to the floor.
As he slowly was pressed downward, he wondered who he was--why he was
here--what had happened. Then, the floor came at him with blinding speed
and he ceased to wonder. The haze about him scintillated and became
impenetrable darkness.

The Baron looked down at the crumpled form.

"Take this man away, Weron," he ordered. "He knew nothing." He stroked
his hair. "When he recovers, assign him to some unimportant duty in the
castle. Something, of course, that will demand little thought or
spirit."

"And the others, Excellency?"

"Oh, bring them in, one at a time. One of them managed to make a
complete fool of his officer, of course. But I'll find him."

Bel Menstal waved his hand in dismissal, then leaned back in his chair,
watching as his steward directed a pair of men-at-arms. They carried the
limp form from the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

"There. That'll pick up any power radiation from the castle." Konar
straightened, looking at the small panel.

"Good enough." Meinora leaned over, checking the dials. "See you've set
it for average power."

"Yes, sir. It'll give a flicker indication for low levels and it'll fail
to trip for unaided thought. Not too much chance of an overload,
either."

"That's right. You're learning." Meinora nodded casually. "Well, let's
keep watch on it." He sat down. "Audio alarm on?"

Konar glanced at the panel again. "I remembered it this time." He
grinned, then looked curiously at his superior's cut cheek. The wound
was healing nicely. In an hour or so, there would be no visible trace of
the injury.

"Say, Chief," he asked, "how'd you happen to get slapped?"

"I asked for it." Meinora smiled thoughtfully.

"Yes, sir. I know that. But what was the purpose?"

"This continent has never been thoroughly checked, so we're sampling the
culture. We know a lot about them now, but there's a lot we still have
to know. For example, how do they react to various stimuli? And how much
stimulus is necessary to produce a given action? Of course, we can't
check every individual, but we can pick up a sample from each community
we contact and extrapolate from them." Meinora spread his hands.

"So, I presented a minor irritation to that officer, and he
reacted--fast. He didn't just slap me for effect. He was infuriated at
the insult to his authority. Not only that, but his men expected him to
react in just that manner. I noted that, too. He'd have lost face if
he'd acted in any other way. And the men-at-arms were disappointed when
we gave them no further excuse for violence. We really lost face with
them. There, we have an indication that violence is the expected thing
in this particular castle, which is a community of the duchy. Right?"

"Yes." Konar nodded thoughtfully. "They're not only violent themselves,
but they expect violence from others. I see what you mean. You'll sample
the other baronies?"

"Certainly. As many as we contact. They can tell us quite a bit. We----"

A buzzer interrupted him. Meinora snapped a switch and sat forward
alertly.

A needle quivered, rose from its rest, and swung abruptly across the
meter scale. With an audible ping, it slapped against the stop beyond
the maximum reading.

Meinora looked sharply at the detector set, then turned a selector
switch. The needle moved reluctantly away from the pin, but remained
above the red line at center scale. Meinora grimaced, twisted the
selector again, and adjusted another knob, till the needle came to rest
at center.

He examined the dial readings, frowned incredulously, then turned.

"Look at it," he invited. "It's a wonder he hasn't burned that amplifier
out. It's a heavy duty job, I know. But----"

Konar leaned over his chief's shoulder.

"What an overload! We've found it, all right. But what's going on?"

"Let's find out." Meinora flipped a switch. The two men tensed against
the resultant shock and were silent for a time. At last, Konar reached
out to snap the switch off.

"Just raw, crushing force," he said wonderingly. "A ferocious demand,
with no regard for facts, no consideration of mental characteristics, no
thought of consequence." He shook his head slowly. "Never experienced
anything just like that before."

"With the power he's using," Meinora remarked, "it's a wonder he doesn't
upset every mind in his castle." He snapped the detector off.

"Including his own." Konar nodded and looked at the dial settings. "One
thing's sure. This boy never had any instruction." He stepped back.
"Well, we know he has it. What's the procedure?"

Meinora was frowning thoughtfully. He stroked his injured cheek, then
shook his head.

"We certainly let that guard officer in for something," he mused. "Have
to pick him up and give him therapy, I think." He looked at Konar. "Oh,
procedure?"

"Yes, sir. Do we catch him alone and proceed as we did with the last
one? That worked with no trouble."

"No, I don't think it'd work out so well in this case. If I caught it
right, this one's almost never by himself outside his apartment. Likes
to impress his personality on people." Meinora looked at the detector
set, then around at the younger man beside him.

"You know, I got some interesting side thoughts just now. Maybe we can
do two jobs in one this time. It'll take a little longer, but it might
save time in the long run."

The communications operator came over. "Not another of those?" he asked
with a grin.

Meinora nodded. "I'm just dreaming up a nice, dirty trick," he admitted.
"Tried something like it once before, on a smaller scale. It worked." He
stood up, stretching.

"The fair's going to be on at Orieano in a little while, right?"

"Yes. Be a pretty big affair, too, I think. Why?"

"And the Duke'll be there, of course, along with most of his court and a
good share of his fighting men?"

"Why, yes, sir. They tell me he's always been there. Don't suppose he'll
skip it this time."

"So, it's perfect. We'll get this set of equipment in public, and with
apparent legitimacy. And in the process, we'll set up social strains
that'll result in this area reorienting itself." Meinora looked around
with a grin.

"Look, call Barskor. Tell him to pick us up with the flier. We'll go
down to the hills south of Orieano. Tell you about it on the way."

       *       *       *       *       *

The last of the river guards was carried out, head dangling limply from
the arms of one of the bearers. Bel Menstal sat back in his chair,
frowning. Abruptly, he turned on his steward.

"None of them knew a thing," he snarled. "None of them. There's
something funny going on here."

The steward's face was drawn. Dizzying forces had assailed him, and he
had almost collapsed several times during the questioning. He tried to
gather his hazy thoughts. Too many kept coming too fast.

"Yes, Excellency," he agreed. "Maybe it _is_ witchcraft."

Bel Menstal's face darkened. "Nonsense," he growled, rising part way out
of his chair. "Witchcraft be damned! There's some explanation to this,
and I'm going to find out what it is."

"Yes, Excellency."

The Baron looked up, then stared contemptuously at his man.

"Yes, Excellency," he mimicked in a singsong voice. "Always 'Yes,
Excellency.' Haven't you an idea of your own?"

"Yes, Excellency, I----"

"Inept fool! There's an explanation to this, I tell you. And peasant
superstition has no part in it. You should have found it. But no! You
came, dragging a whole detachment of guards in for me to question. Me,
the Baron! I have to do all the work--all the thinking. I tell you, I
want men about me who can think and act."

He got out of his chair and circled the table, striding close to the
steward.

"I'll give you one more chance, Weron. Go out and find what happened to
that money. I don't care how you do it, and I'm not going to be bothered
with your petty details. But find out where that money has gone. Is that
simple enough for you to understand?"

"Yes, Excellency." Weron backed toward the door. "I'll----"

Reckless fury shook Florel. Suddenly, he felt an irresistible craving
for direct, violent action. He picked a dagger from his belt.

"You're not only a fool," he shouted, "but a spineless one, as well. I
think I'll have to get another steward. A good one." He raised the
dagger, then paused.

"Here, weakling. You'd like to use this, wouldn't you? But you lack the
will. That's why you're a mere lackey." Abruptly, he threw the weapon at
Weron.

"Try it, fool. Try it, and see how a real man protects himself."

He stalked toward the steward.

The man cringed away, then, pressed by his master, suddenly sobbed with
rage. He raised the dagger. Bel Menstal, protected by his body shield,
brushed the stroke aside.

"Ha!" He snatched the weapon. "You would try it?"

Weron threw his arms before him, trying to ward off the blows, then
slumped as the blade sank into his flesh.

Bel Menstal struck the sagging body a few more times with the dagger,
then threw the weapon on top of the inert form.

"Ho, Guards," he shouted, flinging the door open.

He went back to his chair and watched as the guards came in. In
obedience to his gesture, they carried the one-time steward from the
room. The door closed, and Bel Menstal was alone. Slowly, the
stimulation of the encounter faded, and he shook his head.

It had been pleasant for a few minutes, he thought, but he had solved
nothing.

Could it be that searchers from his native land had at last found him?
He frowned. No, they wouldn't use some devious method, even supposing
they could find some way of corrupting his household. They would simply
expose him and accuse him before the Duke. They'd storm his castle if
necessary, to take him by force. This was something else. He would have
to think. He put his elbows on the table, cupping his face in his hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

The great market square at Orieano was crowded. Colorful tents hid most
of the cobblestones, and the rest of the pavement was obscured from view
by the droves of people. Merchants and their assistants hovered about,
each endeavoring to outdo the rest in enticing the swarming crowd into
his tent. Jugglers and mountebanks competed for attention, outdoing even
themselves in their efforts to gain the ears, the eyes, and the coins of
the mob of bargain hunters.

At one side of the square, the cattle mart was drawing many, who
listened to the noise of the beasts and the shouts of the vendors. Some
paused to bargain. Others simply strode about, still looking for the
things they had come to seek out. Here and there, a cutpurse slunk
through the crowd, seeking his own type of bargain--an unwary victim.

