
The planets, in effect, are bodies as opaque as the Earth, traveling
round the God of Day at a speed proportional to their distance. They
number eight principal orbs, and may be divided into two quite distinct
groups by which we may recognize them: the first comprises four planets,
of relatively small dimensions in comparison with those of the second
group, which are so voluminous that the least important of them is
larger than the other four put together.

In order of distance from the Sun, we first encounter:

          MERCURY, VENUS, THE EARTH, AND MARS

These are the worlds that are nearest to the orb of day.

The four following, and much more remote, are, still in order of
distance:

          JUPITER, SATURN, URANUS, AND NEPTUNE

This second group is separated from the first by a vast space occupied
by quite a little army of minute planets, tiny cosmic bodies, the
largest of which measures little more than 100 kilometers (62 miles) in
diameter, and the smallest some few miles only.

The planets which form these three groups represent the principal
members of the solar family. But the Sun is a patriarch, and each of his
daughters has her own children who, while obeying the paternal influence
of the fiery orb, are also obedient to the world that governs them.
These secondary asters, or _satellites_, follow the planets in their
course, and revolve round them in an ellipse, just as the others rotate
round the Sun. Every one knows the satellite of the Earth, the Moon. All
the other planets of our system have their own moons, some being even
more favored than ourselves in this respect, and having several. Mars
has two; Jupiter, five; Saturn, eight; Uranus, four; and Neptune, one
(at least as yet discovered).

In order to realize the relations between these worlds, we must
appreciate their distances by arranging them in a little table:

                         Distance in    Distance in
                         Millions of    Millions of
                         Kilometers.       Miles.
          Mercury             57              35
          Venus              108              67
          The Earth          149              93
          Mars               226             140
          Jupiter            775             481
          Saturn           1,421             882
          Uranus           2,831           1,755
          Neptune          4,470           2,771

The Sun is at the center (or, more properly speaking, at the focus, for
the planets describe an ellipse) of this system, and controls them.
Neptune is thirty times farther from the Sun than the Earth. These
disparities of distance produce a vast difference in the periods of the
planetary revolutions; for while the Earth revolves round the Sun in a
year, Venus in 224 days, and Mercury in 88, Mars takes nearly 2 years to
accomplish his journey, Jupiter 12 years, Saturn 29, Uranus 84, and
Neptune 165.

Even the planets and their moons do not represent the Sun's complete
paternity. There are further, in the solar republic, certain vagabond
and irregular orbs that travel at a speed that is often most immoderate,
occasionally approaching the Sun, not to be consumed therein, but, as it
appears, to draw from its radiant source the provision of forces
necessary for their perigrinations through space. These are the
_Comets_, which pursue an extremely elongated orbit round the Sun, to
which at times they approximate very closely, at other times being
excessively distant.

And now to recapitulate our knowledge of the Solar Empire. In the first
place, we see a colossal globe of fire dominating and governing the
worlds that belong to him. Around him are grouped planets, in number
eight principal, formed of solid and obscure matter, gravitating round
the central orb. Other secondary orbs, the satellites, revolve round the
planets, which keep them within the sphere of their attraction. And
lastly, the comets, irregular celestial bodies, track the whole extent
of the great solar province. To these might be added the whirlwinds of
meteors, as it were disaggregated comets, which also circle round the
Sun, and give origin to shooting stars, when they come into collision
with the Earth.

Having now a general idea of our celestial family, and an appreciation
of the potent focus that controls it, let us make direct acquaintance
with the several members of which it is composed.




CHAPTER V

THE PLANETS

_A._--MERCURY, VENUS, THE EARTH, MARS


And now we are in the Solar System, at the center, or, better, at the
focus of which burns the immense and dazzling orb. We have appreciated
the grandeur and potency of the solar globe, whose rays spread out in
active waves that bear a fecundating illumination to the worlds that
gravitate round him; we have appreciated the distance that separates the
Sun from the Earth, the third of the planets retained within his domain,
or at least I trust that the comparisons of the times required by
certain moving objects to traverse this distance have enabled us to
conceive it.

We said that the four planets nearest to the Sun are Mercury, at a
distance of 57 million kilometers (35,000,000 miles); Venus, at 108
million (67,000,000 miles); the Earth, at 149 million (93,000,000
miles); and Mars at 226 million (140,000,000 miles). Let us begin our
planetary journey with these four stations.


MERCURY

A little above the Sun one sometimes sees, now in the West, in the
lingering shimmer of the twilight, now in the East, when the tender
roseate dawn announces the advent of a clear day, a small star of the
first magnitude which remains but a very short time above the horizon,
and then plunges back into the flaming sun. This is Mercury, the agile
and active messenger of Olympus, the god of eloquence, of medicine, of
commerce, and of thieves. One only sees him furtively, from time to
time, at the periods of his greatest elongations, either after the
setting or before the rising of the radiant orb, when he presents the
aspect of a somewhat reddish star.

This planet, like the others, shines only by the reflection of the Sun
whose illumination he receives, and as he is in close juxtaposition with
it, his light is bright enough, though his volume is inconsiderable. He
is smaller than the Earth. His revolution round the Sun being
accomplished in about three months, he passes rapidly, in a month and a
half, from one side to the other of the orb of day, and is alternately a
morning and an evening star. The ancients originally regarded it as two
separate planets; but with attentive observation, they soon perceived
its identity. In our somewhat foggy climates, it can only be discovered
once or twice a year, and then only by looking for it according to the
indications given in the astronomic almanacs.

[Illustration: FIG. 32.--Orbits of the four Planets nearest to the Sun.]

Mercury courses round the Sun at a distance of 57,000,000 kilometers
(35,000,000 miles), and accomplishes his revolution in 87 days, 23
hours, 15 minutes; _i.e._, 2 months, 27 days, 23 hours, or a little less
than three of our months. If the conditions of life are the same there
as here, the existence of the Mercurians must be four times as short as
our own. A youth of twenty, awaking to the promise of the life he is
just beginning in this world, is an octogenarian in Mercury. There the
fair sex would indeed be justified in bewailing the transitory nature of
life, and might regret the years that pass too quickly away. Perhaps,
however, they are more philosophic than with us.

[Illustration: FIG. 33.--Orbits of the four Planets farthest from the
Sun.]

The orbit of Mercury, which of course is within that of the Earth, is
not circular, but elliptical, and very eccentric, so elongated that at
certain times of the year this planet is extremely remote from the solar
focus, and receives only half as much heat and light as at the opposite
period; and, in consequence, his distance from the Earth varies
considerably.

[Illustration: FIG. 34.--Mercury near quadrature.]

This globe exhibits _phases_, discovered in the seventeenth century by
Galileo, which recall those of the Moon. They are due to the motions of
the planet round the Sun, and are invisible to the unaided eye, but with
even a small instrument, one can follow the gradations and study Mercury
under every aspect. Sometimes, again, he passes exactly in front of the
Sun, and his disk is projected like a black point upon the luminous
surface of the flaming orb. This occurred, notably, on May 10, 1891, and
November 10, 1894; and the phenomenon will recur on November 12, 1907,
and November 6, 1914.

Mercury is the least of all the worlds in our system (with the exception
of the cosmic fragments that circulate between the orbit of Mars and
that of Jupiter). His volume equals only 5/100 that of the Earth. His
diameter, in comparison with that of our planet, is in the ratio of 373
to 1,000 (a little more than 1/3) and measures 4,750 kilometers (2,946
miles). His density is the highest of all the worlds in the great solar
family, and exceeds that of our Earth by about 1/3; but weight there is
less by almost 1/2.

Mercury is enveloped in a very dense, thick atmosphere, which doubtless
sensibly tempers the solar heat, for the Sun exhibits to the Mercurians
a luminous disk about seven times more extensive than that with which we
are familiar on the Earth, and when Mercury is at perihelion (that is,
nearest to the Sun), his inhabitants receive ten times more light and
heat than we obtain at midsummer. In all probability, it would be
impossible for us to set foot on this planet without being shattered by
a sunstroke.

Yet we may well imagine that Nature's fecundity can have engendered
beings there of an organization different from our own, adapted to an
existence in the proximity of fire. What magnificent landscapes may
there be adorned with the luxuriant vegetation that develops rapidly
under an ardent and generous sun?

[Illustration: FIG. 35.--The Earth viewed from Mercury.]

Observations of Mercury are taken under great difficulties, just because
of the immediate proximity of the solar furnace; yet some have detected
patches that might be seas. In any case, these observations are
contradictory and uncertain.

Up to the present it has been impossible to determine the duration of
the rotation. Some astronomers even think that the Sun's close proximity
must have produced strong tides, that would, as it were, have
immobilized the globe of Mercury, just as the Earth has immobilized the
Moon, forcing it perpetually to present the same side to the Sun. From
the point of view of habitation, this situation would be somewhat
peculiar; perpetual day upon the illumined half, perpetual night upon
the other hemisphere, and a fairly large zone of twilight between the
two. Such a condition would indeed be different from the succession of
terrestrial days and nights.

As seen from Mercury, the Earth we inhabit would shine out in the starry
sky[9] as a magnificent orb of first magnitude, with the Moon
alongside, a faithful little companion. They should form a fine double
star, the Earth being a brilliant orb of first magnitude, and the Moon
of third, a charming couple, and admired doubtless as an enchanted and
privileged abode.

It is at midnight during the oppositions of the Earth with the Sun that
our planet is the most beautiful and brilliant, as is Jupiter for
ourselves. The constellations are the same, viewed from Mercury or from
the Earth.

But is this little solar planet inhabited? We do not yet know. We can
only reply: why not?


VENUS

When the sunset atmosphere is crimson with the glorious rays of the King
of Orbs, and all Nature assumes the brooding veil of twilight, the most
indifferent eyes are often attracted and captivated by the presence of a
star that is almost dazzling, and illuminates with its white and limpid
light the heavens darkened by the disappearance of the God of Day.

Hail, Venus, Queen of the Heavens! the "Shepherd's Star," gentle mother
of the loves, goddess of beauty, eternally adored and cherished, sung
and immortalized upon Earth, by poets and artists. Her splendid
brilliancy attracted notice from earliest antiquity, and we find her,
radiant and charming, in the works of the ancients, who erected altars
to her and adorned their poetry with her grace and beauty. Homer calls
her Callisto the Beautiful; Cicero names her Vesper, the evening star,
and Lucifer, the star of the morning--for it was with this divinity as
with Mercury. For a long while she was regarded as two separate planets,
and it was only when it came to be observed that the evening and the
morning star were always in periodic succession, that the identity of
the orb was recognized.

Her radiant splendor created her mythological personality, just as the
agility of Mercury created that of the messenger of the gods.

We do not see her aerial chariot in the Heavens drawn by a flight of
doves with white and fluttering wings, but we follow the lustrous orb
led on through space by solar attraction. And in the beautiful evenings
when she is at her greatest distance from our Sun, the whole world
admires this white and dazzling Venus reigning as sovereign over our
twilight[10] for hours after sunset, and in addition to the _savants_
who are practically occupied with astronomy, millions of eyes are raised
to this celestial splendor, and for a moment millions of human beings
feel some curiosity about the mysteries of the Infinite. The brutalities
of daily life would fain petrify our dreams, but thought is not yet
stifled to the point of checking all aspirations after eternal truth,
and when we gaze at the starry sky it is hard not to ask ourselves the
nature of those other worlds, and the place occupied by our own planet
in the vast concert of sidereal harmony.

[Illustration: FIG. 36.--The Evening Star.]

Even through a small telescope, Venus offers remarkable phases.

[Illustration: FIG. 37.--Successive phases of Venus.]

Fig. 37 gives some notion of the succession of these, and of the
planet's variations in magnitude during its journey round the Sun.
Imagine it to be rotating in a year of 224 days, 16 hours, 49 minutes, 8
seconds at a distance of 108 million kilometers (67,000,000 miles), the
Earth being at 149 million kilometers (93,000,000 miles). Like Mercury,
at certain periods it passes between the Sun and ourselves, and as its
illuminated hemisphere is of course turned toward the orb of day, we at
those times perceive only a sharp and very luminous crescent. At such
periods Venus is entirely, so to say, against the Sun, and presents to
us her greatest apparent dimension (Fig. 38). Sometimes, again, like
Mercury, she passes immediately in front of the Sun, forming a perfectly
round black spot; this happened on December 8, 1874, and December 6,
1882; and will recur on June 7, 2004, and June 5, 2012. These transits
have been utilized in celestial geometry in measuring the distance of
the Sun.

You will readily divine that the distance of Venus varies considerably
according to her position in relation to the Earth: when she is between
the Sun and ourselves she is nearest to our world; but it is just at
those times that we see least of her surface, because she exhibits to us
only a slender crescent. Terrestrial astronomers are accordingly very
badly placed for the study of her physical constitution. The best
observations can be made when she is situated to right or left of the
Sun, and shows us about half her illuminated disk--during the day for
choice, because at night there is too much irradiation from her dazzling
light.

These phases were discovered by Galileo, in 1610. His observations were
among the first that confirmed the veracity of the system of Copernicus,
affording an evident example of the movement of the planets round the
sun. They are often visible to the unaided eye with good sight, either
at dusk, or through light clouds.

[Illustration: FIG. 38.--Venus at greatest brilliancy.]

Venus, surrounded by a highly dense and rarefied atmosphere, which
increases the difficulties of observing her surface, might be called the
twin sister of the Earth, so similar are the dimensions of the two
worlds. But, strange as it may seem to the many admirers, who are ready
to hail in her an abode of joy and happiness, it is most probable that
this planet, attractive as she is at a distance, would be a less
desirable habitation than our floating island. In fact, the atmosphere
of Venus is perpetually covered with cloud, so that the weather there
must be always foggy. No definite geographical configuration can be
discovered on her, despite the hopes of the eighteenth-century
astronomers. We are not even sure that she rotates upon herself, so
contradictory are the observations, and so hard is it to distinguish
anything clearly upon her surface. A single night of observation
suffices to show the rotation of Mars or of Jupiter; but the beautiful
Evening Star remains obstinately veiled from our curiosity.

Several astronomers, and not the least considerable, think that the
tides produced by the Sun upon her seas, or globe in its state of
pristine fluidity, must have been strong enough to seize and fix her, as
the Earth did for the Moon, thus obliging her to present always the same
face to the Sun. Certain telescopic observations would even seem to
confirm this theoretical deduction from the calculations of celestial
mechanics.

The author ventures to disagree with this opinion, its apparent
probability notwithstanding, because he has invariably received a
contrary impression from all his telescopic observations. He has quite
recently (spring of 1903) repeated these observations. Choosing a
remarkably clear and perfectly calm atmosphere, he examined the splendid
planet several times with great attention in the field of the telescope.
The right or eastern border (reversed image) was dulled by the
atmosphere of Venus; this is the line of separation between day and
night. Beneath, at the extreme northern edge, he was attracted on each
occasion by a small white patch, a little whiter than the rest of the
surface of the planet, surrounded by a light-gray penumbra, giving the
exact effect of a polar snow, very analogous to that observed at the
poles of Mars. To the author this white spot on the boreal horn of
Venus does not appear to be due to an effect of contrast, as has
sometimes been supposed.

Now, if the globe of Venus has poles, it must turn upon itself.

Unfortunately it has proved impossible to distinguish any sign upon the
disk, indicative of the direction and speed of its rotary movement,
although these observations were made, with others, under excellent
conditions.--Three o'clock in the afternoon, brilliant sun, sky clear
blue, the planet but little removed from the meridian--at which time it
is less dazzling than in the evening.

There is merely the impression; but it is so definite as to prevent the
author from adopting the new hypothesis, in virtue of which the planet,
as it gravitates round the Sun, presents always the same hemisphere.

If this hypothesis were a reality, Venus would certainly be a very
peculiar world. Eternal day on the one side; eternal night on the other.
Maximum light and heat at the center of the hemisphere perpetually
turned to the Sun; maximum cold and center of night at the antipodes.
This icy hemisphere would possibly be uninhabitable, but the resources
of Nature are so prodigious, and the law of Life is so imperious, so
persistent, under the most disadvantageous and deplorable terrestrial
conditions, that it would be transcending our rights to declare an
impossibility of existence, even in this eternal night. The currents of
the atmosphere would no doubt suffice to set up perpetual changes of
temperature between the two hemispheres, in comparison with which our
trade-winds would be the lightest of breezes.

Yes, mystery still reigns upon this adjacent earth, and the most
powerful instruments of the observatories of the whole world have been
unable to solve it. All we know is that the diameter, surface, volume
and mass of this planet, and its weight at the surface, do not differ
sensibly from those that characterize our own globe: that this planet is
sister to our own, and of the same order, hence probably formed of the
same elements. We further know that, as seen from Venus (Fig. 39), the
Earth on which we live is a magnificent star, a double orb more
brilliant even than when viewed from Mercury. It is a dazzling orb of
first magnitude, accompanied by its moon, a star of the second and a
half magnitude.

And thus the worlds float on in space, distant symbols of hopes not
realized on any one of them, all at different stages of their degree of
evolution, representing an ever-growing progress in the sequence of the
ages.

[Illustration: FIG. 39.--The Earth viewed from Venus.]

When we contemplate this radiant Venus, it is difficult, even if we can
not form any definite idea as to her actual state as regards habitation,
to assume that she must be a dreary desert, and not, on the contrary,
to hail in her a celestial land, differing more or less from our own
dwelling-place, travailing with her sisters in the accomplishment of the
general plan of Nature.

Such are the characteristic features of our celestial neighbor. In
quitting her, we reach the Earth, which comes immediately next her in
order of distance, 149 million kilometers (93,000,000 miles) from the
Sun, but as we shall devote an entire chapter to our own planet, we will
not halt at this point, but cross in one step the distance that
separates Mars from Venus.

Let us only remark in passing, that our planet is the largest of the
four spheres adjacent to the Sun. Here are their comparative diameters:

                         The Earth = 1.    In Kilometers.    In Miles.
          Mercury             0.373             4,750           2,946
          Venus               0.999            12,730           7,894
          Earth               1.000            12,742           7,926
          Mars                0.528             6,728           4,172
