
          6. What is the first thing to do after taking the
          food into your mouth?

          7. Why must you chew it?

          8. What does the saliva do to the food?

          9. How can you prove that saliva turns starch into
          sugar?

          10. What happens if the food is not chewed and
          mixed with the saliva?

          11. What comes next to the chewing?

          12. What is there wonderful about swallowing?

          13. What must you be careful about, when you are
          swallowing?

          14. What happens to the food after it is
          swallowed?

          15. How is it changed in the stomach?

          16. What carries the food to every part of the
          body?

          17. How can food mend a bone?




CHAPTER XIII.

STRENGTH.


[Illustration: H]ERE are the names of some of the different kinds of
food. If you write them on the blackboard or on your slates, it will
help you to remember them.

                  _Water._ _Salt._ _Lime._

          Meat,  }                 Sugar,  }
          Milk,  }                 Starch, }
          Eggs,  }                 Fat,    } for fat and heat.
          Wheat, } for muscles.    Cream,  }
          Corn,  }                 Oil,    }
          Oats,  }

Perhaps some of you noticed that we had no wine, beer, nor any drink
that had alcohol in it, on our bill of fare for dinner. We had no
cigars, either, to be smoked after dinner. If these are good things, we
ought to have had them. Why did we leave them out?

          _We should eat in order to grow strong and keep
          strong._


STRENGTH OF BODY.

If you wanted to measure your strength, one way of doing so would be to
fasten a heavy weight to one end of a rope and pass the rope over a
pulley. Then you might take hold at the other end of the rope and pull
as hard and steadily as you could, marking the place to which you raised
the weight. By trying this once a week, or once a month, you could tell
by the marks, whether you were gaining strength.

But how can we gain strength?

We must exercise in the open air, and take pure air into our lungs to
help purify our blood, and plenty of exercise to make our muscles grow.

We must eat good and simple food, that the blood may have supplies to
take to every part of the body.


ALCOHOL AND STRENGTH.

People used to think that alcohol made them strong.

Can alcohol make good muscles, or bone, or nerve, or brain?

You have already answered "No!" to each of these questions.

If it can not make muscles, nor bone nor nerve, nor brain, it can not
give you any strength.


BEER.

Some people may tell you that drinking beer will make you strong.

The grain from which the beer is made, would have given you strength. If
you should measure your strength before and after drinking beer, you
would find that you had not gained any. Most of the food part of the
grain has been turned into alcohol.


CIDER.

The juice of crushed apples, you know, is called cider. As soon as the
cider begins to turn sour, or "hard," as people say, alcohol begins to
form in it.

Pure water is good, and apples are good. But the apple-juice begins to
be a poison as soon as there is the least drop of alcohol in it. In
cider-making, the alcohol forms in the juice, you know, in a few hours
after it is pressed out of the apples.

None of the drinks in which there is alcohol, can give you real
strength.

Then why do people think they can?

Because alcohol puts the nerves to sleep, they can not, truly, tell the
brain how hard the work is, or how heavy the weight to be lifted.

The alcohol has in this way cheated men into thinking they can do more
than they really can. This false feeling of strength lasts only a little
while. When it has passed, men feel weaker than before.

A story which shows that alcohol does not give strength, was told me by
the captain of a ship, who sailed to China and other distant places.

Many years ago, when people thought a little alcohol was good, it was
the custom to carry in every ship, a great deal of rum. This liquor is
distilled from molasses and contains about one half alcohol. This rum
was given to the sailors every day to drink; and, if there was a great
storm, and they had very hard work to do, it was the custom to give
them twice as much rum as usual.

[Illustration]

The captain watched his men and saw that they were really made no
stronger by drinking the rum; but that, after a little while, they felt
weaker. So he determined to go to sea with no rum in his ship. Once out
on the ocean, of course the men could not get any.

At first, they did not like it; but the captain was very careful to have
their food good and plentiful; and, when a storm came, and they were wet
and cold and tired, he gave them hot coffee to drink. By the time they
had crossed the ocean, the men said: "The captain is right. We have
worked better, and we feel stronger, for going without the rum."


STRENGTH OF MIND.

We have been talking about the strength of muscles; but the very best
kind of strength we have is brain strength, or strength of mind.

Alcohol makes the head ache and deadens the nerves, so that they can
not carry their messages correctly. Then the brain can not think well.
Alcohol does not strengthen the mind.

Some people have little or no money, and no houses or lands; but every
person ought to own a body and a mind that can work for him, and make
him useful and happy.

Suppose you have a strong, healthy body, hands that are well-trained to
work, and a clear, thinking brain to be master of the whole. Would you
be willing to change places with a man whose body and mind had been
poisoned by alcohol, tobacco, and opium, even though he lived in a
palace, and had a million of dollars?

If you want a mind that can study, understand, and think well, do not
let alcohol and tobacco have a chance to reach it.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. What things were left out of our bill of fare?

          2. How could you measure your strength?

          3. How can you gain strength?

          4. Why does drinking beer not make you strong?

          5. Show why drinking wine or any other alcoholic
          drink will not make you strong.

          6. Why do people imagine that they feel strong
          after taking these drinks?

          7. Tell the story which shows that alcohol does
          not help sailors do their work.

          8. What is the best kind of strength to have?

          9. How does alcohol affect the strength of the
          mind?




CHAPTER XIV.

THE HEART.


[Illustration: T]HE heart is in the chest, the upper part of the strong
box which the ribs, spine, shoulder-blades, and collar-bones make for
each of us.

It is made of very thick, strong muscles, as you can see by looking at a
beef's heart, which is much like a man's, but larger.


HOW THE HEART WORKS.

Probably some of you have seen a fire-engine throwing a stream of water
through a hose upon a burning building.

As the engine forces the water through the hose, so the heart, by the
working of its strong muscles, pumps the blood through tubes, shaped
like hose, which lead by thousands of little branches all through the
body. These tubes are called arteries (aer't[)e]r iz).

Those tubes which bring the blood back again to the heart, are called
veins (v[=a]nz). You can see some of the smaller veins in your wrist.

If you press your finger upon an artery in your wrist, you can feel the
steady beating of the pulse. This tells just how fast the heart is
pumping and the blood flowing.

The doctor feels your pulse when you are sick, to find out whether the
heart is working too fast, or too slowly, or just right.

Some way is needed to send the gray fluid that is made from the food we
eat and drink, to every part of the body.

To send the food with the blood is a sure way of making it reach every
part.

So, when the stomach has prepared the food, the blood takes it up and
carries it to every part of the body. It then leaves with each part,
just what it needs.


THE BLOOD AND THE BRAIN.

As the brain has so much work to attend to, it must have very pure, good
blood sent to it, to keep it strong. Good blood is made from good food.
It can not be good if it has been poisoned with alcohol or tobacco.

We must also remember that the brain needs a great deal of blood. If we
take alcohol into our blood, much of it goes to the brain. There it
affects the nerves, and makes a man lose control over his actions.


EXERCISE.

When you run, you can feel your heart beating. It gets an instant of
rest between the beats.

Good exercise in the fresh air makes the heart work well and warms the
body better than a fire could do.


DOES ALCOHOL DO ANY HARM TO THE HEART?

Your heart is made of muscle. You know what harm alcohol does to the
muscles.

Could a fatty heart work as well as a muscular heart? No more than a
fatty arm could do the work of a muscular arm. Besides, alcohol makes
the heart beat too fast, and so it gets too tired.


REVIEW QUESTIONS.

          1. Where is the heart placed?

          2. Of what is it made?

          3. What work does it do?

          4. What are arteries and veins?

          5. What does the pulse tell us?

          6. How does the food we eat reach all parts of the
          body?

          7. How does alcohol in the blood affect the brain?

          8. When does the heart rest?

          9. How does exercise in the fresh air help the
          heart?

          10. What harm does alcohol do to the heart?




CHAPTER XV.

THE LUNGS.


[Illustration: T]HE blood flows all through the body, carrying good food
to every part. It also gathers up from every part the worn-out matter
that can no longer be used. By the time it is ready to be sent back by
the veins, the blood is no longer pure and red. It is dull and bluish in
color, because it is full of impurities.

If you look at the veins in your wrist, you will see that they look
blue.

If all this bad blood goes back to the heart, will the heart have to
pump out bad blood next time? No, for the heart has neighbors very near
at hand, ready to change the bad blood to pure, red blood again.


THE LUNGS.

These neighbors are the lungs. They are in the chest on each side of
the heart. When you breathe, their little air-cells swell out, or
expand, to take in the air. Then they contract again, and the air passes
out through your mouth or nose. The lungs must have plenty of fresh air,
and plenty of room to work in.

[Illustration: _The lungs, heart, and air-passages._]

If your clothes are too tight and the lungs do not have room to expand,
they can not take in so much air as they should. Then the blood can not
be made pure, and the whole body will suffer.

For every good breath of fresh air, the lungs take in, they send out one
of impure air.

In this way, by taking out what is bad, they prepare the blood to go
back to the heart pure and red, and to be pumped out through the body
again.

How the lungs can use the fresh air for doing this good work, you can
not yet understand. By and by, when you are older, you will learn more
about it.


CARE OF THE LUNGS.
