for years; and that every officer in his squadron was decked out with
one, too."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Tell me just one thing," Lance pleaded. His nerves were gradually
getting more on edge. "What has all this got to do with Carolyn Sagen?
Why is she being kept from me?"

Nordsen's eyebrows met, evincing a little displeasure. "Don't you get
the drift, major? I've been trying to accomplish two things at the same
time. Cushion a shock for you--and explain why what has happened has
happened. There is no Carolyn Sagen. The colonel and his wife have
always been childless."

Lance got belligerent. "Say that again!"

"There is no Carolyn Sagen here."

"What d'you mean, when you say 'here'?"

Nordsen took off his shell-rimmed glasses, wiped them, restored them to
his boyish face. "I would advise you to brace yourself. By 'here,' I
mean on this particular time-track."

Lance stared at him.

"Doesn't the word have any significance for you?" Nordsen asked.

"Time-track? Sure, I've heard of the concept before. It's a theory that
parallel worlds branch off when ... hey!" Lance's tone rose to a shout.
"You're not trying to imply that ... that I'm on a diff--?"

"That's right. We're trying to tell you that you have obviously landed
in another time-track. One that is parallel to--but just a slight bit
different from the one you formerly knew. To you, we seem to be the
same officers as in that world; but of course, we're not. It isn't the
same universe. Hyperspace is tricky stuff, as our men are finding out.
You've just got bounced around by one of the trickiest things connected
with it."

Lance groaned. "Now, I'm told!"

"I'm sorry. It's nothing new, only the information is classified
top-secret in our world; and evidently in yours, too. It has to be
withheld from hype-trainees, otherwise they might deliberately flunk
their course. We're running pilot classes here on our track, too. We
have to keep them filled."

Lance was stunned. He hardly knew what he should say or do next.

Finally, he put forth a faltering question: "Is there any way I can get
back to Home Base? _My_ home base?"

All three officers in the room shook their heads in unison.

"You might as well look for a pebble in the beach," said Nordsen. He
elucidated: "As a matter of fact, this _is_ Home Base for you. The
differences between one track and another are not usually too great; the
resemblances are many. Sometimes even, the returned pilot accommodates
himself to the new time-track without suspecting in the slightest what's
happened to him."

"And in those cases, you seldom bother to enlighten him, I suppose."

"Naturally not. Security frowns on it."

"But in my case, you couldn't cover up."

"Your case manifests a much more serious slippage. Your path,
evidently, warped to a track several million or billion worlds further
over than anybody from your world had previously experienced.
Consequently, your luck has really been unfortunate. You've materialized
out of hyperspace into a universe where someone you apparently knew
quite closely simply was never born."

[Illustration]

"But Carolyn did exist before ... where I was? I'm not dreaming."

"No. Both our worlds are equally real."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lance, though he felt the truth slowly and inexorably sink in, still
could not quite grasp all its implications. He turned his numbed face to
the other two officers in the room. Colonel Sagen and Major Carmody
inclined their heads.

For one despairing moment, Lance felt almost like hurling himself
through the window. Then, he straightened up. His mouth compressed into
a thin line. "If I must face the facts, I must. But," his tone edged off
into irony, "it sure isn't easy. You'll have to give me time."

Colonel Nordsen stood up, held out his hand. "I'm sorry, major, believe
me. This is a hard blow to take and I wouldn't care to be on the
receiving end, myself. But you'll adjust. If you like, I'll recommend
you for convalescent leave. You understand, of course," the psychiatrist
went on, "that we expect you to keep tight-lipped. Our hype-classes are
still too small. We need a lot of sharp men, and they have to be
volunteers. Right, Colonel Sagen?"

"Right."

Lance dropped the proffered hand. "I get it. Let the word get around how
hyperspace messes you up, all your bright young jets will bug out on it.
That's your main worry, isn't it? Not what happens to me."

"Frankly, yes," Nordsen acknowledged, without blinking. "But the Space
Service is also concerned about individuals. Don't worry now, major.
We'll look after you."

"Don't bother!" An uncontrolled bitterness crept into Lance's reply.
"Far as I'm concerned, the Space Service can go to hell. What reason
have I got to stay in it? You've conned me out of all that meant
anything in my life."

Nobody said a word.

Lance rose to his feet, unsteadily. His sardonic glance swept over them.
"I suppose it's back to the guardhouse for me now, huh? Well, I won't be
sorry to go. I'll find better company. And I refuse your bribe of
special leave-time."

Colonel Nordsen seemed unaffected. "You're making a mistake," he said,
calmly.

"Am I?"

"Major, we're offering you a chance to get adjusted and assimilated.
Take it or leave it. We can hold you in the brig until you see reason.
But you're a good man. We need you."

"For what? More flights through that hyperspace muck?"

"If you can pass our mental stability tests, yes."

"And if not?"

"You'll be grounded."

Lance made a sudden decision.

"I want to go up right now."

"What?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"You heard me. I want to go up in the _Cosmos XII_ right now, tests or
no tests. Ground me--and I'll never have a chance again. Don't you think
I'm hep to that?"

"We'll see that you're not grounded," broke in Colonel Sagen, from
behind his desk.

But Lance didn't believe him.

"Don't try to kid me, colonel," he snapped out. "You write me out flight
orders for the _Cosmos XII_, or I'll blab everything I know. You can't
hang me, you can't tear my tongue out--and I know I'll bust out of your
guardhouse one way or another! You'll see! And then, how will you fill
up your precious training classes? Then, how will you get new chumps to
pilot your ships to the stars? The stars! Ha, ha! That's the biggest
joke of all!"

Colonel Sagen began to splutter. Lance, watching him carefully, decided
there wasn't much resemblance between the old boy and the fine Colonel
Sagen he'd known in his own world. Maybe it'd been having the softening
influence of normal family life and a growing daughter that had made old
Hard-Head human.

"You'll never get away with this," Sagen warned. "We're three against
one."

"Won't I?" Lance's hand darted inside his shirt. "Maybe this'll equalize
us." He brought out the pistol he'd taken off the captain in the
guardhouse. Sagen, Nordsen, and Carmody backed off from it.

"The _Cosmos XII_ is still two-thirds fueled," Lance said. "And
well-stocked on provisions. Besides, I'm a light eater in hyperspace--as
who isn't? I intend to take that ship out again, and you're going to
help me, gentlemen."

Lance flicked off the safety and waved the gun back and forth, to
demonstrate what he meant.

       *       *       *       *       *

It worked.

Lance got his ship, using Colonel Sagen as both shield and go-between
after he had first tied up the other two officers in a closet. He kept a
close watch, of course, for the SSP's and their gas pellets; but
apparently an alarm was not raised soon enough for the base police to
