but it is really one planet among billions."

Professor Jameson was silent.

"I wonder whether or not there are any ruins here to be found?" queried
25X-987.

"I don't believe so," replied the professor. "I remember hearing an
eminent scientist of my day state that, given fifty thousand years,
every structure and other creation of man would be obliterated entirely
from off the earth's surface."

"And he was right," endorsed the machine man of Zor. "Time is a great
effacer."

For a long time the machine men wandered over the dreary surface of the
earth, and then 25X-987 suggested a change of territory to explore. In
the space ship, they moved around the earth to the other side, still
keeping to the belt of shadowland which completely encircled the globe
like some gigantic ring. Where they now landed arose a series of cones
with hollow peaks.

"Volcanoes!" exclaimed the professor.

"Extinct ones," added the machine man.

Leaving the space ship, the fifty or more machine men, including also
Professor Jameson, were soon exploring the curiously shaped peaks. The
professor, in his wanderings had strayed away from the rest, and now
advanced into one of the cup-like depressions of the peak, out of sight
of his companions, the Zoromes.




CHAPTER V

_Eternity or Death_


He was well in the center of the cavity when the soft ground beneath him
gave way suddenly and he catapulted below into the darkness. Through the
Stygian gloom he fell in what seemed to be an endless drop. He finally
crashed upon something hard. The thin crust of the volcano's mouth had
broken through, precipitating him into the deep, hollow interior.

It must have been a long ways to fall--or so it had seemed. Why was he
not knocked senseless or killed? Then he felt himself over with three
tentacles. His metal legs were four broken, twisted masses of metal,
while the lower half of his cubic body was jammed out of shape and
split. He could not move, and half of his six tentacles were paralyzed.

How would he ever get out of there? he wondered. The machine men of Zor
might never find him. What would happen to him, then? He would remain in
this deathless, monotonous state forever in the black hole of the
volcano's interior unable to move. What a horrible thought! He could not
starve to death; eating was unknown among the Zoromes, the machines
requiring no food. He could not even commit suicide. The only way for
him to die would be to smash the strong metal head, and in his present
immovable condition, this was impossible.

It suddenly occurred to him to radiate thoughts for help. Would the
Zoromes receive his messages? He wondered how far the telepathic
messages would carry. He concentrated the powers of his mind upon the
call for help, and repeatedly stated his position and plight. He then
left his mind clear to receive the thought answers of the Zoromes. He
received none. Again he tried. Still he received no welcoming answer.
Professor Jameson became dejected.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was hopeless. The telepathic messages had not reached the machine men
of Zor. They were too far away, just as one person may be out of earshot
of another's voice. He was doomed to a terrible fate of existence! It
were better that his rocket had never been found. He wished that the
Zoromes had destroyed him instead of bringing him back to life--back to
this!

His thoughts were suddenly broken in upon.

"We're coming!"

"Don't give up hope!"

If the professor's machine body had been equipped with a heart, it would
have sung for joy at these welcome thought impressions. A short time
later there appeared in the ragged break of the volcano's mouth, where
he had fallen through, the metal head of one of the machine men.

"We shall have you out of there soon," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The professor never knew how they managed it for he lost consciousness
under some strange ray of light they projected down upon him in his
prison. When he came to consciousness once more, it was to find himself
inside the space ship.

"If you had fallen and had smashed your head, it would have been all
over with you," were the first thought impulses which greeted him. "As
it is, however, we can fix you up first rate."

"Why didn't you answer the first time I called to you?" asked the
professor. "Didn't you hear me?"

"We heard you, and we answered, but you didn't hear us. You see, your
brain is different than ours, and though you can send thought waves as
far as we can you cannot receive them from such a great distance."

"I'm wrecked," said the professor, gazing at his twisted limbs,
paralyzed tentacles and jammed body.

"We shall repair you," came the reply. "It is your good fortune that
your head was not crushed."

"What are you going to do with me?" queried the professor. "Will you
remove my brains to another machine?"

"No, it isn't necessary. We shall merely remove your head and place it
upon another machine body."

The Zoromes immediately set to work upon the task, and soon had
Professor Jameson's metal head removed from the machine which he had
wrecked in his fall down the crater. All during the painless operation,
the professor kept up a series of thought exchanges in conversation with
the Zoromes, and it seemed but a short time before his head surmounted a
new machine and he was ready for further exploration. In the course of
his operation, the space ship had moved to a new position, and now as
they emerged 25X-987 kept company with Professor Jameson.

"I must keep an eye on you," he said. "You will be getting into more
trouble before you get accustomed to the metal bodies."

But Professor Jameson was doing a great deal of thinking. Doubtlessly,
these strange machine men who had picked up his rocket in the depths of
space and had brought him back to life, were expecting him to travel
with them and become adopted into the ranks of the Zoromes. Did he want
to go with them? He couldn't decide. He had forgotten that the machine
men could read his innermost thoughts.

"You wish to remain here alone upon the earth?" asked 25X-987. "It is
your privilege if you really want it so."

"I don't know," replied Professor Jameson truthfully.

       *       *       *       *       *

He gazed at the dust around his feet. It had probably been the
