Matilda's are in the portrait of her that hangs on my study wall. She is
the invariant of each of her iconic Mantrams and her surroundings are
the variables that enter and leave the screen. I am the invariant in my
own portraits, wherever they are. So, except for the slight _twist_ in
my mind that takes place when I _shift_, that I have learned to
recognize from practice in front of my "mirror" each morning when I
shave, and except for the portrait of Aunt Matilda, I would never be
able to suspect what happens.

If Lana had taken my picture without my knowing it and I had never seen
one of her collection of portraits, nor ever heard of an iconic Mantram,
I would have absolutely nothing to go on to suspect the truth that I
know. Except for one thing.

I don't quite know how to explain it, except that I must actually
transfer to one of my portraits, and, transferring, I am more real
than--what shall I call it?--the photographic reproduction of my real
surroundings. Then, sometimes, the photographic reproduction, the iconic
illusion, that is my environment when I am _in_ one of the portraits of
me, fades just enough so that I can look "out" into the reality where my
portrait hangs, and see, and even hear the _watchers_, as ghosts in my
solid "reality."

       *       *       *       *       *

Quite often I can only hear them, and then they are voices out of
nowhere, sometimes addressing me directly, just as often talking to one
another and ignoring my _presence_. But when I can see them too, they
appear as ghostly but sharply clear visions that seem to be present in
my solid-looking environment. There, but somewhat transparent.

I have often seen and talked to Lana in this manner, in her far-off
world, where I am part of her private collection. In fact, I can almost
always tell when I _shift_ to my portrait in her gallery, because I am
suddenly exhilarated and remain so until I shift back, or to some other
portrait. That is so even when she is not there but out on one of her
many photographic expeditions.

When she is there, and is watching me, and my thoughts are quiet and my
mind receptive, she becomes visible. A ghost in my study, or the lab
where I work, or--if I am asleep--in my dreams. Like an angel, or a
goddess. And we talk.

       *       *       *       *       *

Back in the physical reality, of course, no one else can hear her voice.
My real body is going through its routine work almost automatically but
my mind, my consciousness, is focused into my portrait in Lana's
gallery, and we are talking. And of course in the real world I am
talking too, but my associates can't see who I'm talking to, and it
would be useless to try to explain to them.

So I'm getting quite a reputation as a nut! Can you imagine that?

But why should I mind? My reality has a much broader and more complex
scope than the limited reality of my associates. I might be fired, or
even sent to a state hospital, except for the fact that Lana foresees
such problems and teaches me enough things in my field that are unknown
to Earth, so that my employers consider me too valuable to lose.

If this story were fiction the ending would have to be that I am in love
with Lana and she with me, and there would be a nice conclusive ending
where she comes back to Earth to marry me and carry me back to her
world, where we would live happily ever after. But the truth of the
matter is that I'm not in love with Lana, nor she with me. Sometimes I
think I am her favorite portrait, but nothing more.

But really, everything is so interesting. Lana's gallery where I hang,
the museum where there are new faces each time I look out, and new
voices when I can't see out, Aunt Matilda's sewing room where she is at
the moment, and all Sumac as she goes about her normal pattern of
living.

It is a rich, full life that I live, shifting here and there in
consciousness while my physical body goes about its necessary tasks, as
often unguided as not. (What a reputation I'm getting for
absent-mindedness, too!)

And out of it all has come a perspective that, when I feel it strongly,
makes me feel almost like a god. In that perspective all my portraits
(and there are many now, on many worlds and in many places on this
world!) blend into one. That one is the stage of my life. But not a
stage, really. A show window. Yes, that is it. A show window, where the
_watchers_ pass.

I live in a show window that opens out in many worlds and many places
that are hidden from me by a veil that sometimes grows thin, so I can
see through it. And from the other side of that veil, even when I cannot
see through it, come the voices of the watchers, as they pass by, or
pause to look at me.

And I am not the only one! There are others. More and more of them, as
Lana comes back on her photographic expeditions for the museum.

None that I have met understand what it is about as fully as I do. Some
have an insight into the true state of things, but very very few.

But that is understandable. Lana can't give the same time to them that
she gives to me. There aren't that many hours in a day! And, you see, I
am her favorite.

If I were not, she would never have permitted me to tell you all this,
so I must be her favorite!

Doesn't that make sense?

I _AM_ her favorite!


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Amazing Stories_ January 1959.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.

