where the crew had been left. The thermometer was only fifty degrees,
even then, and they shivered in heavy coats.

Every dome man was stretched out on the floor! As Dick stepped within,
his heart almost stopped beating--but they were only unconscious! His
breath escaped in a long sigh, after holding it for almost a minute.

Brown and Martin were trying to revive the prone forms. The control men
lay beside the others, brought there by the two earthmen. The eyes of
first one then another, slowly opened, and they looked around in
amazement. Cold affected them like an anaesthetic, causing complete
unconsciousness.

When the ship reached normal warmth, they felt as good as ever. It
hadn't been cold enough to freeze them, in their section, and not a man
was injured. When they understood what happened, the men hurried back to
the controls.

       *       *       *       *       *

The heavy coils were soon fastened around the tube, and it was filled
through a valve on the upper side. A gauge was set to register the
pressure of the vapor within. They decided to raise steam pressure
enough to equal the compression of the fuel.

It required fifteen minutes for the water to reach the boiling point,
while they nervously held their watches. They could keep track of
minutes and hours, although there was no longer day and night in their
lives. According to their figures, they now ate dinner at three o'clock
in the morning, and went to bed in the early afternoon.

They held their breath when the steam valve was opened. It moved slowly
under Dick's fingers, while a thousand questions raced through every
mind.

"Would it silence the blasts? Would it put them out of commission
permanently? Was that moment, and the turning of that valve, the end of
existence for them all?"

Dick glanced at the gauge on the tube, then jerked the valve shut. The
pressure was still far below that of the fuel. He turned the heating
unit on full, and watched the gauge climb higher. They didn't understand
the numerals of the domed cities, but knew the pressure was getting
terrifically high.

When he opened the valve again, the steam gauge _did not rise_! It held
almost steady. The hiss of escaping steam, sounded through the heavy
metal faintly.

The tubes began to fire spasmodically! Dick bit his lips, as he opened
the valve a little wider. John McCarthy wiped the sweat from his
forehead, as every face turned white as chalk.

_They fired evenly again!!!_ The steam was working through the
mixture--_discharging through the blasts_!

       *       *       *       *       *

They felt their bodies sway under the effects of acceleration and
exultance filled them. There was _some_ reaction, at least!

Morquil appeared on the ramp, his face lighted by a smile. "_What have
you done?_ The ship is traveling at _almost twice the speed that it was
before_! Is it all right?"

Dick sat down hard. Not a man in the crowd was able to answer. Success
had left them speechless. Barrow was the first to recover his voice.

"Are you _sure_?"

"Yes, Dick! We took three separate observations, and each showed the
same result--almost _double_ normal speed! Does it mean what you wanted?
_Can we reach the domes?_"

"I hope so, Morquil. If the steam has made _that_ much difference, we'll
get there without trouble. The water must be conserved as much as
possible--and hope that it lasts. Whether it increases the power of the
fuel, or simply creates an additional body to drive against, is not
important. _We're getting there!_"




CHAPTER VII

_Jupiter and Trouble!_


The huge ship circled the planet twice, with the instruments adjusted to
detect the metal of the domes. They spread over many miles of the
surface, yet were like grains of sand on the enormous globe. When the
gauges quivered over a section, hidden beneath the mists, every one
breathed a sigh of relief.

It would be many hours before the ship was within the cities, but they
were _home_! Every earthman had the same feeling. Jupiter was almost as
much of a home to them as to the natives, even before they had seen it.
They eagerly looked forward to sight of the domes that would be under
their care.

John McCarthy entered the control room with a big tray of containers.
"Here! It's not liquor, but I'll bet you enjoy it more. There's enough
in each of these to _really_ quench your thirst. I for one, will enjoy
drinking all of the water I want, after five weeks on short rations."

It seemed impossible that the clouds outside could be deadly. They were
beautiful in the reflected light of the sun, yet those vapors contained
poison that no man could live in. The domes were the only place that
life could exist on the strange planet.

As they dropped through the heavy mists, it created a feeling of dense
fog. They could see nothing of the surroundings, trusting entirely on
the instruments. It was like groping in the dark, yet the earthmen knew
it had been done before, and the dome men showed no fear.

When a slight jar shook the ship, they breathed easier. _It had touched
the ground!_ They could feel some effect of the heavy gravity, even
within the insulated hull. The ship slanted down at a steep angle,
sliding forward with its own weight.

The earthmen didn't understand what was happening, but watched the
actions of the dome men. They were using a different control board now,
beneath the other panel. McCarthy was down in the hold, watching the
action of machines that had been idle until now.

When they stopped, the mists disappeared from around them. Lights above
outlined a huge metal passage. The ship started forward again and heavy
doors slid back at the approach with bright light appearing beyond.

They were looking across sun-lit country; the most perfect scene they
had ever witnessed. Strange trees, and growth of every description,
spread in every direction. When the ship slid into the open, they were
beneath one of the domes--enormous beyond their greatest imagination,
and exquisitely beautiful.

While they watched spellbound, people started across the fields to greet
the expedition. The women were well proportioned, and far different from
the men of the race. Not as tall as the women of earth, or quite as well
built, but their heads were much smaller than the men's.

All men were dressed in flowing robes, the women in much less clothing.
They wore tight-fitting garments, like bathing suits of metallic cloth.
They were happy and carefree, seemingly without a worry in their lives.
Children came romping across the fields beside their parents.

Minutes, slipped by, and the people from earth hadn't moved. Sight of
their new home was too wonderful to grasp at once. Instead of the gloomy
metal covering they had expected, the curved surface above was finished
in blue that resembled clear sky at home--as if they had reached the
land of their dreams.

       *       *       *       *       *

When their minds snapped back to reality, the dome men were being
welcomed by friends and relatives. The babble of voices came faintly to
the control room, from the power hull.

John McCarthy joined them. When the machines stopped, he came up to find
the reason. Now the others watched as he gazed at the beautiful scene
for the first time. Their own amazement was reflected in his eyes. When
he looked up at the curved dome, his wife slipped her arm around him.

They were disturbed by the crew, returning with their friends to welcome
the engineers. The dome people seemed completely happy. They were like
children greeting their parents, holding the hands of the earth people
and gazing into their faces with adoration. In their minds, the future
was secure, and they no longer had a care in the world. Eileen McCarthy
was so overwhelmed at the reception that she hugged two of the little
women.

It was like a dream to walk across the heavy carpet of moss. There was
no grass, but the velvet coat of green was quite similar. The trees were
shaped like an inverted bowl, their branches conforming to the curve of
the dome above. They were smaller than the trees of earth, with very
large leaves.

The eyes of the earth people kept returning to the dome. It was hard to
believe that it was not blue sky, except for giant supports that reached
from the ground to the metal ceiling, hundreds of feet above.

When Peter Yarbro learned that he was in charge of this agricultural
dome, his pleasure knew no bounds. His wife couldn't wait to see the
home that had been prepared for them--and waiting almost twenty years.

A circle of buildings formed the foundation of the immense metal
ceiling, as well as housing thousands of inhabitants. The back walls of
the structures were always blank, toward the vapor beyond the miniature
civilization. Each city was a world of its own, with a curved horizon at
the top of the buildings.

In Yarbro's dome there were few means of travel, as every inch of soil
was cultivated. The dome dwellers were past masters at farming, and
loved this work more than any other type of labor. To them, it was a
pleasure that vied with amusement machines of other cities.

When Mrs. Yarbro entered her new apartment, thirty stories above the
ground, and stepped to one of the balconies, the view was superb. She
was not interested in the next dome, but wanted to settle her own domain
as soon as possible; completely happy.

The rest of the party entered an open car, mounted on a single track,
and started for the next city. Every object that moved was operated by
the control of gravity, and could develop enormous speed and power. It
rolled swiftly across the open ground, to enter a tunnel three hundred
feet wide, which carried all of the commerce between the cities. When it
emerged in the next dome, the imitation sky was the same, but only a
small portion of the ground surface was cultivated.

Small buildings dotted the level floor, which Morquil explained were the
entrances of the mines, unworked for many years. Jerold Brown and his
wife remained in this city, in an apartment as well situated as that of
the Yarbro's, in the first dome.

Hours passed as they moved from city to city. When they reached the
capitol, only the Barrows, McCarthys and Martins remained of the
original fourteen. The others were in their own domes, settling down to
the new existence.

Every occupation seemed to have been forgotten by the childish people,
to come and welcome the beings from another planet. They lined every
inch of the way, many deep.

The main dome was three times the size of the others. Supporting
pillars, one hundred feet in diameter, seemed vague where they touched
the ceiling above. Parks covered most of the ground, dotted here and
there by amusement buildings and theaters.

Cars whizzed back and forth, as people gathered to see the strangers.
For the first time in generations the amusement buildings were deserted.
Since their arrival, Dick had seen no sign of work, and finally
questioned Morquil.

"The people work one mig out of each lix, Dick. It is enough to carry on
cultivation of the crops, and keep the amusement buildings running
properly and efficiently."

Barrow was stunned. The working period would have to be increased to
three immediately, then four and five. They seemed to think that
bringing men from another world would do the work, and were apt to be
disappointed when he started issuing orders.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Dick and his wife were installed in their new home, and the
McCarthys settled in a nearby apartment, Morquil hesitated. The Martins
were anxious to see their own habitation, and looked at the dome man
questioningly.

He finally spoke with hesitation. "I have bad news for you. The Martins
will have to occupy an apartment in this city for a while. Their dome is
out of order. Trouble developed soon after the ship left here, on this
trip, and over a thousand people were killed. Every other city is
overcrowded with refugees.

"It started with a strange banging on top of the dome, which kept
increasing. No one knew what the trouble was or how to stop it, so they
waited to see what happened. It didn't sound as if the ceiling was going
to fall--but as if the banging came from _outside_! It was several migs
before they knew the cause.

"When a large section crashed to the ground, it was a complete surprise,
and caught the inhabitants unprepared. Soon the air was mixing with the
poison gases from outside. People tried to escape, and most of them did.
All except those that fell unconscious from the gas.
