The way I remember, the last time we saw each other, back on Earth, you
gave me quite a slap in the face. The way I remember, you didn't think I
was hero enough for you." He poured another glass of the champagne.

Di's face was still flushed. She said, her voice low, "I misunderstood
you, Don. Even after your brilliant defeat of that Kraden cruiser, I
still, I admit, think I basically misunderstood you. I told myself that
it could have been done by any pilot of a Scout, given that one in a
million break. It just happened to be you, who made that suicide dive
attack that succeeded. A thousand other pilots might also have taken the
million to one suicide chance rather than let the Kraden escape."

"Yeah," Don said. Even in his alcohol, he was surprised at her words. He
said gruffly, "Sure anybody might've done it. Pure luck. But why'd you
change your mind about me, then? How come the switch of heart?"

"Because of what you've done since, darling."

He closed one eye, the better to focus.

"Since?"

He recognized the expression in her eyes. A touch of star gleam. That
little girl back on Earth, the receptionist at the Interplanetary Lines
building, she'd had it. In fact, in the past few months Don had seen it
in many feminine faces. And all for him.

Dian said, "Instead of cashing in on your prestige, you've been devoting
yourself to something even more necessary to the fight than bringing
down individual Kraden cruisers."

Don looked at her. He could feel a nervous tic beginning in his left
eyebrow. Finally, he reached for the champagne again and filled his
glass. He said, "You really go for this hero stuff, don't you?"

She said nothing, but the star shine was still in her eyes.

He made his voice deliberately sour. "Look, suppose I asked you to come
back to my apartment with me tonight?"

"Yes," she said softly.

"And told you to bring your overnight bag along," he added brutally.

Dian looked into his face. "Why are you twisting yourself, your
inner-self, so hard, Don? Of course I'd come--if that's what you
wanted."

"And then," he said flatly, "suppose I kicked you out in the morning?"

Dian winced, but she kept her eyes even with his, her own moist now.
"You forget," she whispered. "You have been awarded the Galactic Medal
of Honor, the bearer of which can do no wrong."

"Oh, God," Don muttered. He filled his glass, still again, motioned to a
nearby waiter.

"Yes, sir," the waiter said.

Don said, "Look, in about five minutes I'm going to pass out. See that I
get back to my hotel, will you? And that this young lady gets to her
home. And, waiter, just send my bill to the hotel too."

The other bowed. "The owner's instructions, sir, are that Captain
Mathers must never see a bill in this establishment."

Dian said, "_Don!_"

He didn't look at her. He raised his glass to his mouth and shortly
afterward the fog rolled in again.

       *       *       *       *       *

When it rolled out, the unfamiliar taste of black coffee was in his
mouth. He shook his head for clarity.

He seemed to be in some working class restaurant. Next to him, in a
booth, was a fresh-faced Sub-lieutenant of the--Don squinted at the
collar tabs--yes, of the Space Service. A Scout pilot.

Don stuttered, "What's ... goin' ... on?"

The pilot said apologetically, "Sub-lieutenant Pierpont, sir. You seemed
so far under the weather, I took over."

"Oh, you did, eh?"

"Well, yes, sir. You were, well, reclining in the gutter, sir. In spite
of your, well, appearance, your condition, I recognized you, sir."

"Oh." His stomach was an objecting turmoil.

The Lieutenant said, "Want to try some more of this coffee now, sir? Or
maybe some soup or a sandwich?"

Don groaned. "No. No, thanks. Don't think I could hold it down."

The pilot grinned. "You must've thrown a classic, sir."

"I guess so. What time is it? No, that doesn't make any difference.
What's the date?"

Pierpont told him.

It was hard to believe. The last he could remember he'd been with Di.
With Di in some nightclub. He wondered how long ago that had been.

He fumbled in his clothes for a smoke and couldn't find one. He didn't
want it anyway.

He growled at the Lieutenant, "Well, how go the One Man Scouts?"

Pierpont grinned back at him. "Glad to be out of them, sir?"

"Usually."

Pierpont looked at him strangely. "I don't blame you, I suppose. But it
isn't as bad these days as it used to be while you were still in the
Space Service, sir."

Don grunted. "How come? Two weeks to a month, all by yourself, watching
the symptoms of space cafard progress. Then three weeks of leave, to get
drunk in, and then another stretch in space."

The pilot snorted deprecation. "That's the way it used to be." He
fingered the spoon of his coffee cup. "That's the way it still should
be, of course. But it isn't. They're spreading the duty around now and I
spend less than one week out of four on patrol."

Don hadn't been listening too closely, but now he looked up. "What'd'ya
mean?"

Pierpont said, "I mean, sir, I suppose this isn't bridging security,
seeing who you are, but fuel stocks are so low that we can't maintain
full patrols any more."

There was a cold emptiness in Don Mathers' stomach.

He said, "Look, I'm still woozy. Say that again, Lieutenant."

The Lieutenant told him again.

Don Mathers rubbed the back of his hand over his mouth and tried to
think.

He said finally, "Look, Lieutenant. First let's get another cup of
coffee into me, and maybe that sandwich you were talking about. Then
would you help me to get back to my hotel?"

       *       *       *       *       *

By the fourth day, his hands weren't trembling any longer. He ate a good
breakfast, dressed carefully, then took a hotel limousine down to the
offices of the Mathers, Demming and Rostoff Corporation.

At the entrance to the inner sanctum the heavyset Scotty looked up at
his approach. He said, "The boss has been looking for you, Mr. Mathers,
but right now you ain't got no appointment, have you? Him and Mr.
Rostoff is having a big conference. He says to keep everybody out."

"That doesn't apply to me, Scotty," Don snapped. "Get out of my way."

Scotty stood up, reluctantly, but barred the way. "He said it applied to
everybody, Mr. Mathers."

Don put his full weight into a blow that started at his waist, dug deep
into the other's middle. Scotty doubled forward, his eyes bugging. Don
Mathers gripped his hands together into a double fist and brought them
upward in a vicious uppercut.

       *       *       *       *       *

Scotty fell forward and to the floor.

Don stood above him momentarily, watchful for movement which didn't
develop. The hefty bodyguard must have been doing some easy living
himself. He wasn't as tough as he looked.

Don knelt and fished from under the other's left arm a vicious-looking
short-barrelled scrambler. He tucked it under his own jacket into his
belt, then turned, opened the door and entered the supposedly barred
office.

Demming and Rostoff looked up from their work across a double desk.

Both scowled. Rostoff opened his mouth to say something and Don Mathers
