Columbus. The other large edifices, as the Palace of the Government
(shown to the right of the engraving,) that of the commandant of the
marine, the arsenal, the post-office, and the building used for the
manufacture of tobacco, are less remarkable for their architecture
than for their solidity. Besides these, the city contains nine parish
churches; six other churches, connected with hospitals and military
orders; five chapels or hermitages; the Caza Cuna, a foundling
hospital; and eleven convents, four for women, and seven for men. The
other public establishments are the University, the colleges of San
Carlos and San Francisco de Soles, the Botanic Garden, the Anatomical
Museum and lecture rooms, the Academy of Painting and Design, a school
of Navigation, and seventy-eight common schools for both sexes. These
places of education are all under the protection of the Patriotic
Society and the municipal authorities. The charitable institutions
consist of the _Caza de Beneficiencia_, for both sexes, a
penitentiary, a Magdalen Asylum, and seven hospitals--one of them
contains a lunatic asylum. There are, besides, three theatres, an
amphitheatre for bull fights, _plaza de toros_, and several public
promenades, such as the Alameda and the Paseo Nuevo; In Turnbull's
"Travels in Cuba," published by Longman & Co., London, 1840, the city
is said to contain 3,671 houses within the walls, all built of stone;
and in the suburbs, 7,968, of various materials. The number of private
carriages for hire amounted, in 1827, to 2,651, and they are certainly
now more numerous. In the same year, the population was 122,023--the
whites were 46,621; the free negroes, 15,347; the free mulattoes,
8,215; the negro slaves, 22,830, and the mulatto slaves 1,010.

Turnbull, speaking of the _Real Caza de Beneficencia_, says: "Girls
are not admitted to the institution after 10 years of age; and, being
entirely supported there, they are completely separated from their
parents and their families, until the time of their final removal from
the establishment has arrived. They are taught the various branches of
needle-work and dress-making, and receive such other instruction as
may sufficiently qualify them for becoming domestic servants,
housemaids, cooks or washerwomen. They are not suffered, by the
regulations, to remain in the house after the age of twenty-one: but,
before that time, it is the duty of the _junta_, or committee of
management, to endeavor to procure employment for them earlier in a
private family or in some house of business. Should the circumstances
of the parents have improved during the stay of their daughter at the
institution, they are not suffered to take her away until they have
paid her previous board and education at the rate of fifteen dollars a
month; but if the girl herself has acquired property by inheritance,
or is able to improve her condition by marriage or otherwise,
independent of her parents, she is suffered to leave the house without
any payment; and, in the event of her marriage to the satisfaction of
the junta, a little dowry is provided for her, amounting to $500, from
a fund created from prizes in the lottery, the produce of tickets
presented to the institution. Six such marriages had taken place, and
dowries bestowed from this fond in the course of a single year." This
lottery business shows the spirit of gambling so largely developed in
nations of Spanish descent. The Mexicans are noted for it, and Santa
Ana, who spent his exile in Cuba, and recently sailed from Havana for
Vera Cruz, indulged in the propensity to a great extent. But he had
two strings to his bow, and whilst playing his fighting cocks was also
playing for an empire, and has won the game. How long he will hold it
remains to be seen.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: HUMOUROUS]


HUMOROUS.

A VERY LONG NOSE.


A gentleman having put out a candle by accident one night, ordered his
waiting man (who was a simple being) to light it again in the kitchen,
adding--"But take care, James, that you do not hit yourself against
anything in the dark." Mindful of the caution, James stretched out
both arms at length before him, but unluckily, a door that stood half
open, passed between his hands and struck him a woful blow upon the
nose. "Golly gracious!" muttered he, when he recovered his senses a
little, "I always heard that I had a very long nose, but I never
thought it was longer than my arm!"

       *       *       *       *       *




SOL. SMITH.


The American Sentinel, speaking of "Sol. Smith, the Lawyer, Actor,
Preacher," &c,. remarks--"We want a few more of such men," To which a
Dayton (Ala.) paper replies--"You'll not get them. There are none
others like him. He is the first and last of his genus, a _sol_itary
specimen of a strange combination of character. Even in the physical
way Sol. will be hard to match, for he is tall as a May-pole, and
crooked as a pump-handle".

       *       *       *       *       *


The True American says that when John C. Calhoun takes snuff, every
man in South Carolina sneezes.

       *       *       *       *       *




A PROFITABLE HOAX.


Recently at the Copper Mines on Lake Superior, a "greenhorn" asked
some miners to show him where to dig; they offered to do it, provided
he would treat to a quart of "_prairie dew_," which he did, and they
set him to work under a shady tree, in mere sport. Before night he
struck a "_Lead_," and the next sold out for $4000.

       *       *       *       *       *




REFORMING.


"Well, how are you this morning?" said one old rowdy to another.

"Well, sir, quite well--never was better; I'm another man, sir."

"Ah! Then who pays those old accounts of yourself that was?"

"Don't remind me of my sins, I'm reformed man. I was sinful in
contracting such debts, and I must now atone for my error by not
paying for them."

       *       *       *       *       *


Yankee Hill is most outrageously puffed by some of the Albany papers.
It is even insinuated that he is employed in part by a combination of
tailors to cause the citizens to split their coats and other garments
with laughing,--for the benefit of the trade.

       *       *       *       *       *


Isaac Hill of the N. H. Patriot, concludes that the new tariff law is
not seriously affecting the manufacturing interests, because he lately
saw two loads of machinery going into the country. He must be a sage.

       *       *       *       *       *


Some scoundrel has run away with the wife, children and furniture of a
Mr. Reynold, residing in Allegany county, leaving nothing but an empty
house with the rent unpaid. Really too bad.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: Wrong Side Up]


The appearance of many things and circumstances, like the above cut,
depends on the view we take of them: and be it remembered that when a
man's head is inverted, to him all appear _wrong side up_. Hence
arises most of the complaints, grumbling and murmurings, about the
times, the weather, the government, the people, &c. To one who
possesses, or is possessed of a malignant, peevish disposition himself,
most of the conduct of others, and the times and circumstances in
general, will to him appear _wrong side up_, and he will not
infrequently find his own calculations _up side down_. Could we at
once, view each circumstance in all its different bearings, we should
generally see some things that would paliate others, and thus render
the whole at least tolerable: and most of the jarring and clashing in
the world would thus be avoided. But by far the better way is to take
of each and every thing a view the most favorable. This course is
evidently peaceable, else politicians and sectarians could not so
uniformly applaud every act of their favorite sect or party, and as
uniformly oppose and deprecate those of their opponents. Every man who
habituates himself to viewing things in the most favourable light,
will find this course the most conducive to his own happiness, while
it contributes much to that of his neighbors and associates. Look at
the bright side of every thing, and hold every picture _right side
up_.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPORTANCE OF HUMILITY.


Dr. Franklin once received a very useful lesson from the excellent Dr.
Cotton Mather, which he thus relates in a letter to his son:--"The
last time I saw your father was in 1724. On taking my leave, he showed
me a shorter way out of the house, by a narrow passage, which was
crossed by a beam over head. We were still talking, and as I withdrew,
he accompanying me behind, and I turning towards him, he said hastily,
"Stoop, stoop!" I did not understand him till I felt my head hit
against the beam. He was a man who never missed an opportunity of
giving instruction; and upon this he said to me: 'You are young and
have the world before you. _Learn to stoop_ as you go through it, and
you will miss many hard thumps.' This advice, thus beat into my head,
has frequently been of use to me.

And I often think of it when I see pride mortified, and misfortune
brought upon people by their carrying their heads too high."

       *       *       *       *       *


"An ambassador" is defined as a man sent abroad to lie for the good of
his country. To compensate them for the wear and tear of conscience,
the country allows him a larger salary than any other subordinate they
employ.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Communicated_




THE EUREKA: OR JOURNAL OF THE NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF INVENTORS.


(We had not intended to say any thing on the subject of the "Eureka"
in this number, nor until the second number of the work should have
been issued: but finding that a great degree of dissatisfaction exists
in the minds even of those who are represented in that paper to be the
supporters and conductors thereof; and having received an implied
request for the insertion of the following communication, we would not
refuse it, although we doubt whether the Eureka will ever reach its
third number, whether its contents are subjected to public criticism
or not.)

_Mr. Editor:_ I had a little curiosity to hear what the press said of
this periodical; but as yet I have not seen any notice, except the
brief one in your columns. As a general rule, it is inexpedient for an
association to publish a periodical. Instead of being an expression of
the society, it almost unavoidably becomes the organ of a clique, and
renders the patronage of an otherwise liberal organization subservient
to private interest. In the columns of the "N. York Farmer" was first
advocated the formation of the N. Y. State Agricultural Society. Among
the first acts of this society was the issuing of an agricultural
paper at _twenty-five cents_ per annum. This was scattered over the
whole country to the injury of those who had been pioneers in
publishing agricultural papers. The Society could not sustain it
without loss. It was sold to an individual on condition that he would
publish the proceedings of the Society. The price was quadrupled. It
was soon found that a periodical having a general circulation, could
not devote much space to a local society, however noble and
prosperous. Necessity led to the columns of the daily press, and to
the issuing of a yearly volume of Transactions. This will be the
result of every prosperous association. If the proceedings are worth
publishing, the press will spread them over the whole face of the
civilized world. A collection of the most important and well-digested
papers in a yearly volume, is more in accordance with the dignity and
usefulness of a national association. Besides the injustice done to
other periodicals previously in existence, the association adds
nothing to its reputation by the undertaking. There are three or four
individuals at the American Institute who have a hankering for the
control of a paper. It is very easy to see that the publishing of a
weekly paper by the Institute would be a suicidal act. All the
Institute has to do is to make its proceedings interesting, and the
widest publicity will be given as a matter of course.

It was natural to suppose that with such an array of editors,
editorial committee, and of associate professors, the "Eureka" would
have done credit to the age, and claimed a rank, in point of
literature, with other monthlies. But candor leads me to say, I do not
recollect of having read a select journal with so many violations of
correct writing. With the exception of two or three articles, the
whole number abounds with school-boy violations of the English
language. Redundancy and the want of appropriateness in the use of
words are the most common errors. Circumlocution and want of precision
are common; and in many sentences all these and other violations
occur, rendering it almost impossible to guess at the meaning.
Independent of "_inflexibly_ in advance" on the cover, the first
sentence in the announcement on the first page is an instance of
ambiguity and careless construction. In the first article, on the same
page, are several sentences indicating the same carelessness. The
article describing Hoe's cylinder press is a collection of
badly-constructed sentences. If your limits permitted I would give a
whole column of illustrations. The following sentences have so many
faults I cannot Italicise. They may serve to exercise your juvenile
readers.

"We intend to pursue the publication of the list hereafter, future and
past; that is in our next number will appear those of August 20, and
follow for one month; also the list for one month prior to the 21st of
June."

"A material or composition, of a very cheap character, has been
invented, and hard, strong and compact as flint." "From this, streets
of any grade may be formed, and in such a way as to entirely to secure
a permanent and level surface to its proper grade and arch".

Three fourths of the sentences forming the article on Dr. Lewis'
Railroad are very faulty.

"Hutching's Propeller. It consists of forming a set of oars, and by
cams upon themselves, and a foundation-plate with cams to match, cause
the oars to revolve of themselves, when the main wheel, composed of
these oars, revolves."

"A patent is pending for the invention of a wheel, in which Mr. Wm.
Hulme, of Paterson, N. J, has made an invention."

"Russ's Pavement, There is no doubt it will make a good road in
comparison with our present streets, as far as surface goes; but we
must confess our incredulity of the entire success of this plan. We do
not like the ideal method of getting at the water-pipes, &c. of the
city."

The Report on Rider's Iron Bridge is by another and different pen. I
will pass by "_protracted_ from beneath upwards," &c., and give a few
more quotations.

"Inventors scarcely ever receive the compensation due their however
distinguished merit, either pecuniary or laudatory. The originators or
first conceivers of the most momentous plans of utility and comfort
are oftenest the most grossly neglected and overlooked."

"Shortly after these details reached the U. States, by Professor S. F.
B. Morse, of New York, who was at the time of the discovery residing
in Paris."

"This committee give their services for the promotion of good to the
cause of Invention and Science, without any consideration other than
this."

"Almost all other branches of knowledge have their magazines and
journals, and other means of diffusing information, so that in their
departments hardly a desideratum is left to be supplied; while the
Inventor, as such, has almost no channel through which he may
legitimately appear before the public." "An editorial committee was
accordingly appointed for the supervision of this department, and to
whose inspection all matter of the journal, previous to publication,
will be submitted."

All the previous articles have been descriptive. We now come to our
argumentative, on Novelty in Inventions. The reasoning powers of the
writer may be learned from the following:

