Just as she said it a bulky figure in white space fatigues swung out of
the hatch and hurried up the gangplank. Seconds later it burst through
the airlock.

"Frank Nineteen!" we gasped together.

"Please, where is Elizabeth?" he hummed anxiously. "Is she all right? I
have to know."

Frank stood perfectly still when I told him about Elizabeth's
self-deactivation; then a pitiful shudder went through him and he
covered his face with his big Neoprene hands.

"I was afraid of that," he said barely audibly. "Where--you haven't--?"

"No," I said. "She's where you always kept her."

With that the big servo-pilot took off for 22A like a berserk robot and
we were right behind him. We watched him tear open his old locker and
gently lay out the girl's mech's parts so he could study them. After a
minute or two he gave a long sigh and said, "Fortunately it's not as bad
as I thought. I believe I can fix her." Frank worked hard over the
blackened relays for twenty minutes, then he set the unit aside and
began assembling the girl. When the final connections were made and the
damaged unit installed he flicked on her power. We waited and nothing
happened. Five minutes went by. Ten. Slowly the big robot turned away,
his broad shoulders drooping slightly.

"I've failed," he said quietly. "Her DX doesn't respond to the gain."

The girl mech, in her blue dress, lay there motionless where Frank had
been working on her as the servo-pilot muttered over and over, "It's my
fault, I did this to you."

Then Min shouted: "Wait! I heard something!"

There was a slow click of a relay--and movement. Painfully Elizabeth
Seven rose on one elbow and looked around her.

"Frank, darling," she murmured, shaking her head. "I know you're just
old memory tape. It's all I have left."

"Elizabeth, it's really me! I've come to take you away. We're going to
be together from now on."

"_You_, Frank? This isn't just old feedback? You've come back to me?"

"Forever, darling. Elizabeth, do you remember what I said about those
wonderful green little worlds, the asteroids? Darling, we're _going_ to
one of them! You and the others will love Alinda, I know you will. I've
been there many times."

"Frank, is your DX all right? What _are_ you talking about?"

"How stupid of me, darling--you haven't heard. Elizabeth, thanks to Dr.
Scott, Congress has passed Robot Civil Rights! And that movie I made
helped swing public opinion to our side. We're free!

"The minute I heard the news I applied to Interplanetary for homestead
rights on Alinda. I made arrangements to buy a ship with the money I'd
earned and then I put ads in all the Robot Wanted columns for volunteer
colonizers. You should have seen the response! We've got thirty robot
couples aboard now and more coming later. Darling, we're the first
pioneer wave of free robots. On board we have tons of supplies and
parts--everything we need for building a sound robot culture."

"Frank Nineteen!" said the girl mech suddenly. "I should be furious with
you. You and that Diana Twelve--I thought--"

The big servo gave a flat whirring laugh. "Diana and me? But that was
all publicity, darling. Why, right at the start of the filming Diana
fell in love with Sam Seventeen, one of the other actors. They're on
board now."

"Robot civilization," murmured the girl after a minute. "Oh, Frank, that
means robot government, robot art, robot science ..."

"And robot marriage," hummed Frank softly. "There has to be robot law,
too. I've thought it all out. As skipper of the first robot-owned
rocket, I'm entitled to marry couples in deep space at their request."

"But who marries us, darling? You can't do it yourself."

"I thought of that, too," said Frank, turning to me. "This human
gentleman has every right to marry us. He's in command of a moving body
in space just like the captain of a ship. It's perfectly legal, I looked
it up in the Articles of Space. Will you do it, sir?"

Well, what could I say when Frank dug into his fatigues and handed me a
Gideon prayer book marked at the marriage service?

Elizabeth and Frank said their I do's right there in the Renting Office
while the other robot colonizers looked on. Maybe it was the way I read
the service. Maybe I should have been a preacher, I don't know. Anyway,
when I pronounced Elizabeth and Frank robot and wife, that whole bunch
of lovesick mechs wanted me to do the job for them, too. Big copper work
robots, small aluminum sales-girl mechs, plastoid clerks and typists,
squatty little Mumetal lab servos, rationaloids, non-rationaloids and
just plain sub-robots--all sizes and shapes. They all wanted individual
ceremonies, too. It took till noon the next day before the last couple
was hitched and the 990 left for Alinda.

Like I said, the spotel business isn't so different from the motel game
back in California. Sure, you got improvements to make but a new
sideline can get to be pretty profitable--if you get in on the ground
floor.

Min and I got to thinking of all those robot colonizers who'd be coming
out here. Interplanetary cleared the license just last week. Min framed
it herself and hung it next to our orbit license in the Renting Office.
She says a lot of motel owners do all right as Justices of the Peace.




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ December 1957.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note. Subscript
