[Illustration: FIG. 31.--Diagram of oxygen balance and cylinder. At the
top is the balance arrangement, and at the center its support. At the
left is the oxygen cylinder, with reducing valve A, rubber tube D
leading from it, F the electro-magnet which opens and closes D, K the
hanger of the cylinder and support for the magnet, R the lever which
operates the supports for the cylinder and its counterpoise S, T' a box
which is raised and lowered by R, and T its surrounding box.]

It is highly desirable to determine the oxygen to within 0.1 gram, and
we are fortunate in having a balance of the type used frequently in this
laboratory which will enable us to weigh this cylinder accurately with a
sensitiveness of less than 0.1 gram. Since 1 liter of oxygen weighs 1.43
grams, it can be seen that the amount of oxygen introduced into the
chamber can be measured by this method within 70 cubic centimeters.
Even in experiments of but an hour's duration, where the amount of
oxygen admitted from the cylinder is but 25 to 30 grams, it can be seen
that the error in the weighing of the oxygen is much less than 1 per
cent.

The earlier forms of cylinders used were provided with valves which
required some special control and a rubber bag was attached to provide
for any sudden rush of gas. The construction of the valve and valve-stem
was unfortunately such that the well-known reduction valves could not be
attached without leakage under the high pressure of 120 atmospheres.
With the type of cylinder at present in use, such leakage does not occur
and therefore we simply attach to the oxygen cylinder a reduction-valve
which reduces the pressure from 120 atmospheres to about 2 or 3 pounds
to the square inch. The cylinder, together with the reduction valve, is
suspended on one arm of the balance. The equipment of the arrangement is
shown in fig. 31. (See also fig. 5, page 4.) The cylinder is supported
by a clamp K hung from the balance arm, and the reduction-valve A is
shown at the top. The counterpoise S consists of a piece of 7-inch pipe,
with caps at each end. At a convenient height a wooden shelf with
slightly raised rim is attached.

In spite of the rigid construction of this balance, it would be
detrimental to allow this enormous weight to remain on the knife-edges
permanently, so provision is made for raising the cylinders on a small
elevator arrangement which consists of small boxes of wood, T, into
which telescope other boxes, T'. A lever handle, R, when pressed
forward, raises T' by means of a roller bearing U, and when the handle
is raised the total weight of the cylinders is supported on the
platforms.

The balance is attached to an upright I-beam which is anchored to the
floor and ceiling of the calorimeter laboratory. Two large turnbuckle
eye-bolts give still greater rigidity at the bottom. The whole apparatus
is inclosed in a glass case, shown in fig. 5.


AUTOMATIC CONTROL OF OXYGEN SUPPLY.

The use of the reduction-valve has made the automatic control of the
oxygen supply much simpler than in the apparatus formerly used. The
details of the connections somewhat schematically outlined are given in
fig. 32, in which D is the oxygen cylinder, K the supporting band, A the
reduction-valve, and J the tension-equalizer attached to one of the
calorimeters. Having reduced the pressure to about 2 pounds by means of
the reduction-valve, the supply of oxygen can be shut off by putting a
pinch-cock on a rubber pipe leading from the reduction-valve to the
calorimeters. Instead of using the ordinary screw pinch-cock, this
connection is closed by a spring clamp. The spring E draws on the rod
which is connected at L and pinches the rubber tube tightly. The tension
at E can be released by an electro-magnet F, which when magnetized
exercises a pull on the iron rod, extends the spring E, and
simultaneously releases the pressure on the rubber tube at L. To make
the control perfectly automatic, the apparatus shown on the top of the
tension-equalizer J is employed. A wire ring, with a wire support, is
caused to pass up through a bearing fastened to the clamp above J. As
the air inside of the whole system becomes diminished in volume and the
rubber cap J sinks, there is a point at which a metal loop dips into two
mercury cups C and C', thus closing the circuit, which causes a current
of electricity to pass through F. This releases the pressure at L,
oxygen rushes in, and the rubber bag J becomes distended. As it is
distended, it lifts the metal loop out of the cups, C and C', and the
circuit is broken. There is, therefore, an alternate opening and closing
of this circuit with a corresponding admission of oxygen. The exact
position of the rubber diaphragm can be read when desired from a pointer
on a graduated scale attached to a support holding the terminals of the
electric wires. More frequently, however, when the volume is required,
instead of filling the bag to a definite point, as shown by the
pointer, a delicate manometer is attached to the can by means of a
pet-cock and the oxygen is admitted by operating the switch B until the
desired tension is reached.

[Illustration: FIG. 32.--Part of the oxygen cylinder and connections to
tension-equalizer. At the left is shown the upper half of the oxygen
cylinder with a detail of the electro-magnet and reducing-valve. D is
the cylinder; K, the band supporting the oxygen cylinder and
electro-magnet arrangement; F, the electro-magnet; E, the tension
spring; and L, the rubber tubing at a point where it is closed by the
clamp. The tension-equalizer and the method of closing the circuit
operating it are shown at the right. C and C' are two mercury cups into
which the wire loop dips, thus closing the circuit. B is a lever used
for short-circuiting for filling the diaphragm J. G is a sulphuric-acid
container; H, the quick-throw valve for shutting off the tension
equalizer J; M, part of the ingoing air-pipe; N, a plug connecting the
electric circuit with the electro-magnet; and O, a storage battery.]

In order to provide for the maximum sensitiveness for weighing D and its
appurtenances, the electric connection is broken at the cylinder by
means of the plug N and the rubber tube is connected by a glass
connector which can be disconnected during the process of weighing.
Obviously, provision is also made that there be no leakage of air out of
the system during the weighing. The current at F is obtained by means of
a storage battery O. The apparatus has been in use for some time in the
laboratory and has proved successful in the highest degree.


TENSION-EQUALIZER.

The rigid walls of the calorimeter and piping necessitate some provision
for minor fluctuations in the absolute volume of air in the confined
system. The apparatus was not constructed to withstand great
fluctuations in pressure, and thin walls were used, but it is deemed
inadvisable to submit it even to minor pressures, as thus there would be
danger of leakage of air through any possible small opening.
Furthermore, as the carbon dioxide and water-vapor are absorbed out of
the air-current, there is a constant decrease in volume, which is
ordinarily compensated by the admission of oxygen. It would be very
difficult to adjust the admission of oxygen so as to exactly compensate
for the contraction in volume caused by the absorption of water-vapor
and carbon dioxide. Consequently it is necessary to adjust some portion
of the circulating air-current so that there may be a contraction and
expansion in the volume without producing a pressure on the system. This
was done in a manner similar to that described in the earlier apparatus,
but on a much simpler plan.

To the air-pipe just before it entered the calorimeter was attached a
copper can with a rubber diaphragm top. This diaphragm, which is, as a
matter of fact, a ladies' pure rubber bathing-cap, allows for an
expansion or contraction of air in the system of 2 to 3 liters. The
apparatus shown in position is to be seen in fig. 25, in which the tin
can I is covered with the rubber diaphragm J. If there is any change in
volume, therefore, the rubber diaphragm rises or falls with it and under
ordinary conditions of an experiment this arrangement results in a
pressure in the chamber approximately that of the atmosphere. It was
found, however, that even the slight resistance of the piping from the
tension-equalizer to the chamber, a pipe some 26 millimeters in diameter
and 60 centimeters long, was sufficient to cause a slightly diminished
pressure inside the calorimeter, inasmuch as the air was sucked out by
the blower with a little greater speed than it was forced in by the
pressure at the diaphragm. Accordingly the apparatus has been modified
so that at present the tension-equalizer is attached directly to the
wall of the calorimeter independent of the air-pipe.

In most of the experiments made thus far it has been our custom to
conduct the supply of fresh oxygen through pet-cock K on the side of the
tension-equalizer. This is shown more in detail in fig. 32, in which,
also, is shown the interior construction of the can. Owing to the fact
that the air inside of this can is much dryer than the room air, we have
followed the custom with the earlier apparatus of placing a vessel
containing sulphuric acid inside the tension-equalizer, so that any
moisture absorbed by the dry air inside the diaphragm may be taken up by
the acid and not be carried into the chamber. The air passing through
the pipe to the calorimeter is, it must be remembered, absolutely dry
and hence there are the best conditions for the passage of moisture from
the outside air through the diaphragm to this dry air. Attaching the
tension-equalizer directly to the calorimeter obviates the necessity for
this drying process and hence the sulphuric-acid vessel has been
discarded.

The valve H (fig. 25) is used to cut off the tension-equalizer
completely from the rest of the system at the exact moment of the end of
the experimental period. After the motor has been stopped and the slight
amount of air partly compressed in the blower has leaked back into the
system, and the whole system is momentarily at equal tension, a process
occupying some 3 or 4 seconds, the gate-valve H is closed. Oxygen is
then admitted from the pet-cock K until there is a definite volume in J
as measured by the height to which the diaphragm can rise or a second
pet-cock is connected to the can I and a delicate petroleum manometer
attached in such a manner that the diaphragm can be filled to exactly
the same tension each time. Under these conditions, therefore,
the apparent volume of air in the system, exclusive of the
tension-equalizer, is always the same, since it is confined by the rigid
walls of the calorimeter and the piping. Furthermore, the apparent
volume of air in the tension-equalizer is arbitrarily adjusted to be the
same amount at the end of each period by closing the valve and
introducing oxygen until the tension is the same.


BAROMETER.

Recognizing the importance of measuring very accurately the barometric
pressure, or at least its fluctuations, we have installed an accurate
barometer of the Fortin type, made by Henry J. Green. This is attached
to the inner wall of the calorimeter laboratory, and since the
calorimeter laboratory is held at a constant temperature, temperature
corrections are unnecessary, for we have here to deal not so much with
the accurate measurement of the actual pressure as with the accurate
measurement of differences in pressure. For convenience in reading, the
ivory needle at the base of the instrument and the meniscus are well
illuminated with electric lamps behind a white screen, and a small lamp
illuminates the vernier. The barometer can be read to 0.05 millimeter.


ANALYSIS OF RESIDUAL AIR.

The carbon-dioxide production, water-vapor elimination, and oxygen
absorption of the subject during 1 or 2 hour periods are recorded in a
general way by the amounts of carbon dioxide and water-vapor absorbed by
the purifying vessels and the loss of weight of the oxygen cylinder;
but, as a matter of fact, there may be considerable fluctuations in the
amounts of carbon dioxide and water-vapor and particularly oxygen in the
large volume of residual air inside the chamber. With carbon dioxide and
water-vapor this is not as noticeable as with oxygen, for in the 1,300
liters of air in the chamber there are some 250 liters of oxygen, and
slight changes in the composition of this air indicate considerable
changes in the amount of oxygen. Great changes may also take place in
the amounts of carbon dioxide and water-vapor under certain conditions.
In some experiments, particularly where there are variations in muscular
activity from period to period, there may be a considerable amount of
carbon dioxide in the residual air and during the next period, when the
muscular activity is decreased, for example, the percentage composition
of the air may vary so much as to indicate a distinct fall in the amount
of carbon dioxide present. Under ordinary conditions of ventilation
during rest experiments the quantity of carbon dioxide present in the
residual air is not far from 8 to 10 grams. There are usually present in
the air not far from 6 to 9 grams of water-vapor, and hence this
residual amount can undergo considerable fluctuations. When it is
considered that an attempt is made to measure the total amount of carbon
dioxide expired in one hour to the fraction of a gram, it is obvious
that fluctuations in the composition of residual air must be taken into
consideration.

It is extremely difficult to get a fair sample of air from the chamber.
The air entering the chamber is free from water-vapor and carbon
dioxide. In the immediate vicinity of the entering air-tube there is air
which has a much lower percentage of carbon dioxide and water-vapor than
the average, and on the other hand close to the nose and mouth of the
subject there is air of a much higher percentage of carbon dioxide and
water-vapor than the average. It has been assumed that the composition
of the air leaving the chamber represents the average composition of the
air in the chamber. This assumption is only in part true, but in rest
experiments (and by far the largest number of experiments are rest
experiments) the changes in the composition of the residual air are so
slow and so small that this assumption is safe for all practical
purposes.

Another difficulty presents itself in the matter of determining the
amount of carbon dioxide and water-vapor; that is, to make a
satisfactory analysis of air without withdrawing too great a volume from
the chamber. The difficulty in analysis is almost wholly confined to the
determination of water-vapor, for while there are a large number of
methods for determining small amounts of carbon dioxide with great
accuracy, the method for determining water-vapor to be accurate calls
for the use of rather large quantities of air. From preliminary
experiments with a sling psychrometer it was found that its use was
precluded by the space required to successfully use this instrument, the
addition of an unknown amount of water to the chamber from the wet bulb,
and the difficulties of reading the instrument from without the chamber.
Recourse was had to the determination of moisture by the absolute
method, in that a definite amount of air is caused to pass over
pumice-stone saturated with sulphuric acid. It is of interest here to
record that at the moment of writing a series of experiments are in
progress in which an attempt is being made to use a hair hygrometer for
this purpose.

The method of determining the water-vapor and carbon dioxide in the
residual air is extremely simple, in that a definite volume of air is
caused to pass over sulphuric acid and soda-lime contained in U-tubes.
In other words, a small amount of air is caused to pass through a small
absorbing-system constructed of U-tubes rather than of porcelain vessels
and silver-plated cans. Formerly a very elaborate apparatus was employed
for aspirating the air from the chamber through U-tubes and then
returning the aspirated air to the chamber. This involved the use of a
suction-pump and called for a special installation for maintaining the
pressure of water constant. More recently a much simpler device has been
employed, in that we have taken advantage of the pressure in the
ventilating air-system developed by the passage of air through the
blower. After forcing a definite quantity of air through the reagents in
the U-tubes, it is then conducted back to the system after having been
measured in a gas-meter.

This procedure is best noted from fig. 30. The connected series of three
U-tubes on the rack on the table is joined on one end by well-fitting
rubber connections to the tube leading from the mercurial manometer and
on the other end to the rubber tube A leading to the gas-meter. On
lowering the mercury reservoir E, the mercury is drained out of the tube
D and air passes through both arms of the tube and then through the
three U-tubes. In the first of these it is deprived of moisture, and in
the last two of carbon dioxide. The air then enters the meter, where it
is measured and leaves the meter through the tube B, saturated with
water-vapor at the room temperature. To remove this water-vapor the air
is passed through a tower filled with pumice-stone drenched with
sulphuric acid. It leaves the tower through the tube C and enters the
ventilating air-pipe on its way to the calorimeter.

The method of manipulation is very simple. After connecting the U-tubes
the pet-cock connecting the tube C with the pipe is opened, the mercury
reservoir E is lowered, and air is allowed to pass through until the
meter registers 10 liters. By raising the reservoir E the air supply is
shut off, and after closing the stop-cock at C the tubes are
disconnected, a second set is put in place, and the operation repeated.
The U-tubes are of a size having a total length of the glass portion
equal to 270 millimeters and an internal diameter of 16 millimeters.
They permit the passage of 3 liters of air per minute through them
without a noticeable escape of water-vapor or carbon dioxide. The
U-tubes filled with pumice-stone and sulphuric acid weigh 90 grams. They
are always weighed on the balance with a counterpoise, but no attempt is
made to weigh them closer than to 0.5 milligram.


GAS-METER.

The gas-meter is made by the Dansk Maalerfabrik in Copenhagen, and is of
the type used by Bohr in many of his investigations. It has the
advantage of showing the water-level, and the volume may be read
directly. The dial is graduated so as to be read within 50 cubic
centimeters.

The Elster meter formerly used for this purpose was much smaller than
the meter of the Dansk Maalerfabrik we are now using. The volume of
water was much smaller and consequently the temperature fluctuations
much more rapid. While the residual analyses for which the meter is used
are of value in interpolating the results for the long experiments, and
consequently errors in the meter would be more or less constant,
affecting all results alike, we have nevertheless carefully calibrated
the meter by means of the method of admitting oxygen from a weighed
cylinder.[23] The test showed that the meter measured 1.4 per cent too
much, and consequently this correction must be applied to all
measurements made with it.


CALCULATION OF RESULTS.

With an apparatus as elaborate as is the respiration calorimeter and its
accessories, the calculation of results presents many difficulties, but
the experience of the past few years has enabled us to lessen materially
the intricacies of the calculations formerly thought necessary.

The total amount of water-vapor leaving the chamber is determined by
noting the increase in weight of the first sulphuric-acid vessel in the
absorber system. This vessel is weighed with a counterpoise and hence
only the increment in weight is recorded. A slight correction may be
necessary here, as frequently the absorber is considerably warmer at the
end of the period than at the beginning and if weighed while warm there
may be an error of 0.1 to 0.2 gram. If the absorbers are weighed at the
same temperature at the beginning and end, this correction is avoided.

The amount of carbon dioxide absorbed from the ventilating air-current
is found by noting the changes in weight of the potash-lime can and the
last sulphuric-acid vessel. As shown by the weights of this latter
vessel, it is very rare that sufficient water is carried over from the
potash-lime to the sulphuric acid to cause a perceptible change in
temperature, and no temperature corrections are necessary. It may
occasionally happen that the amount of carbon dioxide absorbed is
actually somewhat less than the amount of water-vapor abstracted from
the reagent by the dry air-current as it passes through the can. The
conditions will then be such that there will be a loss in weight of the
potash-lime can and a large gain in weight of the sulphuric-acid vessel.
Obviously, the algebraic sum of these amounts will give the true weight
of the carbon dioxide absorbed.

The amount of oxygen admitted is approximately measured by noting the
loss in weight of the oxygen cylinder. Since, however, in admitting the
oxygen from the cylinder there is a simultaneous admission of a small
amount of nitrogen, a correction is necessary. This correction can be
computed either by the elaborate formulas described in the publication
of Atwater and Benedict[24] or by the more abbreviated method of
calculation which has been used very successfully in all short
experiments in this laboratory. In either case it is necessary to know
the approximate percentage of nitrogen in the oxygen.


ANALYSIS OF OXYGEN.

With the modified method of computation discussed in detail on page 88
it is seen that such exceedingly exact analyses of oxygen as were
formerly made are unnecessary, and further calculation is consequently
very simple if we know the percentage of nitrogen to within a fraction
of 1 per cent. We have used a Haldane gas-analysis apparatus for
analyzing the oxygen, although the construction of the apparatus is such
that this presents some little difficulty. It is necessary, for
example, to accurately measure about 16 cubic centimeters of pure
nitrogen, pass it into the potassium pyrogallate pipette, and then
(having taken a definite sample of oxygen) gradually absorb the oxygen
in the potassium pyrogallate and measure subsequently the accumulated
nitrogen. The analysis is tedious and not particularly satisfactory.
Having checked the manufacturer's analysis of a number of cylinders of
oxygen and invariably found them to agree with our results, we are at
present using the manufacturer's guaranteed analysis. If there was a
very considerable error in the gas analysis, amounting even to 1 per
cent, the results during short experiments would hardly be affected.


ADVANTAGE OF A CONSTANT-TEMPERATURE ROOM AND TEMPERATURE CONTROL.

A careful inspection of the elaborate method of calculation required for
use with the calorimeter formerly at Wesleyan University shows that a
large proportion of it can be eliminated owing to the fact that we are
here able to work in a room of constant temperature. It has been pointed
out that the fluctuations in the temperature of the gas-meter affect not
only the volume of the gas passing through the meter, but likewise the
tension of aqueous vapor. The corrections formerly made for temperature
on the barometer are now unnecessary; finally (and perhaps still more
important) it is no longer necessary to subdivide the volume of the
system into portions of air existing under different temperatures,
depending upon whether they were in the upper or lower part of the
laboratory. In other words, the temperature of the whole ventilating
circuit and chamber, with the single exception of the air above the acid
in the first sulphuric-acid absorber, may be said to be constant. During
rest experiments this assumption can be made without introducing any
material error, but during work experiments it is highly probable that
some consideration must be given to the possibility of the development
of a considerable temperature rise in the air of the potash-lime
absorbers, due to the reaction between the carbon dioxide and the solid
absorbent. It is thus apparent that the constant-temperature conditions
maintained in the calorimeter laboratory not only facilitate
calorimetric measurements, but also simplify considerably the elaborate
calculations of the respiratory exchange formerly required.


VARIATIONS IN THE APPARENT VOLUME OF AIR.

In the earlier form of apparatus the largest variation in the apparent
volume of air was due to the fluctuations in the height of the large
rubber diaphragms used on the tension equalizer. In the present form of
apparatus there is but one rubber diaphragm, and this is small,
containing not more than 3 to 4 liters as compared to about 30 liters in
the earlier double rubber diaphragms. As now arranged, all fluctuations
due to the varying positions of the tension-equalizer are eliminated as
each experimental period is ended with the diaphragm in exactly the same
position, _i. e._, filled to a definite tension.

In its passage through the purifiers the air is subjected to more or
less pressure, and it is obvious that if these absorbers were coupled to
the ventilating system under atmospheric pressure, and then air caused
to pass through them, there would be compression in a portion of the
purifier system. Thus there would be a contraction in the volume, and
air thus compressed would subsequently be released into the open air
when the absorbers were uncoupled. The method of testing the system
outlined on page 100 equalizes this error, however, in that the system
is tested under the same pressure used during an actual experiment, and
hence between the surface of the sulphuric acid in the first porcelain
vessel and the sulphuric acid in the second porcelain vessel there is a
confined volume of air which at the beginning of an experimental period
is under identically the same pressure as it is at the end. There is,
then, no correction necessary for the rejection of air with the changes
in the absorber system.


CHANGES IN VOLUME DUE TO THE ABSORPTION OF WATER AND CARBON DIOXIDE.

As the water-vapor is absorbed by the sulphuric acid, there is a slight
increase in volume of the acid. This naturally results in the diminution
of the apparent volume of air and likewise again affects the amount of
oxygen admitted to produce constant apparent volume at the end of each
experimental period. The amount of increase which thus takes place for
each experimental period is very small. It has been found that an
increase in weight of 25 grams of water-vapor results in an increase in
volume of the acid of some 15 cubic centimeters. Formerly this
correction was made, but it is now deemed unnecessary and unwise to
introduce a refinement that is hardly justified in other parts of the
apparatus. Similarly, there is theoretically at least an increase in
volume of the potash-lime by reason of the absorption of the carbon
dioxide. This was formerly taken into consideration, but the correction
is no longer applied.


RESPIRATORY LOSS.

With experiments on man, there is a constant transformation of solid
body material into gaseous products which are carried out into the
air-current and absorbed. Particularly where no food is taken, this
solid material becomes smaller in volume and consequently additional
oxygen is required to take the place of the decrease in volume of body
substance. But this so-called respiratory loss is more theoretical than
practical in importance, and in the experiments made at present the
correction is not considered necessary.


CALCULATION OF THE VOLUME OF AIR RESIDUAL IN THE CHAMBER.

The ventilating air-circuit may be said to consist of several portions
of air. The largest portion is that in the respiration chamber itself
and consists of air containing oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and
water-vapor. This air is assumed to have the same composition up to the
moment when it begins to bubble through the sulphuric acid in the first
acid-absorber. The air in this absorber above the acid, amounting to
about 14 liters, has a different composition in that the water-vapor has
been completely removed. The same 14 liters of air may then be said to
contain carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and oxygen. This composition is
immediately disturbed the moment the air enters the potash-lime can,
when the carbon dioxide is absorbed and the volume of air in the last
sulphuric-acid absorber, in the sodium-bicarbonate can, and in the
piping back to the calorimeter may be said to consist only of nitrogen
and oxygen. The air then between the surface of the sulphuric acid in
the last porcelain absorber and the point where the ingoing air is
delivered to the calorimeter consists of air free from carbon dioxide
and free from water. Formerly this section also included the
tension-equalizer, but very recently we have in both of the calorimeters
attached the tension-equalizer directly to the respiration chamber.

In the Middletown apparatus, these portions of air of varying
composition were likewise subject to considerable variations in
temperature, in that the temperature of the laboratory often differed
materially from that of the calorimeter chamber itself, especially as
regards the apparatus in the upper part of the laboratory room. It is
important, however, to know the total volume of the air inclosed in the
whole system. This is obtained by direct measurement. The cubic contents
of the calorimeter has been carefully measured and computed; the volumes
of air in the pipes, valve systems, absorbing vessels, and
tension-equalizer have been computed from dimensions, and it has been
found that the total volume in the apparatus is, deducting the volume of
the permanent fixtures in the calorimeter, 1,347 liters. The
corresponding volume for the bed calorimeter is 875. These values are
altered by the subject and extra articles taken into the chamber.

From a series of careful measurements and special tests the following
apparent volumes for different parts of the system have been calculated:

                                                                    Liters.
Volume of the chair calorimeter chamber (without fixtures)           1360.0
Permanent fixtures (5); chair and supports (8)                         13.0
                                                                     ------
    Apparent volume of air inside chamber                            1347.0
Air in pipes, blower, and valves to surface of acid in
  first acid vessel                                                     4.5
                                                                     ------
    Apparent volume of air containing water-vapor                    1351.5
Air above surface of acid in first sulphuric-acid vessel and
  potash-lime can                                                      16.0
