
The remaining two captive rat-men came next. They were swiftly
drugged, unbound, and started on their dazed march. They trudged
woodenly out the rocky projection to its end, then on and over; and
again the grim tragedy of the Devil Crystal's feast was repeated, to
the accompaniment of that eerily beautiful crashing, tinkling song.

The four Devil Crystals that had completed their gruesome feast
moved sluggishly away, leaving the space clear for the two crystals
that remained unfed. The score of guards closed in upon Joan and
Powell.

With the crystalline doom at last staring them squarely in the face,
Powell went berserk in a final desperate effort to gain even a
moment's respite. He lashed out in a writhing, kicking flurry that
almost cleared the space around them.

Then three of the rat-men slipped behind him, and a second later his
feet were jerked from under him. His bound arms made him helpless to
avert his fall, and he crashed heavily to the ground. Then a dozen
of the powerful little beasts swarmed over him, completely
overpowering him by their numbers.

Claw-like hands pried his set jaws apart. A cup of the cloudy white
liquid was pressed to his lips. He choked; then, unable to help
himself, he had to let the stuff pour down his throat. It had an
acid taste faintly reminiscent of lemons. The rat-men apparently
wanted to make sure of giving him enough, for they poured another
full cup of the liquid down his throat before releasing him.

The guards then fell back and Powell stumbled to his feet. Joan was
already up again, standing close beside him. From the wry expression
upon her face, Powell knew that she had also been given the drugged
potion.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a long minute the two stood there with every nerve trembling as
they helplessly waited for the paralyzing numbness to sweep over
their bodies. The seconds passed slowly, and still their minds
remained as clear as though the drug had been water. Another full
minute elapsed without effect, before they could finally convince
themselves of the amazing truth.

The drugged drink of the rat-men, instantly paralyzing to those of
their own rodent race, was utterly harmless to the human being from
another world!

Powell instantly realized the forlorn last chance their unexpected
immunity to the drug gave them.

"Play 'possum, Joan!" he whispered tensely. "Then we'll make a
break for the king and those Belts!"

Joan nodded slightly in quick understanding. Powell let his jaw drop
slack and open, and stiffened his body in imitation of the stupor
the rodent drug victims had shown. Joan promptly followed his lead.
The alertly watching guards relaxed their tense vigilance in obvious
relief.

The guards waited another minute to be sure of the drug's effects.
Then, apparently satisfied, they stepped forward and unbound the two
prisoners. Powell let his bonds drop from him without making a
hostile move of any kind. He wanted first to wait until he was free
of the encircling guards.

The rat-men maneuvered the two into position, and prodded them
forward toward the projecting point of rock. They obediently began
their march, simulating as best they could the wooden mechanical
gait of the drug victims. Powell saw from the corner of his eye that
Joan was tensely watching his face for a sign from him.

As the captives reached the narrow projection the guards dropped a
couple of yards behind and halted to watch. It was the chance for
which Powell had been waiting.

"Let's go!" he shouted to Joan. The girl, alert for his signal, was
right beside him as they wheeled and dashed at break-neck speed for
the rat-king and his sole lieutenant, some ten yards away.

       *       *       *       *       *

They were upon the two startled rodent leaders before they even
realized what was happening. Powell swept the squirming old king up
in the air, tore the Silver Belts from about the monarch's
shoulders, and flung the creature sprawling and senseless at the
pit's edge.

The lieutenant leaped for Powell's throat in a belated effort at
rescue, but Powell smashed a solid fist squarely into its snarling
face, and the brute collapsed with a broken neck.

Snatching his gun-belt from the fallen rat-man, Powell crammed new
clips of ammunition into the two guns and wheeled to confront the
rest of the rat-men. The detachment of guards, demoralized by the
dazzling speed of the captives' sortie, were milling in obvious
uncertainty.

Behind them the thousands of the main horde were chattering and
squealing in excited frenzy, dazed and bewildered by their king's
swift overthrow. The whole clearing was a seething mob of excited
beasts, stunned for the moment, but ready at any second to rally
from their shock and surge forward in a furious charge that would
sweep everything before it.

Powell menaced the rat-men with levelled guns while Joan, with
fingers that shook from excitement and haste, quietly buckled one of
the Silver Belts around each of them.

The guards rallied from their panic first. At a shrill command from
their leader, they began cautiously edging forward toward Joan and
Powell. The two gave ground slowly, working their way back over
toward the projecting tongue of rock. Out on the end of that narrow
strip, Powell knew that he could hold the horde at bay for a few
moments at least.

       *       *       *       *       *

They reached the rocky projection, and began backing slowly and
carefully out toward its end. The guards, galvanized into action by
their captives' retreat, suddenly came surging forward in a furious
charge.

Powell emptied the two automatics in a crashing volley that nearly
wiped out the charging guards. The few survivors turned and fled in
panic back to the main horde. Powell reloaded his clips with
feverish haste.

The thousands of rat-men in the main horde were now milling in what
was apparently a last moment of hesitation before surging forward in
an irresistible stampede toward the beleaguered two out on the rocky
strip.

Several bolder individuals at the edge of the horde edged a step
forward. Their example was followed by a hundred others. Another
hesitant step or two--and then the whole horde was in motion.

Powell swept the front rank with a rain of lead from one of the
automatics, holding the other as a reserve. The heavy bullets plowed
murder into the close-packed furry bodies. The charge wavered
momentarily. Then Powell felt Joan tugging frantically at his arm.

"Larry, the rocks under us are crumbling!" she cried. "We'll be
hurled down into the pit!"

Even as she spoke, Powell felt the narrow strip of rock under them
quiver and settle. He looked quickly down. All along its length, the
narrow rocky projection, weakened by their weight, was breaking
swiftly away from the pit's edge. And on the floor of the pit below
them the two waiting Devil Crystals moved with musical, tinkling
sounds as they waited restlessly for their prey to fall among them.
