The owners have left for a time, and we must see that the cities are
kept clean, that decay is prevented, that everything is kept oiled and
in running condition. The gardens, the streets, the water mains,
everything must be maintained as it was eight years ago, so that when
the owners return, they will not be displeased. We want to be sure that
they will be completely satisfied."

Franks tapped Moss on the arm.

"Come over here," he said in a low voice. "I want to talk to you."

He led Moss and Taylor out of the building, away from the leadys,
outside on the hillside. The soldiers followed them. The Sun was up and
the sky was turning blue. The air smelled sweet and good, the smell of
growing things.

Taylor removed his helmet and took a deep breath.

"I haven't smelled that smell for a long time," he said.

"Listen," Franks said, his voice low and hard. "We must get back down at
once. There's a lot to get started on. All this can be turned to our
advantage."

"What do you mean?" Moss asked.

"It's a certainty that the Soviets have been tricked, too, the same as
us. But _we_ have found out. That gives us an edge over them."

"I see." Moss nodded. "We know, but they don't. Their Surface Council
has sold out, the same as ours. It works against them the same way. But
if we could--"

"With a hundred top-level men, we could take over again, restore things
as they should be! It would be easy!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Moss touched him on the arm. An A-class leady was coming from the
building toward them.

"We've seen enough," Franks said, raising his voice. "All this is very
serious. It must be reported below and a study made to determine our
policy."

The leady said nothing.

Franks waved to the soldiers. "Let's go." He started toward the
warehouse.

Most of the soldiers had removed their helmets. Some of them had taken
their lead suits off, too, and were relaxing comfortably in their cotton
uniforms. They stared around them, down the hillside at the trees and
bushes, the vast expanse of green, the mountains and the sky.

"Look at the Sun," one of them murmured.

"It sure is bright as hell," another said.

"We're going back down," Franks said. "Fall in by twos and follow us."

Reluctantly, the soldiers regrouped. The leadys watched without emotion
as the men marched slowly back toward the warehouse. Franks and Moss and
Taylor led them across the ground, glancing alertly at the leadys as
they walked.

They entered the warehouse. D-class leadys were loading material and
weapons on surface carts. Cranes and derricks were working busily
everywhere. The work was done with efficiency, but without hurry or
excitement.

The men stopped, watching. Leadys operating the little carts moved past
them, signaling silently to each other. Guns and parts were being
hoisted by magnetic cranes and lowered gently onto waiting carts.

"Come on," Franks said.

He turned toward the lip of the Tube. A row of D-class leadys was
standing in front of it, immobile and silent. Franks stopped, moving
back. He looked around. An A-class leady was coming toward him.

"Tell them to get out of the way," Franks said. He touched his gun. "You
had better move them."

Time passed, an endless moment, without measure. The men stood, nervous
and alert, watching the row of leadys in front of them.

"As you wish," the A-class leady said.

It signaled and the D-class leadys moved into life. They stepped slowly
aside.

Moss breathed a sigh of relief.

"I'm glad that's over," he said to Franks. "Look at them all. Why don't
they try to stop us? They must know what we're going to do."

Franks laughed. "Stop us? You saw what happened when they tried to stop
us before. They can't; they're only machines. We built them so they
can't lay hands on us, and they know that."

His voice trailed off.

The men stared at the Tube entrance. Around them the leadys watched,
silent and impassive, their metal faces expressionless.

For a long time the men stood without moving. At last Taylor turned
away.

"Good God," he said. He was numb, without feeling of any kind.

The Tube was gone. It was sealed shut, fused over. Only a dull surface
of cooling metal greeted them.

The Tube had been closed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Franks turned, his face pale and vacant.

The A-class leady shifted. "As you can see, the Tube has been shut. We
were prepared for this. As soon as all of you were on the surface, the
order was given. If you had gone back when we asked you, you would now
be safely down below. We had to work quickly because it was such an
immense operation."

"But why?" Moss demanded angrily.

"Because it is unthinkable that you should be allowed to resume the war.
With all the Tubes sealed, it will be many months before forces from
below can reach the surface, let alone organize a military program. By
that time the cycle will have entered its last stages. You will not be
so perturbed to find your world intact.

"We had hoped that you would be undersurface when the sealing occurred.
Your presence here is a nuisance. When the Soviets broke through, we
were able to accomplish their sealing without--"

"The Soviets? They broke through?"

"Several months ago, they came up unexpectedly to see why the war had
not been won. We were forced to act with speed. At this moment they are
desperately attempting to cut new Tubes to the surface, to resume the
war. We have, however, been able to seal each new one as it appears."

The leady regarded the three men calmly.

"We're cut off," Moss said, trembling. "We can't get back. What'll we
do?"

"How did you manage to seal the Tube so quickly?" Franks asked the
leady. "We've been up here only two hours."

"Bombs are placed just above the first stage of each Tube for such
emergencies. They are heat bombs. They fuse lead and rock."

Gripping the handle of his gun, Franks turned to Moss and Taylor.

"What do you say? We can't go back, but we can do a lot of damage, the
fifteen of us. We have Bender guns. How about it?"

He looked around. The soldiers had wandered away again, back toward the
