lettering upon the control panels and the instruments, while nearly
obliterated, was unmistakably in the same language in which Artur had
addressed us.

The ship had, beyond the shadow of doubt, come from Earth!

"Artur," I said gravely, "you have shown me that which has stirred me
more than anything in my life. This ship of the air came from my own
world, which is called Earth."

"True," he nodded, "that is the name He gave to it: Earth. He was a
young man, but He was full of kindness and wisdom. He took my people
out of the fields and the forests, and He taught them the working of
metals, and the making of such things as He thought were good. Other
things, of which He knew, He kept secret. He had small instruments He
could hold in His hand, and which roared suddenly, that would take the
life of large animals at a great distance, but He did not explain
these, saying that they were bad. But all the good things He made for
my people, and showed them how to make others.

                     *      *      *      *      *

"Not all my people were good. Some of them hated this great one, and
strove against Him. They were makers of trouble, and He sent them to
the southern continent, which is called Neen. Those among my people who
loved Him and served Him best, He made His friends. He taught them His
language, which is this that I speak, and which has been the holy
language of His priests since that day. He gave to these friends names
from his own country, and they were handed down from father to son, so
that I am now Artur, as my father was Artur, and his father before him,
for many generations."

"Just a second," I put in. "Artur? That is not--ah! Arthur! That is the
name: Arthur."

"Perhaps so," nodded the priest of this unknown Earth-child. "In many
generations, a name might slightly change. But I must hasten on with my
story, for outside my people become impatient.

"In the course of time, He passed away, an old man, with a beard that
was whiter than the hair of our new-born children. Here, our hair grows
dark with age, but His whitened like the metal of his ship that brought
Him here. But He left to us His voice, and so long as His voice spoke
to us on the anniversary of the day upon which He came out of the sky,
the Neens believed that His power still protected His people.

"But the Neens were only awaiting the time when His voice would no
longer sound in the Place. Each year their brown and savage
representatives came, upon the anniversary, to listen, and each time
they cowered and went back to their own kind with the word that He Who
Speaks, still spoke to His people.

"But the last anniversary, no sound came forth. His voice was silenced
at last; and the Neens went back rejoicing, to tell their people that
at last the god of the Libars had truly died, and that His voice
sounded no more in the Place."

                     *      *      *      *      *

A tense excitement gripped me; my hands trembled, and my voice, as I
spoke to Artur, shook with emotion.

"And this voice--it came from where, Artur?" I whispered.

"From here." Sorrowfully, reverently, he lifted, from a niche in the
wall, a small box of smooth, shining metal, and lifted the lid.

Curiously, I stared at the instruments revealed. In one end of the
horizontal panel was a small metal membrane, which I guessed was a
diaphragm. In the center of the remaining space was thrust up a heavy
pole of rusty metal. Supported by tiny brackets in such fashion that it
did not quite touch the pole of rusty metal, was a bright wire, which
disappeared through tiny holes in the panel, on either side. Each of
the brackets which supported the wire was tipped with a tiny roller,
which led me to believe that the wire was of greater length than was
revealed, and designed to be drawn over the upright piece of metal.

"Until the last anniversary," said Artur sadly, "when one touched this
small bit of metal, here,"--he indicated a lever beside the diaphragm,
which I had not noted--"this wire moved swiftly, and His voice came
forth. But this anniversary, the wire did not move, and there was no
voice."

"Let me see that thing a moment." There were hinges at one end of the
panel, and I lifted it carefully. An intricate maze of delicate
mechanism came up with it.

                     *      *      *      *      *

One thing I saw at a glance: the box contained a tiny, crude, but
workable atomic generator. And I had been right about the wire: there
was a great orderly coil of it on one spool, and the other end was
attached to an empty spool. The upright of rusty metal was the pole of
an electro-magnet, energized by the atomic generator.

"I think I see the trouble, Artur!" I exclaimed. One of the connections
to the atomic generator was badly corroded; a portion of the metal had
been entirely eaten away, probably by the electrolytic action of the
two dissimilar metals. With trembling fingers I made a fresh
connection, and swung down the hinged panel. "This is the lever?" I
asked.

"Yes; you touch it so." Artur moved the bit of metal, and instantly the
shining wire started to move, coming up through the one small hole,
passing, on its rollered guides, directly over the magnet, and
disappearing through the other hole, to be wound up on the take-up
spool. For an instant there was no sound, save the slight grinding of
the wire on its rollers, and then a bass, powerful voice spoke from the
vibrating metal diaphragm:

"I am Thomas Anderson," said the voice. "I am a native of a world
called Earth, and I have come through space to this other sphere. I
leave this record, which I trust is imperishable, so that when others
come to follow me, they may know that to Earth belongs the honor, if
honor it be, of sending to this world its first visitor from the stars.

"There is no record on Earth of me nor of my ship of space, the
_Adventurer_. The history of science is a history of men working under
the stinging lash of criticism and scoffing; I would have none of that.

                     *      *      *      *      *

"The _Adventurer_ was assembled far from the cities, in a lone place
where none came to scoff or criticize. When it was finished, I took my
place and sealed the port by which I had entered. The _Adventurer_
spurned the Earth beneath its cradles, and in the middle of the
Twenty-second century, as time is computed on Earth, man first found
himself in outer space.

"I landed here by chance. My ship had shot its bolt. Perhaps I could
leave, but the navigation of space is a perilous thing, and I could not
be sure of singling out my native Earth. This is a happy world, and the
work I am doing here is good work. Here I remain.

"And now, to you who shall hear this, my voice, in some year so far
away that my bones shall be less than dust, and the mind refuses to
compute the years, let me give into your charge the happiness and the
welfare of these, my people. May peace and happiness be your portion.
That is the wish of Earth's first orphan, Thomas Anderson."

There was a click, and then the sharp hum of the wire re-spooling
itself on the original drum.

