millions of millions of miles. This is about 11,400,000 times the
distance from the earth to the sun.

Now for the second part of the calculation: The amount of light received
on the earth from some of the brighter stars has been experimentally
compared with the amount received from the sun. The results differ
rather widely, but in the case of Arcturus the ratio of the star's light
to sunlight may be taken as about one twenty-five-thousand-millionth--i.
e., 25,000,000,000 stars, each equal to Arcturus, would together shed
upon the earth as much light as the sun does. But we know that light
varies inversely as the square of the distance; for instance, if the sun
were twice as far away as it is, its light would be diminished for us to
a quarter of its present amount. Suppose, then, that we could remove the
earth to a point midway between the sun and Arcturus, we should then be
5,700,000 times as far from the sun as we now are. In order to estimate
how much light the sun would send us from that distance we must square
the number 5,700,000 and then take the result inversely, or as a
fraction. We thus get 1 / 32,490,000,000,000, representing the ratio of
the sun's light at half the distance of Arcturus to that at its real
distance. But while receding from the sun we should be approaching
Arcturus. We should get, in fact, twice as near to that star as we were
before, and therefore its light would be increased for us fourfold. Now,
if the amount of sunlight had not changed, it would exceed the light of
Arcturus only a quarter as much as it did before, or in the ratio of
25,000,000,000 / 4 = 6,250,000,000 to 1. But, as we have seen, the
sunlight would diminish through increase of distance to one
32,490,000,000,000th part of its original amount. Hence its altered
ratio to the light of Arcturus would become 6,250,000,000 to
32,490,000,000,000, or 1 to 5,198.

This means that if the earth were situated midway between the sun and
Arcturus, it would receive 5,198 times as much light from that star as
it would from the sun! It is quite probable, moreover, that the heat of
Arcturus exceeds the solar heat in the same ratio, for the spectroscope
shows that although Arcturus is surrounded with a cloak of metallic
vapors proportionately far more extensive than the sun's, yet, smothered
as the great star seems in some respects to be, it rivals Sirius itself
in the intensity of its radiant energy.

If we suppose the radiation of Arcturus to be the same per unit of
surface as the sun's, it follows that Arcturus exceeds the sun about
375,000 times in volume, and that its diameter is no less than
62,350,000 miles! Imagine the earth and the other planets constituting
the solar system removed to Arcturus and set revolving around it in
orbits of the same forms and sizes as those in which they circle about
the sun. Poor Mercury! For that little planet it would indeed be a jump
from the frying pan into the fire, because, as it rushed to perihelion,
Mercury would plunge more than 2,500,000 miles beneath the surface of
the giant star. Venus and the earth would melt like snowflakes at the
mouth of a furnace. Even far-away Neptune, the remotest member of the
system, would swelter in torrid heat.

But stop! Look at the sky. Observe how small and motionless the disks of
the stars have become. Back to the telescopes at once, for this is a
token that the atmosphere is steady, and that "good seeing" may be
expected. It is fortunate, for we have some delicate work before us. The
very first double star we try in Booetes, Sigma 1772, requires the use of
the four-inch, and the five-inch shows it more satisfactorily. The
magnitudes are sixth and ninth, distance 5", p. 140 deg.. On the other side
of Arcturus we find zeta, a star that we should have had no great
difficulty in separating thirty years ago, but which has now closed up
beyond the reach even of our five-inch. The magnitudes are both fourth,
and the distance less than a quarter of a second; position angle
changing. It is apparently a binary, and if so will some time widen
again, but its period is unknown. The star 279, also known as Sigma
1910, near the southeastern edge of the constellation, is a pretty
double, each component being of the seventh magnitude, distance 4", p.
212 deg.. Just above zeta we come upon pi, an easy double for the
three-inch, magnitudes four and six, distance 6" p. 99 deg.. Next is xi, a
yellow and purple pair, whose magnitudes are respectively five and
seven, distance less than 3", p. 200 deg.. This is undoubtedly a binary with
a period of revolution of about a hundred and thirty years. Its distance
decreased about 1" between 1881 and 1891. It was still decreasing in
1899, when it had become 2.5". The orbital swing is also very apparent
in the change of the position angle.

The telescopic gem of Booetes, and one of "the flowers of the sky," is
epsilon, also known as Mirac. When well seen, as we shall see it
to-night, epsilon Booetis is superb. The magnitudes of its two component
stars are two and a half (according to Hall, three) and six. The
distance is about 2.8", p. 326 deg.. The contrast of colors--bright orange
yellow, set against brilliant emerald green--is magnificent. There are
very few doubles that can be compared with it in this respect. The
three-inch will separate it, but the five-inch enables us best to enjoy
its beauty. It appears to be a binary, but the motion is very slow, and
nothing certain is yet known of its period.

In delta we have a very wide and easy double; magnitudes three and a
half and eight and a half, distance 110", p. 75 deg.. The smaller star has a
lilac hue. We can not hope with any of our instruments to see all of the
three stars contained in , but two of them are easily seen; magnitudes
four and seven, distance 108", p. 172 deg.. The smaller star is again
double; magnitudes seven and eight, distance 0.77", p. 88 deg.. It is
clearly a binary, with a long period. A six-inch telescope that could
separate this star at present would be indeed a treasure. Sigma 1926 is
another object rather beyond our powers, on account of the contrast of
magnitudes. These are six and eight and a half; distance 1.3", p. 256 deg..

Other doubles are: 44 (Sigma 1909), magnitudes five and six, distance
4.8", p. 240 deg.; 39 (Sigma 1890), magnitudes both nearly six, distance
3.6", p. 45 deg.. Smaller star light red; iota, magnitudes four and a half
and seven and a half, distance 38", p. 33 deg.; kappa, magnitudes five and a
half and eight, distance 12.7", p. 238 deg.. Some observers see a greenish
tinge in the light of the larger star, the smaller one being blue.

There are one or two interesting things to be seen in that part of Canes
Venatici which is represented on map No. 11. The first of these is the
star cluster 3936. This will reward a good look with the five-inch. With
large telescopes as many as one thousand stars have been discerned
packed within its globular outlines.

The star 25 (Sigma 1768) is a close binary with a period estimated at
one hundred and twenty-five years. The magnitudes are six and seven or
eight, distance about 1", p. 137 deg.. We may try for this with the
five-inch, and if we do not succeed in separating the stars we may hope
to do so some time, for the distance between them is increasing.

Although the nebula 3572 is a very wonderful object, we shall leave it
for another evening.

Eastward from Booetes shines the circlet of Corona Borealis, whose form
is so strikingly marked out by the stars that the most careless eye
perceives it at once. Although a very small constellation, it abounds
with interesting objects. We begin our attack with the five-inch on
Sigma 1932, but not too confident that we shall come off victors, for
this binary has been slowly closing for many years. The magnitudes are
six and a half and seven, distance 0.84", p. 150 deg.. Not far distant is
another binary, at present beyond our powers, eta. Here the magnitudes
are both six, distance 0.65", p. 3 deg.. Hall assigns a period of forty
years to this star.

The assemblage of close binaries in this neighborhood is very curious.
Only a few degrees away we find one that is still more remarkable, the
star gamma. What has previously been said about 42 Comae Berenicis
applies in a measure to this star also. It, too, has a comparatively
small orbit, and its components are never seen widely separated. In 1826
their distance was 0.7"; in 1880 they could not be split; in 1891 the
distance had increased to 0.36", and in 1894 it had become 0.53", p.
123 deg.. But in 1899 Lewis made the distance only 0.43". The period has
been estimated at one hundred years.

While the group of double stars in the southern part of Corona Borealis
consists, as we have seen, of remarkably close binaries, another group
in the northern part of the same constellation comprises stars that are
easily separated. Let us first try zeta. The powers of the three-inch
are amply sufficient in this case. The magnitudes are four and five,
distance 6.3", p. 300 deg.. Colors, white or bluish-white and blue or green.

Next take sigma, whose magnitudes are five and six, distance 4", p.
206 deg.. With the five-inch we may look for a second companion of the tenth
magnitude, distance 54", p. 88 deg.. It is thought highly probable that
sigma is a binary, but its period has simply been guessed at.

Finally, we come to nu, which consists of two very widely separated
stars, nu^1 and nu^2, each of which has a faint companion. With the
five-inch we may be able to see the companion of nu^2, the more
southerly of the pair. The magnitude of the companion is variously given
as tenth and twelfth, distance 137", p. 18 deg..

With the aid of the map we find the position of the new star of 1866,
which is famous as the first so-called temporary star to which
spectroscopic analysis was applied. When first noticed, on May 12, 1866,
this star was of the second magnitude, fully equaling in brilliancy
alpha, the brightest star of the constellation; but in about two weeks
it fell to the ninth magnitude. Huggins and Miller eagerly studied the
star with the spectroscope, and their results were received with deepest
interest. They concluded that the light of the new star had two
different sources, each giving a spectrum peculiar to itself. One of the
spectra had dark lines and the other bright lines. It will be
remembered that a similar peculiarity was exhibited by the new star in
Auriga in 1893. But the star in Corona did not disappear. It diminished
to magnitude nine and a half or ten, and stopped there; and it is still
visible. In fact, subsequent examination proved that it had been
catalogued at Bonn as a star of magnitude nine and a half in 1855.
Consequently this "blaze star" of 1866 will bear watching in its
decrepitude. Nobody knows but that it may blaze again. Perhaps it is a
sun-like body; perhaps it bears little resemblance to a sun as we
understand such a thing. But whatever it may be, it has proved itself
capable of doing very extraordinary things.

We have no reason to suspect the sun of any latent eccentricities, like
those that have been displayed by "temporary" stars; yet, acting on the
principle which led the old emperor-astrologer Rudolph II to torment his
mind with self-made horoscopes of evil import, let us unscientifically
imagine that the sun _could_ suddenly burst out with several hundred
times its ordinary amount of heat and light, thereby putting us into a
proper condition for spectroscopic examination by curious astronomers in
distant worlds.

But no, after all, it is far pleasanter to keep within the strict
boundaries of science, and not imagine anything of the kind.




CHAPTER V

IN SUMMER STAR-LANDS

"I heard the trailing garments of the night
  Sweep through her marble halls,
I saw her sable skirts all fringed with light
  From the celestial walls."--H. W. LONGFELLOW.


In the soft air of a summer night, when fireflies are flashing their
lanterns over the fields, the stars do not sparkle and blaze like those
that pierce the frosty skies of winter. The light of Sirius, Aldebaran,
Rigel, and other midwinter brilliants possesses a certain gemlike
hardness and cutting quality, but Antares and Vega, the great summer
stars, and Arcturus, when he hangs westering in a July night, exhibit a
milder radiance, harmonizing with the character of the season. This
difference is, of course, atmospheric in origin, although it may be
partly subjective, depending upon the mental influences of the mutations
of Nature.

[Illustration: MAP NO. 12.]

The constellation Scorpio is nearly as striking in outline as Orion, and
its brightest star, the red Antares (alpha in map No. 12), carries
concealed in its rays a green jewel which, to the eye of the enthusiast
in telescopic recreation, appears more beautiful and inviting each time
that he penetrates to its hiding place.

We shall begin our night's work with this object, and the four-inch
glass will serve our purpose, although the untrained observer would be
more certain of success with the five-inch. A friend of mine has seen
the companion of Antares with a three-inch, but I have never tried the
star with so small an aperture. When the air is steady and the companion
can be well viewed, there is no finer sight among the double stars. The
contrast of colors is beautifully distinct--fire-red and bright green.
The little green star has been seen emerging from behind the moon, ahead
of its ruddy companion. The magnitudes are one and seven and a half or
eight, distance 3", p. 270 deg.. Antares is probably a binary, although its
binary character has not yet been established.

A slight turn of the telescope tube brings us to the star sigma, a wide
double, the smaller component of which is blue or plum-colored;
magnitudes four and nine, distance 20", p. 272 deg.. From sigma we pass to
beta, a very beautiful object, of which the three-inch gives us a
splendid view. Its two components are of magnitudes two and six,
distance 13", p. 30 deg.; colors, white and bluish. It is interesting to
know that the larger star is itself double, although none of the
telescopes we are using can split it. Burnham discovered that it has a
tenth-magnitude companion; distance less than 1", p. 87 deg..

And now for a triple, which will probably require the use of our largest
glass. Up near the end of the northern prolongation of the constellation
we perceive the star xi. The three-inch shows us that it is double; the
five-inch divides the larger star again. The magnitudes are respectively
five, five and a half, and seven and a half, distances 0.94", p. 215 deg.,
and 7", p. 70 deg..

A still more remarkable star, although one of its components is beyond
our reach, is nu. With the slightest magnifying this object splits up
into two stars, of magnitudes four and seven, situated rather more than
40" apart. A high power divides the seventh-magnitude companion into
two, each of magnitude six and a half, distance 1.8", p. 42 deg.. But (and
this was another of Burnham's discoveries) the fourth-magnitude star
itself is double, distance 0.8", p. about 0 deg.. The companion in this case
is of magnitude five and a half.

Next we shall need a rather low-power eyepiece and our largest aperture
in order to examine a star cluster, No. 4173, which was especially
admired by Sir William Herschel, who discovered that it was not, as
Messier had supposed, a circular nebula. Herschel regarded it as the
richest mass of stars in the firmament, but with a small telescope it
appears merely as a filmy speck that has sometimes been mistaken for a
comet. In 1860 a new star, between the sixth and seventh magnitude in
brilliance, suddenly appeared directly in or upon the cluster, and the
feeble radiance of the latter was almost extinguished by the superior
light of the stranger. The latter disappeared in less than a month, and
has not been seen again, although it is suspected to be a variable, and,
as such, has been designated with the letter T. Two other known
variables, both very faint, exist in the immediate neighborhood.
According to the opinion that was formerly looked upon with favor, the
variable T, if it is a variable, simply lies in the line of sight
between the earth and the star cluster, and has no actual connection
with the latter. But this opinion may not, after all, be correct, for
Mr. Bailey's observations show that variable stars sometimes exist in
large numbers in clusters, although the variables thus observed are of
short period. The cluster 4183, just west of Antares, is also worth a
glance with the five-inch glass. It is dense, but its stars are very
small, so that to enjoy its beauty we should have to employ a large
telescope. Yet there is a certain attraction in these far-away glimpses
of starry swarms, for they give us some perception of the awful
profundity of space. When the mind is rightly attuned for these
revelations of the telescope, there are no words that can express its
impressions of the overwhelming perspective of the universe.

The southern part of the constellation Ophiuchus is almost inextricably
mingled with Scorpio. We shall, therefore, look next at its attractions,
beginning with the remarkable array of star clusters 4264, 4268, 4269,
and 4270. All of these are small, 2' or 3' in diameter, and globular in
shape. No. 4264 is the largest, and we can see some of the stars
composing it. But these clusters, like those just described in Scorpio,
are more interesting for what they signify than for what they show; and
the interest is not diminished by the fact that their meaning is more or
less of a mystery. Whether they are composed of pygmy suns or of great
solar globes like that one which makes daylight for the earth, their
association in spherical groups is equally suggestive.

There are two other star clusters in Ophiuchus, and within the limits of
map No. 12, both of which are more extensive than those we have just
been looking at. No. 4211 is 5' or 6' in diameter, also globular,
brighter at the center, and surrounded by several comparatively
conspicuous stars. No. 4346 is still larger, about half as broad as the
moon, and many of its scattered stars are of not less than the ninth
