names for things, and she repeated them after him. She seemed to find
pronouncing them easy.

The other people mostly talked among themselves in their own language.
The pale eyes never stopped talking, it seemed. Would there never be a
moment of thoughtful silence? The voices, all speaking so fast, gabbling
like a flock of turkeys, made him dizzy.

A strange feeling was coming over him. He heard a buzzing in his ears,
like locusts on the prairie. His face felt numb. He reached up and
touched his cheeks with his fingertips, and it was as if he felt his
face through a thin, invisible cloth.

His stomach started to churn. He felt with a sudden panic that he could
not hold all the food he had eaten. The peppers and the wine were
burning together in his stomach. He lurched to his feet, swaying from
side to side. The vast room seemed to be spinning like a canoe in a
whirlpool, and the voices around him faded away.

He felt Nicole quickly stand up with him, her hand firmly on his arm,
steadying him.

He shut his eyes and held his hand tightly over his mouth, wanting to
die of shame and embarrassment. His belly bucked like a wild pony. Hot
liquid spurted through his fingers.

"Here, son, here," a voice said. He opened his eyes to look into the
face of his father, full of pain for him. Pierre held a large wooden
bucket under his chin. On the other side of him Nicole had a strong grip
on his shoulder.

Auguste took his hand away from his mouth and let his belly give up what
it had held. Stained red by the wine, the food he had just eaten poured
into the bucket. The smell of vomit filled his nostrils, making him feel
even sicker.

He fell to his knees, coughing, choking, tears streaming from his eyes.
Pierre knelt beside him, still holding the bucket for him. Auguste's
stomach heaved again and again, forcing the remnants of his meal through
his throat and past his slack lips.

As he recovered a bit, he heard someone laugh softly in a distant part
of the room, and someone else speak in the pale eyes' language. The tone
of contempt was unmistakable.

He was overwhelmed with shame. He had made a fool of himself before his
entire de Marion family and their whole tribe. He had disgraced the
Sauk. He had embarrassed his father.

It was as he had feared. He could not stay here. It was too painful.

_Tonight_, he promised himself, holding his aching belly. _Tonight I
leave the land of the pale eyes forever._

       *       *       *       *       *

Reproaching himself, Pierre knelt beside Auguste, trying through the
pressure of his hand on the boy's back to tell Auguste that he loved
him.

_He said he had tasted wine, but I should have known he could not drink
so much. The poor boy must be dying of shame, and it is all the fault of
stupid Pierre._

Auguste coughed and wiped the back of his hand over his face. Pierre
patted him gently on the back.

Nicole, kneeling on Auguste's other side, suddenly turned her head
toward the door and drew in a frightened breath. Pierre looked up to see
what it was.

A figure filled the doorway, silhouetted in the yellow rectangle of
afternoon sunlight.

Pierre at once recognized the truculent set of Raoul's broad shoulders,
the forward thrust of his head under the wide-brimmed hat.

Pierre had time for one more anguished thought of self-reproach as his
younger brother strode toward them.

_For this, too, I should have better prepared Auguste._

Raoul's boots sounded on the flagstone floor.

Pierre tugged on Auguste's arm, helping him to his feet. He heard Nicole
whisk away the bucket.

"So, this is the little mongrel?" Raoul's deep voice boomed in the
cavernous log hall.

"Raoul," Pierre said, "this is your nephew, Auguste."

Pierre turned to Auguste and in Sauk said, "This is your uncle, Raoul.
He lives here with me and your grandfather. He speaks with a rough
tongue, but do not fear him."

How could the boy not fear a man like Raoul?

"Auguste, is it? A fine French name for a redskin." Raoul set his fists
on his hips, throwing back his blue jacket to show his gilt-handled
pistol and a huge knife in its scabbard. At the sight of the weapons
Pierre's heart pounded.

Raoul went up to Auguste and stared into his face as Pierre stood
tensely.

Raoul said, "Well, brother, you actually did it. You made yourself a
son."

"I'm glad you admit that," said Pierre.

"Oh, I admit that. He's got de Marion written all over his dirty face.
But don't call him my 'nephew.' I reserve that title for legitimate
kin."

Pierre hoped Auguste's knowledge of English was not enough to let him
understand how he was being insulted. The boy looked from Pierre to
Raoul as they spoke, his large, dark eyes watchful, his face
expressionless.

"Raoul, stop this." It was Nicole, back from getting rid of the bucket.
"I'm Auguste's aunt and you're his uncle, and you might as well get used
to it."

"And you are spoiling our dinner, Raoul," Elysee said. "Either sit and
eat with us like a civilized man or leave us alone."

"Spoiling your dinner?" Raoul gave a bellow of laughter. "Mean to tell
me it doesn't spoil your dinner to see that savage puking in our great
hall? Mean to tell me _he's_ civilized?"

Pierre glanced across the table at his father and Frank Hopkins, who had
both risen to their feet. Elysee's eyes burned with anger. Frank held
his little girl's hand and looked sombrely at Raoul. The two Hopkins
boys stared at their uncle.

_I pray God they don't admire him. Boys have a way of looking up to men
who behave like brutes._

Raoul turned to Nicole, his teeth flashing white under his thick black
mustache. "You really want an Indian nephew? Have you forgot what
Indians did to your sister?"

"No, I'll never forget what happened to Helene," Nicole said. "None of
us will. But Auguste had nothing to do with that."

"You didn't watch your sister die," Raoul said. "So that just the sight
of an Indian makes you want to kill."

Pierre saw that Raoul was working himself up into a rage. He would talk
and talk, and every word he said would make him angrier, until at last,
the explosion. A spasm of pain shot across Pierre's stomach.

_Not now_, he prayed. _God, let the illness leave me alone until I can
be alone with it._

Nicole's cheeks were an even brighter red than was usual for her, but
she spoke gently. "Raoul, you do have a living sister. If it had been me
at Fort Dearborn instead of Helene--if I had been raped and murdered--I
would be looking down from Heaven, and I would be hoping your wound
would heal. I would pray that you would welcome Pierre's son, your
nephew, into your home."

"Stop saying that this filthy savage is my nephew," said Raoul. "Look at
him standing there, staring at me. You know what the word mongrel means,
redskin?"

Pierre felt a surge of pride as he saw Auguste standing straight and
slender, gazing levelly at Raoul. Savage? Even though he had been sick
only a moment ago, Auguste held himself as regally as a young prince.

"As for you, Nicole," Raoul went on, "don't ever think you can speak for
Helene. She may be in Heaven now, but she got there by way of Hell. No
decent woman could imagine what she suffered."

Pierre almost screamed aloud as the pain in his belly stabbed him again.
He clutched at his stomach. Just when he needed all his strength!

Auguste looked into his eyes, then down at his hand.

"You hurt, Father," Auguste said in English. "Must sit down."

"Oh? He's already got a few words of English?" said Raoul. "You're
training him to talk, eh? Like a parrot? Going to put him in a medicine
show?"

Elysee suddenly spoke in a loud voice, "My friends--those who were
invited to dine with us here today--will you please excuse us and give
us privacy? We have family matters to discuss."

Silently, eyes cast down, the thirty or so servants and field workers
who had been invited to celebrate the coming of Pierre's son filed out
of the hall.

Pierre thought, _In so many things I have failed today_.

"Raoul," Elysee said, "I have not forgiven Helene's killers. But I am
not stupid enough to hate all Indians, and neither should you be. Do you
think whites have never tortured and killed Indian women?"

Raoul bared his teeth again. "If you can't hate the Indians for what
they did to your daughter and to me, then you never loved either one of
us."

Pierre felt a sudden surge of anger. "Raoul, I forbid you to speak that
way to our father. You are cruel and unjust."

"You owe _me_ justice, Pierre, you and Papa. Where was he when you
abandoned me to the Indians? Where were you?"

Pierre's legs shook. He could feel the rage radiating from Raoul; it was
like standing too close to a red-hot stove.

Auguste said, "Father."

Pierre turned and looked into the dark young eyes.

Auguste spoke in Sauk. "Father, I am the cause of this man's anger."

"There is much to explain, son," said Pierre. "Be patient and quiet, and
all will be well."

Pierre saw fear struggling with resolution in his son's face. A pallor
in the fine olive skin showed that Auguste had not yet gotten over being
sick. Auguste squared his shoulders and took a step toward Raoul. He
raised his right hand in greeting.

"I greet uncle," he said solemnly in English.

"Keep this mongrel away from me, Pierre," Raoul said.

"Frank," said Nicole, "take the children out of here."

Frank picked Abigail up and carried her, with Tom and Benjamin trailing.
He walked off toward the kitchen, looking back over his shoulder at
Nicole.

Elysee said, "Remember, Raoul, this is my grandson."

"Your grandson!" Raoul spat.

Auguste held out his right hand to Raoul. "I sorry you angry. Want be
friend."

In a moment, Pierre thought, he would have to get between them. But his
stomach hurt so badly that he could hardly move.

"If you want to be my friend, you mongrel bastard, get as far away from
this house and from me as you can," Raoul said.

Auguste took another step toward Raoul, still holding out his hand. He'd
learned about shaking hands from Frank Hopkins just a little while ago,
Pierre remembered.

"Auguste, no!" Pierre cried.

"Don't you try to touch me, redskin."

Raoul thrust out his own hand and struck at Auguste's. He grabbed
Auguste's shirt, twisting the buckskin in his big hand.

Raoul had lost all control. The fury was upon him. Pierre forgot about
his own pain and tried to throw himself between Raoul and Auguste. His
chest hit Raoul's arm, hard as an iron bar.

"Let go of him, Raoul," Pierre said.

"Raoul, stop it!" Elysee shouted.

"All right." Raoul punched his fist into Auguste's chest and released
him, sending the boy staggering backward to fall to the floor.

Rage blazed up inside Pierre. The sight of his son knocked to the floor
swept away all constraint. To the Devil with trying to reason with
Raoul. He rushed at Raoul and swung his arm with all his strength,
bringing his palm against Raoul's mouth.

Though open-handed, it was a blow that would have knocked many a man
down. Raoul only staggered back half a step.

But a trickle of blood appeared at the corner of his mouth.

"You still fight like a Frenchman, Pierre," said Raoul with a grin,
wiping his mouth. "Slapping a man. Think you're still a count or
something? Fight like an American."

He lunged at Pierre. Pierre barely saw, out of the corner of his eye,
the fist coming at him. A cannon went off at the side of his head.

He was on the floor, flat on his back.

Nicole screamed, "No! No, Auguste!"

Pierre rolled his aching head to one side to see Auguste standing over
him, his hand on the deerhorn hilt of the knife that hung at his belt,
the knife Pierre had left for him when he was a baby. Nicole held his
arm with both hands.

"Want to fight with knives?" Raoul said. He slid his own huge hunting
knife out and held it upright, the point glittering in the candlelight.

"Come on, redskin!" Raoul shouted, but even as he spoke he charged at
Auguste, as Auguste struggled to break free from Nicole. Raoul's knife
flashed and Pierre heard a cry of pain, and Nicole was between Auguste
and Raoul, and Auguste had his hand to his face and blood was running
through his fingers.

Raoul stepped away from Auguste and wiped his knife on a white
tablecloth.

"What have you done?" Pierre shouted.

"I was kind," Raoul said with a white-toothed grin.

Pierre rushed to Auguste. Blood flowed from a long cut that ran straight
down Auguste's cheek from just below his eye to the corner of his mouth.
The front of Auguste's tan buckskin shirt was stained red.

"If he'd pulled that knife, I would have taken his eye," Raoul said
softly. "I just left a mark on him. So he won't forget me."

"Let go of me, Father," Auguste said in Sauk, in a level, terrible
voice. "I have to kill him."

"No!" said Pierre, holding Auguste tighter.

_You're a brave boy, but I'm afraid it's you that would be killed, my
son._

Blood pounded in Pierre's head. He wanted to take Auguste's knife--the
knife he'd given Auguste long ago--and drive it into Raoul's chest.

_If I were like Raoul, I would do just that. Or try to._

"Raoul, for this I will never forgive you."

"Forgive me?" Raoul shouted. "Can I forgive you for bringing this savage
here to cheat me?"

Nicole took Auguste from Pierre's arms. She pressed a white napkin to
his bleeding face and took him to a chair to sit down. As he sat,
Auguste turned to shoot Raoul a look of pure hate.

"Cheat you? What are you talking about?"

"Just remember, when you die--and I hope God makes it soon--I _will_
have this estate."

Pierre felt Raoul's words as if that blade had plunged into his heart.
That his own brother should wish him dead ...

Pierre went to stand by Auguste, seated in a chair with Nicole wiping
his slashed face.

Pierre said, "In the will I wrote years ago I named you as my heir. I
never thought to change that will. Until today."

Raoul, still wiping his knife, snorted. "No court in Illinois would let
a man disinherit a legitimate white brother in favor of a half-Indian
bastard."

Pierre let his hand rest on Auguste's shoulder. The boy's eyes burned up
at him. Pierre looked down at the blood-soaked napkin that Nicole
pressed to Auguste's cheek.

Auguste, speaking in the Sauk tongue, broke the silence that had
followed Raoul's words. "Even if he is your brother and my uncle, this
man is our enemy, Father. I will stand side by side with you against
him." Auguste put his hand over the hand that lay on his shoulder.

Raoul slammed his knife into its sheath. "You've driven me out of my
home, Pierre. I'm not living under the same roof with an Indian. I won't
be back till I can come back as master of this house."

He strode to the door and turned again. "And then I'll bring my own
family with me."

"What do you mean--your own family?" Elysee called across the long hall.

"I'm marrying Eli Greenglove's daughter," Raoul said with a grin. "And
that mongrel had better not try to touch my children's birth-right."

He was gone, leaving the door hanging open behind him, sunlight pouring
in.

Pierre looked miserably down at Auguste and thought, _I hope your
shaman's skills make you better at predicting the future than I have
been, my son_.




BOOK 2

1831


Moon of Ripe Cherries

_July_




8

Homecoming


Rejoicing at the sight of Victor, Auguste stepped up to the gangplank of
the paddle wheeler _Virginia_ and paused there a moment to look around.
He couldn't help himself: he smiled broadly. The settlement hugging the
bluff was not home, but it was closer to home than he had been in a long
time.

And this summer, he had decided, he would go back to his true home. He
would end the sorrow of being cut off from his people.

This was the sixth spring since Pierre de Marion had come and taken him
to Victoire, and, as with every spring before it, he missed Saukenuk
terribly. He longed for his mother, for the teachings of Owl Carver, for
the arms of Redbird, whom he had lost almost as soon as he made her his.

For six years--he had learned to count years as white people did--he had
obeyed his father and the promise made with the calumet and had not
tried even to send a message to the British Band. He even felt it was a
wise rule. To communicate with his loved ones would have torn him in
two. But more than a month ago in New York City, strolling in the warm
evening air on the busy cobblestone streets, past dooryards where lilacs
were blooming, he made up his mind that when he returned to Illinois he
would visit Victoire only briefly and then would go back to Saukenuk. He
was twenty-one years old now, and among white people that meant he was
master of his own life.

He gazed up at the bluff. There were more houses up there than when he
had last come out here, two years ago. Some were built on the bottomland
itself, in spite of the danger of flooding.

He saw the palisade and flags and towers of Raoul de Marion's trading
post at the top of the bluff, and felt his joy fading. He would have to
face Raoul's insults and threats, as he had every other time he came
back to Victor. His belly tightened as he remembered, as if it had just
happened, that first encounter six years ago, the burning-ice feel of
the knifepoint slicing into his cheek, his hand gripping his own knife,
Aunt Nicole and Father holding him back.

Seemingly with a will of its own his hand went to the scar and his
finger traced the ridge that ran from eye to mouth.

He brought his gaze down from the top of the bluff and saw a more
welcome sight--Grandpapa, Aunt Nicole and Guichard in a black open
carriage from the estate, waiting to take him up to Victoire. He ran
down the gangplank and strode over to them.

"Auguste! My God, you're beautiful!" Aunt Nicole exclaimed, and then her
face reddened and she looked downward.

He felt that he looked good, though "beautiful," as he understood
English, was not the right word for a woman to use about a man. But he
supposed she admired his new clothes, the fawn-colored cutaway coat and
vest, the ruffled silk shirt, the tight, bottle-green trousers. He
wished he were not already holding his tall beaver hat in his hand, so
that he could tip it to her with the graceful motion he'd learned
watching the dandies on Broad Way.

Grandpapa leaned out of the carriage and hugged Auguste. His embrace
felt strong, and his eyes were bright. Auguste was happy to see him in
good health.

_But where is Father?_

Auguste shook hands with Guichard, who had climbed down stiffly from the
driver's seat.

"Your trunk, Monsieur Auguste?"

Auguste pointed out the big wooden chest with brass fittings that had
been unloaded at the Victor pier along with bales and barrels from the
hold of the _Virginia_.

Guichard approached two buckskin-clad men lounging by a piling. He
pointed out the trunk as Auguste had done.

"For _him_?" said one of the men, glowering at Auguste from under his
coonskin cap. "White men don't wait on goddamn Injuns." He spat tobacco
juice at Guichard's feet and turned away, as did the other man.

Auguste wanted to throw the man who had spat at Guichard into the
river. He had no doubt that he could do it, though like most men who
lived in Victor, the man was armed with knife and pistol. Auguste had
been taught to fight as a Sauk, and he had been a champion boxer,
wrestler and fencer at St. George's School. But he was not going to get
into a brawl in his first minutes ashore. Time enough for that if he met
Raoul.

"Come on, Guichard. The trunk's light enough. We don't need any help."
The old servant taking one end and Auguste the other, they loaded it
into the back of the carriage.

"Good to see you again, Grandpapa," Auguste said as he dropped into the
seat facing Elysee and Nicole, his back to the driver. "Aunt Nicole,
it's you who are beautiful. But where's Father?"

Grandpapa patted him on the knee. "Not feeling well, I'm afraid. He
sends his apologies. We will go to him now, at once."

Grandpapa was trying to make his voice sound unconcerned. But Auguste
heard an undertone of sorrow, the anguish of a father who had lost one
of his children years ago and would soon lose another.

With understanding, grief sank into Auguste's marrow. Father--Star
Arrow--had hung on these past six years, growing sicker and sicker, the
evil in his belly swelling up like a poisonous toad. Now the end was
near.

Auguste found himself looking deep into Aunt Nicole's eyes, full of
shared sorrow.

Guichard flicked the reins, and the carriage started off, turning away
from the dock, passing the warehouses and rattling down the long
dusty-white road that led across the bottomland fields to the bluff. It
must have been a good spring out here; though this was only the
beginning of July, the corn was already up to a man's waist.

Auguste felt he would look better wearing his beaver hat as they rode
along. He put it on his head, pulling the rolled-up brim down with both
hands, and set it in place with a pat on the crown.

"So, you are now a finished graduate of St. George's School?" said
Elysee with a smile. "Monsieur Charles Winans has sent long letters full
of good reports about you."

Aunt Nicole reached over and squeezed his hand. "We're proud of you,
Auguste." Her soft, fleshy hand was warm, and her eyes sparkled at him.
He sensed a feeling in her that was more than the affection of an aunt
for a nephew. She now had eight children, he knew, and every time he
had seen her and Frank together, they had seemed very much in love. But
Aunt Nicole was a big woman. She had room in her big heart, perhaps, for
more than one love.

Embarrassed by what he felt radiating from her, Auguste turned to
Elysee.

"If I learned anything at St. George's, I owe it all to the way you
prepared me, Grandpapa. Anyone who could take a boy who could barely
speak English, and in two years cram enough knowledge into his head for
him to go to secondary school in New York City--such a man is no
ordinary teacher."

"You were no ordinary pupil, my boy," said Elysee, leaning back in the
carriage, his hands resting one on top of the other on his silver-headed
cane. "And Pere Isaac laid down a solid foundation in that head of
yours. Those Jesuits are good for that, at least, black-hearted rogues
though they may be in most other respects."

"Papa!" Nicole gave Elysee a reproving frown.

Elysee quickly patted her knee. "Forgive me, my child. Let me not shake
the faith that sustains you."

"It would take more than your wicked tongue to disturb my faith, Papa,"
Nicole said with a wry smile.

It was amusing to hear Grandpapa and Aunt Nicole bicker about what the
whites called "faith." As the carriage rolled along, Auguste recalled
the many lectures he had listened to on Jesus and the Trinity at St.
George's, which was affiliated with the Episcopal Church. But Auguste
had walked with the White Bear and talked with the Turtle. He _knew_
them as he had never known the white people's God, and what went on in
their dimly lit, waxy-smelling churches had no attraction for him.

He knew that Christians, for the most part, saw his beliefs about the
spirit world as rubbish sprung out of ignorance--or, worse, inspired by
the Evil One. Pere Isaac's efforts to persuade him to walk in the way of
Jesus had prepared him for that. At school he did not speak of things
sacred to him, so as not to expose them to white scorn. When teachers
and fellow students tried to persuade him to take instruction in
Christianity, he was polite and evasive.

And when he felt he was smothering in the noise and crowding and dirt of
the huge city of New York, he would borrow a pony from the lady he
called Aunt Emilie--his father's cousin, actually--and ride out of New
York along a trail that led to the north end of the island of
Manhattan. There in a forest cave he had found, he would chew a bit of
the sacred mushroom Owl Carver had given him and restore his link with
the spirit world by journeying with the White Bear. All through these
six years, _his_ faith had remained strong.

Nicole broke in on his thoughts. "You're still studying medicine?"

"Just a beginning: I've read some books, attended some lectures. I
assisted a surgeon--Dr. Martin Bernard--at New York Hospital. I bought
myself a surgeon's box of instruments--got it in the trunk, there. But
if anybody came down with anything worse than an ingrown toenail, I'd be
scared to do anything about it."

Elysee said, "You can pull teeth, I hope, like any proper surgeon?"

Auguste shrugged. "I do have a turnkey for that. But I've never actually
used it."

"The only person in town who knows anything about treating the sick is
Gram Medill, the midwife," Nicole said. "Tom Slattery, the blacksmith,
pulls teeth. We need a real doctor."

Auguste felt a fluttering in his stomach as he wondered when he should
tell this white family of his that he wanted to leave them. Nicole was
thinking, he realized, that he would stay here at Victoire.

The steel-reinforced wooden wheels of the carriage bumped mercilessly
over the rutted road, and Auguste hoped Nicole wasn't pregnant at the
moment. The fact that his shaman's sense did not tell him reminded him
that he had been too long away from the Sauk. As they began to climb the
road that ran up the bluff, Nicole pointed out to Auguste that the newer
houses were made of boards rather than logs, because Frank had set up a
sawmill and workshop on the Peach River. Frank was now a master
carpenter, with four workers to help him when there was a house to be
built.

"But he'd sell the mill in a minute if printing alone would provide him
with a living," she said. "That's where his heart is."

Elysee said, "Pierre and I offered Frank a regular income, so that he
could give all his time to his newspaper and to printing, but he
wouldn't hear of it. He got a bit haughty when I pressed him, and
informed me that the system of feudal patronage is dead. I assured him
that I was well aware of that, and that is why I am here and not in
France."

"Frank is proud, Papa," said Nicole.

Elysee nodded. "I fear he is too often a proud papa."

Auguste roared, and Nicole, though she blushed, could not help laughing.

"The town grows bigger every year," Auguste said. Nicole nodded
sympathetically; she seemed to have guessed what he was thinking: How
numerous the whites were, as he had seen for himself in the East, and
how inexorably they were filling up this part of the country, like a
river in flood. Last year the New York papers had reported the results
of the 1830 census; the United States was over twelve million, Auguste
had read, a number he could not even imagine. And 150,000 of those were
here in the state of Illinois, balanced against the six thousand Sauk
and Fox. Black Hawk's people, the British Band, numbered only two
thousand. Hopeless.

"Victor had a hundred or so people the year you came here," said Elysee.
"Now there are over four hundred. As you see, the bluff is completely
covered with houses. And we have many new industries and crafts. A
preacher, a Reverend Hale, has put up a church on the prairie to the
east of us. I am not sure whether his work counts as an industry or a
craft. There is Frank's sawmill, as Nicole said. There are also a flour
mill and a brewery, and a mason works at a limestone quarry nearby. And
your father is planning to set up a kiln on the estate, so we can build
a new Victoire of brick."

"How sick is my father?" Auguste asked abruptly, dreading the answer he
would get.

"Ah, Nicole, there are your children waiting to greet us," Grandpapa
cried, as if he had not heard Auguste's question.

Where the road made a sharp turn and started upward on a higher level,
stood a two-story frame building painted white. A sign over the door
read, THE VICTOR VISITOR, F. HOPKINS, PUBr, PRINTING AND ENGRAVING.
CARPENTRY.

Auguste could hear the press clanking away inside the house as they
approached. The three younger children, John, Rachel and Betsy, were
lined up by the door, Rachel holding in her arms a baby that must be
Nicole and Frank's newest. Three of the older ones, Benjamin, Abigail
and Martha, leaned out a window to wave to Auguste from the second
story. Auguste felt proud of himself, being able to remember all their
names and which was which.

As Guichard reined up the horse and pushed the brake lever on the
carriage, the sound of the press stopped and Frank came out through the
open door wiping his ink-stained hands on his leather apron. His
forehead was shiny with sweat. The oldest son, Thomas, followed him,
pushing his hands down his own apron with the same gesture.

Auguste climbed down from the carriage and took Frank's hand, then shook
with Thomas and the three little girls. The baby was Patrick, he
learned. He lightly rubbed Patrick's fine hair.

"No wonder the town's population grows so fast, Aunt Nicole," Auguste
said with a smile. "How many more do you think there will be for you and
Frank?"

But as he spoke, his pleasure at his aunt's handsome family was dimmed
by the thought that if all white families were as fertile as this, there
was no hope at all for the red people.

"None, I hope," said Frank firmly. "We've got too big a tribe as it is."

Aunt Nicole's face reddened again, and Auguste reminded himself that
white women were generally reluctant to talk about pregnancy and
childbirth. Auguste recalled his mother, Sun Woman, speaking of a kind
of tea that would keep a woman from getting pregnant. When he went back
to Saukenuk he could find out more about it. He would surely come back
here to visit, and then he could tell Aunt Nicole about it. If white
women knew about that tea, maybe there would be fewer whites in years to
come, and they would not have such a hunger for land.

As they drove on up the road to the top of the bluff, Auguste saw
Nicole's face brighten, and he turned to see what she was looking at. A
black buggy drawn by an old gray horse was coming toward them, having
just rounded the bend in the road at the trading post palisade. Auguste
caught a glimpse of blond braids under a red and white checkered bonnet.

Nicole said, "Auguste, here's a newcomer to our county. I think you'll
enjoy meeting her."

"Ah yes," said Elysee. "Reverend Hale and his daughter, Mademoiselle
Nancy. He came here over a year ago, Auguste, declared the town too
corrupt for his church and started holding services for the farmers out
on the prairie. They built him a church about five miles from town.
Painted white, with a steeple one can see for miles. Its very simplicity
makes it beautiful."

Nicole said, "As much could be said for Nancy."

Curious, Auguste tried to see the face under the red and white bonnet.
Every day, and many times a day, he thought of Redbird and the joy they
so briefly shared, but many of the young white women he had seen in the
past six years had made his heart beat faster. Just last winter he'd
gone with a group of his classmates to an elegant old house on Nassau
Street where he discovered that the body of a white woman, under her
many-layered dress, was in all important respects as interesting as the
body of a woman of his own people. Even though he planned to leave
Victoire as soon as he could, he was eager to meet the new minister's
daughter.

The two carriages pulled side by side, and the drivers, Guichard and the
Reverend Hale, a slab-faced man dressed in black, reined up for the
customary exchange of greeting.

"Reverend Hale, Miss Hale," Elysee said, "may I present my grandson,
Auguste de Marion."

The reverend stared at Auguste for a moment from under bushy brows
before grunting an acknowledgment. Auguste suspected he had heard about
his parentage and was looking for traces of Indian blood.

_Indian._ Auguste had never heard that word before he went to live among
white people. His people were the Sauk, the People of the Place of Fire.
And their allies were the Fox. And besides these there were Winnebago,
Potawatomi, Chippewa, Kickapoo, Osage, Piankeshaw, Sioux, Shawnee--each
a separate people. And besides these, hundreds more, whose names
he did not even know. But the whites had one name for all these
peoples--Indians. And that name, Grandpapa had explained to him with
gentle irony, was altogether a mistake. The explorer Columbus had
thought he had landed in India.

_They do not even respect us enough to call us by an honest name._

But the sight of Nancy Hale drove the bitterness from his mind. Her
braids, emerging from her red and white bonnet and lying on either side
of her white lace collar, were yellow as ripe corn, and her face, while
too long for ideal beauty, was pink and clear. Her mouth was wide, and
her teeth were white when she smiled at Nicole and Elysee. She looked
straight at Auguste for an instant, then she looked down, but in that
moment he saw eyes a vivid shade of blue, like the turquoise stone from
the Southwest he carried in his medicine bag.

"Visiting the members of your flock, are you, Reverend?" Elysee asked.
Auguste noticed that he put the tiniest humorous inflection on the word
"flock."

Hale's thick gray brows drew together as he nodded sourly. "Trying to
bring the Word to that wilderness you call a town."

Here was an unhappy man, thought Auguste, whose life was dedicated to
persuading those around him to be equally unhappy.

"Ah, yes," said Elysee with a broad smile. "Quite a population of sheep
gone astray in Victor."

"In all of Smith County," said Hale.

_It must scandalize him to think that my mother is an Indian woman and
that my father, by the lights of this man, isn't even married to her._

Auguste suddenly wanted to defy the disapproval he felt from the
reverend. He jumped out of the carriage and in an instant was standing
on the road beside the minister's buggy. He swept off his high-crowned
hat with the flourish he'd seen in New York and bowed deeply.

"Miss Hale," he said. "Auguste de Marion. At your service."

The blood rose to Nancy Hale's cheeks.

"My pleasure, Mr. de Marion," she murmured. Her large blue eyes looked
frightened and her flush deepened, but she did not take her eyes away,
and his gaze was locked to hers. His heart beat as hard as it had the
first time he saw the White Bear.

"The Lord's work awaits us in Victor," said the Reverend Hale loudly.
"You really must excuse us." And without waiting for a reply he snapped
the reins of his buggy, and the old horse ambled off.

Auguste stood in the road waiting to see if Nancy would glance back at
him. She did. Even at a distance and through dust he could see the blue
of her eyes.

Elysee said, "Well, Auguste, close your mouth, put your hat back on and
get back up here."

_I'm going to meet her again_, Auguste thought.

He still wanted just as much to go back to his people. He had not
forgotten Redbird. By now, though, she had probably forgotten him. And
so, what harm could there be in getting to know this white young lady a
little better?

Then their carriage was passing the log wall around the trading post. A
shadow fell over his enjoyment at meeting Nancy Hale. He ran his finger
down the scar on his cheek.

"Is _he_ in there?" he said abruptly to Nicole.

Her face paled. "He's down-- You know about what's going on in the Rock
River country, don't you?"

Auguste stiffened. "Has something happened to my people?"

He saw Nicole close her eyes and sigh when he said "my people."

"There has been trouble," said Elysee. "Did no news reach you in New
York?"

_O Earthmaker, let them come to no harm._

Twisting his hands in his lap, Auguste said, "The New York papers only
report what happens on the eastern seaboard." He remembered now
overhearing remarks by some of his fellow passengers on the _Virginia_
about "Injun trouble." But he'd kept to himself on the trip up from St.
Louis.

_We steamed right past the mouth of the Rock River, and I never
