would not send up a warning vibration. But his luck held. He was
nearly at the top before it broke.

"Take him off! Take him off!" It was an eery, strangled shriek from
one of the male prisoners in the throes of a nightmare. With a
startled curse the guard thudded to his feet, peered tensely into the
darkness, his weapon sending twin milky beams of the powerful ionizing
ray toward the source of the sound.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dreamer had awakened, still gasping in the grip of fear, and other
disturbed sleepers were grumbling.

"Better go easy, you fools," the pirate warned them. "Yer just in luck
that I didn't let loose a couple bolts on ye. Got a good notion to do
it, anyway." He played the dangerous little spots of light around,
amused as the prisoners scrambled for safety, but with no real
intention of releasing the deadly electric charge along the paths
provided for it. This cruel pleasure cost him his life. As he turned
his back Quirl leaped. His iron-hard forearm rose and fell, and the
edge of his hand came down on the back of the pirate's thick neck.
There was a muffled crack and he slumped to the platform grating.

Quickly the officer stripped off the man's harness and buckled it
around his own naked chest. The electrogun had been uninjured, and
hooked to the belt was also the riot club, a truly appalling thing at
close quarters. Quirl carried the body down, laid it prone in the
corner he had occupied, snapped on the waistlock, and threw a ragged
old blanket over the hairy legs. In the forthcoming disturbance, if
anyone looked in, he would think the inert form a sleeping prisoner,
and that the guard had deserted post.

Quirl had feared an outbreak among the prisoners, but they were so
apathetic that they paid little attention. Perhaps they thought it was
Quirl who had been killed, and he did not dare even a whispered
farewell to the girl he knew was watching somewhere in the darkness.

Much to Quirl's delight, the long, tubular passage was deserted. Here
the centrifugal gravity was less than it had been in the hold. A weird
place, this central tube, where every direction was down, and a man
could walk on his ceiling, his floor, his walls with equal facility.
No top nor bottom--just a long, smooth tube with numerous enigmatic
doors leading to--where?

At least it was easy to tell where the bow of the ship was. A light
shone through a transom over the door to the navigating room. Should
he try to hold up the navigating officer? He decided against that.
There would be at least three men in there, and it was the custom to
keep those quarters locked.

"If only I knew where they generate the invisibility field!" he
muttered, as he stood irresolute.

       *       *       *       *       *

Opportunity came at that moment. A crack of light appeared along the
passage. A door was opening there. A moment later a head and
shoulders showed. Someone was climbing up. Swiftly the officer ran to
the place. The pirate did not even suspect anything wrong until he
felt the spots of milky light on his face. He showed his terror
plainly.

"Get up!" Quirl hissed. The man obeyed with alacrity. Quirl glanced
down. He saw tiers of bunks, evidently one of the crew's dormitories.

He now turned to the cowering pirate.

"I'd as soon kill you as not!" Quirl snarled.

"You got me wrong, brother!" the pirate whined. "I'm with Gore in this
deal. Lay off!"

"Where you bound for?"

"I have to relieve Burke at the ventilating turbines."

"Let Burke wait. Lead on to the invisibility generators."

"Oh, I can't do that, mister! I got to have a pass. Say, mister, I was
just kidding about being one of Gore's men. I'm for the cap'n, yes,
sir!"

"You lying scum!" Quirl barked impatiently. "Get going!"

The white-faced and bewildered pirate led the way down the tube to the
after end. He unlatched a door and tried to enter, but as soon as he
had dropped through to the platform he was met by a guard with leveled
ionizer.

"This gem'man," he started to explain. But Quirl dropped after him and
gave him a powerful shove, so that he crashed into the guard. The
latter pulled the trigger, and the unfortunate pirate crashed over the
platform's edge to the floor. Quirl had out his own electrogun and
dispatched the guard. At the same time he felt a stunning shock. His
senses reeled, but the grating had taken part of the discharge loosed
by a pirate electrician at the foot of the ladder. Quirl threw his
riot club and followed that up with another lightning bolt.

       *       *       *       *       *

He was then the only living person in the room, in which two
generators hummed softly. Connected to them was a bank of U-shaped
tubes, each as tall as a man, which were filled with silent livid
fire. Quirl picked up a wrench and started hammering at the thick
tubes until the glass cracked. Each time he was engulfed by a wave of
heat, and the tube became black. The great generators idled and
automatically came to a stop. Quirl was certain now that the pirate
ship would be visible, but the position of the captives was still
desperate. He hoped that none of the surviving pirates would think of
calling at the generator room, or find out in some other way that they
were now visible in the eternal day of space.

Quietly he climbed back to the passage and closed the hatch. He cast
about for his next move. He was looking toward the bow, but on hearing
the subdued clink of metal on metal, he turned.

A dozen of the pirates were coming toward him.

It would have been useless to draw his weapon. Theirs were out and
could have burned him to a crisp before he could move. Silently and
with deadliness apparent in every move they approached him.

"Hope they try to capture me alive!" he thought. "What a dog-fight
that'll be!"

Now they were nearly up to him.

"Come along, you fool!" barked the leader of the group as they were
all around him. "Sapheads like you'll give the whole game away."

Quirl could have laughed. This was evidently part of the mutineers'
crew bent on their errand of murder. In the dim light they had taken
him for one of their number. He went with them, meekly.

"Unlocked!" The leader whom Quirl had not seen before, exclaimed with
satisfaction. He pulled the hatch open softly and the hinges had been
oiled. Quietly as panthers they descended the ladder. They stood at
the bottom. Still another door barred the way. Quirl now realized that
they were attacking the captain's quarters. But the leader produced a
key, and silently swung the door open.

"So, you dogs! You've come!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Like an infuriated bull Captain Strom charged them, a riot club in
each hand. He could have killed them all with a ray, but he chose to
vent in physical action his consuming anger at their treachery, which
he had in some way anticipated. Three or four went sprawling under his
mighty blows. The others sought shelter behind tables and chests, and
began stabbing at him with their electroguns. Electricity crackled,
and the air became pungent with ozone. A pair of the twin rays struck
the captain's gold braid, and he went down. With a triumphant yell a
man dashed at him, murderous club up-raised. But Quirl was faster, and
the pirate fell dead with a crushed skull.

