    almost as many nebulae. I went to bed about one o'clock, and up to
    that time, he had found that night four or five new nebulae. The
    thermometer in the garden stood at 13 deg. Fahrenheit; but, in spite of
    this, HERSCHEL observes the whole night through, except that he
    stops every three or four hours and goes in the room for a few
    moments. For some years HERSCHEL has observed the heavens every hour
    when the weather is clear, and this always in the open air, because
    he says that the telescope only performs well when it is at the same
    temperature as the air. He protects himself against the weather by
    putting on more clothing. He has an excellent constitution, and
    thinks about nothing else in the world but the celestial bodies. He
    has promised me in the most cordial way, entirely in the service of
    astronomy, and without thinking of his own interest, to see to the
    telescopes I have ordered for European observatories, and he will
    himself attend to the preparation of the mirrors."

It was at this time, 1783, May 8, that HERSCHEL married. His wife was
the daughter of Mr. JAMES BALDWIN, a merchant of the city of London, and
the widow of JOHN PITT, Esq. She is described as a lady of singular
amiability and gentleness of character. She was entirely interested in
his scientific pursuits, and the jointure which she brought removed all
further anxiety about money affairs. They had but one child, JOHN
FREDERICK WILLIAM, born March 7, 1792.[21]

       *       *       *       *       *

The house at Datchet became more and more unfit for the needs of the
family, and in June, 1785, a move was made to Clay Hall, in Old Windsor.
The residence here was but short, and finally a last change was made to
Slough on April, 3d, 1786.

The ardor of the work during these years can be judged of by a single
sentence from CAROLINA HERSCHEL'S diary:

    "The last night at Clay Hall was spent in sweeping till daylight,
    and by the next evening the telescope stood ready for observation at
    Slough."

From 1786 until his death, HERSCHEL remained at Slough; his life, truly
speaking, was in his observatory.

It is indeed true, as ARAGO has said in his eloquent tribute to him: "On
peut dire hardiment du jardin et de la petite maison de Slough, que
c'est le lieu du monde ou il a ete fait le plus de decouvertes. Le nom
de ce village ne perira pas; les sciences le transmettront
religieusement a nos derniers neveux."

HERSCHEL'S first contribution to the _Philosophical Transactions_ was
printed in the volume for 1780, his last in that for 1818. Of these
thirty-nine volumes, there are only two (1813 and 1817) which contain no
paper from his hand, and many volumes contain more than one, as he
published no less than sixty-eight memoirs in this place.

And yet it must not be thought that his was an austere and grave
existence. Music, which he loved to enthusiasm, was still a delight to
him. All the more that his devotion was free. The glimpses which we get
of his life with his friends show him always cheerful, ardent, and
devoted. Even in his later years, he had not lost a "boyish earnestness
to explain;" his simplicity and the charm of his manner struck every
one.

"HERSCHEL, you know, and everybody knows, is one of the most pleasing
and well-bred natural characters of the present age," says Dr. BURNEY,
who had opportunity to know.

The portrait which is given in the frontispiece must have been painted
about this time (1788), and the eager, ardent face shows his inner life
far better than any words can do.

Even in his scientific writings, which everything conspired to render
grave and sober, the almost poetic nature of his mind shows forth. In
one of his (unpublished) note-books, now in the Royal Society's library,
I found this entry:

    "640th Sweep--November 28, 1786.--The nebula of _Orion_, which I saw
    by the front view, was so glaring and beautiful that I could not
    think of taking any place of its extent."

He was quite alone under the perfectly silent sky when this was written,
and he was at his post simply to make this and other such observations.
But the sky was beautiful to him, and his faithful sister, CAROLINA,
sitting below, has preserved for us the words as they dropped from his
lips.

On the 11th of January, 1787, HERSCHEL discovered two satellites to
_Uranus_.

After he had well assured himself of their existence, but before he
communicated his discovery to the world, he made this crucial test. He
prepared a sketch of _Uranus_ attended by his two satellites, as it
would appear on the night of February 10, 1787, and when the night
came, "the heavens displayed the original of my drawings, by showing in
the situation I had delineated them _the Georgian planet attended by two
satellites_. I confess that this scene appeared to me with additional
beauty, as the little secondary planets seemed to give a dignity to the
primary one which raises it into a more conspicuous situation among the
great bodies of the solar system.". . .

In a memoir of 1789, he has a few sentences which show the living way
in which the heavens appeared to him:

    "This method of viewing the heavens seems to throw them into a new
    kind of light.

    "They are now seen to resemble a luxuriant garden, which contains
    the greatest variety of productions in different flourishing beds;
    and one advantage we may at least reap from it is, that we can, as
    it were, extend the range of our experience to an immense duration.
    For is it not almost the same thing whether we live successively to
    witness the germination, blooming, foliage, fecundity, fading,
    withering, and corruption of a plant, or whether a vast number of
    specimens selected from every stage through which the plant passes
    in the course of its existence be brought at once to our view?"

The thought here is no less finely expressed than it is profound. The
simile is perfect, if we have the power to separate among the vast
variety each state of being from every other, and if the very luxuriance
of illustration in the heavens does not bewilder and overpower the mind.
It was precisely this discriminating power that HERSCHEL possessed in
perfection.

There is a kind of humor in the way he records a change of opinion:

    "I formerly supposed the surface of _Saturn's_ ring to be rough,
    owing to luminous points like mountains seen on it, till one of
    these was kind enough to venture off the edge of the ring and appear
    as a satellite."

In 1782 he replies with a certain concealed sharpness to the idea that
he used magnifying powers which were too high. There is a tone almost of
impatience, as if he were conscious he was replying to a criticism based
on ignorance:

    "We are told that we gain nothing by magnifying too much. I grant
    it; but shall never believe I magnify too much till by experience I
    find that I can see better with a lower power." (1782.)

By 1786, when he returns to this subject, in answer to a formal request
to explain his use of high magnifiers, he is quite over any irritation,
and treats the subject almost with playfulness:

    "Soon after my first essay of using high powers with the Newtonian
    telescope, I began to doubt whether an opinion which has been
    entertained by several eminent authors, 'that vision will grow
    indistinct when the optic pencils are less than the fiftieth part of
    an inch,' would hold good in all cases. I perceived that according
    to this criterion I was not entitled to see distinctly with a power
    of much more than about 320 in a seven-foot telescope of an aperture
    of six and four-tenths inches, whereas in many experiments I found
    myself very well pleased with magnifiers which far exceeded such
    narrow limits. This induced me, as it were, by way of apology to
    myself for seeing well where I ought to have seen less distinctly,
    to make a few experiments."

It is needless to say that these experiments proved that from the point
of view taken by HERSCHEL, he was quite right, and that his high powers
had numerous valuable applications. He goes on to say:

    "Had it not been for a late conversation with some of my highly
    esteemed and learned friends, I might probably have left the papers
    on which these experiments were recorded, among the rest of those
    that are laid aside, when they have afforded me the information I
    want."

The last sentence seems to be a kind of notice to his learned friends
that there is yet more unsaid. As a warning to those to whose criticisms
he had replied, he gives them this picture of the kind of assiduity
which will be required, if some of his observations on double stars are
to be repeated:

    "It is in vain to look for these stars if every circumstance is not
    favorable. The observer as well as the instrument must have been
    long enough out in the open air to acquire the same temperature. In
    very cold weather an hour at least will be required." (1782.)

We may gain some further insight into his character from the following
chance extracts from his writings:

    "I have all along had truth and reality in view as the sole object
    of my endeavors." (1782.)

    "Not being satisfied when I thought it possible to obtain more
    accurate measures, I employed [a more delicate apparatus]." (1783.)

    "To this end I have already begun a series of observations upon
    several zones of double stars, and should the result of them be
    against these conjectures, I shall be the first to point out their
    fallacy." (1783.)

    "There is a great probability of succeeding still farther in this
    laborious but delightful research, so as to be able at last to say
    not only how much the annual parallax _is not_, but how much it
    really _is_." (1782.)

The nature of his philosophizing, and the limits which he set to
himself, may be more clearly seen in further extracts:

    "By taking more time [before printing these observations] I should
    undoubtedly be enabled to speak more confidently of the _interior_
    _construction of the heavens_, and of its various _nebulous_ and
    sidereal strata. As an apology for this prematurity it may be said
    that, the end of all discoveries being communication, we can never
    be too ready in giving facts and observations, whatever we may be in
    reasoning upon them." (1785.)

    "In an investigation of this delicate nature we ought to avoid two
    opposite extremes. If we indulge a fanciful imagination, and build
    worlds of our own, we must not wonder at our going wide from the
    path of truth and nature. On the other hand, if we add observation
    to observation without attempting to draw not only certain
    conclusions but also conjectural views from them, we offend against
    the very end for which only observations ought to be made. I will
    endeavor to keep a proper medium, but if I should deviate from that,
    I could wish not to fall into the latter error." (1785.)

    "As observations carefully made should always take the lead of
    theories, I shall not be concerned if what I have to say contradicts
    what has been said in my last paper on this subject." (1790.)

No course of reasoning could be more simple, more exact, more profound,
and more beautiful than this which follows:

    "As it has been shown that the spherical figure of a cluster is
    owing to the action of central powers, it follows that those
    clusters which, _caeteris paribus_, are the most complete in this
    figure, must have been the longest exposed to the action of these
    causes. Thus the maturity of a sidereal system may be judged from
    the disposition of the component parts.

    "Hence planetary nebulae may be looked on as very aged. Though we
    cannot see any individual nebula pass through all its stages of
    life, we can select particular ones in each peculiar stage." (1789.)

There is something almost grandiose and majestic in his statement of
the ultimate destiny of the Galaxy:

                  "To him the fates were known
             Of orbs dim hovering on the skirts of space."

    "--Since the stars of the Milky Way are permanently exposed to the
    action of a power whereby they are irresistibly drawn into groups,
    we may be certain that from mere clustering stars they will be
    gradually compressed, through successive stages of accumulation,
    till they come up to what may be called the ripening period of the
    globular form, and total insulation; from which it is evident that
    the Milky Way must be finally broken up and cease to be a stratum of
    scattered stars.

    "The state into which the incessant action of the clustering power
    has brought it at present, is a kind of chronometer that may be used
    to measure the time of its past and future existence; and although
    we do not know the rate of going of this mysterious chronometer, it
    is nevertheless certain that since the breaking up of the Milky Way
    affords a proof that it cannot last forever, it equally bears
    witness that its past duration cannot be admitted to be infinite."
    (1814.)

HERSCHEL'S relations with his cotemporaries were usually of the most
pleasant character, though seldom intimate. This peace was broken but by
one unpleasant occurrence. In the _Philosophical Transactions_ for 1792,
SCHROETER had communicated a series of observations made with one of
HERSCHEL'S own telescopes on the atmospheres of _Venus_, the Moon, etc.
It was not only an account of phenomena which had been seen; it was
accompanied by measures, and the computations based on these led to
heights and dimensions for mountains on _Venus_ which were, to say the
least, extravagant. The adjective will not seem too strong when we say
that the very existence of the mountains themselves is to-day more than
doubtful.

The appearances seen by SCHROETER were described by him in perfectly
good faith, and similar ones have been since recorded. His reasoning
upon them was defective, and the measures which he made were practically
valueless. This paper, printed in the _Transactions_ of the Royal
Society, to which SCHROETER had not before contributed, appears to have
irritated HERSCHEL.

No doubt there were not wanting members of his own society who hinted
that on the Continent, too, there were to be found great observers, and
that here, at least, HERSCHEL had been anticipated even in his own
field. I have always thought that the memoir of HERSCHEL which appeared
in the next volume of the _Transactions_ (1793), _Observations on the
Planet Venus_, was a rejoinder intended far more for the detractors at
home than for the astronomer abroad. The review is conceived in a severe
spirit. The first idea seems to be to crush an opposition which he
feels. The truth is established, but its establishment is hardly the
_first_ object.

It seems as if HERSCHEL had almost allowed himself to be forced into a
position of arrogance, which his whole life shows was entirely foreign
to his nature. All through the review he does not once mention
SCHROETER'S name. He says:

    "A series of observations on _Venus_, begun by me in April, 1777,
    has been continued down to the present time. . . . The result of my
    observations would have been communicated long ago if I had not
    flattered myself with the hope of some better success concerning the
    diurnal motion of _Venus_, which has still eluded my constant
    attention as far as concerns its period and direction. . . . Even at
    this present time I should hesitate to give the following extracts
    if it did not seem incumbent on me to examine by what accident I
    came to overlook mountains in this planet of such enormous height as
    to exceed four, five, or even six times the perpendicular height of
    Chimboraco, the highest of our mountains. . . . The same paper contains
    other particulars concerning _Venus_ and _Saturn_. All of which
    being things of which I have never taken any notice, it will not be
    amiss to show, by what follows, that neither want of attention, nor
    a deficiency of instruments, would occasion my not perceiving these
    mountains of more than twenty-three miles in height, this jagged
    border of _Venus_, and these flat, spherical forms on _Saturn_."

The reply of SCHROETER (1795) is temperate and just. It does him honor,
and he generously gives full justice to his critic.

It would hardly be worth while to mention this slight incident if it
were not that during these years there certainly existed a feeling
