"Now let us have a look at our captive," he said, striding over.

They followed, and one glance told Jim what had happened. That
sinister lump of orange metal had vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *

But where was it? That was what he wanted to know.

"A natural question, but not one easy to answer," was Professor
Wentworth's reply. "I shall tell you what I have done; then you may
judge for yourself."

The cannon-like device which had accompanied the seeming miracle was
an adaptation of the cathode tube, whose rays are identical with the
beta rays of the atom and consist of a stream of negatively charged
particles moving at the velocity of light--186,000 miles a second.
These rays, in theory, have the power to combine with the positively
charged alpha rays of the atom and drag them from their electrons,
causing them to discharge their full quanta of energy at once, in the
form of complete disintegration--and it was this theory the professor
had acted on.

"But, good Lord--that's splitting the atom!" exclaimed Jim. "You don't
mean to say you've done that?"

"I apparently have," was the grave admission. "But do not let it seem
such a miracle. Bear in mind, as I have pointed out before, that
nature has accomplished this alchemy many times. All radio-active
elements are evidences of it. The feat consists merely in altering the
valence of the atom, changing its electric charge, in other words.
What I have done in the present instance is merely to speed up a
process nature already had under way, inasmuch as we are dealing with
a radio-active substance."

"But what has happened to the by-product of the reaction?"

"Your guess is as good as mine. I have not had time to study that
phase of it. Heat, mainly, was produced. Possibly a few atoms of
helium. But the substance is gone. That is our chief concern just
now."

It was only after abandoning chemical means and turning to physics
that he had met with success, he said. Cathode rays had finally proved
the key to the riddle.

"But do you think this thing will work on a big scale?" asked Jim
regarding that fragile tube doubtfully.

Professor Wentworth hesitated before replying.

"I do not know," he admitted, "but I intend to find out--to-night."

       *       *       *       *       *

Jim looked at him in amazement. "To-night?"

"Yes. Or rather, the experiment will be at dawn. If successful, this
continent at least will be rid of the menace."

Jim's amazement turned to incredulity and a sudden fear gripped him.
Had the strain of the past few weeks unbalanced the professor's mind?

"But surely you can't hope to wipe them out with one tube. Why, it
would take hundreds."

"No, only one. You see, I am going to place the tube in the center of
the circle and direct its rays outward toward the circumference in a
swinging radius."

Whereupon, for a moment, Jim's fear seemed confirmed.

"But, good God!" he exclaimed. "It couldn't possibly be that powerful,
could it?"

"I think it can be made to be," was Professor Wentworth's grave
assurance. "The greatest power we know in the universe is radiant
energy, which reaches us from the sun and the stars, traveling at the
speed of light."

"Like light rays, these heat rays can be focused, directed; and the
beta rays of the cathode, traveling at the same velocity, can be made
to ride these rays of radiant heat much as electric power rides radio
waves. The giant, in short, can be made, to carry the dwarf, with his
deadly little weapon. That, at least, is the theory I am acting on."

This somewhat allayed Jim's fears--fears that vanished when the
professor went on to explain somewhat the working of his mechanism.

"But how are you going to get the thing out there?" he asked,
picturing with a shudder the center of the flaming hell.

"I imagine the War Department will provide me with a volunteer plane
and pilot for the purpose," was the calm reply.

"And you will go?"

"Yes, I will go."

Jim debated, but not for long.

"Well, you needn't trouble the War Department. Here's your volunteer
pilot! The plane's outside. When do we start?"

"But, my dear young man!" objected the professor. "I cannot permit you
to make this sacrifice. It is suicide, sheer suicide."

"Is my life any more precious than yours, or that of some volunteer
Army pilot?" Jim asked him.

"But there is Joan. If I fail--she must depend on you."

"If you fail, Professor, Joan won't need me or anyone, for long. No, I
go. So let's chuck the argument and get ready."

"Oh, Jimmy!" sobbed Joan. "Jimmy!"

But her eyes, as they met his mistily, were lit with a proud splendor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two hours later, Jim Carter's little auto-plane lifted into the night,
and, with that precious tube mounted above the cabin, winged swiftly
westward.

As on his former foray into that fiery realm, Jimmy timed his flight
to arrive over the eastern edge of the Arizona desert just before
dawn. Somewhere in that great sandy waste, they felt, there would be a
place to set the plane down and get the ray going.

Professor Wentworth had broadcast the particulars of his tube to his
scientific colleagues wherever humanity still remained, and the eyes
of the world were on this flight. If successful, swift planes would
bear similar tubes to the centers of the devastated regions elsewhere,
and sweep outward with their deadly rays. The earth would be rid of
this fiery invader. If it were not successful....

Jim preferred not to think of that, as he drove on into the night.

Crossing the Missouri River at dark and deserted Kansas City, they
soon saw the eastern arc of that deadly orange circle loom on the
horizon. To get over it safely, Jim rose to twenty thousand feet, but
even there the heat, as they sped across the frontier into enemy
territory, was terrific.

Anxiously he watched his revs and prayed for his motor to hold up. If
it stopped now, they were cooked!

The sturdy engine purred on with scarcely a flutter, however, and soon
they were behind the lines, in a region pitted with the smoldering
fires of towns and cities.

It made them shudder, it presented such an appalling panorama of ruin.
But at the same time, it strengthened their hope. For very few flares
of orange gleamed now among the red. The main forces of the invader
were at the front. That meant there should be a safe place to land
somewhere.

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later, some miles beyond that weird glass citadel that had
been their objective, they found a wide stretch of empty desert, and
there Jim brought the little plane down to a faultless landing, just
as dawn was lightening the east.

Stepping out, he drew a deep breath of relief. For had he crashed, or
smashed that fragile tube, all would have been in vain.

"Well, here we are!" he exclaimed, grimly cheerful, as Professor
Wentworth stepped out after him. "Now let's--"

Then he broke off, horrified, as he saw another figure follow the
