fanning the air like grotesque wings, the serpent lashed out towards us,
coming at amazing speed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Correy, sure that he was observed by the serpent, leaped down from the
huge leaf upon which he had been standing. Hendricks and I, followed by
our men, scrambled desperately toward the deep path or lane that
Correy's ray had cut through the tangled, stinking growth. Correy's plan
had given some promise of success, had we had time to put it into proper
operation. As it was, neither Hendricks or I had had time to get into
position.

Hendricks, on my right, was working his way as rapidly as possible
toward the path, but he had a long way to go. Unless a miracle happened,
he would be too late to help. The portable ray machines would be
helpless against such a mighty bulk, except at close range.

I reached the path and glanced hastily to the right, the direction, from
which the great serpent was sweeping down on us. He was less than the
_Ertak's_ length away.

"Hide, men!" I ordered. "Under the vegetation--in the muck--anywhere!" I
glanced down the lane to the left, and saw, to my relief, that Correy
and his men were a goodly distance away, and still far from the end of
the swath their ray had cut for them. Then, with the monster towering
almost over my head. I darted behind a spongy, spotted growth,
listening, above the pounding of my heart, to the rapid slithering of
the serpent's ponderous body.

Of a sudden the sound stopped. I was conscious of an excited warning
from Hendricks: "He's stopped, sir! _Run!_ He's seen you ... he--"

Startled, I glanced up--directly into the hideous face of the snake.

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed to me he was grinning. His mouth was partially open, and the
pale, writhing barbels that surrounded his mouth seemed to reach out
toward me. The long and graceful antennae were bent downward
inquiringly, quivering tensely, and his small eyes glowed like
wind-fanned coals of fire. The brownish fins were rigid as metal, the
retractile claws unsheathed and cruelly curved. He was so close that I
could hear the air rushing through his crater-like breathing holes.

For an instant we stared at each other; he with confident gloating:
myself, too startled and horrified to move. Then, as his head shot
downward, I leaped aside.

The scaly head raked the clothes from one side of my body, and sent me,
sprawling and breathless, into the welter of sagging weeds.

I heard the sharp whine of my ray generator going into action, but I
took no chances on the accuracy of my men. They were working under
tremendous difficulties. As I fell, I snatched an atomic bomb from my
belt, and, as the horrid head drew back to strike again, I threw the
bomb with all my strength.

I had thrown from an exceedingly awkward position, and the bomb exploded
harmlessly some distance away, showering us with muck and slimy
vegetation.

Evidently, however, the explosion startled the serpent, for his head
slewed around nervously, and I felt the ground tremble under me as his
mighty coils lashed the ground in anger. Scrambling to my feet, I seized
the projector tube of the disintegrator ray and swept the beam upward
until it beat upon that terrible head.

The thing screamed--a high, thin sound almost past the range of
audibility. Reddish dust sifted down around me--the heavy dust of
disintegration. In the distance, I could hear the slashing of the tail
as it tore through the rubbery growth of weeds.

With half his head eroded by the ray, the serpent struck again, but this
time his aim was wild. The mighty head half buried itself in the muck
beside me, and I swung the projector tube down so that the full force of
the ray tore into the region above and behind the eyes, where I imagined
the brain to be. The heavy reddish dust fairly pelted from the ugly
head.

Correy had come running back. Dimly, I could hear him shouting.

"Look out!" I warned him. "Keep back, Correy! Keep the men back! I've
got him, but he'll die hard--"

As though to prove my words true, the head, a ghastly thing eroded into
a shapeless mass, was jerked from the mud, and two tremendous loops of
tortured body came hurtling over my head. One of the huge fins swung by
like a sail, its hooked talons ripping one of Correy's men into bloody
shreds. Correy himself, caught in a desperate endeavor to save the
unfortunate man, was knocked twenty feet. For one terrible instant, I
thought the beast had killed Correy also.

Gasping, Correy rose to his feet, and I ran to assist him.

"Back, men!" I shouted. "Hendricks! Get away as far and as fast as you
can. Back! _Back!_" Half dragging Correy, who was still breathless from
the blow, I hurried after the men.

Behind us, shaking the earth in his death agonies, the monstrous serpent
beat the plain about him into a veritable sea of slime.

       *       *       *       *       *

From a point of vantage, atop the _Ertak_, we watched for the end.

"I have never," said Correy in an awed voice, "seen anything take so
long to die."

"You have never before," I commented grimly, "seen a snake so large. It
took ages to grow that mighty body; it is but natural that, even with
the brain disintegrated into dust, the body would not die immediately."

"Undoubtedly he has a highly decentralized nervous system," nodded
Hendricks, who was, as I have said, something of a practical scientific
man, although no laboratory worker or sniveling scientist. "And instinct
is directing him back toward the sea from which, all unwillingly, he
came. Look--he's almost in the water."

"I don't care where he goes," said Correy savagely, "so he goes there as
carrion. Clark was a good man, sir." Clark was the man the serpent had
killed.

"True," I said. Making the entry of that loss would hurt; even though
the discipline of the Service is--or at least, used to be--very rigid,
officers get rather close to their men during the course of many tours
of duty in the confines of a little ship like the _Ertak_. "But the
_Kabit_, with her nearly two thousand souls, is safe."

We all looked up. The _Kabit_ was no longer visible. Battered, but still
space-worthy, she had gone on her way.

"I suppose," grinned Correy, "that we'll be thanked by radio." The grin
was real; Correy had had action enough to make him happy for a time. The
nervous tension was gone.
