       *       *       *       *       *

Seven days of grace! But Phobar knew that less than ten minutes remained
to him. Only here could he possibly accomplish anything. Once off the
surface of Xlarbti, there was not the remotest chance that all the
nations of Earth could reach the invaders or even attempt to defy them.
Yet what could he alone do in a week, to say nothing of ten minutes?

He sensed the amused, supercilious contempt of his captor. That was
really the greatest obstacle, this ability of theirs to read
thought-pictures. And already he had given them enough word-pictures of
English so that they could understand....

In the back of Phobar's mind the ghost of a desperate thought suddenly
came. What was it he had learned years ago in college? Homer--"The
Odyssey"--Plutarch.... From rusty, disused corners of memory crept forth
the half-forgotten words. He bent all his efforts to the task, not
daring to think ahead or plan ahead or visualize anything but the Greek
words.

He felt the bewilderment of his captor. To throw it off the track,
Phobar suddenly let an ancient English nursery rime slip into his
thoughts. The disgust that emanated from his captor was laughable;
Phobar could have shouted aloud. But the Greek words....

       *       *       *       *       *

Already the pair had left the mountain-high titan city far behind; they
rippled across the smooth, black surface of Xlarbti, and bore like rifle
bullets down on the swiftly looming laboratory. In a few minutes it
would be too late forever. Now the lost Greek words burst into Phobar's
mind, and, hoping against hope, he thought in Greek word-pictures which
his captor could not understand. He weighed chances, long shots. Into
his brain flashed an idea.... But they were upon the laboratory; a
stupendous door dissolved weirdly into shimmering haze; they sped
through.

Phobar's hand clutched a bulge in his pocket. Would it work? How could
it?

They were beyond the door now and racing across the great expanse of the
floor, past the central tower, past the control-panel which he had first
seen....

And as if by magic there leaped into Phobar's mind a clear-cut, vivid
picture of violet oceans of energy crackling and streaking from the
heavens to crash through the laboratory roof and barely miss striking
his captor behind. Even as Phobar created the image of that terrific
death, his captor whirled around in a lightning movement, a long arm of
metal flicking outward at the same instant to drop Phobar to the ground.

Like a flash Phobar was on his feet; his hand whipped from his pocket,
and with all his strength he flung a gleaming object straight toward the
fifth lever on the control-panel a dozen yards away. As a clumsy arrow
would, his oversize bunch of keys twisted to their mark, clanked, and
spread against the fifth control, which was the size regulator.

As rapidly as Phobar's captor had spun around, it reversed again, having
guessed the trick. A tentacle of pliant metal snaked toward Phobar like
a streak of flame.

But in those few seconds a terrific holocaust had taken place. As
Phobar's keys spattered against the fifth lever, there came an
immediate, growing, strange, high whine, and a sickening collapse of
the very surface beneath them. Everywhere outlines of objects wavered,
changed melted, shrank with a steady and nauseatingly swift motion. The
roof of the laboratory high overhead plunged downward; the far-distant
walls swept inward, contracted. And the metal monsters themselves
dwindled as though they were vast rubber figures from which the air was
hissing.

       *       *       *       *       *

Phobar sprang back as the tentacle whipped after him. Only that jump and
the suddenly dwarfing dimensions of the giant saved him. And even in
that instant of wild action, Phobar shouted aloud--for this whole world
was collapsing, together with everything on it, except he himself who
came of a different universe and remained unaffected! It was the long
shot he had gambled on, the one chance he had to strike a blow.

All over the shrinking laboratory the monsters were rushing toward him.
His dwindling captor flung another tentacle toward the control-panel to
replace the size-regulating lever. But Phobar had anticipated that
possibility and had already leaped to the switchboard, sweeping a heavy
bar from its place and crashing it down on the lever so that it could
not be replaced without being repaired. Almost in the same move he had
bounded away again, the former hundred-foot giant now scarcely more than
his own height. But throughout the laboratory, the other metal things
had halted in their tasks and were racing onward.

Phobar always remembered that battle in the laboratory as a scene from
some horrible nightmare. The catastrophe came so rapidly that he could
hardly follow the whirlwind events. The half dozen great leaps he made
from the lashing tentacles of his pursuer sufficed to give him a few
seconds' respite, and then the weird, howling sound of the tortured
world swelled to a piercing wail. His lungs were laboring from the
violence of his exertions; again and again he barely escaped from the
curling whips of metal tentacles. And now the monster was hardly a foot
high; the huge condensers and tubes and colossal machinery were like
those of a pygmy laboratory. And overhead the roof plunged ever
downward.

But Phobar was cornered at last. He stood in the center of a circle of
the foot-high things. His captor suddenly shot forth a dozen rope-like
arms toward him as the others closed in. He had not even a weapon, for
he had dropped the bar in his first mad bound away from the
control-panel. He saw himself trapped in his own trick, for in minutes
at most the laboratory would be crushing him with fearful force.

       *       *       *       *       *

Blindly Phobar reverted to a primitive defense in this moment of
infinite danger and kicked with all his strength at the squat monster
before him. The thing tried to whirl aside, but Phobar's shoe squashed
thickly through, and in a disorder of quivering pieces the metal
creature fell, and subsided. Knowing at last that the invaders were
vulnerable and how they could be killed, Phobar went leaping and
stamping on those nearest him. Under foot, they disintegrated into
little pulpy lumps of inert metal.

In a trice he broke beyond the circle and darted to the control-panel.
One quick glance showed him that the roof was now scarcely a half dozen
yards above. With fingers that fumbled in haste at tiny levers and
dials, he spun several of them--the repulsion-ray full--the
attraction-ray full. And when they were set, he picked up the bar he
had dropped and smashed the controls so that they were helplessly
jammed. He could almost feel the planet catapult through the heavens.

The laboratory roof was only a foot over his head. He whirled around,
squashed a dozen tiny creeping things, leaped to a disk that was now not
more than a few inches broad. Stooping low, balancing himself
precariously, he somehow managed to close the tiny switch. A haze of
orange light enveloped him, there came a great vertigo and dizziness and
