tele-stat; he strolled over to the instrument and leaned against it,
with a knowing look at Beardsley.

Sheila Carmack tilted her chin in defiance. "But I _wish_ to answer this
man. I insist on answering! Loved Amos Carmack? Love him?" Her voice
rose a full octave and broke in stridence. "For the past nine years I
have _hated--his--guts_!"

       *       *       *       *       *

For a long moment the room was silent. No one moved. Beardsley's thick
glasses glinted eerily as he peered around at them, from Mandleco to
Sheila to Pederson and back to Mandleco.

"Well now," he said, "this is remarkable. Most remarkable! Everyone
hated Carmack. Professor Losch--we know why. Pederson here--he's told us
why. His wife--I think it's obvious. Who else? Surely not you, Mandleco!
Carmack was a pal of yours! You backed his cause with ECAIAC, you
lobbied for him, you even stole patents for him.... I wonder what
persuasion he held over you to bring all that about. Or is _persuasion_
too mild a word? Vintage '60 had a better term for it!"

Slowly, through the murk of his agitation Mandleco seized a measure of
control; he gazed at Beardsley out of cold incalculable eyes now hooded
with dire intention. "You're really trying hard, aren't you!" he grated.
"Well, make the most of it, because I guarantee _you_ won't be around,
not after the next Annual Basic! Do you understand that--_Mister_
Cooerdinator?"

But Beardsley was watching Pederson now, whose face took on a sudden
febrile gleam. "Blackmail ... by God, Beardsley, that's it! And I have
the proof! Sure, it was Carmack I was after, but I dug out a lot more--"
Pederson shot a challenging look at the Minister of Justice. "It goes
back some years, but I can prove that Amos Carmack had enough on
Mandleco to _finish him politically any time he chose_. You can bet your
life Mandleco hated him. Enough to warrant murder!"

There was an odd, illogical delight in the way Pederson said it--and
something almost frightening the way Mandleco just stood there in cold
silence, gazing at the tele-columnist with a look of boundless regret.

Beardsley said very softly, "Thanks, Pederson, but I'd suggest you save
it. It's scarcely pertinent now."

"Not pertinent? But, man, I tell you I have proof! What better motive
would you--"

"Motive?" Beardsley hit him with a pitying glance. "Why, I thought it
was obvious. We've progressed beyond _motives_ now."

Again there was an electric silence, and Beardsley let it assimilate. "I
have said," he went on, "that all this is most remarkable. But you know,
the _really_ remarkable thing--" He paused and watched them. Mandleco
continued to grind a fist into his palm; Pederson straightened
attentively, and d'Arlan, sneery no longer, moved over to stand beside
Sheila Carmack.

"--the really remarkable thing is this. I am now ready to state,
unequivocally, that the person who killed Amos Carmack ... _didn't hate
him at all_."

       *       *       *       *       *

A thought was throbbing through the room like the seconds passing. Quick
and cumulative, almost embodied, it made transition from stunned mind
to startled mind as Beardsley stood there blinking at them. Beardsley
really didn't mind; they just couldn't know how subtly he worked into
his themes! Taking advantage of the lull, he went over to the door and
peered out into the Operations Room.

He peered long and soberly, then turned. Mandleco had found his voice
first, perplexity pushing down his anger: "Beardsley, either you're
bereft of your senses or--Do you mean to say," he choked--"after going
to these preposterous lengths do you mean to say that no one _here_--"

"Just a moment!" To everyone's surprise it was d'Arlan who broke in.
"I'm not sure what's going on here, not sure at all, but I want to make
one thing quite clear. _Sheila_ had no complicity in this crime! I know,
because--" He hesitated, touched her gently on the arm. "Sorry, darling,
I've got to say it. I know because she was with _me_ that night."

Sheila was startled for a moment, then utterly scathing. "You needn't
lie for me, Victor! I appreciate your sense of the dramatic, and even
your motives, but I assure you they are both misplaced. I have never
heard such nonsense!"

d'Arlan looked more desolate than abashed. As for Beardsley, he was only
a little amused. "Well, now, this is really more than I deserve; in all
my years on Homicide I wanted to experience this, but I finally put it
down as a myth. The Noble Alibi!" He peered sharply. "True vintage,
right out of the _whodunits_--wouldn't you agree, Mrs. Carmack?"

The answer didn't come, and Beardsley went on sternly: "And you reject
his noble attempt on your behalf. That is interesting! Especially, as it
occurs to me that d'Arlan's effort is just a little delayed...." He
paused, gazing thoughtfully upward. "It's enough to make one wonder
whether his noble effort is designed to protect you--or himself!"

d'Arlan suddenly paled, as if he had just been kicked in the stomach. He
gulped heavily and tried to speak. Beardsley watched stolidly for a
moment, then dismissed him with a gesture of complete disgust. "Oh,
hell, never mind! I would say neither. The lady is right, sonny, you'd
better watch those impulses. You just aren't the type!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Mandleco had been hanging onto every word, grimly intent; he was sure
Beardsley was getting somewhere at last. Now he straightened, and his
grinding fist indicated that he'd had quite enough. Without a word,
without even a deigning glance at Beardsley, he traversed the office
with great purposeful strides and slammed through the outer door into
ECAIAC's room--

And was back an instant later, trailing Jeff Arnold as the latter
brushed past him into the office. Mandleco was saying something
urgently, tugging at Arnold's arm. Arnold ignored him. His startled gaze
was on the little group.

"Sheila!" He took a step forward. "Sheila, what are _you_ doing here?"

"I wish you'd tell me, Jeff. I wish _someone_ would explain what this is
all about...."

Beardsley watched the tableau in silence. Jeff Arnold's gaze flicked to
d'Arlan, who stared back with insolence, and there was no mistaking the
hostility that leaped between the two.

Sheila noticed it, too, and there was an indecisive moment that mounted
toward panic. Beardsley watched her churning effort to control it. She
said quickly, an inflection of fear in her voice: "Mr. Beardsley, if it
_really_ matters--my whereabouts that night--you'll understand my
reluctance to say it before! I was with Jeff. Truly! I'm sure he will
tell you--"

The words were directed at Beardsley, but she was talking to Jeff
Arnold. And deliberately, almost brutally, Arnold refused to accept the
cue. Beardsley saw the pleading turn to apprehension in Sheila's eyes.

"But, Jeff, you remember! Surely you do! Jeff, you don't understand--you
must tell them--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Arnold looked at her for a single comprehending instant, a pitying
instant, then his lips compressed tightly as he turned away.

There was finality in it. Sheila's eyes were stark and unbelieving. She
stood there without motion, without a word, her mind groping in a shock
of blindness.

Beardsley said gently, "It's all right, Mrs. Carmack. It's really all
right. Merely an experiment, an inquiry into comparative methods as
Mandleco said. I'm truly sorry if my methods seemed harsh, but"--he
shrugged--"I dare say my participation is over now."

"You're damned right you may say it, Beardsley!" Arnold's eyes raked him
with venom, but he controlled himself and turned to Mandleco. "I only
came to tell you, sir, that we have ECAIAC ready. We'll be reaching
Cumulative very shortly now."

"Jeff ... are you _sure_?"

"Quite sure! Depend on it, there'll be no more trouble."

More than relief took hold of Mandleco; it was transformation, it was as
if a spell had been snapped. He glanced once about the room, and
shuddered as his gaze encountered Beardsley.

"Uh--yes. Fine!" he said. "That's fine, Jeff! Shall we proceed?" He
strode through the door, pausing only to fling back scathingly: "That
is, if Mr. Beardsley is quite sure it meets with _his_ approval!"

       *       *       *       *       *

ECAIAC was in finest fettle again as the tapes sped through. Circuits
were activated. Codes gave meaning. Synaptic cells summed and
integrated, cancelled and compared and with saucy assurance sent the
findings on toward Cumulative. The murmur was soft and sustained and
somehow apologetic, as if ECAIAC were quite aware that she had failed in
her duty but would be just pleased to make amends _this_ time.

So like a woman ... fractious, unfathomable, then fawning and
attrite--with a purpose! Beardsley cocked his head and listened, his
mien almost beatific. Purpose? This creature had none that could quite
match his! He was convinced of it now, and he had never been more happy
or self-assured.

It was Pederson who was distressed, as he paced with long nervous
strides and watched the equate-panel where the mathematics were made
visible in a pattern of constantly changing lights. It had meaning only
for the techs, but Pederson couldn't seem to take his eyes from it. At
last he came over to Beardsley and managed to steer him aside.

"Beardsley, I just don't get it! This whole thing--are you quite sure--"

Beardsley blinked at him. "Sure of what, Pederson?"

"Of what you're doing! Damn it, man, don't tell me that was all waste
effort in there! Look--I know what this means, and I'm with you all the
way. If only you could beat ECAIAC, I'll give it all the publicity it
can bear! Who knows--"

Beardsley looked at him blankly, and Pederson gave a snort and a
gesture. "All right! I guess I'm wrong. For a while there I actually
thought you had it." Pederson surveyed him shrewdly. "Just the same,
that bit you exploded--about the person who killed Carmack didn't hate
him at all--you meant that, Beardsley!"

"That's right, I meant it."

"My choice is Jeff Arnold."

"Ah? Now why do you say that?"

"The way you built up to it, that's why. And you got your result! Sheila
Carmack's in love with Arnold, and she tried to cover up for him ...
sure, that's it! It's obvious! She thinks he's the killer, either thinks
or knows it--"

"Ah, yes. The obvious," Beardsley said with a grimace. "But you know, I
learned a long time ago that the _obvious_ can be a mighty tricky thing.
A dangerous thing. The forceps of the mind are greedy, and inclined to
crush a little in the seizing...."

Pederson pondered that. "And you," he said slowly, "are not seizing. I
take that to mean you still have an angle!"

Beardsley didn't answer at once. He glanced over at the equate-panel, at
the flux of dancing lights. Mandleco was bright-eyed and attentive,
chomping on the stub of a cigar, head thrust forward as he listened to
some detail of Arnold's. Sheila stood miserably near by, still in a
blind shock of disbelief; it was as if she had a need to be close to
Arnold, and he felt it, too, but they dared not look at each other.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Now let's suppose," said Beardsley, "just suppose that Arnold thinks
_Sheila_ is the killer. Eh? Let us say they _suspect each other_.
Naturally, each has disclaimed any part of the deed. But the suspicion
is there, that tiny seed; and suspicion, particularly where love is
involved, has a habit of taking root and giving growth. Neither can be
_totally_ sure of the other's innocence--eh?" He paused, peering up at
Pederson. "And Arnold would want to protect her from any possible
consequence. Now what would be his way of doing that? The only way he
knew?"

He saw the idea take hold. Pederson was staring at the equate-panel with
an odd look of excitement.

"Total reject," he gasped. "By God, if he should try _that_--to equate
her from Logical into reject--" He gestured helplessly. "No, it isn't
possible. Those tapes are coded! There's no way of tampering--" Pederson
stopped abruptly, as a great light dawned. "Wait a minute, though. It
needn't be the tapes! One thing I've always wondered--_would_ it be
possible to negate a given factor beyond all reach of empirical
cooerdinates? You know, through operational technique or setup--"

Beardsley peered at him. "I'd say anything was possible," he urged,
"given time and incentive."

Pederson bobbed his head in facile agreement. "By God, you're right! For
example, I've always thought there wasn't sufficient control on
Cumulative! You can bet your life Arnold would know ... results at that
point _could_ be juggled a little, say if the extrapolations were
just--"

The forceps, the forceps of the mind. Already Pederson was reaching out
to seize and to crush; the man was a fool after all! Beardsley felt a
burgeoning disgust, but there was something more, a throbbing,
chest-filling sensation that he strove to hold rigidly in leash. He said
quickly: "Come to think of it, Arnold did mention that he was here most
of last night, working on setup."

He watched Pederson absorb that, too; he saw the excitement grow.
"Beardsley, if you are _sure_--if you could prove that Arnold managed a
thing like that--"

They were interrupted by the sudden quiet that engulfed the room. It was
so total as to be frightening. CUMULATIVE--CUMULATIVE--CUMULATIVE. For
half-a-minute all operation ceased, as the words flashed bright across
the panel.

But the techs had been waiting. It was a mere respite. Swiftly, they
checked their respective units against Cumulative Code, and at the end
of thirty seconds every light went green for total clearance as ECAIAC's
deep-throated power resumed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beardsley had been waiting too. "Cumulative!" he breathed. He let his
breath out slowly, and made a sweeping gesture that seemed to encompass
all the latent delight, all the unleashed joy of his being.

He was aware of Pederson again, a voice in panic: "Beardsley! Don't you
know what it means? If there's been an imbalance, it has passed through!
It will reach final equate!"

