"This then is the end," he whispered hoarsely.

"Is there none of the drug left?" Jack shook him out of his lethargy.

"Enough for a half portion for all of us," sighed the doctor. "But
what use of that? Better we poisoned ourselves now and escaped that
demon."

"Nonsense. A half portion means twelve hours of life. In that time I
can rig up the big transmitter. Perhaps there is still time to revive
New York. Solinski won't know we have a generator until we turn on the
power. Quick. Poor June must be nearly frightened to death at our
shouting."

       *       *       *       *       *

But they found the girl sitting tense and jubilant at the controls.

"Father! Jack!" she cried as the door opened. "It's working. I saw her
move. That means we may be able to revive the world!" Her face was
streaked with tears.

"Her heart's beating," whispered the doctor, feeling the child's
pulse. "Slow but steady. She'll regain consciousness any moment now."

"No time to wait." Disregarding June's cry of protest Jack stripped
off the electrodes. "We must get the big machine working."

"But the little thing will die again," cried June, throwing herself on
her knees beside the tot. "I didn't think you could be so cruel."

"Solinski has cut off our drug supply," explained Manthis gently.
"He's operating the other station. Don't blame Jack. We must work
fast."

"You mean that Russian is responsible for all this?"

"Yes, child. But maybe we can defeat him yet. Don't lose courage. Now
I must go and prepare what's left of the drug. We're overdue for it
now."

Meanwhile Jack was busy running leads from the generator room,
connecting banks of tubes, stringing an aerial on the terrace.

"Twelve hours! Twelve hours!" he muttered. "Just time to make it if
the doctor's calculations are correct. June, hand me those pliers, but
be careful of the wires. I haven't time to insulate them. When we
start the dynamo they'll be carrying twelve thousand volts."

"But won't Solinski and his men come back and kill us?" For the first
time the full weight of despair descended upon her brave spirit.

"Probably. Does your father have a revolver?"

"I--I think so."

"Find out." Jack connected a loading coil with deft fingers. "Then go
down to a sporting goods store and get some ammunition. If there are
any shotguns in the place bring two back with plenty of buckshot
shells. I don't think we're being watched yet, but if you're attacked,
run for it."

Noting she looked hurt at his abruptness, he kissed her quickly.

"Sorry, darling. Every second counts. Run along, like a good girl."

She smiled for the first time in a long while and patted his hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

When she returned, two shotguns and several boxes of shells held like
wood in her bent arms, the generator was sparkling merrily. The
gasoline engine barked steadily and the vacuum tubes glowed green.

Manthis came in at that moment and injected all the remaining drug as
Jack gave crisp orders. Automatically the engineer had taken command.

"I'll get things going and handle the dials until Solinski sends his
rats down on us. June, you watch the street door. Run up at the first
sign of an attack. After that you'll take my place and hold it, no
matter what happens, until we succeed or are killed. The doctor and I
will go downstairs when you come up, and hold them off or retreat
slowly. Thank heaven we can command both the front and rear stairways
from the halls. Now doctor, watch the circuit breaker. I'm going to
throw on full power."

As he advanced the rheostat the tubes glowed brighter, bathing the
room in unearthly light. Jack adjusted his headset, and smiled up at
June. She kissed him bravely before hurrying to her dangerous post.

Once more he sat listening to that whining, fluctuating wave. The
engineer's thoughts wavered between speculations on the future, fond
memories of June and impatience with the dragging hours. Would nothing
ever happen? Through the earphones now came a jangling, agonized
whine, as if the two antagonistic waves were endowed with life and
actually struggling in the ether.

From time to time his glance wandered to the child, who, having
obtained a head start through her preliminary treatment, now was
stirring fretfully.

Slowly the time plodded by. Jack smoked cigarette after cigarette in
an effort to fight off the drowsiness which loaded his eyelids with
lead.

It must have been three o'clock when a whimper from the divan apprised
them that the child at last had awakened.

"Where's mama?" She blinked into the glare. "I've lost my mama."

"There, there, honey," soothed the doctor, stopping his pacing up and
down the room and picking her up. "Your mama had to go away for
awhile. She'll be back any minute. Let's go find a drink of water. And
I've something for you to play with too." Gently he carried her into
June's bedroom.

Soon he reappeared and patted Jack on the shoulder.

"Our first victory," he said in a broken voice. "She's in perfect
condition and sleeping naturally now. I gave her one of June's old
dolls to play with." He sighed and collapsed into the nearest chair.
"I'm almost dead with the strain of it. Do you think there's a
chance?"

"Three more hours should turn the trick. I don't understand why
Solinski--"

The crash of a shotgun, coming faint but clear from the street below,
brought him up short. The shot was answered by a volley of rifle fire.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jack almost lost the wave in his excitement, but regained it with a
desperate twist of the wrist. No time for nerves now. He must be calm!

"Go down and hold them until June can get back to relieve me," he
ordered. "Hurry. They may rush her any moment."

The doctor seemed ten years younger as he thrust a revolver into his
pocket, snatched a shotgun from behind the door and ran out.

The commotion had awakened the child, who started whimpering, adding
further to Jack's distractions. Yet he managed, in spite of ghastly
mental pictures of June being torn to pieces by her attackers, to keep
his hands steady.

A few minutes later she slipped into the room and laid her cold cheek
against his before taking her place at the instruments.

"It's all right," she added. "I don't think they'll attack in the
dark. There are five of them. I'm sure I wounded or killed one. They
weren't expecting a guard. I left the gun with father. He's behind the
cashier's desk." Then, all her courage evaporating, she turned an
appealing, little girl face toward her lover. "Don't let yourself be
killed, Jack. I'd die too."

"June, you're wonderful," he whispered. "I didn't know there was a
girl alive as brave as you. Good-by. No matter what happens, keep the
wave in tune." He kissed her tenderly, trying not to think he had done
so for the last time, and hurried out.

The stairs were black as the inside of a tomb. Once he stumbled over
the body of a charwoman and came near falling headlong.

"Nothing's happened since that first volley," whispered Manthis when
Jack slipped into the cage. "They're holding off for dawn. Look!" his
