terrible, shambling gait, his head lowered, a dark, misshapen shadow
seeming to lengthen before him on the sand like a spindle of flame.

The clearing was abruptly tumultuous with sound. The fury which had been
unleashed against me turned upon the monster and became a closed circle
of deadly, intent purpose hemming him in--and he was caught in a
crossfire that hurled him backwards to the sand.

He jumped up and lunged straight for the well. What happened then was
like the awakening stages of some horrible dream. The madman shambled
past the well, the air at his back a crackling sheet of flame. The
barrage behind him was continuous and merciless. The men were organized
now, standing together in a solid wall, firing with deadly accuracy and
a grim purpose which transcended fear.

The madman went clumping on past me and climbed a dune with his
shoulders held straight. With a sunset glare deepening about him, he
went striding over the dune and out of sight.

       *       *       *       *       *

I turned and stared back at the camp. The pursuit had passed the well
and was headed for me. But no one paid the slightest attention to me.
Twelve men passed me, walking three abreast. Bill came along in their
wake, his eyes stony hard. He reached out as he passed me, gripping my
shoulder, giving me a foot-of-the-gallows kind of smile.

"We know now who killed Ned," he whispered. "We know, fella. Take it
easy, relax."

My head was throbbing, but I could see the big prints from where I
stood--the prints of a murderer betrayed by his insatiable urge to slay.

I saw Kenny pass, and he gave me a contemptuous grin. He had done his
best to destroy me, but there was no longer any hate left in me.

I took a slow step forward--and fell flat on my face....

I woke up with my head in Molly's lap. She was looking down into my
face, sobbing in a funny sort of way and running her fingers through my
hair.

She looked startled when she saw that I was wide awake. She blinked
furiously and started fumbling at her waist for a handkerchief.

"I must have passed out cold," I said. "It's quite a strain to be at the
receiving end of a lynching bee. And what I saw afterwards wasn't
exactly pleasant."

"Darling," she whispered, "don't move, don't say a word. You're going to
be all right."

"You bet I am!" I said. "Right now I feel great."

My arm went around her shoulder, and I drew her head down until her
breath was warm on my face. I kissed her hair and lips and eyes for a
full minute in utter recklessness.

When I released her her eyes were shining, and she was laughing a little
and crying too. "You've changed your mind," she said. "You believe me
now, don't you?"

"Don't talk," I said. "Don't say another word. I just want to look at
you."

"It was you right from the start," she said. "Not Ned--or anyone else."

"I was a blind fool," I said.

"You never gave me a second glance."

"One glance was enough," I whispered. "But when I saw how it seemed to
be between you and Ned--"

"I was never in love with him. It was just--"

"Never mind, don't say it," I said. "It's over and done with."

I stopped, remembering. Her eyes grew wide and startled, and I could see
that she was remembering too.

"What happened?" I asked. "Did they catch that vicious rat?"

She brushed back her hair, the sunlight suddenly harsh on her face. "He
fell into the canal. The bullets brought him down, and he collapsed on
the bank."

Her hand tightened on my wrist. "Bill told me. He tried to swim, but the
current carried him under. He went down and never came up."

"I'm glad," I said. "Did anyone in the camp ever see him before?"

Molly shook her head. "Bill said he was a drifter--a dangerous maniac
who must have been crazed by the sun."

"I see," I said.

I reached out and drew her into my arms again, and we rested for a
moment stretched out side by side on the sand.

"It's funny," I said after a while.

"What is?"

"You know what they say about the whispering. Sometimes when you listen
intently you seem to hear words deep in your mind. As if the Martians
had telepathic powers."

"Perhaps they have," she said.

I glanced sideways at her. "Remember," I said. "There were cities on
Mars when our ancestors were hairy apes. The Martian civilization was
flourishing and great fifty million years before the pyramids arose as a
monument to human solidarity and worth. A bad monument, built by slave
labor. But at least it was a start."

"Now you're being poetic, Tom," she said.

"Perhaps I am. The Martians must have had their pyramids too. And at the
pyramid stage they must have had their Larsens, to shoulder all the
guilt. To them we may still be in the pyramid stage. Suppose--"

"Suppose what?"

"Suppose they wanted to warn us, to give us a lesson we couldn't forget.
How can we say with certainty that a dying race couldn't still make use
of certain techniques that are far beyond us."

"I'm afraid I don't understand," she said, puzzled.

"Someday," I said, "our own science will take a tiny fragment of human
tissue from the body of a dead man, put it into an incubating machine,
