
"Johnson. East Entry. More of the same." Then, "Say, Jase, how about it?
These double shifts are getting me."

"What's the matter with you, now?"

"My feet hurt, Jase. Neither one of us is as young as we used to be,
remember. How about knocking off?"

"Hmphf ..." Johnson, Jason thought, was getting old. He'd been a good
man in his day but-- Hey, he was still a good man! It was Jason's own
stubbornness that was wearing Johnson down. Jason's useless
stubbornness. After all, without the backing of Anx or Gov, without
results from the equipment he had filched to use on Lonnie, what was the
use of everlastingly sticking around the Tiara like a fly buzzing
molasso-saccharine anyway? Jason opened his mouth to send them all home,
pressed the communico button and--shelved the relieving order
temporarily. Instead, he blasted into the microphone: "Sergeant!
SERGEANT!"

From the communico, an intermittent drone became a gasping gulp; changed
into a violent yawn and only then turned into startled speech. "Yeah?
Huh?... Yeah, Chief!"

"Sergeant, if I ever catch you asleep again, you won't ever get your
pension."

"Chief, I wasn't asleep! Honest! I--"

"All right. What's happening up there?"

"Nothin' ... nothin' ... I wasn't asleep, Chief. I'd'a called you 'f
anything--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Something bright, or was it dull, plucked at the edge of Jason's vision.
Inside the Fane, far down at one end. A thin, vertical bar of difference
in the blaze of light. Chin half turned, Jason stared. What?...

"_Chief!_ That tracer's asleep--I mean--that there tracer's just GONE
t'sleep! I mean--Chief! It's--"

"Shut up!" Jason hissed. "Holland! If you've let anyone slip past you
out of that house--"

"Nobody did. You know me better than that, Chief."

"Adams! McGillis! Johnson! What's happening?"

"Nothing ..."

"Not a thing ..."

"_Johnson!_" Jason licked suddenly dry lips. "Dammit, Johnson,
report!... _Johnson!_"

Silence.

Grimly, Jason watched the vertical bar of different brightness edge back
to the Fane's East wall and disappear into the even dazzle of the
marble. He had a feeling it wasn't any use calling Johnson again. Ever.

"Chief, what's up? What do we do?"

"Huh? Oh ... You, Holland, get over to the East Entry as fast as your
legs'll stretch."

"There in three minutes flat!"

"You, too, McGillis."

"On my way!"

"Adams, you stick at that West Entry. If anything gets past you, I'll--"

"Don't worry, Chief. I've got Johnson to even up for."

Not watching how he ran, Jason hurled himself toward the East Entry; his
eyes following, in the opposite direction, a dullness moving in the
blaze inside the Fane. A smoothly moving, white on white, unfaced ghost
of whiteness within, a part of, the blazing radionic light. Just as he
rounded the East end of the Fane, he glimpsed the vertical bar of
whiteness again--the edge of the marble slab that was the entry door,
reflecting the blazing light at a different angle. Behind it, McGillis's
tightly grinning face. Under McGillis's face, the stab of blue-white
light reflected a glancing ray from the old-fashioned solid-missile
service pistol that Jason had insisted all four men arm themselves with
for this assignment.

Over the sound of his own labored breathing as he plunged through the
East Entry, Jason heard panting behind him. Holland. Holland bettering
his promised three minutes--and with a forbidden disarmer in his hand.
Guiltily, Jason felt the weight of the disarmer he had himself secreted
under his armpit.

Then there wasn't time for thinking or feeling, only for running down
the dazzling half-mile inside the Fane to the Tiara. Up ahead, the
different-white shape was motionless in front of it. Oddly, a dark,
vertical line appeared from the top to what would be the waist of the
shape. And for the instant it took the Tiara to vanish inside, Jason saw
clearly in the radiant light the profile of Lonnie's unmistakable face.
Saw Lonnie's eyes swivel in the direction of the thundering echoes of
their footfalls in the silence of the Fane. Saw Lonnie turn toward them,
the dark line disappearing from waist to top as if it had never been.

Once more the different-whiteness moved. Toward them. Edging for the
back wall to skirt around them; one limb-shape fumbling in the palm of
the other.

"No you don't!" McGillis, ahead of Jason, yelled, his howl drowned in
the smacking crack of his pistol.

There seemed to be a waver in the different-whiteness. A small black dot
appeared against it; hung briefly, apparently unsupported, in the air;
then the undistorted bullet dropped inertly to the floor.

"You _still_ won't!" McGillis hurled himself, shoulders low and legs
driving, at the shape. Two feet from it, he rebounded sharply, trod on
the rolling bullet, went down, his head splatting dully against the
marble floor.

Holland grunted. Crouched to leap. Thrust his disarmer high, ready to
snap into line.

"Hold it!" Jason commanded. Silently, eyelids barely separated to endure
the dazzle, he stared at the different-whiteness that confronted him. "I
made it this time, Lonnie," he called. "Caught up with you-- No!" His
arm flung out, startling him with the feel of his disarmer now oddly in
his hand.

"Don't move!"

The white-within-white's limb-shapes moved up, the hand-ends one over
the other. Through the minute spaces the overlapping fingers left,
glimpses of a thin dark line appeared. The hood was open a trifle at
mouth level, and from the opening Lonnie's voice emerged, sifting
through the protecting screen of gloves. "You can't see me! You
_can't_!"

"No? Take one step sideways. Just _one_! Stop!"

The different-whiteness had moved, and Holland had moved with it;
crouching now, alertly motionless, in his new position. Jason changed
the angle of his own facing. "Now do you think we can't see you?"

"But ... but how!"

"Your albedo is showing," Jason chuckled harshly. "You never would take
the trouble to learn the _how_ of anything, Lonnie. Sure, your damned
disguise is the same color as the marble. Maybe even exactly the same.
But the material is different, and the surface texture; it doesn't have
