dollars into the biggest space lift in history!

"Oh, sure; I know. The old fraud is convinced he was telling the
truth. But were you tapping his mind when the prediction flash came?
No! Was anyone? No! And he's perfectly capable of lying to himself,
and you know it!

"And what will happen if it doesn't come off? We're past the first
deadline already. If that meteor doesn't hit within the next
twenty-eight days, the Society will be right back where it was ten
years ago! Or worse!

"And all because you trusted the word of Mr. Phony-Doctor Forsythe!"

"Donna," Taggert said softly, "do you really think I'm that big a
fool?" He handed her a handkerchief.

"N-no," she answered, wiping at her eyes. "Of c-course I don't. It's
just that it makes me so d-darn _mad_ to see everything go wrong like
this."

"Nothing's gone wrong yet. I suggest you go take a good look at
Forsythe's mind again and really try to understand the old boy. Maybe
you'll get more of the fine-grain structure of it if you'll try for
more understanding."

"What do you mean?" she asked, sniffing.

"Look. Forsythe has made his living being a fraud, right? And yet he
sent out those warning _free_--and anonymously. He had no thought of
any reward or recompense, you know that. Why? Because he is basically
a kind, decent human being. He wanted to do all he could to stop any
injury or loss of life.

"Why, then, would he send out a fraudulent warning? He wouldn't. He
didn't. Every one of those warnings--_including the last one_--was
sent out because he _knew_ that something was going to happen.

"Evidently, once he gets a flash about a certain event, he can't get
any more data on that particular area of the future, or we could get
more data on the Moonbase accident. I think, if we can boost his basic
understanding up past the critical point, we'll have a man with
controlled prescience, and we need that man.

"But, Donna, the only way we're ever going to do that--the only way
we'll ever whip this problem--is for you to increase _your_
understanding of _him_.

"You're past the critical point--way past it--in _general_
understanding. But you've got to keep an eye on the little specific
instances, too."

She nodded contritely. "I know. I'm sorry. Sometimes a person can get
too near a problem." She smiled. "Thanks for the new perspective,
Brian. I'll go back to work and see if I can't look at it a little
more clearly."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the White House, Senator Mikhail Kerotski was facing two men--James
Bandeau, the Secretary of Space, and the President of the United
States.

"Mr. President," he said evenly, "I've known you for a long time. I
haven't failed you yet."

"I know that, Mike," the President said smoothly. "Neither has your
Society, as far as I know. It's still difficult for me to believe that
they get their information the way you say they do, but you've never
lied to me about anything so far, so I take your word for it. Your
Society is the most efficient espionage and counterespionage group in
history, as far as I know. But this is different."

"Damned right it's different!" snapped Secretary Bandeau. "Your own
Society, senator, admits that we've stirred the Soviets up with this
space lift thing. They've got ships of their own going out there now.
According to reports from Space Force intelligence, Chinese Moon cars
have been prowling around Moonbase One, trying to find out what's
going on."

"More than that," added the President, "they've sneaked a small group
aboard the old _Lunik IX_ to see what they can see from up there."

Secretary Bandeau jerked his head around to look at the President.
"The old circumlunar satellite? Where did you hear that?"

The President smiled wanly. "From the S.M.M.R.'s report." He looked at
Kerotski. "I doubt that it will do them any good. I don't think
they'll be able to see anything now."

"Not unless they've figured out some way to combine X rays with
radar," the senator said. "And I'm quite sure they haven't."

"Senator," said the Secretary of Space, "a lot of money has been spent
and a lot of risks have been taken, just on your say-so. I--"

"Now, just a minute, Jim," said the President flatly. "Let's not go
off half-cocked. It wasn't done on Mike's say-so; it was done on mine.
I signed the order because I believed it was the proper, if not the
_only_ thing to do." Then he looked at the senator. "But this is the
last day, Mike. Nothing has happened.

"Now, I'm not blaming you. I didn't call you up here to do that. And I
think we can quit worrying about explaining away the money angle. But
we're going to have to explain _why_ we did it, Mike. And I can't tell
the truth."

"I'll say you can't!" Bandeau exploded. "That would look great,
wouldn't it? I can see the headlines now: _'Fortuneteller Gave Me
Advice,' President Says_. Brother!"

"Jim," the President said coldly, "I said to let me handle this."

"What you want, then, Mr. President," Kerotski put in smoothly, "is
for me to help you concoct a good cover story."

"That's about it, Mike," the President admitted.

Kerotski shook his head slowly. "It won't be necessary."

Bandeau looked as though he were going to explode, but a glance from
the President silenced him.

"Go on, Mike," he said to the senator.

"Mr. President, I know it looks bad. It's going to look even worse for
a while. But, let me ask you one question. How is the Ch'ien space
drive coming along?"

"Why ... fine. It checked out months ago. The new ship is on her
shakedown cruise now. You know that."

"Right. Now, ask yourself one more question: What is the purpose of
Moonbase One?"

"Why, to--"

The telephone rang.

The President scooped it up with one hand. "Yes?"

Then he listened for a long minute, his expression changing slowly.

