Occupation force, while the men now among us continue directly on to
the Alkorian war from which many of them will never return._

_We must not resent the fact that on this, their last day among us,
these men are forbidden to speak to us or to let us speak to them nor
say that this is unfair when Commander Y'Nor's Occupation troops will
be permitted to associate freely with us. These things are beyond our
power to change. We must accept the inevitable and show only by our
silent conduct the love we have for these warriors whom we shall never
see again._

Kane gulped convulsively, read it again, and hurried back to Larue's
office.

"How long has that last edict been up?" he demanded.

"About twelve hours."

"Then every shift has seen it?"

"Ah ... yes. Why--is something wrong with it?"

"That depends on the viewpoint. I want them removed at once. And tell
that sanctified old weasel that if this last edict of his gets me
hanged, which it probably will, I'll see to it that he gets the same
medicine."

He went back into the plant and made his way through the bare-legged,
soft-eyed girls, looking for Dalon. He overheard a guard say in low,
bitter tones to another: "... _Maybe eight hours on Vogar, and we
can't leave the ship, then on to the battle front for us while Y'Nor
and his home guard favorites come back here and pick out their
harems_--"

He found Dalon and said to him, "Watch your men. They're resentful.
Some of them might even desert--and Y'Nor wasn't joking about that
gallows for us last night."

"I know." Dalon ran his finger around the collar that seemed to be
getting increasingly tighter for him. "I've warned them that the
Occupation troops would get them in the end."

       *       *       *       *       *

He found Graver at a dial-covered panel. The brown-eyed secretary--her
eyes now darker and more appealing than ever--was just leaving, a
notebook in her hand.

"Since when," Kane asked, "has it been customary for technicians to
need the assistance of secretaries to read a dial?"

"But, sir, she is a very good technician, herself. Her paper work is
now done and she was helping me trace a circuit that was fluctuating."

Kane peered suspiciously into Graver's expressionless face.

"Are you sure it was a circuit that was doing the fluctuating?"

"Yes, sir."

"Did you know that half of Dalon's guards seem to be ready to jump
ship?"

"Yes, sir. But their resentment is not characteristic of my
technicians."

He realized, with surprise, that that was true. And Graver, in
contrast to Dalon's agitation, had the calm, purposeful air of a man
who had pondered deeply upon an unpleasant future and had taken steps
to prevent it.

"I have no desire to hang, sir, and I have convinced my men that it
would be suicide for part of them to desert. I shall do my best to
convince Dalon's guards of the same thing."

He went back through the plant, much of his confidence restored, and
back to the ship.

Y'Nor was pacing the floor again, his impatience keying him to a mood
more vile than ever.

"This ship will leave at exactly twenty-three fifteen, Vogar time,"
Y'Nor said. "Any man not on it then will be regarded as a deserter and
executed as such when I return with the Occupation force."

He stopped his pacing to stare at Kane with the ominous anticipation
of a spider surveying a captured fly.

"Although I can operate this ship with a minimum of two crewmen, I
shall expect you to make certain that every man is on board."

Kane went back out of the ship, his confidence shaken again, and back
to the plant.

       *       *       *       *       *

Night came at last and, finally, the first shielded tank of fuel was
delivered to the ship. Others followed, one by one, as the hours went
by.

It was almost morning when Graver came to him and said, "My duties and
those of my men are finished here, sir. Shall we go to prepare the
ship for flight?"

"Yes--get busy at it," Kane answered. "Don't give the commander any
excuse to get any madder than he already is."

An hour later the last of the fuel went into the last tank and was
hauled away. Someone said, "That's all," and a switch clicked. A
machine rumbled off into silence, followed by others. Control panels
went dark. Within a minute there was not a machine running, not a
panel lighted.

Dalon's whistle for Guard Assembly sounded, high and shrill. A girl's
voice called to one of the guards: "Hurry back to your ship,
Billy--the thunder hawks might get you if you stayed--" and broke on a
sob. Another girl said, "Hush, Julia--it's not his fault."

He went out of the plant, and past Larue's office. He saw that the
brown-eyed secretary was gone, her desk clean. Larue was still there,
looking very tired. He did not go in. The fuel had been produced, he
would never see Larue again.

He took the path that led toward town. Part of the Whirlpool star
cluster was still above the horizon, a white blaze of a thousand suns,
and the eastern sky was lightening with the first rays of dawn. A
dozen girls were ahead of him, their voices a low murmur as they
hurried back toward town. There was an undertone of tension, all of
the former gaiety gone. The brief week of make-believe was over and
the next Vogarians to come would truly be their enemy.

He came to the hilltop where he had met the mountain girl, thought of
her with irrational longing, and suddenly she was there before him.

The pistol was again in her belt.

"You came with all the stealth of a plains ox," she said. "I could
have shot you a dozen times over."

"Are we already at war?" he asked.

"We Saints have to let you Vogarians kill some of us, first--our
penalty for being ethical."

"Listen to me," he said. "We tried to fight the inevitable in the Lost
Islands. When the sun went down that day, half of us were dead and the
rest prisoners."

"And you rose from prisoner to officer because you were too selfish to
keep fighting for what was right."

"I saw them bury the ones who insisted on doing that."

"And you want us to meekly bow down, here?"

"I have no interest of any kind in this world--I'll never see it
again--but I know from experience what will happen to you and your
people if you try to fight. I don't want that to happen. Do you think
