Keeper talked in low tones with his colleagues, Dodeth stalked over to
one of the pesticide robots who was prowling nearby.

"Found anything useful?" he asked sarcastically, knowing that sarcasm
was useless on a robot.

"I'm not looking for anything useful, sir. I'm looking for the animals
we are supposed to destroy."

"You come over and tell the Eldest Keeper that," Dodeth said.

"Yes, sir," the robot agreed promptly, rolling along beside Dodeth as
he returned to where the Keepers were waiting.

"What's going on here?" the Eldest demanded curtly of the robot. "Why
haven't you destroyed the animals?"

"Because we can't find them, sir."

"What's your name?" the Eldest snapped.

"Arike, sir."

"All right, Arike," said the Eldest somewhat angrily. "Stand by for
orders. You'll repeat them to the other robots, understand?"

"Yes, sir," said the robot.

"All right, then," said the Eldest. "First, you take a run up that
hill and look into that clearing. You'll see those creatures in there
all right."

"Yes, sir. I've seen those creatures in there."

The Eldest Keeper exploded. "Then get in there and obey your orders!
Don't you realize that their very existence threatens the life of all
of us? They must be eliminated before our whole culture is destroyed!
Do you understand? Obey!"

"Yes, sir," said the robot. His voice sounded odd, but he spun around
and went to pass the word on to the other robots. Within minutes, more
and more of the pesticide robots were swarming towards and into the
clearing. They could hear rumbling noises from the clearing--low
grunts that were evidently made by animals who were trapped by the
encircling robots.

And then there was a vast silence.

Dodeth and the Keepers waited.

Not a shot was fired.

It was as though a great, sound-proof blanket had been flung over the
whole area.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What in the Unknown Name of the Universal Motivator is going on
around here?" said Dodeth in a hushed tone. He wondered how many times
he had asked himself that.

"We may as well take a look," said the Eldest Keeper.

Two hundred pesticide robots were ranged around the perimeter of the
clearing, their weapons facing inward. Not a one of them moved.

Inside the circle of machines, the twenty wygorex stood motionless,
watching the ring of robots. Now and then, one of them gave a deep,
coughing rumble, but otherwise they made no noise.

Dodeth Pell could stand it no longer. "Robots!" He shouted as loudly
as he could, his voice shrill with urgency. "I order you to fire!"

It was as though he hadn't said a word. Both robots and wygorex
ignored him completely.

Dodeth turned and yelled to one of the patrol robots that was
standing nearby. "You! What's your name?"

"Arvam, sir."

"Arvam, can you tell what it is those things have done to the robots?"

"They haven't done anything, sir."

"Then why don't the robots fire as they've been told?" Dodeth didn't
want to admit it, even to himself, but he was badly frightened. He had
never heard of a robot behaving this way before.

"They can't, sir."

"They _can't_? Don't they realize that if those things aren't killed,
we may all die?"

"I didn't know that," said the patrol robot. "If we do not kill them,
then you may be killed, and you have ordered us to kill them, but if
we obey your orders, then we will kill them, and that will mean that
you won't be killed, but they will, so we can't do that, but if we
don't then you _will_ be killed, and we must obey, and that means we
must, but we can't, but if we don't we will, and we can't so we must
but we can't but if we don't you will so we must but we can't but
we--" He kept repeating it over and over again, on and on and on.

"Stop that!" snapped Dodeth.

But the robot didn't even seem to hear.

Dodeth was really frightened now. He looked back at the five keepers
and scuttled toward them.

"What's wrong with the robots?" he asked shrilly. "They've never
failed us before!"

The Elder Keeper looked at him. "What makes you think they've failed
us now?" he asked softly.

Dodeth gaped speechlessly. The Eldest didn't seem to be making any
more sense than the patrol robot had.

"No," the Keeper went on, "they haven't failed us. They have served us
well. They have pointed out to us something which we have failed to
see, and, in doing so, have saved us from making a catastrophic
error."

"I don't understand," said Dodeth.

"I'll explain," the Elder Keeper said, "but first go over to that
patrol robot and tell him quietly that the situation has changed.
Tell him that we are no longer in any danger from the wygorex. Then
bring him over here."

       *       *       *       *       *

Dodeth did as he was told, without understanding at all.

"I still don't understand, sir," he said bewilderedly.

"Dodeth, what would happen if I told Arvam, here, to fire on you?"

"Why ... why, he'd _refuse_."

"Why should he?"

"Because I'm _human_! That's the most basic robot command."

"I don't know," the Eldest said, eying Dodeth shrewdly. "You might not
be a human. You might be a snith. You _look_ like a snith."

Dodeth swallowed the insult, wondering what the Eldest meant.

"Arvam," the Eldest Keeper said to the robot, "doesn't he look like a
snith to you?"
