
Hunter was sure no armed guards patrolled the forbidden paradise.
There was no need for them, for scanners formed a protective grid over
the area. An autojet, attempting a landing from any direction, would
break a beam and instantly become the target for the autoblasters
erected at intervals along the fence. A man attempting to scale the
wall would meet the same lethal charge.

Hunter saw one small gate with an identification screen mounted in
front of it. Obviously the gate would open to the handprint of a Von
Rausch or a Farren. But a stranger would find himself standing in the
line of fire of two blasters, conspicuous over the gate.

The scanners, the blasters, the identification screen--all the
complex, electronic watchdogs--depended solely upon power. Countless
other people, Hunter knew, had realized that. Only mechanically
produced power made the area invulnerable. Anyone could break through
the fence. It hadn't been done before, perhaps, because no other man
had ever had Hunter's motivation. None had been a fugitive on the run.

Hunter made his way out of the casino and crossed the park in the
direction of the government building. Sheltered by the trees from the
blaze of light, he was able to see the stars, bright in the velvet
sky. The endless universe! Somewhere he could find a haven for himself
and Ann, a pinprick of light in the high-arching firmament which the
cartels had overlooked.

Dawn had said that running away was madness. But what alternative did
he have? To stay, and attempt to make the cartel rat-race over,
sweetly and rationally so that no one would be hurt? Hunter laughed
bitterly. Von Rausch had the Exorciser, and he could keep it. It would
be part of the bargain the captain thought he could make to save Ann.
With that weapon, Von Rausch would sooner or later tear his own world
to shreds. No man in his right mind would want to stay around to pick
up the pieces--if any. He drew his blaster and took careful aim at the
power distribution center.

The machine exploded. Burning wires sang in the air. In the casinos
the lights winked out, and the entertainment machines went dark.
Hunter heard the shrill screaming of the trapped crowd. He knew that
it would bring the police running, but he also knew they would have
arrived shortly in any case. The important thing was that the
electronic watchdogs on the wall were now lifeless.

Hunter blasted open the gate, and took the path that led east.

The Von Rausch castle--and the word was scarcely a metaphor--was
something lifted bodily out of a Tri-D historical romance, complete
with porticos, battlements, stone-walled towers and an imitation moat
where mechanical swans floated on the dark water.

He crossed the moat on a rustic footbridge of plastic cleverly
fabricated to seem like crudely hewn wood. Through a high, narrow
window he saw a pale flicker of light. The pane was thick with grime.

Hunter could distinguish nothing in the room except a thin, elderly
woman who seemed to be moving around a table where six candles burned
in a silver candelabrum.

He kicked open the window. The woman looked at him, neither frightened
nor alarmed. She was wearing an odd black dress, long-sleeved,
high-necked, with a hemline that touched the floor. Her face was pale
and wrinkled, unrelieved by any sort of cosmetic.

She held out her fragile hands. "You did come, Karl! I knew you
wouldn't disappoint Auntie."

Hunter cried through clenched teeth, "I want Werner von Rausch. Where
is he?"

"Goodness, dear, how should I know? Werner never comes to my parties."

Hunter noticed the table, then, set for eight, its gleaming silver and
gold-rimmed china glowing in the soft candle light.

"Your Cousin Charlotte's already here, Karl." The woman gestured
gracefully toward the table. "And little Helmig. They know how
important it is to come on time."

He felt horror--and unconscious pity--as he realized the truth. Yet he
tried once more to get from her the information he wanted.

"Oh, bother with Werner," she answered, pouting. "If you must know, I
didn't even invite him. He's such a bore among young people."

She saw the blaster in Hunter's hand and pushed it aside gently, with
a grimace of disapproval. "I don't like you to have these toys, Karl.
Next thing, you'll be wanting to join the army."

Hunter flung himself out of that room, into a dark and musty hall.
Behind him he heard the woman still talking, as if he had never left
her. He blundered from one bleak room to another, rooms that were like
tombs smelling of dust and decay.

On the second floor he came upon a small, balding man who sat reading
at a desk in a room crammed with tottering stacks of old books. The
light came from an antiquated electric lamp. Obviously the house had
its own generating plant, independent of the power center Hunter had
destroyed.

Hunter jerked up his blaster again. "Werner von Rausch?"

"One moment," the man said. Ignoring Hunter, the man quietly finished
what he was reading, slipped a leather placemark into the book, and
put it on top of a stack beside the desk. The pile promptly collapsed
in a cloud of dust at Hunter's feet.

Max saw some of the title pages. The books were extraordinarily old,
some of them with a printing date a thousand years in the past. The
man pinched a pair of eye-glasses on his nose and studied Hunter
carefully.

"You're from the police, I presume?" he asked.

"If you are Werner von Rausch--"

"I'm Heinrich. I sent in the report. Though, I must say, you couldn't
have come at a more inconvenient time. I'm collating the spells
tonight. I have them all, right here at my fingertips. And when I'm
finished--" He seized the captain's jacket and his voice was suddenly
shrill. "--I'll have the power to summon up any demon from hell. Think
what that means! I'll be greater than Faust. I'll have more power
than--"

"Where can I find Werner von Rausch?"

"Yes, Werner. Poor boy." Heinrich was calm again. "You'll have to do
your duty, officer. He's been annoying me all afternoon. So much
noise--a man can't think. He's in his shop at the end of the hall. But
don't be too severe with him. Perhaps this time just a warning will
make him see reason."

Hunter went back to the corridor, feeling again the shadow of horror
at this sick distortion of reality. In the distance, beyond the metal
fence, he heard the scream of sirens, and realized he had at best
another three minutes before the police would be there. Three minutes
to make a deal with Werner and save Ann.

Hunter pushed back the nightmare that welled up from the depths of his
mind. It wasn't true; it couldn't be true. If it were, nothing in the
jungle made sense.


VIII

As he felt his way along the hall, he passed the cage of a lift, a
private transit between the house and the cartel offices on the city
levels below. He noted it subconsciously, as a possible means of
escape. But he was through running. He could make a deal with Von
Rausch. After that the police wouldn't matter.

At the end of the corridor he came upon a paneled door. Behind it he
could hear the hum of a motor, and knew that he had found Werner's
shop, and the source of the noise that had disturbed Heinrich's
research.

Hunter flung open the door. The light was bright and gay. On the
floor, a fat old man sat hunched over the remote control console of a
toy monorail system. Toy space liners and fighting ships buzzed in the
air.

"Werner von Rausch?" Hunter whispered.

"You've come to play with me!" The fat, old man flashed the cherubic
smile of a child. "And you brought me a blaster. Oh, let me see it!
Let me see it!"

He clapped his hands eagerly.

Hunter turned and fled. The scream of the sirens still seemed no
closer, but without assessing his chances Hunter sprang into the
private lift. It dropped downward toward its unknown destination. What
that was, Hunter didn't care. Anything to escape from so hideous a
madhouse.

The Von Rausch clan: an old lady who lived with ghosts; a scholar of
demonology; a patriarch lost in an eternal childhood. All of them
running away into their own private fantasies.

But this Was the family which ruled a cartel and directed the conquest
of half the galaxy; these were the most powerful human beings who had
ever lived. And they were escaping into insanity. Escaping what?
Responsibility? The jungle of the cartels?

"Two alternatives," Dawn had said. "Pull down the world or run away
from it." The Von Rausches had made this mess and then fled in horror
from their own brutal and destructive creation.

The lift cage jerked to a stop. The door opened on a warmly lighted
executive office where a white-haired man sat at a desk which had been
cut from a single slab of Venusian crystal. A much enlarged projection
of the United Researchers' emblem glowed from the Wall. Hunter raised
his weapon.

The old man gestured imperiously. "Don't be a fool, Captain. I
wouldn't be here unless I had adequate protection. There are blasters
in the wall, which I can trigger with a single spoken word."

"You want to finish the job your men bungled this afternoon?"

"Not our men, Captain. We got in on this deal a little late. We knew
nothing about this psychiatric patent until the strikes started
today."

"But Ann Saymer--"

"Unfortunately, we do not have her. It's Consolidated. We sent our men
out to bring you in, Captain. We wanted your help. When you got away,
it didn't occur to me that you would go to the top level. Not until we
heard the report of the destruction of the power distributor. It was
easy enough to anticipate your moves after that.

"If you hadn't used the private Von Rausch lift, you would have gone
out again through the gate, where my men were waiting. Naturally we
couldn't send them inside. You can understand why, of course."

Hunter heard only vaguely what the man was saying, for abruptly the
pattern fell into place. Neither Consolidated nor United had Ann or
the Exorciser. Each cartel suspected the other because they hadn't yet
adjusted to the idea that a third cartel existed: Eric Young's union.

Ann's micropic had told the literal truth. She had taken her
commission-job with the biggest private clinic, operated by the
U.F.W. It was a dead giveaway when Young struck both cartels
simultaneously, if Hunter had read the data correctly.

Hunter moved toward the crystal desk. "I know where Ann is, sir," he
said. "I can--"

"You can stay where you are," the old man interrupted. "One hour ago,
