
"For what exactly?"

Red looked miserable and remained silent.

The Astronomer broke in again. "If you don't mind my putting in a few
words--You'll remember that just after breakfast my son came in to ask
what animals ate."

"Oh, you're right. How stupid of me to forget. Look here, Red, did you
take it for an animal pet you've got?"

Red recovered indignant breath. He said, "You mean Slim came in here and
said I had an animal? He came in here and said that? He said I had an
animal?"

"No, he didn't. He simply asked what animals ate. That's all. Now if he
promised he wouldn't tell on you, he didn't. It's your own foolishness
in trying to take something without permission that gave you away. That
happened to be stealing. Now have you an animal? I ask you a direct
question."

"Yes, sir." It was a whisper so low as hardly to be heard.

"All right, you'll have to get rid of it. Do you understand?"

Red's mother intervened. "Do you mean to say you're keeping a
meat-eating animal, Red? It might bite you and give you blood-poison."

"They're only small ones," quavered Red. "They hardly budge if you touch
them."

"They? How many do you have?"

"Two."

"Where are they?"

The Industrialist touched her arm. "Don't chivvy the child any further,"
he said, in a low voice. "If he says he'll get rid of them, he will,
and that's punishment enough."

He dismissed the matter from his mind.


VIII

Lunch was half over when Slim dashed into the dining room. For a moment,
he stood abashed, and then he said in what was almost hysteria, "I've
got to speak to Red. I've got to say something."

Red looked up in fright, but the Astronomer said, "I don't think, son,
you're being very polite. You've kept lunch waiting."

"I'm sorry, Father."

"Oh, don't rate the lad," said the Industrialist's wife. "He can speak
to Red if he wants to, and there was no damage done to the lunch."

"I've got to speak to Red alone," Slim insisted.

"Now that's enough," said the Astronomer with a kind of gentleness that
was obviously manufactured for the benefit of strangers and which had
beneath it an easily-recognized edge. "Take your seat."

Slim did so, but he ate only when someone looked directly upon him. Even
then he was not very successful.

Red caught his eyes. He made soundless words, "Did the animals get
loose?"

Slim shook his head slightly. He whispered, "No, it's--"

The Astronomer looked at him hard and Slim faltered to a stop.

With lunch over, Red slipped out of the room, with a microscopic motion
at Slim to follow.

They walked in silence to the creek.

Then Red turned fiercely upon his companion. "Look here, what's the idea
of telling my Dad we were feeding animals?"

Slim said, "I didn't. I asked what you feed animals. That's not the same
as saying we were doing it. Besides, it's something else, Red."

But Red had not used up his grievances. "And where did you go anyway? I
thought you were coming to the house. They acted like it was my fault
you weren't there."

"But I'm trying to tell you about that, if you'd only shut _up_ a second
and let me talk. You don't give a fellow a chance."

"Well, go on and tell me if you've got so much to say."

"I'm _trying_ to. I went back to the space-ship. The folks weren't there
anymore and I wanted to see what it was like."

"It isn't a space-ship," said Red, sullenly. He had nothing to lose.

"It is, too. I looked inside. You could look through the ports and I
looked inside and they were _dead_." He looked sick. "They were dead."

"_Who_ were dead."

Slim screeched, "Animals! like _our_ animals! Only they _aren't_
animals. They're people-things from other planets."

For a moment Red might have been turned to stone. It didn't occur to him
to disbelieve Slim at this point. Slim looked too genuinely the bearer
of just such tidings. He said, finally, "Oh, my."

"Well, what are we going to do? Golly, will we get a whopping if they
find out?" He was shivering.

"We better turn them loose," said Red.

"They'll tell on us."

"They can't talk our language. Not if they're from another planet."

"Yes, they can. Because I remember my father talking about some stuff
like that to my mother when he didn't know I was in the room. He was
talking about visitors who could talk with the mind. Telepathery or
something. I thought he was making it up."

"Well, Holy Smokes. I mean--Holy Smokes." Red looked up. "I tell you. My
Dad said to get rid of them. Let's sort of bury them somewhere or throw
them in the creek."

"He _told_ you to do that."

"He made me say I had animals and then he said, 'Get rid of them.' I got
to do what he says. Holy Smokes, he's my Dad."

Some of the panic left Slim's heart. It was a thoroughly legalistic way
out. "Well, let's do it right now, then, before they find out. Oh,
golly, if they find out, will we be in trouble!"

They broke into a run toward the barn, unspeakable visions in their
minds.


IX

It was different, looking at them as though they were "people." As
animals, they had been interesting; as "people," horrible. Their eyes,
which were neutral little objects before, now seemed to watch them with
active malevolence.

"They're making noises," said Slim, in a whisper which was barely
audible.

"I guess they're talking or something," said Red. Funny that those
noises which they had heard before had not had significance earlier. He
was making no move toward them. Neither was Slim.

The canvas was off but they were just watching. The ground meat, Slim
noticed, hadn't been touched.

Slim said, "Aren't you going to do something?"

"Aren't you?"

"You found them."

"It's your turn, now."

"No, it isn't. You found them. It's your fault, the whole thing. I was
watching."

"You joined in, Slim. You know you did."

"I don't care. You found them and that's what I'll say when they come
here looking for us."

Red said, "All right for you." But the thought of the consequences
inspired him anyway, and he reached for the cage door.

Slim said, "Wait!"

Red was glad to. He said, "Now what's biting you?"

"One of them's got something on him that looks like it might be iron or
something."

"Where?"

"Right there. I saw it before but I thought it was just part of him. But
if he's 'people,' maybe it's a disintegrator gun."

"What's that?"

"I read about it in the books from Beforethewars. Mostly people with
space-ships have disintegrator guns. They point them at you and you get
disintegratored."

"They didn't point it at us till now," pointed out Red with his heart
not quite in it.
