little dude?"

The professor shrugged. "Nothing that would satisfy you."

"That's right." Suddenly Buck stiffened, looking out the window. He
got up, his bulging blue eyes staring down at us. "Randolph's coming
down the street! You two just stay put, and maybe--just maybe--I'll
let you live. Professor, I wanta talk to you some more about this
telekinesis stuff. Maybe I can get even faster than I am, or control
my bullets better at long range. So you be here, get that?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He turned and walked out the door.

The professor said, "He's not sane."

"Nutty as a locoed steer," I said. "Been that way for a long time. An
ugly shrimp who hates everything--and now he's in the saddle holding
the reins, and some people are due to get rode down." I looked
curiously at him. "Look, professor--this telekinesis stuff--is all
that on the level?"

"Absolutely."

"He just _thinks_ his gun into his hand?"

"Exactly."

"Faster than anyone could ever draw it?"

"Inconceivably faster. The time element is almost non-existent."

I got up, feeling worse than I'd ever felt in my life. "Come on," I
said. "Let's see what happens."

As if there was any doubt about what was bound to happen.

We stepped out onto the porch and over to the rail. Behind us, I
heard Menner come out too. I looked over my shoulder. He'd wrapped a
towel around his head. Blood was leaking through it. He was looking at
Buck, hating him clear through.

       *       *       *       *       *

The street was deserted except for Buck standing about twenty feet
away, and, at the far end, Sheriff Ben Randolph coming slowly toward
him, putting one foot ahead of the other in the dust.

A few men were standing on porches, pressed back against the walls,
mostly near doors. Nobody was sitting now--they were ready to
groundhog if lead started flying wild.

"God damn it," I said in a low, savage voice. "Ben's too good a man to
get kilt this way. By a punk kid with some crazy psychowhosis way of
handling a gun."

I felt the professor's level eyes on me, and turned to look at him.

"Why," he said, "doesn't a group of you get together and face him
down? Ten guns against his one. He'd have to surrender."

"No, he wouldn't," I said. "That ain't the way it works. He'd just
dare any of us to be the first to try and stop him--and none of us
would take him up on it. A group like that don't mean anything--it'd
be each man against Buck Tarrant, and none of us good enough."

"I see," the professor said softly.

"God...." I clenched my fists so hard they hurt. "I wish we could
think his gun right back into the holster or something!"

Ben and Buck were about forty feet apart now. Ben was coming on
steadily, his hand over his gunbutt. He was a good man with a gun,
Ben--nobody around these parts had dared tackle him for a long time.
But he was out-classed now, and he knew it. I guess he was just hoping
that Buck's first shot or two wouldn't kill him, and that he could
place a good one himself before Buck let loose any more.

But Buck was a damn good shot. He just wouldn't miss.

The professor was staring at Buck with a strange look in his eyes.

"He should be stopped," he said.

"Stop him, then," I said sourly.

"After all," he mused, "if the ability to perform telekinesis lies
dormant in all of us, and is released by strong faith and desire to
accomplish something that can be accomplished only by that means--then
our desire to stop him might be able to counter his desire to--"

"Damn you and your big words," I said bitterly.

"It was your idea," the professor said, still looking at Buck. "What
you said about thinking his gun back into its holster--after all, we
_are_ two to his one--"

I turned around and stared at him, really hearing him for the first
time. "Yeah, that's right--I said that! My God ... do you think we
could do it?"

"We can try," he said. "We know it _can_ be done, and evidently that
is nine-tenths of the battle. He can do it, so we should be able to.
We must want him _not_ to more than he _wants_ to."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Lord," I said, "I want him not to, all right...."

Ben and Buck were about twenty feet apart now, and Ben stopped.

His voice was tired when he said, "Any time, Buck."

"You're a hell of a sheriff," Buck sneered. "You're a no-good
bastard."

"Cuss me out," Ben said. "Don't hurt me none. I'll be ready when you
start talking with guns."

"I'm ready now, beanpole," Buck grinned. "You draw first, huh?"

"_Think of his gun!_" the professor said in a fierce whisper. "Try to
grab it with your mind--break his aim--pull it away from him--_you
know it can be done! Think, think_--"

Ben Randolph had never in anyone's knowledge drawn first against a
man. But now he did, and I guess nobody could blame him.

He slapped leather, his face already dead--and Buck's Peacemaker was
in his hand--

And me and the professor were standing like statues on the porch of
the Once Again, thinking at that gun, glaring at it, fists clenched,
our breath rasping in our throats.

The gun appeared in Buck's hand, and wobbled just as he slipped
hammer. The bullet sprayed dust at Ben's feet.

Ben's gun was halfway out.

