place at all, on any pretext whatever. Had he walked in his sleep,
drawn by some freak of his subconscious mind into the room of Manape?

Slowly, afraid to look yet forced by something outside himself, he
turned his eyes toward the corner where the beast's cage was.

The cage was empty!

The door of it was open!

Stunned by his discovery, wondering what had happened during the
night, Bentley looked about him. He noticed the long narrow table at
the end of the cage, and the white covering it bore. He recognized it
instantly as an operating table, and wondered afresh.

Where was Barter?

       *       *       *       *       *

Bentley raised his voice to shout the scientist's name. But before he
could himself recognize the syllables of the scientist's name, through
the whole room rang the bellowing challenge of a giant anthropoid ape.
Bentley cowered down fearfully and looked around him. Where was the
ape that had uttered that frightful noise? The sound had broken in
that very room, yet save for himself the room was empty.

Bentley turned his head as he heard someone fumbling with the door.

Barter entered, and his face was a study as his eyes met those of
Bentley. Bentley noticed that Barter held that whip in his hand,
uncoiled and ready for action.

What was this that Barter was saying?

"I warn you, Bentley, that if anything happens to me you are doomed.
If I am killed it means a horrible end for you."

Bentley tried to answer him, tried to speak, but something appeared to
have gone wrong with his vocal cords, so that all that came from his
lips was a senseless gibberish that meant nothing at all. He recalled
the odor of violets, Barter's enigmatic good-night utterance with
reference to violets, and wondered if their odor, stealing into the
room where he had gone on guard over Ellen, had had anything to do
with paralyzing his powers of speech.

"I see you haven't discovered, Bentley," said Barter after a moment of
searching inspection of Bentley. "Look at yourself!"

Surprised at this puzzling command, Bentley slowly looked down at his
chest. It was broad and hairy, huge as a mighty barrel, and his arms
hung to the floor, the hands half closed as though they grasped
something. Horror held Bentley mute for a moment. Then he raised his
eyes to Barter, to note that the scientist was smiling and rubbing his
hands with immense satisfaction.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bentley started across the floor toward a mirror near Barter's bed. He
refused to let his numbed brain dwell upon the instant recognition of
his manner of progress. For he moved across the floor with a peculiar
rolling gait, aiding his stride with the bent knuckles of his hands
pressed against the floor.

He fought against the horror that gripped him. He feared to look into
the mirror, yet knew that he must. He reached it, reared to his full
height, and gazed into the glass--at the reflection of Manape, the
great ape of the cage!

Instantly a murderous fury possessed him. He whirled on Barter, to
scream out at the man, to beg him to explain what had happened, why
this ghastly hallucination gripped him. But all he could do was
bellow, and smash his mighty chest with his fists, so that the sound
went crashing out across the jungle--to be answered almost at once by
the drumming of other mighty anthropoids outside, beyond the clearing
which held the awful cabin of Caleb Barter.

He started toward Barter, still bellowing and beating his chest. His
one desire was to clutch the scientist and tear him limb from limb,
and he knew that his mighty arms were capable of ripping the scientist
apart as though Barter had been a fly.

"Back, you fool!" snarled Barter. "Back, I say!"

The long lash of the whip cracked like a revolver shot, and the lash
curled about the chest and neck of Bentley. It ripped and tore like a
hot iron. It struck again and again. Bentley could not stand the awful
beating the scientist was giving him. In spite of all his power he
found himself being forced back and back.

       *       *       *       *       *

He stepped into the cage, cowered back against its side. Barter darted
in close, shut the door and fastened it. Then he stood against the
bars, grinning.

"Nod your head if you can understand me, Bentley," he said.

Bentley nodded.

"I told you I would yet prove to the world the greatness of Caleb
Barter," said the scientist. "And you will bear witness that what I
have to tell is true. Would you like to know what I have done?"

Again, slowly and laboriously, Bentley nodded his shaggy head.

Barter grinned.

"Wonderful!" he said. "You see, you are now Manape. Yesterday you had
the brain of a black man, and to exchange your brain with Manape's of
yesterday would not have served my purpose in the least. So I had to
find an ape of more than average intelligence. That's why I spent so
much time in the jungle yesterday. I needed a brain to put in the body
of Lee Bentley's--an ape's brain. Your body is a healthy one and I did
not think it would die as the savage's did. I was right. It is doing
splendidly. It would interest you to see how your body behaves with an
ape's brain to direct it. Your other self, whom I call Apeman, is
unusually handsome. Miss Estabrook, however, who does not know what
has happened, has taken a strange dislike to the other you! Splendid!
I shall study reactions at first hand that will astound the world!

"But remember, whatever your fine brain dictates that you do, don't
ever forget that I am the only living person who can put you to rights
again--and if I die before that happens, you will continue on, till
you die, as Manape!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Barter stopped there. Bentley stiffened.

From the room where he knew Ellen Estabrook to be came her voice,
raised high in a shout of fear.

"Lee! Please! I can't understand you. Please don't touch me! Your eyes
burn me--please go away. What in the world has come over you?"

Bentley listened for the reply of the creature he knew was in the
other room with Ellen Estabrook.

But the answer was a gurgling gibberish that made no sense at all! His
own body, directed by the brain of an ape, could not emit speech that
Ellen could understand, because the ape could not speak. The ape's
vocal cords, which now were Bentley's, were incapable of speech.

How, if Barter continued to keep Ellen in ignorance of what had
happened, would she ever know the horrible truth--and realize the
danger that threatened her?

"Don't worry for the moment, Bentley," said Barter with a smile. "I am
not yet ready for your other self to go to undue lengths--though I
dislike intensely to leave the marks of my whip on that handsome body
of yours!"

Barter slipped from the room.

Bentley listened, amazed at the clarity with which he heard every
vagrant little sound--until he remembered again that his hearing was
that of a jungle beast--until he knew that Barter had entered that
other room.

Then came the crackling reports of the whip, wielded mightily by the
hands of Barter.

A scream that was half human, half animal, was the result of the
lashing. Bentley cringed as he imagined the bite of that lash which he
himself had experienced but a few moments before.

"Professor Barter! Professor Barter!" distinctly came the voice of
Ellen Estabrook. "Don't! Don't! He didn't mean anything, I am sure. He
is sick, something dreadful has happened to him. But he wouldn't
really hurt me. He couldn't--not really. Stop, please! Don't strike
him again!"

But the sound of the lash continued.

"Stop, I tell you!" Ellen's voice rose to a cry of agonized entreaty.
"Don't strike him again. See, you've ripped his flesh until he is
covered with blood! Strike me if you must strike someone--for with
all my heart and soul I love him!"


CHAPTER V

_Fumbling Hands_

Now Bentley was beginning to realize to the full the horrible thing
that had befallen himself and Ellen Estabrook. He knew something else,
too. It had come to him when he had heard Ellen's words next
door--telling Barter that she loved the creature Barter was beating,
which she thought was Lee Bentley. That creature was Lee Bentley; but
only the earthly casement of Lee Bentley. The ruling power of
Bentley's body, the driving force which actuated his body, was the
brain of an ape.

As for Bentley himself, that part of him of which he thought when he
thought of "I," to all intents and purposes, to all outer seeming, had
become an ape. His body was an ape's body, his legs were an ape's,
everything about him was simian save one thing--the "ego," that
something by which man knows that he is himself, with an individual
identity. That was buried behind the almost non-existent brow of an
ape.

In all things save one he was an ape. That thing was "Bentley's"
brain. In all things save one that creature in the room with Ellen
Estabrook was Bentley. Bentley, driven to mad behavior by the brain of
an ape!

The horror of it tore at Bentley, as he still thought of himself.

"If I were to get out of this cage," he told himself voicelessly, "and
were to enter that room with Ellen, she would cower into a corner in
terror. She would fly to the arms of that travesty of 'me,' for she
thinks it is 'I' in there with her because it _looks_ like me."

Now that Ellen was beyond his reach, more beyond his reach than if she
had been dead, he realized how much she meant to him. In the few mad
hours of their association they had come to belong to each other with
a possessiveness that was beyond words. Thinking then that the
travesty in there with her--with Bentley's body--was really Bentley,
to what lengths might she not be persuaded in her love? It was a
ghastly thing to contemplate.

       *       *       *       *       *

But what could Bentley do? He could not speak to her. If he tried she
would race from him in terror at the bellowing ferocity of his voice.
How could he tell her his love when his voice was such as to frighten
the very wild beasts of the jungle?

Yet....

How could he allow her to remain with that other Bentley--that body
which perhaps was provided with a man's appetites, and the brain of a
beast which knew nothing of honor and took what it wished if it were
strong enough?

There was one ray of hope in that Barter had hinted he would protect
Ellen from the apeman. That meant physically, with all that might
indicate; but who could compensate her for the horror she must be
experiencing with that speechless imbecile she thought was Bentley? If
this thing were to continue indefinitely, and Ellen were kept in
ignorance, she would eventually grow to hate the "thing"--and if ever,
as he had hinted, Barter were to transfer back the entities of the man
and the ape, Ellen would always shudder with horrible memories when
she looked at the man she had just now admitted she loved.

Bentley was becoming calmer now. He knew exactly what he faced, and
there was no way out until Barter should be satisfied with his mad
experiment. Bentley must go through with whatever was in store for
him. So must the ape who possessed his body--and in the very nature
of things unless Bentley could train himself to a self-saving
docility, both bodies would repeatedly know the fiery stinging of that
lash of Barter's. Bentley could control himself after a fashion. The
ape might be cowed, but long before that time arrived, Bentley's body
would be made to suffer marks they would bear forever to remind him of
this horror.

"I must somehow manage to continue to care for Ellen," he told
himself. "But how?"

       *       *       *       *       *

He scarcely realized that his great hands were wandering over his
body, scratching, scratching. But when he did realize he felt sick,
without being able to understand how or where he felt sick. If he felt
sick at the stomach he thought of it as his own stomach. When he
thought of moving the hairy hands he thought of his hands. He grinned
to himself--never realizing the horrible grimace which crossed his
face, though there was none to see it--when he recalled how men of his
acquaintance during the Great War, had complained of aching toes at
the end of legs that had been amputated!

He was learning one thing--that the brain is everything that matters.
The seat of pain and pleasure, of joy and of sorrow, of hunger and of
thirst even.

Bentley waddled to the door of the cage. He studied the lock which
held him prisoner, and noted how close he must hold his face to see at
all. All apes might be near-sighted as far as he knew; but he did know
that this one was. Perhaps he could free himself.

He tried to force his massive hands to the task of investigating the
lock. But what an effort! It was like trying to hypnotize a subject
that did not wish to be hypnotized. A distinct effort of will, like
trying to force someone to turn and look by staring at the back of
that someone's neck in a crowd. It was like trying to make an entirely
different person move his arm, or his leg, merely by willing that he
move it.

But the great arms, which might have weighed tons, though Bentley
sensed no strain, raised to the door and fumbled dumbly, clumsily. He
tried to close the gnarled fingers, whose backs were covered with the
rough hair, to manipulate the lock, but he succeeded merely in
fumbling--like a baby senselessly tugging at its father's fingers, the
existence of which had no shape or form in the baby's brain.

But he strove with all his will to force those clumsy hands to do his
bidding. They slipped from the lock, went back again, fumbled over it,
fell away.

"You must!" muttered Bentley. "You must, you must!"

He would discover the secret of the lock, so that he would be able to
remove it when the time was right--but so slow and uncertain and
clumsy were the movements of his ape hands, he was in mortal fear that
he would unlock the door and then not be able to lock it again, and
Barter would discover what he had in mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

But he struggled on, while foul smelling sweat poured from his mighty
body and dripped to the floor. He concentrated on the lock with all
his power, knowing as he did so that the lock would have been but a
simple problem for a child of six or seven. It was nothing more than a
bar held in place with a leather thong. But the powerful fingers which
now were Bentley's were too blunt and inflexible to master the knot
Barter had left.

Bentley paused to listen.

From Ellen's room came the sound of weeping. From the front room came
Barter's pleased laughter as he talked with the thing which so much
resembled Bentley. That was a relief--to know that his other self had
been at least temporarily removed from any possibility of injuring
Ellen.

In Bentley's mind were certain pictures of Barter. He saw him plainly
on his knees begging for mercy, while Bentley's ape hands choked his
life away. He saw him tossed about like a mere child, and casually
torn apart, ripped limb from limb by the mighty hands of Manape.
