
"What do you suggest be done about it?" Duran asked.

"Well, the first step," said Ambly, "is to get Congress to recognize
the problem for what it is. And even that won't be easy."

"That's where you're supposed to come in," the Governor said, grinning
a little guiltily. "Fritz has been tryin' to get me to talk to you
about it for some months. I've got to admit, though, that the business
this afternoon involvin' your son was what finally convinced me you
might be sold."

"I'm sold, Will," Duran told him. "But what's the solution? We can't
supervise the activities of every kid in the country with an IQ above
a hundred and ten. Anyway, they're too limited as it is. That, it
seems to me, is part of the trouble. And we can't hold their parents
accountable. Responsibility has to be an individual matter. So what's
the solution?"

Governor Gorton raised a quizzical eyebrow at Fritz Ambly, who in turn
merely shrugged. The senator glanced at each of them, then down at his
drink.

"So there isn't one," he said.

"Whatever it is," said Ambly, "it won't be simple or painless. There's
only one such solution, and that's the time-honored technique of
letting them grow into maturity. And even that is far from painless
and simple to those doing the growing, nor is it always the solution."

"Yet you're convinced this--" the senator paused briefly, "phenomenon
constitutes a danger to the nation?"

Ambly merely smiled. But very, very grimly.

"Well, think it over, Vance," the Governor said, getting to his feet.
"Say, there are a couple of hydroponics men here somewhere who are
pretty interested in meetin' you. You've heard of Van Neef Industries.
He's one of 'em."

_So much for the welfare of the nation_, Duran thought with a taste of
bitterness. _Now back to politics._

But he finished off his drink, and put out his cigar, and rose to
follow the Governor. Politics, after all, was the reason he had come.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was two a.m. before Senator Vance Duran wearily dropped into bed.
But he found no rest in sleep that night. For in his dreams he seemed
to see a youngster walking, now through a forest, now through a city,
now through an autumn countryside. And in the boy's hand was a tightly
capped bottle. And the expression on his face was an enigma....

Early the next morning Jack Woodvale parked the helicopter in a lot
back of the city youth detention home. Five minutes later the senator
was again talking to his older son.

"I have to get back to Washington this morning, Roger," he said. "I've
scheduled a committee meeting for ten-thirty. I suppose I could call
it off, but we've got to do something about the Mars colony project
before public apathy forces us to drop the whole thing. You
understand, don't you?"

"Sure," the boy said with apparent indifference. "Maybe you should
have let _me_ volunteer. You'd have solved two problems at the same
time."

"Now, Roger--" Duran began. But he stopped, suddenly alert.

"Son, you weren't ever serious about that, were you? I mean all that
talk I used to hear about your wanting to go to one of the planets?"

"Ah, I don't know, Dad--"

"Please, Roger, you've got to be honest with me. I want to know
exactly how you feel about it. I know you've tried before, and I
refused to take you seriously. I realize that. But now--now tell me
the truth."

And the curious thing was, he realized, that he wanted to hear from
his son what he feared most to hear.

"Well--sure, I wanted to go," his son said. "I kept telling you,
didn't I? Of course, I wouldn't want to go unless some of the gang
were going too."

"You really think that you'd be willing to leave Earth, your home,
your family--"

Duran hesitated angrily, knowing it was the wrong approach. He waited
a moment, then began again.

"I'm not condemning you for it, Roger. I just find it hard to believe.
And I have to be sure you know what you'd be sacrificing."

"I think I do, Dad," Roger said. "But you've got to make a break
sometime. I guess there'd be some girls going along, wouldn't there?"

Duran grinned numbly.

"I guess there would, son," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Senator watched the land of his home state sink rapidly into the
morning haze as the jetliner soared upward. It was a sight he had seen
often, but never with the sense of challenge he experienced now. For
every moment brought him closer to what beyond all doubt would be the
toughest fight of his political career. But he felt that he had logic
on his side, though sentiment would very probably be against him.

He sat back, lit a cigarette, and considered the irony of the
situation. When legislation had been passed authorizing the Department
of Extraterrestrial Development to start the colony project, a list of
criteria had been drawn up for the would-be settler. It had
meticulously specified the requirements of health, intelligence, and
adaptability. And most rigidly adhered to of all had been the
provision that the applicant be over the age of twenty-five. For,
above all, it was assumed, a colonist must be mature.

And in that assumption, Duran concluded, had been hidden the fallacy
which had made a fiasco of the project. For was not maturity largely a
matter of finding an acceptable place for oneself in the scheme of
