some kind of restraining layer into the conscious levels. He didn't
remember thinking anything that might have brought it on--his mind was
strictly on Ciel. Maybe that was how it came through, with the attention
of his conscious mind directed elsewhere.

With the hunch he heard Ciel's voice again, heard it very clearly,
saying: "_I'm sure we can find a quiet place. Out on the terrace or
something._" And with that other things started to fall into place.

As he thought, and as the possibilities of his hunch fanned out to
embrace other possibilities he became suddenly cold and sick inside. He
fought the feeling. "Got to go through with it," he muttered to himself.
"Got to."

As soon as he was dressed he took the tunnel cars to Station D-90,
changing twice. People were aboard at this hour, returning from the
evening. Lots of men and women in uniform: the green of the
landfighters, the white of the seamen, the blue of the flyers, the
silver and black of the space force. Young people. Kids mostly: kids who
had never seen war, smelled death, heard the wounded scream. He hoped
they never would. But if his hunch was correct they might be dangerously
near to it right now.

If only he had time to call Kronski. He'd feel a lot safer....

He shook himself. Have to stop thinking about it. Proceed cautiously
now, and take each thing as it came. That was the only thing to do.

He went topside and stepped from the elevator kiosk into the night air.
Ahead he saw the bright globular sign of the Stardust Cafe. But he
didn't go toward it right away. He turned in the other direction, walked
swiftly, and kept a sharp eye on the shadows. He turned off on a side
street, circled a small park, and then crossed a sloping lawn toward the
back of the night club. He headed for the light of the service entrance.

A half-credit bill got him inside through the back entrance. He found
the door with the temporary sign saying: Marco the Mentalist. He
knocked.

Marco the Mentalist opened the door. He didn't look quite as tall
face-to-face as he did out on the floor, nor quite as impressive. His
face was still dark and faintly saturnine, but the jowls seemed a little
puffier now, there was a faint network of capillaries around his
nostrils and his eyes looked just the least bit weary and tired. In a
pleasant enough voice he said, "Yes?"

Pell showed his C.I.B. identification.

Marco raised his eyebrows a little and said, "Come inside, please."
Inside he found a chair for Pell. He sat across from him at his dressing
table, half-turned toward the room. "I must get ready for my show in a
little while. You understand that, of course."

Pell nodded. "What's on my mind won't take long. First of all, I want to
ask a few questions about hypnotism. They may seem silly to you, or
maybe a little elementary, but I'd like you to answer 'em just the
same."

Marco's eyebrows went a little bit higher and he said, "Proceed."

"Okay. Question number one: can anybody be hypnotized against his will?"

"Some can, some can't." Marco smiled. "The average person, under average
circumstances--no. I appear in my act to hypnotize people against their
wills. Actually, subconsciously, they _wish_ to be hypnotized, which is
why they volunteer to let me try in the first place."

"Okay, number two. Is there any drug that can hypnotize a person?"

Marco frowned. "Pentothal and several things _appear_ to do that. You
could argue it either way, whether the subject is actually hypnotized or
not. I believe post-hypnotic commands have been given to subjects under
sodium pentothol and carried out, even back in the dark ages of
psychiatry several hundred years ago."

"I've got one more really important question," Pell said then. "I'd
understood that somebody under hypnosis won't do anything against his
moral or ethical sense. An honest man, for instance, can't be forced to
steal. Is that true?"

Marco laughed and gestured with his graceful fingers. "I don't think it
is true. It was once believed to be, because hypnotic technique was not
strong enough. That is, the subject's hypnosis was not strong enough to
overcome a strong moral sense, which is actually a surface veneer on a
deeper, more brutal nature. But I think with deep enough hypnosis, and
the right kind of command, you can get a person to do most anything in
post-hypnotic behavior--and of course not know why he _must_ do it, even
knowing it's wrong. Do you follow me?"

"I hope I do." Then Pell leaned forward. "And now I have a very great
favor to ask of you."

"Yes?"

"I want you to put on a little special private performance for me, right
here and now."

"I'm afraid I don't understand."

"You will, in about sixty seconds. Just listen carefully...."




Chapter V


He was late for his date with Ciel, of course. He glanced at his chrono
as he entered the Stardust Cafe by the front door and saw that he was
twenty minutes late. However, this time he was certain Ciel wouldn't
complain too vigorously.

Again the askarins were playing, and once more the green-skinned
Venusian girls were doing their writhing, spasmodic, aphrodisiacal
dance. It was remarkable how they could achieve such an effect of utter
abandon and yet keep their faces blank and frozen. He looked around the
rest of the room swiftly. Not so crowded tonight, and people were
generally quieter. There were no oversexed spacemen clawing after the
dancers on the floor.

Ciel was again in a rear booth, in the same corner of the room she had
chosen before. She had spotted him now; she was looking his way. She
lifted a white-gloved hand and waved.

He smiled and headed for her. He forced his smile, and made himself
forget the prickling of his wrists and the feeling of bristling fur
along his spine. And he held his smile all the way across the room.
_Why, hello, darling, fancy seeing you here; no, nothing's wrong,
nothing at all, why on earth would you think anything was wrong?_

"Hi, baby," was all he actually said.

"I'm--I'm glad you're here, Dick." Her eyes didn't show much. They roved
over his face a little too much perhaps, but otherwise they seemed
simply as large and dark as ever. He noticed that the meth glass in
front of her was empty.

Grinning, he sat down. "This is a big moment. This is almost too much
for me to handle. Maybe that's what I need--a good slug of meth."

"No."

"No?"

"Let's not waste time. Let's go out on the terrace. I want you to kiss
me."

"Best offer I've had all evening." He rose again. "Where's the terrace?"

"Through that door. There's a dining room there that's closed at night.
You go through the dining room and out to the terrace."

"Okay."

He took her arm and led her in and out of tables, across the room. They
moved swiftly through the quiet, nearly dark dining room, and after that
through a pair of window-doors. They were on the terrace then, a
flagstoned space with a low wall. It overlooked the scattered lights of
World City's topside area and some distance beyond they could see the
river, a blue-silver ribbon in the moonlight.

They stopped at the wall. She turned toward him. He looked down at her,
at her pale face and deep, dark eyes. He smelled her perfume and he felt
her live warmth near him and coming nearer. He saw her eyes close, her
lips part just slightly, and each lip glistening, faintly moist....

He was wondering when it would happen. He was wondering when he would be
struck.

As he wondered that he suddenly discovered he wasn't on the terrace any
more.

       *       *       *       *       *

He looked about him in some surprise. It was nearly dark. He was in a
room; he could sense the walls about him. He heard a curious,
high-pitched metallic voice--and recognized it.

"_Pell? Are you awake now?_"

It had happened then, just as he had expected. Someone had thrown a
freezer on him there in the patio, and during his complete
unconsciousness he'd been taken here, wherever this was. He sighed. The
least they could have done would have been to let him finish kissing
Ciel.

As calmly as he could he said to the four blank walls, "I'm awake."

Soft glowlights came on gradually and he saw that the room about him was
fairly small--twenty by fifteen, roughly--and very plain. It contained a
bed and a few odd pieces of furniture, all apparently of good quality.
There was a door in one wall. He tried the door. Locked. He went back to
the middle of the room.

"Chief," he said to the blank walls, "what's this all about? Is it some
kind of a joke?"

The metallic voice chuckled. It belonged to Eustace J. Larkin, Chief,
Central Investigation Bureau, and even filtered like this it was
somewhat prim and precise. "No, Dick, it's not a joke, I'm afraid. I'm
surprised you haven't guessed what it's all about. Or at least had one
of your brilliant hunches." There was sarcasm in this last.

"Where's Ciel?" Pell asked.

"Right here with me. In the next room. Here--listen."

Ciel's voice said, "Don't worry, darling, we'll explain everything. And
when it's all over it will be for the best. You'll see that it will."

"All right, everybody," said Pell, half-belligerently, "what's the big
idea?"

"Big idea is right," Larkin's voice came back. "The biggest that ever
hit the human race. And as Ciel says we'll explain it all in a moment.
But first I'd like your word that you won't be foolish and make any kind
of a struggle. If you'll promise that you can come in the other room
here and we can all talk face to face."

Pell frowned. "I don't know--I'm not so sure I can honestly promise
that."

"Suit yourself, then. A few minutes from now it won't make any
difference anyway."

"Will you stop being so damned mysterious and tell me what it's all
about?"

Larkin's voice laughed. "Very well. I haven't had much chance to tell
about it, frankly. And I think you'll agree we've rather neatly kept our
