line. I realize this woman must be made to talk so I will take over. It
will be distasteful to me, but duty is duty."

I got a withering look from my dear wife. "Distasteful? In a pig's eye!
You'd like nothing better than to get your hands on her--by way of duty
of course."

"Joy!"

"Don't Joy me." And with an expert twist, she flipped the struggling
Cora out of the roadster, goose-stepped her across and into the back
seat of the Cadillac.

"You and Bag Ears get in and start driving--slow. I'll have some answers
in a minute or two."

We did as we were told and I eased the car away from the curb. I had to
watch the road, of course, so could not turn to witness what was going
on rearward. In the mirror I saw flashes of up-ended legs and, from time
to time, other and sundry anatomical parts that flew up in range only to
vanish again as the grim struggle went on.

Bag Ears, however, turned to witness the bringing forth of the answers.
His first comment was, "Oh boy!"

Joy was breathing heavily. She said, "Okay, babe. Talk, or I'll put real
pressure on this scissors!"

Bag Ears said, "Man oh man!"

Joy said, "Quit gaping, you moron! I'm back here too."

I gave Bag Ears a stern admonition to keep his eyes front.

"Give," Joy gritted.

"Ouch! No!"

"Give!"

Cora gave forth an agonized wail. Then an indignant gasp. "Cut it out!
You fight dirty! That ain't fair!"

"Give!"

"All right! All right. Pete's meeting Hands
at--ouch--Joe's--ouch--Tavern on Clark Street. Ouch! Cut it out, will
you?"

And it was here that I detected a trace of sadism in my lovely wife.
"All right," she said regretfully. "Sit up. Gee, but you talk easy."

"Just where is this tavern?" I asked. "And what is the purpose of the
meeting?"

Cora's resistance was entirely gone. "In the 2800 block. Pete went there
to get some money from Hands to skip town with."

Joy now spoke with relish. "Lying again. I'll have to--"

"I ain't lying!"

"Don't give us that! Uncle Peter is wealthy. He doesn't need Hands'
money. Come here, baby."

"Wait, Joy," I cut in hastily. "The young lady may be telling the truth.
Uncle Peter is always short of funds. You see, Aunt Gretchen holds the
purse strings in our family and Uncle Peter is always overdrawn on his
allowance."

"Then let's get to that tavern and find out what's going on."

It took ten minutes to reach the tavern; a standard gin mill with a red
neon sign proclaiming its presence. We quitted the car and I entered
first, Joy bringing Cora along with a certain amount of force, and Bag
Ears bringing up the rear.

And I was just in time to prevent another murder.

As I came through the door, I saw Hands and Uncle Peter leaning casually
against the bar. There was no one else in the place. The barkeep was
facing his two customers and there were three glasses set before them.
The barkeep held one in his hand.

Uncle Peter had just finished spiking the barkeep's drink with a clear
fluid from a small vial. Uncle Peter said, "It's something new I
invented. Pure dynamite. You haven't lived until you've tasted my
elixir."

       *       *       *       *       *

Hands said, "Go ahead. Drink it. I want to make sure I wasn't seeing
things back at that dame's house."

The barkeep said, "Pure dynamite, huh?"

"Your not fooling, chum."

He raised the glass and grinned. "Salud."

I got to the bar just in time to knock the glass out of his hairy paw.
He grunted, "What the hell--oh, a wise guy, huh?" and started over the
bar.

I yelled, "It's murder. They're trying to poison you!"

"Oh, a crackpot!"

He came toward me, shaking off Uncle Peter's restraining hand. I took a
step backward, thankful he was coming in wide open because I had seen
few tougher-looking characters in my lifetime.

I set myself and sent a short knockout punch against his chin. It was a
good punch. Everything was in it. It sounded like a sledge hammer
hitting a barn door.

The barkeep shook his head and came on in. I stepped back and slugged
him again. No result.

Then Joy slipped into the narrow space between us. She was smiling and,
with her upturned waiting lips, she was temptation personified. The
barkeep dropped his hands, paralyzed by her intoxicating nearness.

She said, "Hello, Iron Head. How about you and I taking a little
vacation together somewhere."

He grinned and reached for her. This, it developed, was a mistake,
because Joy reached for him at the same time. She lifted his
two-hundred-odd pounds as though he were a baby and he went flying
across the room like a projectile. He hit a radiator head-on and lay
still.

Again I was stupefied. It seemed I knew nothing at all about this girl
I'd married. She smiled at me and said, "Don't be alarmed, angel.
There's an explanation. You see, my mother gave me money for piano
lessons and I invested most of it in a course of ju-jitsu. I thought an
occasion like this might arise sometime. Do you want to take McCaffery,
or shall I do it? I doubt if he'll come to the station peaceably."

But Hands McCaffery was not to be caught flatfooted. Without his machine
gun he was just an ordinary little man who didn't want to go with us. He
took one look at the prone barkeep, muttered, "Geez!" and headed for the
back door.

"Get him," Joy yelled. "Maybe we can make a deal with the cops to fry
Hands in place of Uncle Peter!"

I started after Hands and as I went through the back door I heard Uncle
Peter protesting feebly. "I say now. This is all uncalled-for--"

"Don't let him get away!" Joy called. "He's got the serum!"

That cleared things up somewhat and made me even more resolute.
Evidently we had interrupted Uncle Peter and Hands in the process of
doing away with all the latter's enemies. With that bottle in his
possession, he was a menace to the entire population of the city. A man
of his type would certainly have far more enemies than friends.

Outside in the dark alley, I was guided only by footsteps. The sound of
Hands' retreat told me he was moving up the smelly passageway toward
Division Street. I went after him.

I am no mean sprinter, having won laurels in college for my fleetness in
the two-twenty and the four-forty, and I had no trouble in overtaking
the little assassin. We were fast approaching the alley entrance where I
would have had the aid of street lights and could have swiftly collared
McCaffery whose heavy breathing I could now hear--when disaster struck
in the form of a painful obstacle. It was heavy and it caught me just
below the knees.

I tripped and fell headlong, plowing along a couple of yards of slippery
brick pavement on my face. I got groggily to my feet and shook my head
to clear my brain. From the deposits of old eggs, rejected tomatoes and
other such refuse in my face and ears, I gathered that I had tripped
over a garbage can.

This delayed me for some moments. When I finally staggered out into
Division Street, a strange sight met my eyes. Hands McCaffery had been
apprehended. It seemed that the police had orders to pick him up because
two uniformed patrolmen had him backed against the wall and were
approaching him with caution. They had him covered and were taking no
chances of his pulling a belly gun on them.

But he did not draw a gun. Instead, while I stared wide-eyed, he raised
Uncle Peter's vial to his lips and drank the contents.

I will not bore you with details of his going _pop_. If you have read
this letter carefully, the details are not necessary.

I turned and retraced my steps, realizing Hands McCaffery had been
vicious and defiant to the last. Rather than submit to arrest, he had
taken the wild animal's way out.

