On the main deck, Craig held a conference with Michaelson and Guru. The
answers to the questions he asked left him with a grim look on his face.
He called the sailors together.

"I have been talking to Guru," he said. "Guru tells me that the city of
the Ogrum is not far from here. He says we can reach it tonight, if we
go by land, and if we use the big logs that float--by which he means our
power boats--we can reach it by midnight."

He paused and looked expectantly at the sailors. A little stir ran
through them. They instantly grasped what he was driving at.

"Moreover," he continued, "Guru tells me that the city is usually
unguarded, that the Ogrum do not bother to post sentries."

Craig watched the men closely. There was hard, bitter resentment on
their faces. They had seen their comrades carted away like so many
sticks of wood to some unguessed fate. All they wanted was a chance to
rescue their friends, or failing in that, to avenge them.

Craig wasted few words. "I am going to the city of the Ogrum," he said.
"All of you who want to go with me, step forward."

The fierce shout that answered him told him all he wanted to know. The
blue-jackets were with him. Only one man failed to step forward. It was
Voronoff. Craig eyed him.

"What about you, Voronoff?" he said.

"Don't be a damned fool!" Voronoff spat out the words. "We don't have a
chance."

"No?"

"No! The Ogrum have planes and gas and everything else. If we jump them,
they'll mow us down."

"What would you recommend that we do?" Craig asked. His voice was soft
and there was a worried expression on his face. He looked like a man who
is faced with a tough problem and is weighing all the possibilities
before deciding what to do.

"There is only one thing to do," Voronoff snapped. "Get to hell away
from here as fast as we can. Hide in the jungle. Maybe the Ogrum don't
know there are any of us left alive. If we jump them, they'll know we're
alive and they'll clean us out."

"Hmmm," Craig said thoughtfully. "You've probably got something there.
But what about the men the Ogrum have captured?"

Voronoff shrugged indifferently. "They're done for," he said. "We can't
help what happens to them."

       *       *       *       *       *

A low growl came from the mass of sailors as Voronoff spoke.

"I suppose we really can't help what happens to them," Craig said. "But
I, for one am going to try to help it. We need every able-bodied man we
have. That includes you, Voronoff. Are you going with us or aren't you?"

Craig's voice was still soft and pleasant. Voronoff completely
misinterpreted it.

"Include me out!" he snapped. "I'm not going."

"No?"

"No! You can't make me volunteer if I don't want to."

"But we need you, Voronoff," Craig pleaded. "We need all the strength we
can muster."

"You can go to hell!" Voronoff said sullenly.

"You won't go?"

"I won't go!"

Craig glanced over the side of the ship. Dusk had already fallen but
there was still enough light for him to see the triangular fins cutting
the surface. He nodded toward the water. "Either you go with us,
Voronoff," he said evenly, "Or I, personally, am going to throw you
overboard."

Voronoff looked like a man who did not believe his own ears. A low growl
of approval came from the sailors. They remembered how they had found
this man hiding in the lowest depths of the ship when they had come
aboard. While their kidnapped comrades had fought, he had gone to hide.

"You--you don't mean it," Voronoff whispered.

"I never meant anything more," Craig answered. "We can't have any
slackers here. Either you go with us or you go overboard and take your
chances of swimming ashore."

His voice was hard and flat and there was not the slightest trace of
sympathy in it. There was no mistaking his meaning. Voronoff turned
pale. He looked quickly around as though seeking a place to hide.

"You've got no hole to pull in after you now," Craig said. "What is your
answer."

Voronoff gulped. "I'll--I'll go with you," he said.

"Good," Craig said. He gave swift orders for the preparation of the
attacking party. The sailors scurried to do his bidding. He was aware
that Michaelson was plucking at his sleeve.

"Weren't you being rather hard on him?" the scientist questioned.

"Maybe," Craig answered. "The truth is, I don't like him. There is
something furtive about him. He impresses me as being pretty much of a
rat. Besides, we need every man we can get."

"I know we do," Michaelson said slowly. "But would you honestly have
thrown him overboard if he had refused to go?"

Craig shrugged. "Don't ask me such questions. I don't know the answers.
Maybe I would and maybe I wouldn't."

"I see," the scientist smiled. "You're a hard man, Craig. All I can say
is that in this situation we need a hard man and I'm glad we have you to
lead us."

"Thank you," Craig said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hours later Craig stood on the side of a mountain looking down at an
incredible scene. Guru, by devious paths known only to the dawn man, had
guided them here. Below them lay the city of the Ogrum.

The city was located on the edge of a huge, circular bay that had
apparently at some time in the remote past been the crater of a large
volcano. To the east where the walls of the volcano had crumbled down
was a vast swamp, a favorite feeding ground for the dinosaurs. Hundreds
of the great beasts could be heard screaming and fighting in the swamp.

The city itself held Craig's eyes.

He had seen the Ogrum in airplanes, he had seen them use gas, both of
which meant an advanced civilization, with a great knowledge of
technology. He had expected to find a city bright with lights, numbering
hundreds of thousands of inhabitants, with large factories, broad
streets, and--since they used planes--landing fields.

None of these things was visible. The city of the Ogrum was unlighted.
There were no wide streets, no factories in sight. There was only one
large building in the city, and the buildings which apparently served as
homes for the Ogrum were little better than crude huts. There was a
brilliant full moon overhead, clearly revealing the whole scene.

"It's not possible!" Craig whispered to Michaelson. "This can't be the
city of the Ogrum. Guru brought us to the wrong place."

The scientist questioned Guru. Craig could hear the dawn man's replies.

"Guru says this is the right place," Michaelson spoke. "He says this is
the city of the Ogrum, that there is no other city."

"But with the exception of that temple, this place is a dump!" Craig
protested. "I have seen Papuan head-hunters who had built more
pretentious cities than this. The Ogrum have planes. You can't build
planes without a complex industrial system."

"It is certainly strange," the scientist said musingly. "But Guru
insists this is the place and I am inclined to believe him. You will
note also that the city below us is not laid out in streets and I see no
evidence of a lighting system."

"Maybe they've got a black-out on," a sailor suggested.

Guru, consulted on this point, said no, the city of the Ogrum was always
dark at night. Guru had a great deal of difficulty in understanding what
was meant by light, but once he grasped the idea, he insisted the Ogrum
never used lights.

"Well, it's a damned mystery," Craig said. "And I'm going down there and
find out about it. Guru, come with me."

Craig had spent the hours in the boats trying to grasp the language of
the dawn man. He still did not understand Guru as well as Michaelson did
but he could understand enough for his purpose.

"Just the two of you going down there?" Michaelson questioned.

"Yes. Any more would only increase the chances of discovery. We've got
to know the lay of the land and we've got to have some idea of what we
will meet down there before we attempt a rescue. We probably will not be
able to make an attack before tomorrow night anyhow."

After disposing his force and ordering them to get as much rest as
possible, Craig and Guru started down to the city of the Ogrum.
Michaelson had to be restrained from accompanying them.

"You stay here," Craig bluntly told the scientist. "You're not as young
as I am and you need a rest."

Overhead was a broad tropic moon. There was no wind. From the great
swamp came the only sound that broke the silence of the night, the
scream of the dinosaurs, the roaring of the great lions of this time.
Below lay the strange city of the Ogrum.

       *       *       *       *       *

Craig felt the weirdness of the scene as he and Guru started down the
side of the mountain. What kind of creatures were the Ogrum? What secret
lay behind their existence? They had left no mark on history as he knew
it. So far as the human race knew, the Ogrum had never existed. And
yet--the sudden thought was startling--there was a word in the English
language that came close to describing these creatures--ogre! Ogre and
Ogrum were very similar. Were these the original ogres, those
mythological monsters who devoured human beings? Had the Ogrum, known,
feared, and named by the dawn men, come down through legends as ogres?

The thought sent a shivery feeling up Craig's spine. Was he going down
into a city of monsters? Were Stinky Higgins and Margy Sharp and
hundreds of men from the Idaho held as prisoners by ogres? What horrible
secret was hidden down there in that silent city?

They reached the edge of the city. It was larger than Craig had thought.
Hundreds, possibly thousands of rude huts, were hidden in the jungle
growth. The place smelled bad. Apparently no effort at sanitation had
ever been made. A nauseous stench arose from the ground. Craig wrinkled
his nose in disgust.

"Filth!" he muttered. "This place needs nothing so much as it needs
burning to the ground. Where Ogrum, Guru?" he said, turning to the dawn
man.

"Ogrum sleep," Guru answered. "In little caves," he said, nodding toward
the huts. "Ogrum sleep."

"Where prisoners?" Craig asked. He had to rephrase the question and
repeat it several times before the dawn man understood.

"In big cave," Guru said, understanding at last.

"Where big cave?" Craig asked.

"Big rock cave," Guru answered, pointing toward the large stone temple
that stood in the center of the city.

"Then that is where we are going," Craig said. "Come on."

Guru hung back. Craig sensed the dawn man's fear. "What's wrong?" he
asked.

"Monster that is always hungry in big cave," Guru answered.

"Ah," Craig said. The monster that is always hungry! The bright beast
that eats forever! A shiver passed through him as he remembered how Guru
had described whatever was in the cave. "What is the monster?" he
questioned.

But Guru either did not understand or could not explain, and Craig was
left with no knowledge of the nature of the monster. However he could
guess that the Ogrum regarded the thing in the temple as a god and
offered sacrifices to it, an impression which Guru confirmed.

"Tomorrow when sun goes," Guru said. "Ogrum feed one man to bright beast
that is always hungry. Next day when sun goes feed beast again. Keep up
until no one left to feed. Then go hunt more people."

Craig recognized the performance as an incredibly ancient ritual of
sacrifice to ensure the return of the sun. The Ogrum seemingly had no
real knowledge of the universe. Each night when the sun went down they
were not sure that it would rise again. To make certain the bright light
in the sky would return again, they offered a sacrifice to it.

"What do they do when they run out of captives?" he asked.

"Catch Ogrum, feed him to beast," the dawn man answered.

When they ran out of captives, the Ogrum sacrificed their own people!

"Well, we've still got to find out what is in that temple and where our
people are being held," Craig said grimly. "If Guru is afraid, Guru may
stay here. I will go alone."

Guru was afraid. There was no doubt about that. Craig did not criticize
the dawn man for being afraid. He regarded it as evidence of good, sound
sense. But, afraid or not, Guru went with him. Slipping like a pair of
ghosts through the rough paths that served as streets, they entered the
silent city. Guru was as noiseless as a shadow, and Craig, every sense
alert, moved as quietly as an Indian. The big American knew that from
any of the huts an Ogrum might emerge at any moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

They reached the temple unobserved.

It was a bigger building than had been apparent from the mountain above.
Unlike the huts, it was constructed of stone. Roughly circular in shape,
a line of columns circled the outer edge. The construction was crude.
The Ogrum either had not yet invented the arch or scorned to use it.
Numerous holes big enough for a man to enter standing erect, but not
much bigger, served as entrances. The holes were without doors, another
invention the Ogrum apparently had not yet made, and Craig was again
struck by the strangely warped development of this race that knew how to
build airplanes and to use poison gas but still did not know how to
build arches.

Unlike the city, the temple was guarded. Yellow-robed, shaven-headed
sentries paced around the building keeping inside the circles of the
columns.

"Friends of the bright beast that is always hungry," Guru called them.
Craig decided they were priests, temple guards. He saw they were armed
with spears and swords. In addition each guard carried a pouch of small,
round objects that looked like grenades.

"Are those things _grenades_?" Craig whispered. But Guru had never heard
of grenades. He did not understand. Nor could Craig make him understand.

Through the small dark holes that served as entrances to the temple
occasional flashes of light could be seen. The light was dull, like the
fitful glow from a campfire that has almost burned out.

"What is that?" Craig asked.

But Guru either did not know or, for some superstitious reason, refused
to talk.

"I'm going into that temple," Craig decided. "You stay here and wait for
me."

This time Guru did not insist on going along and Craig realized that the
dawn man was desperately afraid of something within the temple. Craig,
waiting until one of the pacing sentries had passed, darted into the
nearest opening.

He knew, as he slid into the building, that there was an excellent
chance he would never come out, but he had to go in. He had to know what
was in there, so he could plan how to defeat it. He had to know where
the men of the Idaho were held prisoner and how well they were guarded
and if it was possible to organize a way for them to escape. Finally, he
had to know the nature of the bright beast that was always hungry, the
god of the Ogrum.

What was the monster that was always hungry? Some black leering idol on
whose altar was daily sacrificed a living victim? Or was it something
else, some real monster that the Ogrum believed to be divine?

Guided by the fitful flickering of light ahead of him, Craig slipped
along what was in effect an artificial tunnel. He reached the end of the
tunnel, and stopped, appalled at what he saw.

The temple was built like a gigantic amphitheater, like some large bowl
in which athletic contests were held. Circling downward in ordered rows
were tier on tier of rough stone steps. Down below him, in a huge cup
that apparently rose from the solid foundation of the mountain itself
was--_a seething mass of white-hot bubbling lava_!

       *       *       *       *       *

The city of the Ogrum was located in the crater of a supposedly extinct
volcano. The volcano was not extinct. It was merely inactive. Fires
still seethed in its heart, and the white-hot lava, held in balance by
some subterranean arrangement of pressures, bubbled up here, like a
geyser that never overflows and never subsides.

This bowl of lava, rising from the volcano beneath, was what Guru called
the white beast that was always hungry. It was the god of the Ogrum. In
a flash Craig saw why they worshipped it and why they fed human
sacrifices to it. It was bright and hot like the sun. Therefore, by the
laws of sympathetic magic, a sacrifice offered to the lava was the same
as a sacrifice offered to the sun. The Ogrum, creatures of the dawn
world, in spite of their planes and their poison gas, had no real
knowledge of science, of the laws of cause and effect. The Ogrum thought
that they could assure the return of the warming and life-giving sun by
offering a living sacrifice to this bubbling lava!

If their reasoning was erroneous and false, it was nonetheless hideous
and real for all that. For they would certainly offer in sacrifice,
here, every man taken from the Idaho, unless they were prevented by
force.

Across the arena he could see a larger opening closed by a grill of
wooden poles. The flickering light from the pool of bubbling lava
enabled him to see faces behind the grill--the prisoners. Involuntarily
he started toward them. Then he saw the company of shaven-headed yellow
clad guards standing beside the enclosure.

The Ogrum were on watch!

Studying the situation, Craig could see no way by which he could effect
the release of the men. He had a handful of sailors to help him. There
were thousands of the Ogrum. The Ogrum had planes and if they did not
have firearms, they certainly had other weapons.

"Surprise!" Craig thought. "We've got to take them by surprise, divert
them long enough to release our men. Then--" He cursed softly. Presuming
a sudden surprise attack enabled them to release the prisoners? What
would happen then?

"They'll hit us with planes!" Craig cursed. "They'll gas us and spray
acid on us, and even if we manage to get away from here, they will
follow us through the air." His eyes narrowed. "Which means that we have
