"Or, perhaps, just children," David replied. He stood up, stretching, so
that his muscles rippled beneath his plaid shirt. "Well, we better get
that wire, Don, and go back to work."

       *       *       *       *       *

After the twins had left, Elvin went up to his room to bathe. His mind
skipped pleasantly over the delightful and limitless possibilities of
his new understanding. The whole thing, of course, hinged on his
approach. But, after all, that shouldn't be hard; they were still
children emotionally. Five years of teaching had demonstrated, to his
satisfaction, that he could handle any adolescent.

He began to dress. The clothes he had worn that day were streaked and
torn. He took his second suit out of the closet. As he hung the coat
over the back of his desk chair, he heard metal strike against the wood.
It was the coat he had worn on Friday night, when he found the rocket;
in the pocket was the strip of metal that had been sealed over the
cylinder of colored spheres.

He held it in his hand again. It was the first time the full surface of
the metal had touched his skin. As he had before, he felt the sensation
of jumbled words flooding his mind, but now the feeling was more
intense. He could not put the metal down. Instead he dropped into his
desk chair and his eyes were drawn irresistibly to the pattern of tiny,
translucent globes that dotted the surface of the metal. The heat of his
body produced a chemical reaction; one by one the little globes
exploded.

Pictures filled Elvin's mind, of cities, machines, towering stacks of
books. These dissolved, and he saw planets whirling on the black
emptiness of space around the glowing disk of a red sun. There was a
cataclysmic splatter of light as the sun exploded, and slashing flame
shot out to destroy its circling planets. That picture, too, disappeared
and he was staring at a gray nothingness while an emotional voice spoke
to him deep within his brain.

"_To the intelligent life form, on the Third Planet, System K, Greetings
from the dying world of Dyran. You have located our rocket from the
hypnotichord built into the fins, and, by opening it, you have
demonstrated a condition of rationality that we are able to help. We
speak to you now through hypnotic pictures which you are translating
into the symbology of your own society. Our astronomers predict that our
planetary system will shortly be destroyed, because our sun is dying. It
is useless for us to try to escape, for no world that we can find within
the limits of our telescope has the particular combination of
atmospheric gases which we need in order to live. The only sky-body that
we have ever studied that gives any indication of higher life forms is
yours. To you, then, we send the substance of our knowledge, the laws
and principles that we have developed over a period of two million years
since our recorded history began. We could have sent our machines, our
libraries of records, yet the chance that you would not comprehend them
alone is too great. Instead we send our learning capsules, which we use
in the instruction of our young. Break the container which is sealed
into this rocket and consume one of the colored spheres. It is,
basically, a stimulant to the cerebral cortex of any reasoning animal
which already has a memory of the past and a concept of the future. Long
ago we discovered that, unaided, the mind will function with only a
small portion of its specialized cells. This stimulant forces conscious
activity upon all parts of the cortex; in the process of stimulation,
your brain will receive the full knowledge of basic principles which we
ourselves have developed. We send you fifty of these only, but it will
be enough. You have not, on your planet, the material with which to make
additional capsules for your people, but you will not need them. The
fifty who learn from these will become teachers for the rest. Carry on
for us the culture that we have made on the dying world of Dyran._"

       *       *       *       *       *

The gray mist faded and Elvin stood up. He felt refreshed, alert; his
mind bubbled again with schemes. He looked at the bottle of colored
spheres still standing on his desk, and he knew they were no more than
bubble gum or candy. On Friday night, while he telephoned, the tenth
graders at the Schermerhorn party had started their bubble gum contest,
but instead of gum they had by accident absorbed the accumulated
knowledge of Dyran, a culture more than three hundred times as old as
the earth's!

It was overwhelmingly clear what had happened after that. Thirty
adolescents, suddenly possessing more knowledge than the world had ever
known, had run riot, playing with hypnotism, the transmutation of
matter, the Law of Degravitation, the fourth dimensional transposition
of whole city blocks. Within two days their energetic curiosity, their
adolescent love of excitement and experiment, had thrown the world into
crisis. By this time, Elvin concluded, they would be terrified by a
feeling of immense guilt, ready to be told what to do to make amends.

It was up to him to be the one who did the telling. If, at the same
time, he could get his hands on one of the learning capsules--the
prospect was so dazzling it left him breathless.

He slipped out to the boys' workshop back of the garage. When he knocked
on the door, Donald opened it two inches and quickly tried to close it
again. But Elvin thrust his hand over the latch.

"No, Donald," he said sternly. "This time you don't get away with it.
You see, I know what happened when you ate the spheres."

The door creaked open. Elvin walked into the workshop, where all thirty
of the tenth graders were gathered around the littered work table. The
rocket was there, and they were studying the tiny motor. In a corner was
a hastily constructed forge; three girls were working with it, turning
out curved strips of metal, which a boy was machining on the metal
lathe. In the center of the shop was a tall, gleaming bar of metal,
surrounded by a network of wires and fastened to a wooden base made from
an orange crate.

"You're cooking up some more surprises for us?" Elvin asked.

"No," Donald replied solemnly. "We're ashamed of--"

"As, indeed, you should be."

"We're doing our best to put everything back the way it was," Mabel
Travis said. "Honestly, Mr. Elvin."

"It won't help much; the damage is already done."

"But it can be undone. We've already fixed up part of it."

"Yes," David Schermerhorn cut in anxiously. "When Don and I came back
this morning, the first thing we did was bring back the bank. Our
machine's kind of crude, Mr. Elvin, so we couldn't get it right at
first. I guess we picked up a castle or something in between; but that's
all right, now. And the gold--well, we're going to turn it back to
gravel again tonight." He gestured toward the bar of metal.

"We can work from the edge of our field," David pointed out. "The whole
desert will change at once, the way it did last night."

"And what will you do with all the people on it?"

"It won't hurt them."

"But when they find their gold is gravel, you'll have a major
catastrophe on your hands."

Marilyn bit her lip. "That's why we haven't done anything yet. We don't
want anybody to get hurt but--"

"So you've considered that at last." The more Elvin rubbed in the guilt,
he reasoned, the more secure he would make himself.

"We could just transpose the whole area," Charles suggested. "We've
considered that, too. Maybe in pieces, Mr. Elvin. You know, an acre or
two to Australia, another to Germany, another to England. That couldn't
cause much more than local riots."

"But the men would be mighty uncomfortable for a while."

"The only trouble is, our machines are so crude; we've had to build them
out of scraps. And something could go wrong. We might try to send some
of the mob to China, and end up putting them in the Pacific, or maybe
back in time."

"You've done enough tampering," Elvin declared. "I won't help you at
all, unless you promise to leave everything as it is. You have to put
yourselves in a position to help the world, not destroy it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Elvin had injected just the right tone of nobility into his voice. The
thirty adolescents consulted together in whispers. Then David asked,

"What do you want us to do, Mr. Elvin?"

"Let me act as your representative. I'll go to Washington and talk to
responsible men in the government; I'll try to see the president
