dulling, a call for help smothered on his lips. He fell on his face, and
Ennis saw that the heel-knife was stuck in his back. Inspector Campbell
jerked it out, and put it back into his shoe. And now Ennis, staggering
up, saw that Campbell had knifed the two hooded guards and that they lay
in a dead heap.

"Campbell!" cried the American, gripping the detective's arm. "They've
wounded you--I saw them shoot you."

Campbell's bruised face grinned briefly. "Nothing of the kind," he said,
and tapped the soiled gray vest he wore beneath his coat. "Chandra Dass
didn't know this vest is bullet-proof."

He darted an alert glance up and down the lighted tunnel. "We can't stay
here or let these bodies lie here. They may be discovered at any
moment."

"Listen!" said Ennis, turning.

The chanting from ahead swelled down the tunnel, louder than at any time
yet, waxing and waxing, reaching a triumphant crescendo, then again
dying away.

"Campbell, they're going on with the ceremony now!" Ennis cried. "Ruth!"

The detective's desperate glance fastened on the dark mouth of one of
the branching tunnels, a little ahead.

"That side tunnel--we'll pull the bodies in there!" he exclaimed.

Taking the pistols of the dead men for themselves, they rapidly dragged
the three bodies into the darkness of the unlit branching tunnel.

"Quick, on with two of these robes," rasped Inspector Campbell. "They'll
give us a little better chance."

Hastily Ennis jerked the gray robe and hood from Chandra Dass' dead body
and donned it, while Campbell struggled into one of the others. In the
robes and concealing hoods, they could not be told from any other two
members of the Brotherhood, except that the badge on Ennis' breast was
the double star instead of the single one.

Ennis then spun toward the main, lighted tunnel, Campbell close behind
him. They recoiled suddenly into the darkness of the branching way, as
they heard hurrying steps out in the lighted passage. Flattened in the
darkness against the wall, they saw several of the gray-hooded members
of the Brotherhood hasten past them from above, hurrying toward the
gathering-place.

"The guards and robe-issuers we saw above!" Campbell said quickly when
they were passed. "Come on, now."

He and Ennis slipped out into the lighted tunnel and hastened along it
after the others.

Boom of thundering ocean over their heads and rising and falling of the
tremendous chanting ahead filled their ears as they hurried around the
last turns of the tunnel. The passage widened, and ahead they saw a
massive rock portal through whose opening they glimpsed an immense,
lighted space.

Campbell and Ennis, two comparatively tiny gray-hooded figures, hastened
through the mighty portal. Then they stopped. Ennis felt frozen with the
dazing shock of it. He heard the detective whisper fiercely beside him.

"It's the Cavern, all right--the Cavern of the Door!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They looked across a colossal rock chamber hollowed out beneath the
floor of ocean. It was elliptical in shape, three hundred feet by its
longer axis. Its black basalt sides, towering, rough-hewn walls, rose
sheer and supported the rock ceiling which was the ocean floor, a
hundred feet over their heads.

This mighty cathedral hewn from inside the rock of earth was lit by a
soft, white, sourceless light like that in the main tunnel. Upon the
floor of the cavern, in regular rows across it, stood hundreds on
hundreds of human figures, all gray-robed and gray-hooded, all with
their backs to Campbell and Ennis, looking across the cavern to its
farther end. At that farther end was a flat dais of black basalt upon
which stood five hooded men, four wearing the blazing double-star on
their breasts, the fifth, a triple-star. Two of them stood beside a
cubical, weird-looking gray metal mechanism from which upreared a
spherical web of countless fine wires, unthinkably intricate in their
network, many of them pulsing with glowing force. The sourceless light
of the cavern and the tunnel seemed to pulse from that weird mechanism.

Up from that machine, if machine it was, soared the black basalt wall of
that end of the cavern. But there above the gray mechanism the rough
wall had been carved with a great, smooth facet, a giant, gleaming black
oval face as smooth as though planed and polished. Only, at the middle
of the glistening black oval face, were carven deeply four large and
wholly unfamiliar characters. As Ennis and Campbell stared frozenly
across the awe-inspiring place, sound swelled from the hundreds of
throats. A slow, rising chant, it climbed and climbed until the basalt
roof above seemed to quiver to it, crashing out with stupendous effect,
a weird litany in an unknown tongue. Then it began to fall.

Ennis clutched the inspector's gray-robed arm. "Where's Ruth?" he
whispered frantically. "I don't see any prisoners."

"They must be somewhere here," Campbell said swiftly. "Listen----"

As the chant died to silence, on the dais at the farther end of the
cavern the hooded man who wore the triple-jeweled star stepped forward
and spoke. His deep, heavy voice rolled out and echoed across the
cavern, flung back and forth from wall to rocky wall.

"Brothers of the Door," he said, "we meet again here in the Cavern of
the Door this year, as for ten thousand years past our forefathers have
met here to worship They Beyond the Door, and bring them the sacrifices
They love.

"A hundred centuries have gone by since first They Beyond the Door sent
their wisdom through the barrier between their universe and ours, a
barrier which even They could not open from their side, but which their
wisdom taught our fathers how to open.

"Each year since then have we opened the Door which They taught us how
to build. Each year we have brought them sacrifices. And in return They
have given us of their wisdom and power. They have taught us things that
lie hidden from other men, and They have given us powers that other men
have not.

"Now again comes the time appointed for the opening of the Door. In
their universe on the other side of it, They are waiting now to take the
sacrifices which we have procured for them. The hour strikes, so let the
sacrifices be brought."

As though at a signal, from a small opening at one side of the cavern a
triple file of marchers entered. A file of hooded gray members of the
Brotherhood flanked on either side a line of men and women who did not
wear the hoods or robes. They were thirty or forty in number. These men
and women were of almost all races and classes, but all of them walked
stiffly, mechanically, staring ahead with unseeing, distended eyes, like
living corpses.

"Drugged!" came Campbell's shaken voice. "They're all drugged, and don't
know what is going on."

Ennis' eyes fastened on a small, slender girl with chestnut hair who
walked at the end of the line, a girl in a straight tan dress, whose
face was white, stiff, like those of the others.

"There's Ruth!" he exclaimed frantically, his cry muffled by his hood.

He plunged in that direction, but Campbell held him back.

"No!" rasped the inspector. "You can't help her by simply getting
yourself captured!"

"I can at least go with her!" Ennis exclaimed. "Let me go!"

Inspector Campbell's iron grip held him. "Wait, Ennis!" said the
detective. "You've no chance that way. That robe of Chandra Dass' you're
wearing has a double-star badge like those of the men up there on the
dais. That means that as Chandra Dass you're entitled to be up there
with them. Go up there and take your place as though you were Chandra
Dass--with the hood on, they can't tell the difference. I'll slip around
to that side door out of which they brought the prisoners. It must
connect with the tunnels, and it's not far from the dais. When I fire my
pistol from there, you grab your wife and try to get to that door with
her. If you can do it, we'll have a chance to get up through the tunnels
and escape."

Ennis wrung the inspector's hand. Then, without further reply, he walked
boldly with measured steps up the main aisle of the cavern, through the
gray ranks to the dais. He stepped up onto it, his heart racing. The
chief priest, he of the triple-star, gave him only a glance, as of
annoyance at his lateness. Ennis saw Campbell's gray figure slipping
round to the side door.

The gray-hooded hundreds before him had paid no attention to either of
them. Their attention was utterly, eagerly, fixed upon the stiff-moving
prisoners now being marched up onto the dais. Ennis saw Ruth pass him,
her white face an unfamiliar, staring mask.

The prisoners were ranged at the back of the dais, just beneath the
great, gleaming black oval facet. The guards stepped back from them, and
they remained standing stiffly there. Ennis edged a little toward Ruth,
who stood at the end of that line of stiff figures. As he moved
imperceptibly closer to her, he saw the two priests beside the gray
mechanism reaching toward knurled knobs of ebonite affixed to its side,
beneath the spherical web of pulsing wires.

The chief priest, at the front of the dais, raised his hands. His voice
rolled out, heavy, commanding, reverberating again through all the
cavern.




_5. The Door Opens_


"Where leads the Door?" rolled the chief priest's voice.

Back up to him came the reply of hundreds of voices, muffled by the
hoods but loud, echoing to the roof of the cavern in a thunderous
response.

"_It leads outside our world!_"

The chief priest waited until the echoes died before his deep voice
rolled on in the ritual.

"Who taught our forefathers to open the Door?"

Ennis, edging desperately closer and closer to the line of victims, felt
the mighty response reverberate about him.
