Keane strode to Madame Sin's phone, and got Gest on the wire.

"Gest, can you tell me if Kroner and Chichester are still out of the
hotel?"

Gest's voice came back promptly. "Kroner is here with me now. I guess
Chichester is still at his home on Ocean Boulevard; at any rate he isn't
in the hotel----"

"Ascott!" Beatrice said tensely.

Keane hung up and turned to her.

"The woman--Madame Sin!" Beatrice said, pointing toward the still,
lovely form on the chaise-lounge. "I thought I saw her eyes open a
little--thought I saw her look at you!"

Keane's own eyes went down a bit to veil the sudden glitter in them from
Beatrice.

"Probably you were mistaken," he said easily. "Probably you only thought
you saw her eyelids move.... I'm going to wind this up now, I think. You
go back to your suite, and watch the time. If I'm not back here in two
hours, go with the police to the home of Chichester, the treasurer of
this unlucky resort development. And go fast," he added, in a tone that
slowly drained the blood from Beatrice's anxious face.




_5. Death's Lovely Mask_


Chichester's home sat on a square of lawn between the new boulevard and
the bay shore like a white jewel in the sun. It looked prosperous,
prosaic, serene. But to Keane's eyes, at least, it seemed covered with
the psychic pall that had come to be associated in his mind with the
dreaded Doctor Satan. He walked toward the blandly peaceful-looking new
home with the feeling of one who walks toward a tomb.

"A feeling that might be well founded," he shrugged grimly, as he
reached the porch.

He could feel the short hair at the base of his skull stir a little as
he reached the door of this place he believed to be the latest lair of
the man who was amused to call himself Doctor Satan. And it stirred
still more as he tried the knob.

The door was unlocked.

He looked at it for several minutes. A lock wouldn't have mattered to
Keane, and Satan knew that as well as Keane himself. Nevertheless, to
leave the door invitingly open like this was almost too obliging!

He opened the door and stepped in, bracing himself for instant attack.
But no attack of any kind was forthcoming. The front hall in which he
found himself was deserted. Indeed, the whole house had that curiously
breathless feeling encountered in homes for the moment untenanted.

Down the hall was an open double doorway. Keane stared that way. He
himself could not have told how he knew, but know he did, that beyond
that doorway lay what he had come to find. He walked toward it.

Behind him, the street door opened again, very slowly and cautiously. An
eye was put close to the resultant crack. The eye was dark, exotically
lovely. It fastened on Keane's back.

Keane stared in through the doorway. He was gazing into a library,
dimmed by drawn shades. He entered it, with every nerve-end in his body
silently shrieking of danger.

The street door softly closed after admitting a figure that moved on
soundless feet. A woman, with a face like a pale flower on an exquisite
throat. Madame Sin.

Her face was as serenely lovely as ever. Not by a line had it changed.
And yet, subtly, it had become a mask of beautiful death. Her eyes were
death's dark fires as she moved without a sound down the hall toward the
library. In her tapering hands was the gold-link bag.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the library, Keane stood with beating heart over two stark, still
bodies that lay on the thick carpet near a flat-topped desk. One was
wizened, lank, a little undersized, with dry-looking skin. It was the
body of Chichester. At first it seemed a corpse, but then Keane saw the
chest move with slow, deep breaths, as the breast of the woman back at
the hotel had moved.

But it was not this figure that made Keane's heart thud and his hands
clench. It was the other.

This was a taller figure, lying on its back with hands folded. The hands
were red-gloved. The face was concealed by a red mask. The body was
draped by a red cloak. From the head sprang two little knobs, or
projections, like Lucifer's horns. Doctor Satan himself!

"It's my chance," whispered Keane. "Satan--sending his soul and mind and
spirit from his own shell--into that of others--Madame Sin--Chichester.
Now his body lies here empty! If I killed that----"

Exotically beautiful dark eyes--with death in their loveliness--watched
him from the library doorway as he bent over the red-robed figure.
Sardonic death in lovely eyes!

"No wonder Gest thought that Wilson was killed in the conference room,
just before he could tell of the roulette wheel, as if Doctor Satan had
been there himself! Satan _was_ there! And he was on the roof garden
earlier, and in the roulette room! A trance for the woman, the crowding
of Satan's black spirit into her body--and she becomes Madame Sin, with
Satan peering from her eyes and moving in her mantle of flesh! A trance
for the unfortunate Chichester--and Satan talks with Gest and Kroner as
the Blue Bay treasurer, and can strike down Wilson when he comes to
report! Chichester and Madame Sin--both Doctor Satan--becoming lifeless,
trance-held shells when Satan's soul has left them!"

But here was Satan's physical shell, lying in a coma at his feet, to be
killed at a stroke! His deadly enemy, the enemy of all mankind,
delivered helpless to him!

"But if I do kill the body," Keane whispered, "will I kill the spirit
too, or banish it from the material world so that humanity won't again
be troubled? Satan's spirit, the essential man, is abroad in another
body. If I kill this red-robed body, will it draw the spirit out of
mortal affairs with it? Or would it simply deprive it of its original
housing so that I'd have to seek Satan's soul in body after body, as I
have till now sought him in the flesh in lair after lair? That would
be--horrible!"

He drove away the grim thought. It was probable that with the death of
his body, Doctor Satan in entirety would die, or at least pass out of
mortal knowledge through the gateway called death. And the mechanics of
forcing him through that gateway was to kill the body.

Behind him, Madame Sin crept closer and closer on soundless feet. Her
red lips were set in a still smile. The gold-link purse was extended a
little toward Keane. Her forefinger searched for the movable bar that
changed angles of the queer, metal cage within.

Keane's hand raised to strike. His eyes burned down at the red-clad
figure of the man at his feet, who was mankind's enemy. Behind him,
Madame Sin's finger found the little bar....

It was not till then that Keane felt the psychic difference caused by
the entrance of another into a room that had been deserted save for
himself. Another person would not have felt that difference at all, but
Keane had developed his psychic perceptions as ordinary men exercise and
develop their biceps.

With an inarticulate cry he whirled, and leaped far to the side.

[Illustration: "The wall behind the spot where he had been
disappeared."]


The wall behind the spot where he had been disappeared as the gold-link
bag continued to point that way. The woman, snarling like a tigress,
swung her bag toward Keane in his new position. But Keane was not
waiting. He sprang for her. His hand got her wrist and wrenched to get
the gold-link purse away from her. It turned toward her, back again
toward him, with the little bar moving as her hand was constricted over
the thing in the purse.

It was a woman's body he struggled with. But there was strength in the
fragile flesh beyond the strength of any woman! It took all his steely
power to tear from her grasp the gold-link purse with its enclosed
device. As he got it, he heard the woman's shrill cry of pain and
terror, felt her sag in his arms. And then he heard many voices and
stared around like a sleepwalker who has waked in a spot different from
that in which he had begun his sleep--a comparison so exact that for one
wild moment he thought it must be true!

He was in a familiar room.... Yes, Doctor Grays' room at the Blue Bay
Hotel.

The people around him were familiar.... There was Gest. There were
Kroner and Doctor Grays, and--Beatrice. There were the Blue Bay chief of
police, and two men.
