maggots, stranded upon the earth by the scattering of their soupy broth,
were torn in pieces. The flies who were seized vanished into tiny maws.
The serried ranks of black insects went on.

The tiny clickings of their limbs, the perpetual challenges and
cross-challenges of crossed antennae, the stridulations of the
creatures, all combined to make a high-pitched but deafening din. Now
and then another sound pierced the noises made by the ants themselves. A
cricket, seized by a thousand tiny jaws, uttered cries of agony. The
shrill note of the crickets had grown deeply bass with the increase in
size of the organs that uttered it.

There was a strange contrast between the ground before the advancing
horde and that immediately behind it. Before, a busy world, teeming with
life. Butterflies floating overhead on lazy wings, grubs waxing fat and
huge upon the giant cabbages, crickets eating, great spiders sitting
quietly in their lairs waiting with invincible patience for prey to draw
near their trap doors or fall into their webs, colossal beetles
lumbering heavily through the mushroom forests, seeking food, making
love in monstrous, tragic fashion.

And behind the wide belt of army ants--chaos. The edible mushrooms gone.
The giant cabbages left as mere stumps of unappetizing pulp, the busy
life of the insect world completely wiped out save for the flying
creatures that fluttered helplessly over an utterly changed landscape.
Here and there little bands of stragglers moved busily over the denuded
earth, searching for some fragment of food that might conceivably have
been overlooked by the main body.

Burl was putting forth his last ounce of strength. His limbs trembled,
his breathing was agony, sweat stood out upon his forehead. He ran a
little, naked man with the disjointed fragment of a huge insect's limb
in his hand, running for his insignificant life, running as if his
continued existence among the million tragedies of that single day were
the purpose for which the whole of the universe had been created.

He sped across an open space a hundred yards across. A thicket of
beautifully golden mushrooms (_Agaricus caesareus_) barred his way.
Beyond the mushrooms a range of strangely colored hills began, purple
and green and black and gold, melting into each other, branching off
from each other, inextricably tangled.

They rose to a height of perhaps sixty or seventy feet, and above them a
little grayish haze had gathered. There seemed to be a layer of tenuous
vapor upon their surfaces, which slowly rose and coiled, and gathered
into a tiny cloudlet above their tips.

The hills, themselves, were but masses of fungus, mushrooms and fungoids
of every description, yeasts, "musts," and every form of fungus growth
which had grown within itself and about itself until this great mass of
strangely colored, spongy stuff had gathered in a mass that undulated
unevenly across the level earth for miles.

Burl burst through the golden thicket and attacked the ascent. His feet
sank into the spongy sides of the hillock. Panting, gasping, staggering
from exhaustion, he made his way up the top. He plunged into a little
valley on the farther side, up another slope. For perhaps ten minutes he
forced himself on, then collapsed. He lay, unable to move further, in a
little hollow, his sharp-toothed club still clasped in his hands. Above
him, a bright yellow butterfly with a thirty-foot spread of wing,
fluttered lightly.

He lay motionless, breathing in great gasps, his limbs stubbornly
refusing to lift him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sound of the army ants continued to grow near. At last, above the
crest of the last hillock he had surmounted, two tiny antennae appeared,
then the black glistening head of an army ant, the forerunner of its
horde. It moved deliberately forward, waving its antennae ceaselessly.
It made its way toward Burl, tiny clickings coming from the movements of
its limbs.

A little wisp of tenuous vapor swirled toward the ant, a wisp of the
same vapor that had gathered above the whole range of hills as a thin,
low cloud. It enveloped the insect--and the ant seemed to be attacked by
a strange convulsion. Its legs moved aimlessly. It threw itself
desperately about. If it had been an animal, Burl would have watched
with wondering eyes while it coughed and gasped, but it was an insect
breathing through air-holes in its abdomen. It writhed upon the spongy
fungus growth across which it had been moving.

Burl, lying in an exhausted, panting heap upon the purple mass of
fungus, was conscious of a strange sensation. His body felt strangely
warm. He knew nothing of fire or the heat of the sun, and the only
sensation of warmth he had ever known was that caused when the members
of his tribe had huddled together in their hiding place when the damp
chill of the night had touched their soft-skinned bodies. Then the heat
of their breaths and their bodies had kept out the chill.

This heat that Burl now felt was a hotter, fiercer heat. He moved his
body with a tremendous effort, and for a moment the fungus was cool and
soft beneath him. Then, slowly, the sensation of heat began again, and
increased until Burl's skin was red and inflamed from the irritation.

The thin and tenuous vapor, too, made Burl's lungs smart and his eyes
water. He was breathing in great, choking gasps, but the period of
rest--short as it was--had enabled him to rise and stagger on. He
crawled painfully to the top of the slope, and looked back.

The hill-crest on which he stood was higher than any of those he had
passed in his painful run, and he could see clearly the whole of the
purple range. Where he was, he was near the farther edge of the range,
which was here perhaps half a mile wide.

It was a ceaseless, undulating mass of hills and hollows, ridges and
spurs, all of them colored, purple and brown and golden-yellow, deepest
black and dingy white. And from the tips of most of the pointed hills
little wisps of vapor rose up.

A thin, dark cloud had gathered overhead. Burl could look to the right
and left, and see the hills fading into the distance, growing fainter as
the haze above them seemed to grow thicker. He saw, too, the advancing
cohorts of the army ants, creeping over the tangled mass of fungus
growth. They seemed to be feeding as they went, upon the fungus that had
gathered into these incredible monstrosities.

The hills were living. They were not upheavals of the ground, they were
festering heaps of insanely growing, festering mushrooms and fungus.
Upon most of them a purple mould had spread itself so that they seemed a
range of purple hills, but here and there patches of other vivid colors
showed, and there was a large hill whose whole side was a brilliant
golden hue. Another had tiny bright red spots of a strange and malignant
mushroom whose properties Burl did not know, scattered all over the
purple with which it was covered.

Burl leaned heavily upon his club and watched dully. He could run no
more. The army ants were spreading everywhere over the mass of fungus.
They would reach him soon.

Far to the right the vapor thickened. A column of smoke arose. What Burl
did not know and would never know was that far down in the interior of
that compressed mass of fungus, slow oxidization had been going on. The
temperature of the interior had been raised. In the darkness and the
dampness deep down in the hills, spontaneous combustion had begun.

Just as the vast piles of coal the railroad companies of thirty thousand
years before had gathered together sometimes began to burn fiercely in
their interiors, and just as the farmers' piles of damp straw suddenly
burst into fierce flames from no cause, so these huge piles of
tinder-like mushrooms had been burning slowly within themselves.

There had been no flames, because the surface remained intact and nearly
air-tight. But when the army ants began to tear at the edible surfaces
despite the heat they encountered, fresh air found its way to the
smouldering masses of fungus. The slow combustion became rapid
combustion. The dull heat became fierce flames. The slow trickle of thin
smoke became a huge column of thick, choking, acrid stuff that set the
army ants that breathed it into spasms of convulsive writhing.

From a dozen points the flames burst out. A dozen or more columns of
blinding smoke rose to the heavens. A pall of fume-laden smoke gathered
above the range of purple hills, while Burl watched apathetically. And
the serried ranks of army ants marched on to the widening furnaces that
awaited them.

They had recoiled from the river, because their instinct had warned
them. Thirty thousand years without danger from fire, however, had let
their racial fear of fire die out. They marched into the blazing
orifices they had opened in the hills, snapping with their mandibles at
the leaping flames, springing at the glowing tinder.

       *       *       *       *       *

The blazing area widened, as the purple surface was undermined and fell
in. Burl watched the phenomenon without comprehension and even without
thankfulness. He stood, panting more and more slowly, breathing more and
more easily, until the glow from the approaching flames reddened his
skin and the acrid smoke made tears flow from his eyes.

Then he retreated slowly, leaning on his club and looking back. The
black wave of the army ants was sweeping into the fire, sweeping into
the incredible heat of that carbonized material burning with an open
flame. At last there were only the little bodies of stragglers from the
great ant-army, scurrying here and there over the ground their comrades
had denuded of all living things. The bodies of the main army had
vanished--burnt to crisp ashes in the furnace of the hills.

There had been agony in that flame, dreadful agony such as no man would
like to dwell upon. The insane courage of the ants, attacking with their
horny jaws the burning masses of fungus, rolling over and over with a
flaming missile clutched in their mandibles, sounding their shrill war
cry while cries of agony came from them--blinded, their antennae burnt
off, their lidless eyes scorched by the licking flames, yet going madly
forward on flaming feet to attack, ever attack this unknown and
unknowable enemy.

Burl made his way slowly over the hills. Twice he saw small bodies of
the army ants. They had passed between the widening surfaces their
comrades had opened, and they were feeding voraciously upon the hills
they trod on. Once Burl was spied, and a shrill war cry was sounded, but
he moved on, and the ants were busily eating. A single ant rushed toward
him. Burl brought down his club, and a writhing body remained to be
eaten later by its comrades when they came upon it.

Again night fell. The skies grew red in the west, though the sun did not
shine through the ever present cloud bank. Darkness spread across the
sky. Utter blackness fell over the whole mad world, save where the
luminous mushrooms shed their pale light upon the ground and fireflies
the length of Burl's arm shed their fitful gleams upon an earth of
fungus growths and monstrous insects.

Burl made his way across the range of mushroom hills, picking his path
with his large blue eyes whose pupils expanded to great size. Slowly,
from the sky, now a drop and then a drop, now a drop and then a drop,
the nightly rain that would continue until daybreak began.

Burl found the ground hard beneath his feet. He listened keenly for
sounds of danger. Something rustled heavily in a thicket of mushrooms a
hundred yards away. There were sounds of preening, and of delicate feet
placed lightly here and there upon the ground. Then the throbbing beat
of huge wings began suddenly, and a body took to the air.

A fierce, down-coming current of air smote Burl, and he looked upward in
time to catch the outline of a huge body--a moth--as it passed above
him. He turned to watch the line of its flight, and saw a strange glow
in the sky behind him. The mushroom hills were still burning.

He crouched beneath a squat toadstool and waited for the dawn, his club
held tightly in his hands, and his ears alert for any sound of danger.
The slow-dropping, sodden rain kept on. It fell with irregular, drumlike
beats upon the tough top of the toadstool under which he had taken
refuge.

Slowly, slowly, the sodden rainfall continued. Drop by drop, all the
night long, the warm pellets of liquid came from the sky. They boomed
upon the hollow heads of the toadstools, and splashed into the steaming
pools that lay festering all over the fungus-covered earth.

And all the night long the great fires grew and spread in the mass of
already half-carbonized mushroom. The flare at the horizon grew brighter
and nearer. Burl, naked and hiding beneath a huge mushroom, watched it
grow near him with wide eyes, wondering what this thing was. He had
never seen a flame before.

The overhanging clouds were brightened by the flames. Over a stretch at
least a dozen miles in length and from half a mile to three miles
across, seething furnaces sent columns of dense smoke up to the roof of
clouds, luminous from the glow below them, and spreading out and forming
an intermediate layer below the cloudbanks.

It was like the glow of all the many lights of a vast city thrown
against the sky--but the last great city had moulded into fungus-covered
rubbish thirty thousand years before. Like the flitting of airplanes
above a populous city, too, was the flitting of fascinated creatures
above the glow.

       *       *       *       *       *

Moths and great flying beetles, gigantic gnats and midges grown huge
with the passing of time, they fluttered and danced the dance of death
above the flames. As the fire grew nearer to Burl, he could see them.

Colossal, delicately formed creatures swooped above the strange blaze.
Moths with their riotously colored wings of thirty-foot spread beat the
air with mighty strokes, and their huge eyes glowed like carbuncles as
they stared with the frenzied gaze of intoxicated devotees into the
glowing flames below them.

Burl saw a great peacock moth soaring above the burning mushroom hills.
Its wings were all of forty feet across, and fluttered like gigantic
sails as the moth gazed down at the flaming furnace below. The separate
flames had united, now, and a single sheet of white-hot burning stuff
spread across the country for miles, sending up its clouds of smoke, in
which and through which the fascinated creatures flew.

Feathery antennae of the finest lace spread out before the head of the
peacock moth, and its body was softest, richest velvet. A ring of
