In other words, Jupiter is a striped or banded planet, the bands lying
along the direction of turning. These bands are coloured in varying tints,
and the planet rotates very rapidly, for the details in the bands pass
quickly from one limb to the other. And not only is the speed of rotation
of the whole very rapid--Jupiter turns about its axis in a little less
than ten hours, so that a particle at its equator moves through 466 miles
in each minute--but the various items that form the bands rotate in
different times. They may also alter their form and their colour. Jupiter
seems, then, to be a planet with a great and rapidly changing atmosphere
that extends above a shoreless sea formed of some liquified substance or
substances--the whole in a state of flux.

But if we turn back to the Table, we see that Jupiter at its mean distance
from the Sun is 5.2 times that of the Earth; that is to say, it receives
only 1/27th of the light and heat that we receive. But in Chapter VIII, we
learnt from Mars that as this receives only 3/7ths of the Earth's light
and heat, its mean temperature would sink to -30 deg.C.; the Earth's being
16 deg.C. Mars is therefore almost always a frozen planet; frozen except on
its mere surface when this is exposed to the full rays of the Sun. No sea
there would ever be melted to a depth of more than a few inches, even at
noonday in midsummer. And yet Mars has at least ten times the advantages
of Jupiter. Jupiter, then, must be a frozen planet through and through; no
liquid of any sort can exist on its surface; no vapour of any substance
can exist in its atmosphere. It must be icebound even at its summer
noonday.

Yet, from the description given by Prof. Keeler, it is manifestly not so;
and another item in the Table emphasizes that it cannot be so. The density
of the Sun is 1.4 that of water, Jupiter's is 1.33, showing that but a
very small proportion (if any) of its bulk can be solid; the rest must be
vaporous, or at least fluid. How then can we reconcile these
inconsistencies?

It is in the dimensions of Jupiter that we find the answer. The mass of
the planet is 317 times that of the Earth; it is indeed nearly three times
as great as that of all the other planets put together. But the
aggregation of so vast an amount of material is of itself a source of
heat; the chief source at the present time of the enormous output of heat
from the Sun is ascribed to its gradual contraction; the slow falling of
its substance, if we may so express it, a little nearer to its centre. The
great mass of Jupiter points to its inherent store of heat being much
greater than that of any other planet. And of two bodies equally hot, the
larger must cool more slowly than the smaller. If, therefore, all the
members of the solar system had at one and the same moment possessed the
same surface temperature, that equality would have ceased directly they
began to radiate their heat into space; the temperature of the smaller
bodies falling more rapidly than those of the larger. This is another
example of the principle that has already been noted, that the properties
of a small world are not those of a large world divided by a constant
factor. It is not possible to conceive a model of the solar system in
which all the significant factors should be true to the same scale. If the
diameters and distances were all made on a one-tenth scale, the surfaces
would be one-hundredth of reality, the volumes one-thousandth.

But a radiating body radiates from its surface, while the store of heat
from which that radiation is kept up is supplied by its volume. It
follows, therefore, that a large and heavy world must differ from a small
light world, not merely in scale, but also in kind.

The surface of a world is all that we see of it; it is, therefore, very
commonly all that we consider. But unseen, and hence often unconsidered,
beneath the surface lies its substance or mass, and it is this that
determines the state and condition of the surface; it is the underlying
power. Two men may be contending in a financial struggle; to the eye they
may look alike, equally prosperous; both may have the same amount of money
actually in their pockets; but the one has nothing else, the other has a
great banking account and vast investments, and is, in fact, a
millionaire; and it is his unseen power and resources that will make
themselves felt.

Jupiter therefore introduces us to a new factor in world-condition; not
all its heat is derived from the Sun; much is inherent to it. And though
it is not possible at present to say that the mass of Jupiter being so
much its inherent heat must be this or that quantity as a function of that
mass, yet in general, and neglecting other considerations, we can say that
of two worlds the one with the greater mass will be that with the higher
inherent temperature. This factor of inherent temperature was one that did
not require to be noticed in dealing with the Moon, or Venus, or Mars, for
these and all the planets yet noticed are less in size, surface, volume,
and mass than the Earth, and hence possess less inherent heat. It is only
now that the greater planets are being considered that the question of a
source of heat, other than the Sun, can arise.

But the evidence of such heat on Jupiter is not to be disputed. The albedo
or reflective index of Jupiter has been put by the late Prof. G. Bond, of
Harvard College Observatory, as higher than unity; in other words, that it
emits more light than it receives. This is now generally regarded as an
excessive estimate, but the albedo of the disc as a whole cannot be put
lower than 0.72, or about that of white paper. But many of the "belts" or
dark regions are of a dull copper tint, and the polar caps are dusky, so
that Bond's estimate must be realized for the most brilliant "zones," as
the brighter regions are called; certainly for the whitest of the white
spots.

No direct evidence of inherent luminosity has been obtained, for the
satellites disappear entirely in eclipse. But though their shadows in
transit appear very dark, it is clear that they are not absolutely black,
since sometimes such a shadow is not distinguishable in darkness from the
satellite that casts it; a delicate proof that the background on which it
falls has some intrinsic luminosity.

Unless there is the counteracting effect of a high temperature, the
atmosphere of Jupiter would have a pressure at the surface of 104 lb. to
the square inch, and the level of half pressure be attained at a mile and
a quarter; the reverse condition to that on Mars would obtain, and the
atmosphere of Jupiter would be much denser and much shallower than that of
the Earth. Denser it probably is; shallower it cannot be, for the great
white spots, each often five or six thousand miles in diameter, that range
themselves at times along the equatorial regions till they look like the
portholes of a ship, evidently rise from depths great even as compared
with their size. But it is only by intense heat that the effect of the
great mass of Jupiter in constricting its atmosphere within shallow depths
can be overcome.

Again, the extraordinary lightness of the planet, so little above the
density of water, points in the same direction. So, not less unmistakably,
do the magnitude and rapidity of the atmospheric movements. The clouds and
storms of our own atmosphere are worked by solar heat; solar heat it is
that draws up the vapours and provides the chief part of the energy
manifested in the speed and strength of the air-current. But solar heat
can only give 1/27th the amount of that energy at the distance of Jupiter,
so that, if they were entirely dependent on solar radiation, the winds of
Jupiter should be very feeble.

Further, the difference of presentment due to the difference of latitude
is a fruitful cause of inequalities of temperature and pressure in the
terrestrial atmosphere. But as a degree of latitude on Jupiter is eleven
times as wide as on the Earth, such inequalities connected with a given
difference in latitude are spread over eleven times the distance that they
would be on the Earth, and are, therefore, so much the less pronounced.
Yet, across a gulf of 400 millions of miles we can clearly discern the
bright zones of Jupiter now narrowing down and constricting the red belts,
now thrust apart by them, and can detect changes taking place in an hour
of time over areas equal to that of a terrestrial hemisphere.

A notable peculiarity of Jupiter is found in the proper motions of its
spots. Many of the white spots are exceedingly swift, giving a rotation
period of 9h. 50m. while the equatorial belt in general gives a period 5m.
longer; so that in 119 rotations (nearly 49 days) a white spot will have
passed entirely round the belt, gaining upon it at a rate of nearly 240
miles an hour.

The most famous of all the markings in Jupiter is the Great Red Spot,
which became conspicuous in 1878, since when the spot itself, or at least
the nest in which it lay, has always been visible. It has been identified
with a great red spot observed by Hooke and Cassini in 1664-6, that
appeared and vanished again eight times between 1665 and 1708. It
therefore has had a history practically as long as our telescopic
knowledge of the planet, and may be looked upon as in some sort a
permanent feature. Yet that it is not in the nature of a portion of a
solid crust is clear. It occupies on Jupiter much the position and
relative area of Australia on the Earth, but whereas Australia of
necessity rotates in one piece with all the other continents, the Great
Red Spot has a rotation period which is neither that of the equatorial
belt, nor of the quickly moving white spots, and is not itself stable. An
"Australia on the loose" is impossible, even unthinkable here, but the
Great Red Spot, for all its long duration, is mobile and inconstant, and
is therefore no portion of a solid permanent crust.

The giant planet Jupiter, therefore, offers us an example of what we may
call a "semi-sun"; a world still bubbling with tremendous energies of its
own, still pulsing with its own inherent heat, still without a solid
crust; probably without a solid nucleus, liquid or vaporous throughout.
Whatever the future may hold for such an orb, it is clearly no world for
habitation at present. Full of colour, and movement, and change as it is,
it lacks the Earth's "gloom of iron substance," which is necessary, no
less than its veiling by the plant, as a stage for "the passion and
perishing of mankind."

But if Jupiter be a semi-Sun, still a source of heat, perhaps even of
light, can it yield the means of life to its satellites? For Jupiter is
sun-like, not merely in its own condition, but also in that it is the
centre and ruler of a system of its own. We know already of eight
satellites revolving round it.

Of these eight, only four--the four discovered by Galileo, in the first
days of his possession of a telescope--need be considered; the other four
are of the same order of size as the asteroids, and are indeed much
smaller than Ceres.

But the Galilean satellites are of a higher rank. Europa, the smallest, is
in size a twin to the Moon; Callisto, the outermost, is almost exactly the
size of Mercury; Io, the innermost, is midway between the two in its
dimensions. But Ganymede, the largest, is almost comparable with Mars, its
diameter being 0.45 that of the Earth instead of the 0.53 of Mars.

But the Moon, Mercury, and Mars have all been shown, on the ground of
their small size, to be worlds unfit for habitation; the satellites of
Jupiter are, therefore, all rejected on the same score. Nor can the
greater nearness of their immediate primary compensate for their
remoteness from the Sun. It is true that Jupiter presents to Ganymede a
disc with more than 200 times the apparent area that the Sun presents to
the Earth, but to make up for the falling-off of the solar radiation, each
unit of this area should radiate about 1/250th as much heat as each unit
of the Sun's surface. In other words, the absolute surface temperature of
Jupiter should be 1/4th that of the Sun, or about 1550 deg. C., and this is
higher than can be admitted. The Sun and Jupiter together cannot put
Ganymede in as favourable a position as Mars, much less as favourable as
the Earth.

The case of Jupiter carries with it those of Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
All three, from their high albedoes and low densities, are still in a
vaporous condition; still in some sort, semi-Suns; sources of a certain
amount of heat, and not recipients merely. The days are yet far distant
when a solid crust can form on any one of them, and the water condense
from the steamy atmosphere to form oceans, seas, and rivers. Not till
then, if at all, when water as a liquid, water that flows, is present, can
life begin to appear and enter on its long course of change.




CHAPTER XI

WHEN THE MAJOR PLANETS COOL


The question has been asked: "It is evident that life cannot exist at the
present time on the outer planets, since they are in a highly heated and
quasi-solar condition; but when they cool down, as cool they must, and a
solid crust is formed, may not a time come when they will be habitable? It
seems impossible to think that worlds so beautiful to our eyes and so vast
in scale are destined never to be peopled by intelligent beings."

It is clearly difficult to answer satisfactorily a question that requires
so deep a plunge into the recesses of the unknown future; yet, so far as
our knowledge goes, there is no reason to think that Jupiter will be more
habitable then than it is now. The difficulty of the small supply of light
and heat received from the Sun would apparently still remain, if indeed,
the cooling of the Sun itself would not increase it. We do not know of any
means by which our Sun could so increase its radiation as to supply to
Jupiter from 25 to 30 times as much heat as it now receives, and this
would be necessary to place it in the same favoured condition as the
Earth. If so great a change were to take place in the Sun, life would be
scorched out of existence on all planets nearer than Jupiter, and,
similarly, if the solar emission were increased to meet the necessities of
Uranus or Neptune, even Jupiter would fall a victim.

But we may consider it as a conceivable case that a planet of the exact
dimensions of Jupiter may be revolving in an annual period of the same
length as his, round some star that is capable of affording it adequate
nourishment; and so with the three other giant planets. The actual Jupiter
and Saturn of the solar system have, so far as we can tell, neither
present nor future as habitable worlds, but we can consider what would be
the case of imaginary bodies of similar dimensions in systems where the
supply of heat would be sufficient. Or we can neglect the question of
temperature altogether, as we did at first in the case of Mars.

All the four planets must shrink much in volume before their
solidification will take place. Their average density at present but
little exceeds that of water; indeed, Saturn is not so dense as water; yet
we must suppose that the same elements are in general common to the Earth
and to them all. If we assume, then, that the four planets all cool to the
point of solidification, their densities must be much increased, and their
volumes correspondingly diminished. Since all four greatly exceed the
Earth in mass, it is but natural to expect that, when they have assumed
the terrestrial condition, they will be more closely compacted than the
Earth, and their densities in consequence will be greater. It will,
however, be simpler if we assume exactly the same density for them as for
the Earth. Jupiter will then have shrunk to about one-fourth of its
present volume, and the statistics for the four planets will run as in the
following Table:

STATISTICS OF THE FOUR OUTER PLANETS IF WITH THE SAME DENSITY AS THE EARTH

  PROPORTIONS OF THE PLANETS:--
                                       Uranus  Neptune  Saturn  Jupiter
    Diameter in miles                  19300    20400    36000   54000
      do                [Symbol] = 1    2.44     2.57     4.56    6.82
    Surface,            [Symbol] = 1    6.0      6.6     20.8    46.6
    Mass and Volume,    [Symbol] = 1   14.6     17.0     94.8   317.7
    Gravity at surface, [Symbol] = 1    2.44     2.57     4.56    6.82
  Rate of Fall, Feet in
    the First Second                   39.2     41.3     73.3   109.7

  ATMOSPHERE, assuming the
  total mass of the atmosphere
  to be proportional to
  the mass of the planet:--

  Pressure at the surface in lb.
    per square inch                    88.2     97.0    305.8   685.0
  Pressure at the surface in
    "atmospheres"                       6.0      6.6     20.8    46.6
  Level of half-pressure in miles       1.37     1.30     0.73    0.49
  Boiling point of water at
    surface                            127 deg.C    129 deg.C    148 deg.C   164 deg.C

Jupiter offers two peculiarities. In its shrunken condition, its diameter,
instead of being eleven times that of the Earth, will be not quite seven,
and the force of gravity at the surface will be greater than that of the
Earth in the same proportion. A man who here weighs 150 lb. will there
weigh over 1000 lb.; and the muscular effort of movement will be increased
in the same ratio. The athlete who here can clear a height 5 ft. 8 in.
will there, with like pains, surmount 10 inches; and other efforts will be
in the same proportion. The atmosphere, supposing it to be in proportion
to the mass of Jupiter, will exercise a pressure of 46-1/2 "atmospheres,"
or more than 680 lb., to the square inch. Following on this enormous
pressure at the surface would be the rapidity with which the atmosphere
would thin out in the upward direction. The level of half-pressure would
be attained by ascending less than half a mile in height; that is to say,
there would be a difference of pressure of 340 lb. on the square inch from
that experienced at the sea-level. We know from the fact that fishes live
at enormous depths in the ocean, that living organisms can be constructed
to endure great pressures, but they are not constructed to endure great
alterations of pressure. The deep-sea fishes are as instantly killed by
being brought up to the surface, as the surface fishes or the land animals
would be if they were plunged into the depths. And it is clear that on
Jupiter a low range of hills that on the Earth would be considered only
an easy climb, would be an impassable barrier, not only from the immense
exertion of mounting it, but chiefly from the unendurable change of
pressure which the ascent would involve.

The sevenfold gravity of Jupiter, taken in connection with this enormous
atmospheric pressure, would tend to make the meteorological disturbances
of the planet violent far beyond anything of which the Earth can furnish
an example. The atmosphere would possess a high viscosity, and differences
in condition, pressure and saturation would tend to accumulate, until at
length the balance would be restored with explosive suddenness and force.
Here our most violent tornadoes may reach a speed of 100 miles an hour; on
Jupiter, gales of five or six times that velocity would be common. We
cannot conceive that living organisms would be able to grow, flourish and
multiply where the conditions were so cataclysmic.

This difficulty must always exist where the planet is great in mass, and
the force of gravity high at the surface. The case of Saturn is not so
extreme as that of Jupiter, though it is probably sufficiently severe to
exclude it from the ranks of worlds that could ever be dwelt in. The
atmospheric pressure would be about 21 "atmospheres," or more than 300 lb.
on the square inch. The level of half-pressure would be reached at about
three-quarters of a mile, and the force of gravity be nearly 4-1/2 times
that of the Earth.

But the serious condition for Saturn would come from that feature which
renders it by far the most attractive of all the planets seen in the
telescope, the presence of the wonderful Ring system.

To us, viewing Saturn from afar, and from practically the same direction
as the Sun, the Rings are seen lit up; but to a dweller on Saturn, the
Rings during the day are between his world and the Sun, and hence turn
their dark side toward him. More than that, the telescope shows us that
the Rings cast a shadow on the planet; in other words, they eclipse part
of it; and this shadow changes its position with the progress of the
Saturnian year. Proctor computed that if the Rings were a hundred miles in
thickness, the equator would suffer, in consequence, total eclipse for
nearly ten days at each equinox, and partial eclipse for about forty days
more. Moving away from the equator, each higher latitude would have a
longer and longer period of eclipse in the winter half of its year; the
higher the latitude, the later after the autumnal equinox the eclipse
would begin, and the longer it would last, until about latitude 40 deg. was
reached. Here the eclipses would begin nearly three terrestrial years
after the time of the autumnal equinox. At first the Sun would be eclipsed
only in the morning and evening of each day, but the length of the daily
eclipse would increase, until the Sun was hidden the whole day long. This
period of total eclipse would last for about 6 years 8 months, terrestrial
reckoning, or with the periods of partial eclipse, 8 years and nearly 10
months. Whatever the efficiency of the Sun that afforded light and heat to
such a planet, it is clear that such eclipses must be fatal to life in two
ways: light and heat would be cut off from wide regions of the planet for
long periods of time, and terrible meteorological convulsions must follow
in the train. Here on the Earth, though a total eclipse generally lasts
only two or three minutes, the atmospheric disturbance is perceptible, and
the fall of temperature very marked, and it does not require much
reflection to see that the analogous disturbance in an atmosphere twenty
times as dense must be terrific indeed during an eclipse that lasts not a
few minutes only, but for more than six of our years.

The case of Uranus introduces us to another class of conditions fatal to
habitability. The equator of Jupiter is inclined only 3 deg. to the plane of
its orbit; the difference in its seasons is, therefore, almost
imperceptible; there is hardly any alteration in the incidence of the
solar rays; it is, as if on the Earth, the height of the Sun at noon in
mid-winter were what it actually is on the 14th of March, and its height
at midsummer the same as we observe on March 28. The inclination of the
equator of Saturn is considerably greater than that of Mars or the Earth,
so that its seasons are more pronounced, but not to an extent that would
introduce any radical difference. But for Uranus, the inclination of the
equator to the plane of the orbit is 82 deg. If this were the case for the
Earth, the noonday sun for London would be, at the spring equinox, 38-1/2 deg.
high as at present, but its altitude day by day would increase with great
rapidity, and before the end of April, the Sun at noon would be right in
the zenith, and 13 deg. above the horizon at midnight. At midsummer, indeed,
it would be only 59 deg. high at noonday, but it would be north of the zenith
instead of south, and at technical midnight, it would still be 44 deg. in
altitude, thus moving round in a very small circle, only 15 deg. in diameter.
From about April 18 to August 25--that is to say, for 129 days--the Sun
would never set, and unlike the summer day of our own polar regions now,
wherein the Sun, though always present, is always low down in the sky, for
much of that period it would pass the meridian quite close to the zenith.

As the year of Uranus is 84 times the length of our year, the London of
Uranus would have to endure not far short of 30 years continuous
scorching.

And the winter would be as long; the perpetual day of summer would be
replaced by a night as enduring. More than 29 years of unbroken darkness,
of unmitigated cold, cannot possibly ever consist with the conditions
necessary for life upon a planet. Whatever the brightness of the imagined
sun of Uranus, if for 29 years at a time that sun were below the horizon,
the water on the planet must be congealed, and during the 29 years of
unbroken day all the water would be as certainly evaporated.

Thus, though Uranus is not burdened by the enormous mass of Jupiter, nor
overshadowed, like Saturn, by a system of rings, the extraordinary
inclination of its axis introduces a condition which is as fatal to it, as
a world to dwell in, as any of the disabilities of the other planets.

It is curious that these four outer planets, that resemble each other so
strikingly in many of their conditions--in their vast size, high albedo,
low density, and vaporous envelopes, that show, in their spectra, not
merely the lines of reflected sunlight, but also special lines due to
their own atmospheres (the chief of these being common to all the four
planets)--should yet, in the inclination of their axes to the plane of
their orbits, display every possible variety. The axis of Jupiter is
almost normal to its orbit, that of Uranus lies almost in the plane of its
orbit. The axes of Saturn and Neptune have a mean inclination, but it
would appear that the rotation of Neptune is in the reverse direction to
that of planets in general, so that the true inclination is usually taken
as being the complement of the observed angle, as if the axis were turned
right over. It is uncertain whether this would have any important effect
upon the habitability of the planet, but it supplies the fourth possible
case for the position of the axis.




CHAPTER XII

THE FINAL QUESTION


In passing in review the various members of the solar system, it has been
seen that there are many conditions that have to be fulfilled before a
planet can be regarded as the possible abode of life, because there are
many conditions necessary in order that water may exist on its surface in
the liquid state. The size and mass of the planet are restricted within
quite narrow limits; and a world much larger or much smaller than our own
is necessarily excluded. The supply of light and heat received from the
Sun must not fall much below that received by the Earth, nor greatly
exceed it; in other words, the distance of the planet from its Sun is
somewhat precisely fixed, since the light and heat vary inversely not as
the distance, but as its square. Of course, in different systems, with
suns of different power, the most favourable distance will not be the same
in each; but in any system there will be one most advantageous distance,
and no great departure from it will be possible. This condition further
implies that the planetary orbits must be nearly circular; pronounced
eccentricity, such as the orbits of even our short-period comets display,
would be fatal to the persistence of water in the liquid state, and hence
to the continuance of life. A wide discordance between the planes of the
planet's equator and of its orbit, by rendering the seasons extravagantly
diverse, would act as prejudicially as an eccentric orbit, and a rotation
period equal to that of revolution would mean that one hemisphere was
eternally frozen while the other was exposed to perpetual heat.

It follows that in any given system there can be at most only one or two
planets upon which life can find a home, and this only where the right
conditions of size and mass, of rotation period, inclination of axis, and
shape of orbit, all co-exist in a globe at the proper distance. But the
type of system offered by our Sun and his planets is not the only one that
exists. A very large proportion of stars are binaries--two suns revolve
round their common centre of gravity. In many cases the two suns are
separable in the telescope, and their relative movements can be measured;
in other cases, termed "spectroscopic binaries," we only learn that a star
which appears absolutely single has two components from the evidence of
its spectrum; the spectroscope revealing two sets of lines that vibrate to
and fro with respect to each other. Yet, again, a third class of double
stars has made itself known in the "Algol variables." The optical double
