center punch mark in the steam chest, and the other end in the center
punch mark in the slide spindle, the valve is in its proper position
when the crank is on the corresponding dead center. This plan is a
very old one and possesses the advantage that the valve may be set
without seeing it, that is to say, with the steam chest cover on. If
the length of the piece of wire measured direct from point to point is
known, the valve may be set when the engine is upon the road without
taking off the steam chest cover. The center punch mark upon the steam
chest should, however, always be placed in about the same spot, so as
to avoid mistakes in case of there being other similar marks upon the
chest. It should always be made deep, so as not to get filled up with
paint and be difficult to find. In course of time the mark upon the
slide valve spindle is apt to disappear from the wear of the spindle,
hence the center punch with which it is made should have a long
conical point. To mark the position of the eccentric upon the axle,
it is an excellent plan, after the eccentrics are finally adjusted,
to take a chisel with the cutting end ground to the form of a fiddle
drill, one cutting edge being at a right angle to the other. The
chisel must be held so that while one edge rests upon the axle, the
other edge will bear against the radial face of the eccentric. A sharp
blow with a hammer upon the chisel-head will make a clean indented cut
upon the axle and the eccentric, the two cuts exactly meeting at their
junction and denoting the position of the eccentrics. In setting the
valves of inside cylinder locomotives, the back ports being out of
sight, the amount of lead is ascertained by making a wooden wedge
about three inches long, a thirty-second of an inch thick at one end
and three eighths of an inch thick at the other end. The faces of this
wedge are chalked, and the lead is measured by inserting it between
the edge of the valve and the edge of the port until its thickness
just fills the space, and then moving it edgeways so that the valve
and port edges will just mark it. By measuring the thickness of the
wedge at the mark, the amount of lead is ascertained. After the valves
are set, it is still desirable to mark the position by center
punch marks upon the outside of the steam chests and upon the valve
spindles, as already described.

If an eccentric should slip when the engine is upon the road,
and there are no marks whereby to readjust them, it may be done
approximately as follows: Put the reverse lever in the end notch of
the forward gear, then place the crank as nearly on a dead center as
the eye will direct, and open both the cylinder cocks, then disconnect
the slide valve spindle from the rocker arm, and move the valve
spindle until the opening of the port corresponding to the dead center
on which the crank stands will be shown by steam blowing through the
cylinder cock, the throttle valve being opened a trifle. The position
of the valve being thus determined, the eccentric must be moved upon
the shaft until the valve spindle will connect with the rocker arm
without being moved at all. The throttle valve should be very slightly
opened, otherwise so much steam will be admitted into the cylinder
that it will pass through any leak in the piston and blow through
both cylinder cocks before there is time to ascertain which cock gives
first exit to the steam.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW STEAMER.


A new steamer for the Mallory line, between New York and Texas, was
lately launched from the yard of Roach & Co., Chester, Pa., 2,200 tons
burden. Principal dimensions as follows: Length over all, 239 feet 7
inches; beam (moulded), 34 feet; depth from the base to the spar deck
beams, 18 feet 21/2 inches; depth of hold, 16 feet 51/2 inches; diameter
of propeller (Hirsch's patent-four blades), 11 feet 6 inches. She
is to be provided with compound engines, having cylinders 24 and 44
inches in diameter, with a stroke of 44 inches, and two return tubular
boilers 10 feet long, 10 feet 3 inches wide, and 8 feet 6 inches high.
Aft are compartments capable of holding 80 tons of water, for the
purpose of depressing the stern before and after crossing the bar at
Corpus Christi. Her low draught is 71/2 feet; speed, 14 knots.

       *       *       *       *       *




A TIN-CAN TELEPHONE.


In Professor Bell's telephone a plate of sheet iron is made to vibrate
by means of the electrical current, something after the manner of
the skin of a drumhead. In a recent improvement by Mr. G. B. Havens,
Louisville, Ky., the electrical wires are wrapped around a common tin
fruit can. By means of tin cans at each end, sounds, it is said, were
sent over 92 miles of wire, and included several pieces of music.

       *       *       *       *       *




MR. HOTCHKISS, an American inventor, whose improved revolving cannon
we illustrated some time since, has received intimation that his
system has been approved by the French Government, and that they have
decided to adopt his cannon.

       *       *       *       *       *




COLLENDER'S IMPROVED BILLIARD TABLE.


In the accompanying engravings, we illustrate two important
improvements in the construction of billiard tables, which have
recently been devised by Mr. H. W. Collender, the well known billiard
table manufacturer of this city. The first, which is represented in
Fig. 1, relates to the construction of the bed-supporting frame, and
aims to render the same stronger while cheapening its manufacture.
In putting together the body and framework of the table, the usual
practice is to cut away the stock of the cross beam and longitudinal
beam, and halve them together. Longitudinal grooves are also formed on
the inner surface of the side and "broad rails," to accommodate tenons
on the ends of the cross beams; and the latter are secured in place
by bolts fastening their ends to the broad rails. Mr. Collender claims
that, by this mode of construction, not only are the cross beams
weakened by being halved together, but the broad rails are also
weakened by the cutting away of this stock near the middle to effect
the framing into them of the ends of the cross beams.

[Illustration: Fig 1, billiard table support frame]

From Fig. 1, it will be seen that the cross beam, A, is combined with
the side broad rails in the following manner: Upon the inner face of
each broad rail is secured a cast iron socket piece, B, into which
fits one end of the cross beam, A. From said beam the bolt, C, passes
through the shoe, B, and is secured by a nut, D, let into the stock of
the broad rail. The shoe, B, has lugs which enter the broad rail; and
the aperture in it, through which the bolt passes, is made oblong to
admit of the drawing of the parts together after the insertion of the
bolt. Upon the sides of the cross beam near the middle, and directly
opposite each other, are two shoes, E; these have no bolt holes. In
them are placed the adjacent ends of the longitudinal beams, F, the
other extremities of which are seated in shoes on the broad rails.
The shoes, E, have their lugs of such a length, compared with the
thickness of cross beam, A, that when put in place on said beam said
lugs will come together. The advantage of this is that, should the
beam, A, shrink in width, the shoes on each side of it will still
maintain their proper relation to form immovable abutments for the
ends of pieces, F. This construction allows of shorter stuff being
used in the manufacture, and renders the framework stronger.

[Illustration: Figure 2, billiard table frame corner]

In Fig. 2 is illustrated a new method of forming the corners of the
table. Hitherto it has been customary to use corner blocks, of various
sizes according to the dimensions of the table, located one at each
corner. Into these the broad rails were framed and secured. To this
arrangement Mr. Collender adduces a long category of objections, based
on the possibility of the weight of the bed being thrown on these
blocks in case of shrinkage of the frame, on the fact that the corner
of the table bed must necessarily be left without any support where
it extends over the upper end of the corner block, and also that in
a bevel table, in which the area of the top of the corner block is
unavoidably much greater than that of the top of the corner block of
a vertical-sided table, a large portion of the table bed will be left
without any support.

The new device consists of a cast iron union plate, G, which is bolted
to the leg as shown. The broad rails and casting are securely fastened
by the bolt, H. It will be seen that this bolt, passing through the
end of one broad rail, and into a nut let into the other rail,
will securely draw and hold together the ends of said rails and the
interposed metal plate clamped between them, and that as the plain
ends of the wooden rails just fit (widthwise) between the projecting
heads on the edges of said interposed plate, the latter will form a
sort of housing for the ends of the rails. And it will be understood
that in this construction not only does the bead on the outer edge of
the plate overlap the edges of the rails and form a neat and durable
corner finish to the body, but the broad rails being bolted together
in the direction of the grain of the wood with only an interposed
metal plate, there will be no tendency to a loosening of the union of
the parts of the frame. The main importance of this invention rests
in the idea of dispensing with the usual corner blocks, and thus
permitting the top edges of the broad rails, on which the bed rests,
to practically come together and afford a perfect support to the bed
clear out to the corners of the latter; at the same time the whole
structure is rendered stronger and more durable with less weight of
material.

These inventions are the subject of separate patents, that of the
first being dated April 4, 1876, and of the second, November 16, 1875.
For further information, address the manufacturer and patentee, Mr. H.
W. Collender, 738 Broadway, New York city.

       *       *       *       *       *




COATING ENGRAVED COPPER PLATES WITH STEEL.


In order to render copper plates which are used in printing more
durable, they can be covered with an electrolytic deposit of iron
which possesses an unusual degree of hardness almost superior to
steel. The salt usually employed has been the double sulphate of iron
and ammonia. Professor Boettger, who first invented this process, has
recently devised an improvement in the bath employed. He dissolves 10
parts of ferrocyanide of potassium (yellow prussiate of potash) and
20 parts of the double tartrate of soda and potash (Rochelle salts) in
200 parts of water, and to this he adds 3 parts of persulphate of iron
dissolved in 50 parts of water. A large precipitate of Prussian
blue is formed. To the whole is added, drop by drop, with constant
stirring, a solution of caustic soda until the blue precipitate
entirely disappears, leaving a perfectly clear, light yellow liquid,
which is now ready for use.

Professor Boettger also claims that this solution can be employed with
advantage for dyeing cotton yarn and fabrics a beautiful blue, without
the use of a mordant. For this purpose the goods are put into the
bath, that has previously been slightly warmed, until they are
saturated through and through, and then dried in the air, after which
they are immersed in extremely dilute sulphuric acid (1 to 50), which
neutralizes the alkali, and after washing and drying again they are
permanently dyed a fine blue color.

       *       *       *       *       *




TEST FOR SULPHUR IN ORGANIC COMPOUNDS.


H. Vohl recommends the following as the best method of detecting
sulphur in organic compounds: The substance to be tested is heated in
a solution of caustic lime and oxide of lead in glycerin. The latter
is prepared as follows: One volume of distilled water is mixed with
2 volumes of pure glycerin and heated to boiling; freshly prepared
slaked lime is added, little by little, until it is saturated. Freshly
precipitated hydrated oxide of lead, or moist litharge, is added in
excess, and the liquid allowed to boil gently for a few minutes,
then tightly corked and left to cool, after which the clear liquid
is decanted from the sediment into a glass vessel that can be tightly
corked. If into this solution be introduced and heated any organic
which contains sulphur, like hair, feathers, horn, albumen, and the
like, it will at once turn black from the formation of sulphide of
lead. The great delicacy of this test is evident from the fact that,
when pure wheat bread is boiled with this reagent, it turns yellow at
first and then dark gray in consequence of the presence of sulphur in
the gluten of the bread.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED BILLIARD BALL HOLDER.


The usual receptacle for the fourth ball, when only three balls are
used in the game of billiards, is placed at the side of the table. As
this is both inconvenient and unsightly, a neat device, clearly shown
in the annexed illustration, has been invented, which is intended to
be attached to a gas fixture over the table. A plate or sign is also
added on which the number of a table--in case several tables are
employed, as in a billiard saloon--may be inscribed. The form and
design of the arrangement may of course be varied in many ways.

[Illustration: billiard ball holder]

Patented May 2, 1876. For further particulars, address the
manufacturer, Mr. H. W. Collender, 738 Broadway, New York city.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MONITOR CHALK CUP.


The annexed engraving represents an improved chalk cup or holder
for billiard tables, which is so constructed that it will not become
loose, sag down, mar the table, or jar when the ball strikes the
cushion. It may be adjusted to remain in any desired position.

The shank is pivoted in a metallic frame which is secured to the
table. The rear end of the shank works against a spring. On the upper
portion of the shank is a projection which embraces a horizontal
flange to sustain the box against being forced downward. The
arrangement is very similar to the ordinary window catch. The player
has only to start the box from its position under the table, when
the spring carries it out at right angles to the rail. A touch is
sufficient to cause the spring to carry the box back to its former
position. The device is very simple, and its advantages will be
evident to all billiard players cognizant of the defects of the
ordinary cup.

[Illustration: THE MONITOR CHALK CUP.]

Patented May 1, 1877. For further particulars, address the
manufacturer and patentee, Mr. H. W. Collender, 738 Broadway,
New York city.

       *       *       *       *       *




CURIOUS CARNIVOROUS PLANTS.


The _arum Dracunculus_ is one of the most curious of that wonderful
series of carnivorous plants which at the present time are engaging
the closest scrutiny of naturalists. It is a true trap in one
sense--inasmuch as it captures the victim which ventures near it; but
it relies on little or no mechanical means for securing its prey, but
stupefies the living insect by its odor. The flower is horn-shaped,
