is maintained in constant, practical, though not absolute contact
with the disk. Round the upper part of the disk is a metal band, A, to
which the circuit wire is attached, and the current thus passed on to
the next lamps.

At a recent trial of this lamp, the current was derived from a small
Gramme electro-plating machine, requiring only 2 horse power to put
it in full work. It may therefore be assumed that this was about the
limit of the power at work to produce the light. At the commencement
of the proceedings two lights were maintained, each stated to be equal
to 320 sperm candles. At this rate the two lights would be equal to
640 candles, or 40 full power gas lights, each consuming 5 cubic feet
of 16 candle gas per hour. Such gas lights, it may be observed, are
not often seen, except in the argand form. The two lights burned with
extreme steadiness, there being no undulation, or flickering whatever,
although there was no glass globe to tone down any variations of
luster. The lights were perfectly bare and unprotected, and the place
where the trial was made was a workshop of moderate size.

Later in the evening one light was exhibited outside the building, in
an open thoroughfare, and the same perfect steadiness was observable.
After the two lights had been burning for a time they were
extinguished, and the current was sent through a row of ten lamps.
The light per lamp was of course reduced, but there was the remarkable
fact that ten lights were maintained by a comparatively weak machine,
driven by an engine exerting the power of only two horses.

The light of each of these ten lamps was stated to be that of 40
candles, making, therefore, a total of 400. A reduction of light,
consequent on the further division of the current, is thus apparent;
but for this loss there may be ample compensation in the superior
economy of a distributed light as compared with one that is
concentrated. In the case of the ten lamps, the light is equal to that
of 25 full power gas lights, consuming altogether 125 cubic feet of
gas per hour. The extremely small arc due to the peculiar arrangement
of the carbons in the Werdermann light has the advantage of offering
the least possible resistance to the passage of the current.

This resistance increases much more rapidly than is represented by
increase of distance between the carbon points. Hence the electric
power with Werdermann's lamp is economized to the utmost in this
respect, and it becomes possible--as in the recent experiment--to make
use of an electric current large in quantity but of low intensity.
The tension being small, there is the less difficulty with regard to
insulation. If one lamp or more should be accidentally extinguished,
the rest will continue to burn. The whole of the lamps can also be
extinguished and relit by merely stopping the current and then sending
it on again. No nice and troublesome adjustment with reference to the
length of the electric arc is requisite, and simple contact between
the point of the rod and the surface of the disk is sufficient for the
manifestation of the light.

In respect to duration, a carbon rod 5-32 in. in diameter, and a yard
long, obtained from Paris, costs a franc. This, placed in a large
lamp, having an estimated lighting power of 320 candles, will last
from 12 to 15 hours. The smaller lamps take a carbon of 1/8 in.
diameter.

Mr. Werdermann endeavors to make the resistance of the external
portion of the circuit equal to the internal resistance, in order to
obtain the greatest effect. It is well known that the best results
are obtained when the internal and external resistances are equal. The
method adopted is that known to electricians as the divided arc, and
will easily be understood from Fig. 2. Let B represent the source of
the electric current, and A a copper wire connected to the positive
and negative poles of the source as in the diagram. The wire, A, has
a certain resistance. Suppose, now, we arrange for the current to pass
as in the diagram, Fig. 3. By the insertion of the new wire, C, we
have lessened the total external resistance and increased the current,
as will be seen by reference to Ohm's law. C = E/(R+r) where C
= current; E = electromotive force; R = resistance external; r =
resistance internal. The fraction E/(R+r) increases as its denominator
is lessened.

The current passes along the two branches in equal quantities if the
resistances of the wires are equal, but inversely as the resistances
if they are unequal. Thus, if the branch, A, has a resistance, 9, and
C has a resistance, 1, 9-10 of the current will pass through C, and
1-10 through A. Similarly, for any number of branches the current will
divide itself according to the resistances. If, then, we have a number
of branches, as indicated in Fig. 4, the current will divide itself
equally among the branches when the resistances of the branches are
equal. This is the arrangement adopted by Mr. Werdermann, as will be
seen from the annexed diagram, Fig. 5, in which N and P represent
the negative and positive poles of the machine, and L L the electric
lamps.

When any one lamp is put out the inventor arranges that an equivalent
resistance shall be put into the circuit, so that as a whole the
circuit is unaltered, and the other lamps unaffected.

       *       *       *       *       *




CASSON'S SAW BENCH.


We give herewith a perspective view of a circular saw bench made by
Messrs. Oliver & Co. (Limited), of Chesterfield, England, which we
take from _Engineering_. The chief features in this machine are that
it is fitted with Mr. John Casson's patent feed gear and apparatus for
steadying the saws. This feeding arrangement has now been in use some
years, and has been fitted to a very large number of circular saw
benches. This being the case, and the arrangement being very clearly
shown by our engraving, it will be unnecessary for us to describe it
in detail here.

The saw-steadying apparatus, with which the saw bench we illustrate
is fitted, is a novel arrangement, recently patented by Mr. Casson; in
the present case it is applied to two saws.

The steadying arrangement consists of accurately fitted sliding jaws
mounted on the arms of a forked support, so that they can be moved and
adjusted only by fine threaded screws, the jaws having their surfaces
next the saws, accurately parallel with the plane of the collar of the
saw spindle; these jaws, A, are fixed when the adjusting screws are at
rest, and they are faced with strips of greenheart or other suitable
timber, secured by countersunk screw bolts, these faces forming a
perfectly true guide for the saw blades.

For a single saw the guides just described would suffice; but for two
or more saws the outside guides must be supplemented by others between
the saw blades.

It will be noticed that the support, F, carrying the guiding jaws, has
a square stem sliding through the head of a suitable standard, and it
can be readily fixed at any desired height by means of the set screw.

[Illustration: BENCH WITH SAW-STEADYING APPARATUS.]

The arrangement we have been describing is well carried out, and there
can be no doubt that it will do good service, and enable thin saws
to be efficiently used with a heavy feed. We have received very
satisfactory reports of its performance.

       *       *       *       *       *




A BAIT FOR INVENTORS.


I will give $200 for a machine that will bale hay in the field. Rake
and press combined would be preferable, but would not object to
its taking the hay in the windrow. The machine must be expeditious,
executing as fast as a mower is able to cut. Must have sufficient
power to make a bale suitable for commercial uses; shape of the bale
immaterial; a round one preferred. Must be of light draught; one team
is generally all that is available for any machine on the farm. These,
with the other qualifications demanded of every machine, simplicity,
durability, easy to manage, etc. If such an invention could be
produced it would make a revolution in the hay field almost equal to
that which the mower has made.

What an awkward, ungainly spectacle a man presents, struggling at one
end of a six foot pole, with a ten pound lock of hay at the other end,
endeavoring with all his might and main to elevate it 12 or 15 feet on
top of a load! It is an insult to human intelligence. A load of loose
hay is an uncertain quantity. You are never sure of getting it into
the barn. Top heavy, one sided, too wide or too high for the doors;
and even with the best of luck, a good percentage has drizzled in the
wake of the wagon over the lot to the barn. A 100 or 200 lb. bale,
with an inclined plane, or a pulley on side or aft of a good strong
rack, and all this barbarism has succumbed to civilization.

At the barn comes a worse servitude. (I don't mean the horse fork;
that is a grand lift to civilization. I hope to modify it shortly to
throw bales.) There a man struggles with sheer desperation to press
by his own avoirdupois 20 tons of hay into a place that won't hold 10.
Tramp, tramp, tramp, leg-weary, panting like an overheated dog, every
fiber of his clothing saturated with perspiration, a subject worthy
of a better immortality than the Greek slave. O Edison! don't fritter
away your genius on sounding brass and tinkling cymbal. Elevate the
laborer. Liberate our overworked people. Make us a chariot to press
our hay.--_Edmund Adams, North Manlius, N. Y., to the New York
Tribune._

       *       *       *       *       *




A SILVER MILL IN THE CLOUDS.


The largest and most complete silver mill ever constructed, says the
San Francisco Stock Report, has recently been built by Messrs. Rankin,
Brayton & Co., of the Pacific Iron Works of that city, for the Cerro
de Pasco Mining Company, of Peru, and shipped for Callao, the port of
destination. This enormous mill consists of 80 stamps, 900 lbs, each,
44 live foot amalgamating pans, 22 nine foot settlers, and all the
accessories of a first-class modern mill. It is to be erected upon the
above named mines, which are situated in the heart of the Andes,
some 150 miles east of the city of Lima, at an elevation of more than
14,000 feet. To admit of mule transportation a portion of the way up
this tremendous ascent, the mill had to be made in sections, no piece
weighing more than 500 lbs. Some idea of the magnitude of this work
may be inferred from the fact that the mill, as thus constructed,
consisted of more than 17,000 pieces, and weighed upward of 600 tons.
This enormous amount of machinery was constructed by the above firm
and put on board a ship 50 days from date of contract.

The Cerro de Pasco mines have been the richest and most famous in the
world's history. They have been worked by the old arastra process for
the past 200 years, and have produced, according to the most authentic
records, more than $500,000,000. With such improved machinery the
product of these mines will undoubtedly attract the attention of the
world, and so reflect great credit upon the capacity, ingenuity, and
skill of our mechanical establishments.

       *       *       *       *       *




POULTICES.


The common practice in making poultices of mixing the linseed meal
with hot water, and applying them directly to the skin, is quite
wrong, because, if we do not wish to burn the patient, we must wait
until a great portion of the heat has been lost. The proper method
is to take a flannel bag (the size of the poultice required), to fill
this with the linseed poultice as hot as it can possibly be made, and
to put between this and the skin a second piece of flannel, so that
there shall be at least two thicknesses of flannel between the skin
and the poultice itself. Above the poultice should be placed more
flannel, or a piece of cotton wool, to prevent it from getting cold.
By this method we are able to apply the linseed meal boiling hot,
without burning the patient, and the heat, gradually diffusing through
the flannel, affords a grateful sense of relief which cannot be
obtained by other means. There are few ways in which such marked
relief is given to abdominal pain as by the application of a poultice
in this manner.--_Dr. T. Lauder Brunton, in Brain._

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW MECHANICAL INVENTIONS.


Mr. Joseph Adams, of Washington, D. C., has patented an improved Gas
Regulator, designed either to cut off the gas entirely or to let on
a larger amount of gas than its automatic action would ordinarily
permit, or to allow the regulator to operate with an automatic action,
as usual.

Mr. Jean A. Hitter, Jr., of St. Martinsville, La., has patented an
improved Type Writer, of simple and compact construction, that may be
readily used for printing on paper and for other purposes, being
small enough to be carried conveniently in the pocket, if desired, and
readily operated with little practice.

Messrs. Edwin N. Boynton, Geo. M. Coburn, and Thos. F. Carver, of
Worcester, Mass., have patented an improved Hand Drilling Machine, by
which a fast or slow motion can be readily obtained, at the will
of the operator, the slower motion being especially advantageous in
drilling large holes, as more power is obtained, and the holes are
drilled with greater ease.

Mr. Reuben R. James, of Rising Sun, Ind., has devised an improved
Adding Machine of simple and comparatively inexpensive construction.
The chief feature of the machine is a series of toothed revolving
counting wheels, which are inscribed on their peripheries with the
nine digits and cipher, and mounted loosely on a common axis, and each
having four lateral inclines or cams, which cause, at the proper time,
a weighted pawl lever to engage the next counting wheel on the left,
so as to carry ten when the numbers added on the wheel on the right
exceed ten. The adding is effected by successively drawing down to a
stop on the finger board the teeth of the counting wheels which are
opposite the numbers to be added, and the numerical result will be
seen on the wheels in a series of slots or apertures in the case of
the machine.

Mr. Jacob Croft, of Scipio, Utah Ter., has devised an improved Turbine
Water Wheel, which is constructed to prevent back pressure by the
water against the casing as it escapes from the buckets. Sand and
other substances in the water are prevented from entering around the
shaft and cutting or wearing it.

An improvement in Sweeping Machines has been patented by Mr. Isaac
A. Chomel, of Brooklyn, N. Y. This invention relates to apparatus for
sweeping up and collecting dirt, dust, and other refuse from floors,
carpets, streets, and other places. The dust box is to be rolled over
the floor and the brush revolved by a winch. The speed of the brush is
independent of the motion of the machine along the floor.

Mr. D. A. Ferris, of Tioga Center, N. Y., has patented an improved
Implement for Forcing Flooring Planks together when laying floors. It
is simple, convenient, and powerful.

       *       *       *       *       *




EFFECT OF QUININE ON THE HEARING.


It is a well known fact to medical men that there exists a great
prejudice among a large number of people against taking quinine, the
idea being very prevalent that a prolonged use of it not only affects
the hearing, but (to use the common expression) that it "gets into
the bones." As regards the former belief, Dr. Roosa, of New York,
has recently been collecting and examining the evidence as far as
possible, and has come to the conclusion that in some cases there
really is a permanent nervous affection of the ear produced which
justifies the opinion held by the laity. Hitherto physicians have
generally disbelieved this, and ascribed the notion to prejudice.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MICROPHONE AS A THIEF CATCHER.
