"If it's the last thing I do," said the General, rising, "I'm going to
see you get credit for what you've done."

MacReedy made a gesture of dismissal. "Don't let it bother you,
General," he said. "I like my work. Maybe you could arrange for me to
make some models for the War College."

"Hell, why not the Smithsonian?" said the General. "Why not both? We
ought to have a historical ordnance exhibit somewhere. And you're the
man, no doubt about it."

As he left with the precious model MacReedy asked, "By the way,
General, what do you want me to work on next?"

The General hesitated, then said, "Follow your hunches--logic if you
will. Let's see what the next weapon after this one is going to be.
You've been ahead of us the rest of the way."

"I'll see what I can do," said MacReedy with his quiet smile. "Let me
know how things come out."

"That I will," said the General. Toby walked with him to the car and the
General gave him another five dollars. He wished he could do something
more for both of them; but at the moment it was out of the question.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was almost six months before the General got back to the Long Island
chalet. Thanks to his now fully-established reputation as an inventive
genius, he was able to get a full speed ahead order on the new-type
mobile rocket-launcher. MacReedy's improvements were valid, and the
Department experts came up with further simplifications. By the time
they were ready to go into production they actually had the weapon
self-propelled, were well ahead of _Them_ on mobility, range and
accuracy. It promised to be a military revolution.

Then the General had to make a flying trip around the world--to visit
American military installations in Western Europe, in Italy and Spain,
in Africa, Formosa, Japan and Korea. He got back to Washington, a
thoroughly tired man, and walked into both his promised third star and
the Chiefship of the Department. Also into an international situation
worse than any since September, 1939--when the Nazis invaded Poland.

_They_ were pushing aggressively in both Europe and Asia, pushing with
an arrogance that suggested they felt they could win in a walk if the
free nations of the world offered large-scale military defiance. Rumors
of a terrible secret weapon were being bruited about--not only in
hush-hush military circles but in the public prints as well. One picture
magazine of national circulation had actually published an article
stating that _They_ had mastered pushbutton warfare.

The General, and the Combined Chiefs made a hurried and secret trip to
Aberdeen the day after his return. There, on the proving ground, they
watched a big transport-plane land on a makeshift airstrip. They saw a
small group of soldiers unload from the plane an odd-looking
tractor-mounted weapon that resembled an immense stove-pipe with certain
refinements.

They saw a lean sausage of a rocket rolled into a door near the base of
the tube, watched a trifle nervously while it was elevated almost
vertically. An order was barked, a button was pushed--and the rocket
rose rapidly from the tube with a dullish report, rose to a height of
perhaps a hundred yards.

Then, suddenly, its tail blossomed smoke and flame; it rose with a new
lease on life, to disappear into the heavens, leaving a trail of smoke
behind it. Pointing to a prefabricated building that stood alone, a mile
away, the General said, "Watch that target, gentlemen," and lifted his
field glasses to his eyes.

A minute later--fifty-eight seconds was the exact time--the structure
was suddenly obliterated by a tremendous explosion. The General sighed
and said quietly, "That was TNT. We have a stockpile of atomic weapons
ready."

"But the accuracy!" exclaimed a weathered full admiral. "With the wind
and the earth's rotation to consid...." He hesitated, then said, "Oh, a
guided missile."

The General nodded, and said, "We can put batteries of these new
missile-launchers, completely-mobile and with atomic heads, anywhere in
the world within twenty-four hours by plane. They have a reasonably
effective range of small targets of just over two hundred miles--with
air-guidance, of course, over target. Gentlemen, I think _They_ are in
for a surprise."

_They_ got it two days later--in another special test of the new weapon.
The General didn't even bother to watch it. His attention was focussed
upon a stocky blond man who wore the gaudy shoulder-boards of a
lieutenant colonel, and was present as assistant military-attache and
qualified observer. His face remained impassive, save for a slight
twitch of the lips, when the target was obliterated.

Which was enough to satisfy the General.

       *       *       *       *       *

Denied a sure-thing victory _They_ were forced to call off _Their_
war--with violent internal results. It became quickly evident that
_They_ were going to be busy for a long time keeping order within their
own boundaries. The international situation became easier and happier
than at any time since Locarno.

The General, who was due shortly to receive his fourth star, played an
active role in the military portion of the peace-making. He had little
time even to think of Angus MacReedy and little Toby and the
miracle-workroom on Long Island. When he did think of them it was with
an inner warmth that was almost devout, with a resolve to see that the
model-maker received a satisfactory reward.

Then one morning, while skimming through a stack of reports, a phrase
caught his eye. It read--

     _... and in accord with current fiscal retrenchment-policies, all
     personnel on special duty were called in for terminal assignments.
     These included...._

The report was from Second District HQ at Governor's Island. With a
sinking sensation he scanned the list. There it was--special
sentry-detail to guard house of Captain Angus MacReedy (ret). He picked
up a telephone and called Governor's Island direct.

Yes, the detail had been withdrawn more than a week earlier.... No,
there had been no report of trouble.... Hold on, there was something in
the morning paper....

The General made it in less than two hours. Angus MacReedy had been shot
in the back of his head the previous evening, while building model
soldiers in his cellar workroom. A boy who lived next door and heard the
shot while on his way to pay MacReedy a visit, had seen the murderer
drive away in a black sedan. He had given the alarm and local
constabulary had picked up the trail and given chase. Ignoring a red
light, their quarry had been killed when his sedan was hit by a truck.
He had no identification on him but appeared to be a stocky blond man of
about forty. An alien pistol, recently discharged, had been found in the
wreckage.

