
The tribesmen waited until the wasp had begun its orgy, licking up the
toothsome stuff disgorged by its dead prey. It ate in gluttonous haste,
blind to all sights, deaf to all sounds, able to think of nothing,
conceive of nothing, but the delights of the liquid it was devouring.

At a signal the tribesmen darted forward. They wavered when near the
slender-waisted gourmet, however, and Burl was the first to thrust his
spear with all his strength into the thinly armored body.

Then the others took courage. A short, horny spear penetrated the very
vitals of the wasp. A club fell with terrific impact upon the slender
waist. There was a crackling, and the long, spidery limbs quivered and
writhed, while the tribesmen fell back in fear, but without cause.

Burl struck again, and the wasp fell into two writhing halves, helpless
for harm. The pink-skinned men danced in triumph, and the women and
children ventured near, delighted.

Only Burl noticed that even as the wasp was dying, sundered and pierced
with spears, its slender tongue licked out in one last, ecstatic taste
of the nectar that had been its undoing.

Burdened with the pollen-covered legs of the giant bee, and filled with
the meat from choice portions of the wasp's muscular limbs, the tribe
resumed its journey. This time Burl had men behind him, still timid,
still prone to flee at the slightest alarm, but infinitely more
dependable than they had been before.

They had attacked and slain a wasp whose sting would have killed any of
them. They had done battle under the leadership of Burl, whose spear had
struck the first blow. Henceforth they were sharers, in a mild way, of
his transcendent glory, and henceforth they were more like followers of
a mighty chief and less like spineless worshipers of a demigod whose
feats they were too timid to emulate.

That night they hid among a group of giant puff-balls, feasting on the
loads of meat they had carried thus far with them. Burl watched them now
without jealousy of their good spirits. He and Saya sat a little apart,
happy to be near each other, speaking in low tones. After a time
darkness fell, and the tribefolk became shapeless bodies speaking in
voices that grew drowsy and were silent. The black forms of the
toadstool heads and huge puff-balls were but darker against a dark sky.

The nightly rain began to fall, drop by drop, drop by drop, upon the
damp and humid earth. Only Burl remained awake for a little while, and
his last waking thought was of pride, disinterested pride. He had the
first reward of the ruler, gratification in the greatness of his people.

The red mushrooms had continued to show their glistening heads, though
Burl thought they were less numerous than in the territory from which
the tribe had fled. All along the route, now to the right, now to the
left, they had burst and sent their masses of deadly dust into the air.

Many times the tribefolk had been forced to make a detour to avoid a
slowly spreading cloud of death-dealing spores. Once or twice their
escapes had been narrow indeed, but so far there had been no deaths.

Burl had observed that the mushrooms normally burst only in the daytime,
and for a while had thought of causing his followers to do their
journeying in the night. Only the obvious disadvantages of such a
course--the difficulty of discovering food, and the prowling spiders
that roamed in the darkness--had prevented him. The idea still stayed
with him, however, and two days after the fight with the hunting wasp he
put it in practise.

The tribe came to the top of a small rise in the ground. For an hour
they had been marching and counter-marching to avoid the suddenly
appearing clouds of dust. Once they had been nearly hemmed in, and only
by mad sprinting did they escape when three of the dull-red clouds
seemed to flow together, closing three sides of a circle.

They came to the little hillock and halted. Before them stretched a
plain all of four miles wide, colored a brownish brick-red by masses of
mushrooms. They had seen mushroom forests before, and knew of the
dangers they presented, but there was none so deadly as the plain before
them. To right and left it stretched as far as the eye could see, but
far away on its farther edge Burl caught a glimpse of flowing water.

Over the plain itself a dull-red haze seemed to float. It was nothing
more or less than a cloud of the deadly spores, dispersed and
indefinite, constantly replenished by the freshly bursting red
mushrooms.

While the people stood and watched a dozen thick columns of dust rose
into the air from scattered points here and there upon the plain,
settling slowly again, but leaving behind them enough of their finely
divided substance to keep the thin red haze over the whole plain in its
original, deadly state.

Burl had seen single red mushrooms before, and even small thickets of
two and three, but here was a plain of millions, literally millions upon
millions of the malignant growths. Here was one fungoid forest through
whose aisles no monster beetles stalked, and above whose shadowed depths
no brightly colored butterflies fluttered in joyous abandon. There were
no loud-voiced crickets singing in its hiding-places, nor bodies of
eagerly foraging ants searching inquisitively for bits of food. It was a
forest of death, still and silent, quiet and motionless save for the
sullen columns of red dust that ever and again shot upward from the torn
and ragged envelope of the bursting mushroom.

Burl and his people watched in wonderment and dismay, but presently a
high resolve came to Burl. The mushrooms never burst at night, and the
deadly dust from a subsided cloud was not deadly in the morning. As a
matter of fact the rain that fell every night made it no more than a
sodden, thin film of reddish mud by daybreak, mud which dried and caked.

Burl did not know what occurred, but knew the result. At night or in
early morning, the danger from the red mushrooms was slight. Therefore
he would lead his people through the very jaws of death that night. He
would lead them through the deadly aisles of this, the forest of
malignant growths, the place of lurking annihilation.

It was an act of desperation, and the resolution to carry it through
left Burl in a state of mind that kept him from observing one thing that
would have ended all the struggles of his tribe at once. Perhaps a
quarter-mile from the edge of the red forest three or four giant
cabbages grew, thrusting their colossal leaves upward toward the sky.

And on the cabbages a dozen lazy slugs fed leisurely, ignoring
completely the red haze that was never far from them and sometimes
covered them. Burl saw them, but the oddity of their immunity from the
effects of the red dust did not strike him. He was fighting to keep his
resolution intact. If he had only realized the significance of what he
saw, however--

The slugs were covered with a thick soft fur. The tribespeople wore
garments of that same material. The fur protected the slugs, and could
have made the tribe immune to the deadly red dust if they had only
known. The slugs breathed through a row of tiny holes upon their backs,
as the mature insects breathed through holes upon the bottom of their
abdomens, and the soft fur formed a mat of felt which arrested the fine
particles of deadly dust, while allowing the pure air to pass through.
It formed, in effect, a natural gas-mask which the tribesmen should have
adopted, but which they did not discover or invent.

The remainder of that day they waited in a curious mixture of resolve
and fear. The tribe was rapidly reaching a point where it would follow
Burl over a thousand-foot cliff, and it needed some such blind
confidence to make them prepare to go through the forest of the million
deadly mushrooms.

The waiting was a strain, but the actual journey was a nightmare. Burl
knew that the toadstools did not burst of themselves during the night,
but he knew that the beetle on which he had taken his involuntary ride
had crashed against one in the darkness, and that the fatal dust had
poured out. He warned his people to be cautious, and led them down the
slope of the hill through the blackness.

For hours they stumbled on in utter darkness, with the pungent, acrid
odor of the red growths constantly in their nostrils. They put out their
hands and touched the flabby, damp stalks of the monstrous things. They
stumbled and staggered against the leathery skins of the malignant
fungoids.

Death was all about them. At no time during all the dark hours of the
night was there a moment when they could not reach out their hands and
touch a fungus growth that might burst at their touch and fill the air
with poisonous dust, so that all of them would die in gasping, choking
agony.

And worst of all, before half an hour was past they had lost all sense
of direction, so that they stumbled on blindly through the utter
blackness, not knowing whether they were headed toward the river that
might be their salvation or were wandering hopelessly deeper and deeper
into the silent depths of the forest of strangled things.

When day came again and the mushrooms sent their columns of fatal dust
into the air would they gasp and fight for breath in the red haze that
would float like a tenuous cloud above the forest? Would they breathe in
flames of firelike torment and die slowly, or would the red dust be
merciful and slay them quickly?

They felt their way like blind folk, devoid of hope and curiously
unafraid. Only their hearts were like heavy, cold weights in their
breasts, and they shouldered aside the swollen sacs of the red mushrooms
with a singular apathy as they followed Burl slowly through the midst of
death.

Many times in their journeying they knew that dead creatures were near
by--moths, perhaps, that had blundered into a distended growth which
had burst upon the impact and killed the thing that had touched it.

No busy insect scavengers ventured into this plain of silence to salvage
the bodies, however. The red haze preserved the sanctuary of malignance
inviolate. During the day no creature might hope to approach its red
aisles and dust-carpeted clearings, and at night the slow-dropping rain
fell only upon the rounded heads of the mushrooms.

In all the space of the forest, only the little band of hopeless people,
plodding on behind Burl in the velvet blackness, callously rubbed
shoulders with death in the form of the red and glistening mushrooms.
Over all the dank expanse of the forest, the only sound was the dripping
of the slow and sodden rainfall that began at nightfall and lasted until
day came again.

The sky began to grow faintly gray as the sun rose behind the banks of
overhanging clouds. Burl stopped short and uttered what was no more than
a groan. He was in a little circular clearing, and the twisted,
monstrous forms of the deadly mushrooms were all about. There was not
yet enough light for colors to appear, and the hideous, almost obscene
shapes of the loathsome growths on every side showed only as mocking,
leering silhouettes as of malicious demons rejoicing at the coming doom
of the gray-faced, huddled tribefolk.

Burl stood still, drooping in discouragement upon his spear, the
feathery moth's antennae bound upon his forehead shadowed darkly against
the graying sky. Soon the mushrooms would begin to burst--

Then, suddenly, he lifted his head, encouragement and delight upon his
features. He had heard the ripple of running water. His followers looked
at him with dawning hope. Without a word, Burl began to run, and they
followed him more slowly. His voice came back to them in a shout of
delight.

Then they, too, broke into a jog-trot. In a moment they had emerged from
the thick tangle of brownish-red stalks and were upon the banks of a
wide and swiftly running river, the same river whose gleam Burl had
caught the day before from the farther side of the mushroom forest.

Once before Burl had floated down a river upon a mushroom raft. Then his
journey had been involuntary and unlooked for. He had been carried far
from his tribe and far from Saya, and his heart had been filled with
desolation.

Now he viewed the swiftly running current with eager delight. He cast
his eyes up and down the bank. Here and there the river-bank rose in a
low bluff, and thick shelf-growths stretched out above the water.

Burl was busy in an instant, stabbing the hard growths with his spear
and striving to wrench them free. The tribesmen stared at him,
uncomprehending, but at an order from him they did likewise.

Soon a dozen thick masses of firm, light fungus lay upon the shore where
it shelved gently into the water. Burl began to explain what they were
to do, but one or two of the men dared remonstrate, saying humbly that
they were afraid to part from him. If they might embark upon the same
thing with him, they would be safe, but otherwise they were afraid.

Burl cast an apprehensive glance at the sky. Day was coming rapidly on.
Soon the red mushrooms would begin to shoot their columns of deadly dust
into the air. This was no time to pause and deliberate. Then Saya spoke
softly.

Burl listened, and made a mighty sacrifice. He took his gorgeous velvet
cloak from his shoulders--it was made from the wing of a great moth--and
tore it into a dozen long, irregular pieces, tearing it along the lines
of the sinews that reinforced it. He planted his spear upright in the
largest piece of shelf-fungus and caused his followers to do likewise,
then fastened the strips of sinew and velvet to his spear-shaft, and
ordered them to do the same to the other spears.

In a matter of minutes the dozen tiny rafts were bobbing on the water,
clustered about the larger, central bit. Then, one by one, the tribefolk
took their places, and Burl shoved off.

The agglomeration of cranky, unseaworthy bits of shelf-fungus moved
slowly out from the shore until the current caught it. Burl and Saya sat
upon the central bit, with the other trustful but somewhat frightened
pink-skinned people all about them. And, as they began to move between
the mushroom-lined banks of the river and the mist of the night began to
lift from its surface, far in the interior of the forest of the red
fungoids a column of sullen red leaped into the air. The first of the
malignant growths had cast its cargo of poisonous dust into the
still-humid atmosphere.

The conelike column spread out and grew thin, but even after it had sunk
into the earth, a reddish taint remained in the air about the place
where it had been. The deadly red haze that hung all through the day
over the red forest was in process of formation.

But by that time the unstable fungus rafts were far down the river,
bobbing and twirling in the current, with the wide-eyed people upon them
gazing in wonderment at the shores as they glided by. The red mushrooms
grew less numerous upon the banks. Other growths took their places.
Molds and rusts covered the ground as grass had done in ages past.
Mushrooms showed their creamy, rounded heads. Malformed things with
swollen trunks and branches in strange mockery of the trees they had
superseded made their appearance, and once the tribesmen saw the dark
bulk of a hunting spider outlined for a moment upon the bank.

All the long day they rode upon the current, while the insect life that
had been absent in the neighborhood of the forest of death made its
appearance again. Bees once more droned overhead, and wasps and
dragon-flies. Four-inch mosquitoes made their appearance, to be fought
off by the tribefolk with lusty blows, and glittering beetles and
shining flies, whose bodies glittered with a metallic luster, buzzed and
flew above the water.

Huge butterflies once more were seen, dancing above the steaming,
festering earth in an apparent ecstasy from the mere fact of existence,
