on, shrilling their defiance. They poured devotedly--and
ferociously--into the inferno of flame. At last there were only small
groups of stragglers from the great ant-army scurrying here and there
over the ground their comrades had stripped of all life. The bodies of
the main army made a vast malodor, burning in the furnace of the hills.

There had been pain in that burning, agony such as no one would willing
dwell upon. But it came of the insane courage of the ants, attacking the
burning stuff with their horny jaws, rolling over and over with flaming
lumps of charcoal clutched in their mandibles. Burl heard them shrilling
their war-cry even as they died. Blinded, antennae singed off, legs
shriveling, they yet went forward to attack their impossible enemy.

Burl made his way slowly over the hills. Twice he saw small bodies of
the vanished army. They had passed between the widening furnaces and
furiously devoured all that moved as they forged ahead. Once Burl was
spied, and a shrill cry sounded, but he moved on and only a single ant
rushed after him. Burl brought down his club and a writhing body
remained to be eaten by its comrades when they came upon it.

And now the last faint traces of light had vanished in the west. There
was no real brightness anywhere except the flames of the burning hills.
The slow, slow nightly rain that dripped down all through the dark hours
began. It made a pattering noise upon the unburnt part of the hills.

Burl found firm ground beneath his feet. He listened keenly for sounds
of danger. Something rustled heavily in a thicket of toadstools a
hundred feet away. There were sounds of preening, and of feet delicately
placed here and there upon the ground. Then a great body took to the air
with the throbbing beat of mighty wings.

A fierce down-current of air smote Burl, and he looked upward in time to
glimpse the outline of a huge moth passing overhead. He turned to watch
the line of its flight, and saw the fierce glow filling all the horizon.
The hills burned brighter as the flames widened.

He crouched beneath a squat toadstool and waited for the dawn. The
slow-dripping rain kept on, falling with irregular, drum-like beats upon
the tough top of the toadstool.

He did not sleep. He was not properly hidden, and there was always
danger in the dark. But this was not the darkness Burl was used to. The
great fires grew and spread in the masses of ready-carbonized mushroom.
The glare on the horizon grew brighter through the hours. It also came
nearer.

Burl shivered a little, as he watched. He had never even dreamed of fire
before, and even the overhanging clouds were lighted by these flames.
Over a stretch at least a dozen miles in length and from half a mile to
three miles across, the seething furnaces and columns of flame-lit smoke
sent illumination over the world. It was like the glow the lights of a
city can throw upon the sky. And like the flitting of aircraft above a
city was the assembly of fascinated creatures of the night.

Great moths and flying beetles, gigantic gnats and midges grown huge
upon this planet, fluttered and danced above the flames. As the fire
came nearer, Burl could see them: colossal, delicately-formed creatures
sweeping above the white-hot expanse. There were moths with
riotously-colored wings of thirty-foot spread, beating the air with
mighty strokes, their huge eyes glowing like garnets as they stared
intoxicatedly at the incandescence below them.

Burl saw a great peacock-moth soaring above the hills with wings all of
forty feet across. They fluttered like sails of unbelievable
magnificence. And this was when all the separate flames had united to
form a single sheet of white-hot burning stuff spread across the land
for miles.

Feathery antennae of the finest lace spread out before the head of the
peacock-moth; its body was of softest velvet. A ring of snow-white fur
marked where its head began. The glare from below smote the maroon of
its body with a strange effect. For one instant it was outlined clearly.
Its eyes shone more redly than any ruby's fire. The great, delicate
wings were poised in flight. Burl caught the flash of flame upon the two
great irridescent spots on the wings. Shining purple and bright red, all
the glory of chalcedony and of chrysoprase was reflected in the glare of
burning fungi.

And then Burl saw it plunge downward, straight into the thickest and
fiercest of the leaping flames. It flung itself into the furnace as a
willing, drunken victim of their beauty.

Flying beetles flew clumsily above the pyre also, their horny wing-cases
stiffly outstretched. In the light from below they shone like burnished
metal. Their clumsy bodies, with spurred and fierce-toothed limbs,
darted through the flame-lit smoke like so many grotesque meteors.

Burl saw strange collisions and still stranger meetings. Male and female
flying creatures circled and spun in the glare, dancing their dance of
love and death. They mounted higher than Burl could see, drunk with the
ecstasy of living, and then descended to plunge headlong in the roaring
flames below.

From every side the creatures came. Moths of brightest yellow, with
furry bodies palpitant with life, flew madly to destruction. Other moths
of a deepest black, with gruesome symbols on their wings, swiftly came
to dance above the glow like motes in sunlight.

And Burl crouched beneath a toadstool, watching while the perpetual,
slow raindrops fell and fell, and a continuous hissing noise came from
where the rain splashed amid the flames.




_4. A KILLER OF MONSTERS_


The night wore on, while the creatures above the firelight danced and
died, their numbers ever reinforced by fresh arrivals. Burl sat tensely
still, his eyes watching everything while his mind groped for an
explanation of what he saw. At last the sky grew dimly gray, then
brighter, and after a long time it was day. The flames of the burning
hills seemed to dim and die as all the world became bright. After a long
while Burl crawled from his hiding-place and stood erect.

No more than two hundred paces from where he stood, a straight wall of
smoke rose from the still-smouldering fungus-range. Burl could see the
smoke rising for miles on either hand. He turned to continue on his way,
and saw the remains of one of the tragedies of the night.

A great moth had flown into the flames, been horribly scorched, and
floundered out again. Had it been able to fly, it would have returned to
its devouring deity; but now it lay upon the ground, its antennae
hopelessly seared. One beautiful wing was nothing but gaping holes. The
eyes had been dimmed by flame. The exquisitely tapering limbs lay
broken and crushed by the violence of landing. The creature was helpless
on the ground, only the stumps of its antennae moving restlessly and the
abdomen pulsating slowly as it drew pain-racked breaths.

Burl drew near. He raised his club.

When he moved on there was a velvet cloak cast over his shoulders,
gleaming with all the colors of the rainbows. A gorgeous mass of soft
blue moth-fur was about his middle, and he had bound upon his forehead
two yard-long fragments of the moth's magnificent antennae.

He strode on slowly, clad as no man had been clad in all the ages before
him. After a while another victim of the holocaust--similarly blundered
out to die--yielded him a spear that was longer and sharper and much
more deadly than his first. So he took up his journey to Saya looking
like a prince of Ind upon a bridal journey--though surely no mere prince
ever wore such raiment.

For many miles, Burl threaded his way through an extensive forest of
thin-stalked toadstools. They towered high over his head, colorful,
parasitic moulds and rusts all about their bases. Twice he came upon
open glades where bubbling pools of green slime festered in corruption.
Once he hid himself as a monster scarabeus beetle lumbered by three
yards away, clanking like some mighty machine.

Burl saw the heavy armor and inward-curving jaws of the monster. He
almost envied him his weapons. The time was not yet come, though, when
Burl and his kind would hunt such giants for the juicy flesh within its
armored limbs. Burl was still a savage, still ignorant, still
essentially timid. His only significant advance had been that where at
first he had fled without reasoning, now he paused to see if he need
flee.

He was a strange sight, moving through the shadowed lanes of the forest
in his cloak of velvet. The fierce-toothed leg of a fighting beetle
rested in a strip of sinew about his waist, ready for use. His new spear
was taller than himself. He looked like a conqueror. But he was still a
fearful and feeble creature, no match for the monstrous creatures about
him. He was weak--and in that lay his greatest hope. Because if he were
strong, he would not need to think.

Hundreds of thousands of years before, his ancestors had been forced to
develop brains as penalty for the lack of claws or fangs. Burl was sunk
as low as any of them, but he had to combat more horrifying enemies,
more inexorable dangers, and many times more crafty antagonists. His
ancestors had invented knives and spears and flying missiles, but the
creatures about Burl had weapons a thousand times more deadly than the
ones that had defended the first humans.

The fact, however, simply put a premium on the one faculty Burl had
which the insect world has not.

In mid-morning he heard a discordant, deep-bass bellow, coming from a
spot not twenty yards from where he moved. He hid in panic, waiting for
an instant, listening.

The bellow came again, but this time with a querulous note. Burl heard a
crashing and plunging as of some creature caught in a snare. A mushroom
tumbled with a spongelike sound, and the thud was followed by a
tremendous commotion. Something was fighting desperately against
something else, but Burl did not know what creatures were in combat.

He waited, and the noise died gradually away. Presently his breath came
more slowly and his courage returned. He stole from his hiding-place and
would have made away, but new curiosity held him back. Instead of
creeping from the scene, he moved cautiously toward the source of the
noise.

Peering between two cream-colored stalks he saw a wide, funnel-shaped
snare of silk spread out before him, some twenty yards across and as
many deep. The individual threads could be plainly seen, but in the mass
it seemed a fabric of sheerest, finest texture. Held up by tall
mushrooms, it was anchored to the ground below and drew away to a small
point through which a hole led to some as yet unseen recess. All the
space of the wide snare was hung with threads: fine, twisted threads no
more than half the thickness of Burl's finger.

This was the trap of a labyrinth spider. Not one of the interlacing
strands was strong enough to hold any but the feeblest prey, but the
threads were there by thousands. A cricket had become entangled in the
sticky maze. Its limbs thrashed out and broke threads with every stroke,
but each time became entangled in a dozen more. It struggled mightily,
emitting at intervals--again--its horrible bass roar.

Burl breathed more easily. He watched with fascinated eyes. Mere death
among insects--even tragic death--held no great interest for him. It was
too common an occurrence. And there were few insects which deliberately
sought man. Most insects have their allotted prey and will seek no
others.

But this involved a spider, and spiders have a terrifying impartiality.
A spider devouring some luckless insect was but an example of what might
happen to Burl. So he watched alertly, his eyes traveling from the
enmeshed cricket to the strange opening at the back of the funnel-shaped
labyrinth.

That opening darkened. Two shining, glistening eyes had been watching
from the tunnel in which the spider had been waiting. Now it swung out
lightly, revealing itself as a gray spider, with twin black ribbons upon
its thorax and two stripes of curiously speckled brown and white upon
its abdomen. Burl saw, also, two curious appendages like a tail, as it
came nimbly out of its hiding-place and approached the trapped creature.

The cricket was struggling weakly, now, and the cries it uttered were
but feeble, because of the cords that fettered its limbs. Burl saw the
spider throw itself upon the cricket which gave one final, convulsive
shudder as fangs pierced its armor.

Shortly after, the spider fed. With bestial enjoyment it sucked all the
succulence, all the fluid, from its victim's carcass.

Then the breath left Burl in a peculiar, frightened gasp. It was not
from anything he saw or heard. It was something that he thought.

For a second, his knees knocked together in self-induced panic. It
occurred to him that he, Burl, had killed a hunting spider--a
tarantula--upon the red-clay cliff. True, the killing had been an
accident and had nearly cost him his own life in the web-spider's snare.
But--he had killed a spider and of the most deadly kind. Now it occurred
to Burl that he could kill another.

Spiders were the ogres of the human tribes on the forgotten planet.
Knowledge of them was hard to come by, because to study them was death.
But all men knew that web-spiders never left their traps. Never! And
Burl had imagined himself making an impossibly splendid, incredibly
daring use of that fact.

Denying to himself that he intended any action so suicidal, he
nevertheless drew back from the front of the snare and made his way to
the back, where the spider's tunnel was no more than ten feet away.

Then he found himself waiting.

Presently, through the interstices of the silk, he saw the gray bulk of
the spider. It had left the drained and shrunken carcass of the cricket
to return to its resting-place, settling itself carefully upon the soft
walls of the fabric tunnel. From the yielding, globular nest at the
tunnel's end it fixed maniacal eyes once more upon the threads of its
snare, seen down the length of the passage-way.

Burl's hair stood on end from sheer fright, but he was the slave of an
idea.

The tunnel and the nest at its end did not rest on the ground, but were
suspended in air by cables like those that spread the gin itself. The
gray labyrinth-spider bulged the fabric. It lay in luxurious comfort,
waiting for victims to approach.

There was sweat on Burl's face as he raised his spear. The bare idea of
attacking a spider was horrifying. But actually he was in no danger
whatever before the instant of the spear-thrust, because web-spiders
never, never, leave their webs to hunt.

So Burl sweated, and grasped his spear with agonized firmness--and
thrust it into the bulge that was the spider's body in its nest. He
thrust with hysterical fury.

And then he ran as if the devil were after him.

It was a long time before he dared come back, his heart in his throat.
All was still. He had missed the horrid convulsions of the wounded
spider; he had not heard the frightful gnashings of its fangs at the
piercing weapon, nor seen the silken threads of the tunnel ripped and
torn in the spider's death-struggle. Burl came back to quietness. There
was a great rent in the silken tunnel, and a puddle of ill-smelling
stuff lay upon the ground. From time to time another droplet fell from
the spear to join it. And the great spider had fallen half through its
own enlargement of the rent made by the spear in the wall of the nest.

Burl stared. Even when he saw it, the thing was not easy to believe. The
dead eyes of the spider looked at him with mad, frozen malignity. The
fangs were still raised to kill. The hairy legs were still braced as if
to enlarge further the gaping hole through which it had partly fallen.

Then Burl felt exultation. His tribe had been furtive vermin for almost
forty generations, fleeing from the mighty insects, hiding from them,
and when caught waiting helplessly for death, screaming shrilly in
horror. But he, Burl, had turned the tables. He, a man, had killed a
spider! His breast expanded. Always his tribesmen went quietly and
fearfully, making no sound. But a sudden, surprising, triumphant yell
burst from Burl's lips--the first hunting-cry of man upon the forgotten
planet in two thousand years.

Next second, of course, his pulse almost stopped in sheer terror because
he had made such a noise. He listened fearfully. The insect world was
oblivious to him. Presently, shuddering but infinitely proud, he drew
near his prey. He carefully withdrew his spear, poised to flee if the
spider stirred. It did not. It was dead. The blood upon the spear was
revolting. Burl wiped it off on a leathery toadstool. Then....

He thought of Saya and his tribesmen. Trembling even as he gloated over
his own remarkable self, he shifted the spider and worked it out of the
nest. Presently he moved off with the belly of the spider upon his back
and two of its hairy legs over his shoulders. The other limbs of the
monster hung limp, trailing on the ground behind him.

Marching, then he was the first such spectacle in history. His velvet
cloak shining with its irridescent spots, the yard-long scraps of golden
