imprisoned the fish with a lid of sound they couldn't endure. And then
suppose that thing sank into the water again. The fish couldn't swim
through the walls of noise around them. They couldn't swim through the
lid of sound above them. They'd have to swim downward, just as if a hood
were closing on them from above."

"Very neat," said Davis. "But of course you don't believe anything of
the sort."

"I can't imagine what would produce that sound in that way and send up a
cork of sound to take the fish below. And I can't imagine why it would
be done. So I can't say I believe it."

Davis said slowly, "I think we begin to understand each other. We'll
stay as close to this place as we can until dawn, when we will find
nothing to show that anything out of the ordinary happened here."

"Still less," said Terry, "to hint at its meaning. I've been doing sums
in my head. That bright water was almost solid with fish. I'd say there
was at least a pound of fish to every cubic foot of sea."

"An underestimate," said Davis judicially.

"When the bright patch was a thousand yards across--and it was even
more--there'd have been four hundred tons of fish in the top three-foot
layer."

Davis seemed to start. But it was true. Terry added, "The water was
clear. We could see that the packing went on down a long way. Say fifty
yards at least."

"Y-yes," agreed Davis. "All of that."

"So in the top fifty yards, at one time, there were at least twenty
thousand tons of fish gathered together. Probably very much more. What
_La Rubia_ carried away couldn't be noticed. All those thousands of tons
of fish were pushed straight down. Tell me," said Terry, "what would be
the point in all those fish being dragged to the bottom? I can't ask who
or what did it, or even why. I'm asking, what results from it?"

Davis grunted.

"My mind stalls on who or what and why. And I'd rather not mention my
guesses. I.... No!"

He moved abruptly away.

The _Esperance_ remained under sail near the patch of sea that had
glittered earlier and now looked exactly like any other square mile of
ocean. The recorder verified the position by giving out, faintly, the
same unpleasant humming noise, either louder or fainter. A soft warm
wind blew across the waters. The land was somewhere below the horizon.
The reel of recorder-tape ran out. It was notable that there were very
few fish sounds to be heard, now. Very few. But the hum continued.

Toward morning it stopped abruptly. Then there was nothing out of the
ordinary to be observed anywhere.

The sun rose in magnificent colorings. The sky was clear of clouds.
Again the waves looked like living, leaping, joyous things. Gulls were
squawking.

Doug came up from belowdecks. He carried some photographic prints in his
hand. He'd developed and printed what the gun-cameras had photographed
when the mysterious object, or beast, leaped clear of the sea. There
were seven different pictures. Four showed flashbulb-lighted sections of
empty ocean. One showed a column of sea water rising at fantastic height
from the sea. Another one showed the edge of something at the very edge
of the film.

The seventh picture Terry recognized. It was what he'd seen when the
flashbulb of his gun-camera went off. The focus was not sharp. But it
was neither a whale nor a blackfish--not even a small one--nor was it a
shark. It was not a squid. It was not even a giant manta. The picture
was a blurry representation of something unreal made for an unimaginable
purpose, under abnormal conditions.

Deirdre looked at it over his shoulder. It could be a living creature.
It could be ... anything.

"You said you didn't like mysteries," commented Deirdre. "Are you sorry
you came?"




_Four_


The next morning the _Esperance_ headed southeast over a sunlit sea.
First, of course, the crew examined the sea's surface for miles around.
As expected, there was nothing remarkable to be observed. Davis did
point out that there were no fish jumping, which was an indication that
there were not as many fish as usual in this part of the ocean. But it
was hard to be sure. There is no normal number of times when fish will
be seen to jump. They usually jump to escape larger fish that want to
eat them. The number is pure chance. But there seemed to be almost no
jumps at all this morning.

It was not discussed at length, however. All the ship's company was
curiously reluctant to refer to the events of the previous night. In
broad daylight, a detached review was simply impractical. With gulls
squawking all about, with seas glinting in the sunshine, with decks to
be washed and breakfast to be eaten, and commonplace, routine
ship-keeping to be done, the adventure of the patch of shining sea
seemed highly improbable. Terry felt that it couldn't really have
happened. To discuss it seriously would be like a daylight ghost tale.
One was unable to believe it in daylight. It was better ignored.

Terry, though, did get out his tools to make a minor modification in the
underwater microphone. It had been designed to be directional, so that
the sound of surf or fish could be located by turning the mike, but he
hadn't been able to point it vertically downward, and last night that
had been the key direction--right under the yacht's keel. So now he
improvised gimbals for the microphone, and a mounting for it similar to
that of a compass, so it could tilt in any desired direction, as well as
turn.

Which, of course, was a tacit admission that something peculiar had
happened. Presently, Deirdre came and watched him.

"What's that for?" she asked, when he fitted the gimbals in place.

He told her. She said hesitantly, "Yesterday, when I asked you not to
try the paddle until we got to shallow water, you got angry and said
you'd ask to be put ashore. We're headed for Barca now. Someone there is
building something for my father, the same thing I had asked you to
build--a fish-driving instrument. If you still want to go, you can get a
bus from there to Manila. But I hope you have changed your mind."

"I have," said Terry dourly. "I told your father so. I was irritated
because I couldn't get any answers to the questions I asked. Now I've
got some questions your father wants answers to. And I'm going to try to
find them out."

Deirdre sighed, perhaps in relief.

"I put some pictures and a clipping in a book on the cabin table," she
said. "Did you see them?"

He nodded.

"What did you think?"

"That you put them for me to see," he said.

"It was to make you realize that we can't answer every question, which
you know now."

"I still think you could answer a few more than you have," he observed.
"But let it go. Is the Barca harbor shallow?"

"Ten, fifteen feet at low tide," she informed him. "We're having a sort
of dredge made there. Something to go down into the sea, take pictures,
get samples of the bottom, and then come up again. There's an
oceanographic ship due in Manila shortly, by the way. It will have a
bathyscaphe on board. Maybe that will help find out some answers." Then
she said uncomfortably, "I have a feeling the bathyscaphe isn't ...
safe."

He glanced up.

"_Ellos?_" He grinned as she looked sharply at him. Then he said, "This
dredge: isn't it pretty ambitious for a boat this size to try to dredge
some thousands of fathoms down?"

"It's a free dredge," she said. "It will sink by itself and come up by
itself. There's no cable. What are you doing now?"

He'd put away the submarine microphone he'd just altered and was now
taking out the still untested underwater horn.

"I'm going to try to make this directional, too," he said. "In fact, I'm
going to try to make it project sound in a beam shaped like a fan. A
hollow cone may come later."

She was silent. The _Esperance_ sailed on.

"Ever talk to the skipper of _La Rubia_?" he asked presently.

She shook her head.

"You should. He's a stupendous, self-confident liar," said Terry. "He
lies automatically. Gratuitously. A completely amiable man, but he can't
tell the truth without stopping to think."

"We found that out," said Deirdre. "I didn't. Someone else."

"Is this another censored subject, or can I ask what happened?"

"I'd better see about lunch," said Deirdre quickly.

She got up and left. Terry shrugged. The day before yesterday, or even
yesterday, he'd have been indignant. But then he'd known these people
had secrets in which he had no share. Today he was beginning to share
those secrets, and he had fabulously nonsensical material on which to
work on his own. He had strange ideas about the event of last night. He
did not quite believe them, but he thought he had devised some ways to
see how much of truth they contained, if any. Deirdre could keep her
secrets, so long as he did not have to disclose his own wildly
imaginative ideas.

The routine of the yacht went on. It was in a way a very casual routine.
Davis gave orders when the need arose, but there was no formal
discipline; there was co-operation. Terry heard one of the crew-cuts ask
Deirdre a question using her first name. It would have been highly
improbable in a paid crew, but it was reasonable enough in a volunteer
expedition. He heard Deirdre say, "Why don't you ask him?"

The crew-cut, Tony, came to the part of the deck where Terry worked.

"We got into an argument," he said without preface. "We were talking
about that ... 'whale' last night."

Terry nodded. The use of the term "whale" was a deliberate pretense that
the previous night's events were natural and normal.

"How fast do you think it was traveling when it broached?" asked Tony.
"I know a whale can jump clear of the water. I've seen it in the movies.
But that one jumped awfully high!"

"I hadn't tried to estimate it," said Terry.

"You've got a tape of the noise," said Tony. "Could you time the
interval between the sound when it left the water, and the splash when
it fell back?"

"Mmm. Yes," said Terry. He looked up. "Of course."

"It would be interesting to do it," said Tony, semicasually. Then he
added hastily, "I've read somewhere that whales have been clocked at
pretty high speeds. If we can find out how long its leap lasted, we
could know how fast it was going."

Terry considered for a moment, and then got out the recorder. He played
the tape for a moment, and skipped forward to later parts of the record
until he came to the place where the unpleasant humming sound was loud,
and finally reached the beginning of the rushing noise. That, in turn,
had preceded the leap of the object photographed by the gun-cameras.

Terry glanced at his watch when the rushing started. He timed the period
of ascent of the noise, while it grew louder and louder and became a
booming sound, which was at its loudest the instant before it ceased. At
that moment the mysterious object had leaped out of the sea. The splash
of its re-entry came long seconds later.

Tony timed the leap. When the splash came he made his calculations
absorbedly, while Terry switched off the recorder.

"It would take the same amount of time going up as it does coming down,"
said Tony, scribbling numbers. "Since we know how fast things fall, when
we know how long they fall we can tell how fast they were traveling when
they landed, and therefore when they leaped."

He multiplied and divided.

"Sixty miles an hour, roughly," he pronounced. "The whale was going
sixty miles an hour straight up when it left the water! What can swim
that fast?"

"That's your question," said Terry. "Here's one of mine. We heard it
coming for five minutes ten seconds. How deep is the water where we
were?"

"About forty-five hundred fathoms."

"If we assume that it came from the bottom, it must have been traveling
at least sixty miles an hour when it broke surface," said Terry.

"But can a whale swim sixty miles an hour?"

"No," said Terry.

Tony hesitated, opened his mouth, closed it, and went away.

Terry returned to the changing of the submarine horn. Sound has its own
tricks underwater. If you know something about them you can produce some
remarkable results. A deliberately made underwater signal can be heard
through an unbelievable number of thousands of miles of seawater. But,
except through a yet untested fish-driving paddle, Terry had never heard
of fish being herded by sound. Still, fish can be stunned or killed by
concussions. They have been known to be made unconscious by the noise
of a very near submarine bell. It wasn't unreasonable that a specific
loud noise could make a barrier no fish would try to cross. But there
were still some parts of last night's events that did not fit into any
rational explanation.

Davis came over to Terry.

"I think," he said, "that we may have missed a lot of information by not
having submarine ears before. There may have been all sorts of noises we
could have heard."

"Possibly," agreed Terry.

"We're more or less in the position of savages faced with phenomena they
don't understand," said Davis vexedly. "The simple problems of savages
range from what produces thunder to what makes people die of disease.
Savages come up with ideas of gods or devils doing such things for
reasons of their own. We can't accept ideas of that sort, of course!"

"No," agreed Terry, "we can't."

"But what happened last night," said Davis, "is almost as mysterious to
us as thunder to a savage. A savage would blame it on devils or
whatnot."

"Or on _ellos_," said Terry.

"He'd imagine a personality behind it, yes," said Davis. "He does things
because he wants to, so he thinks all natural phenomena occur because
somebody wants them to. He has no idea of natural law, so he tries to
imagine what kind of person--what kind of god or devil--does the things
he notices. It's a natural way to think."

