
Donald Alexander is all for Ackerman and wishes to make no secret of
it:

"I've been watching the controversy in 'The Boiling Point.' It seems
to me that young Forrest J. Ackerman is by far the most sensible of
the lot. Instead of intelligently answering his arguments, Messrs.
Smith, Lovecraft, Barlow, etc., have made fools of themselves
descending to personalities. Ackerman is a most interesting type of
'crank.' (Everyone who writes in to a magazine is a 'crank.' So'm I).
At least, F. J. A. shows signs of a rudimentary intelligence, which
most cranks don't. I agree with him. 'The Light from Beyond' and
several other Smith yarns, had no place in _Wonder Stories_. WS
calls itself a science fiction magazine. Smith's story under
discussion isn't science fiction, so, it had no place in such a
magazine. F. J. A. is right there. I see no reason why Lovecraft
should condemn Ackerman for not liking Smith. After all, we each have
our own tastes. Smith, in my own opinion, is a poor writer. His
stories are all like the ravings of some fearfully diseased mind.
Lovecraft, on the other hand, is a fairly good writer. But I'm wasting
good typewriter ink; your readers haven't enough intelligence to grasp
such a common sense argument as the one presented by Ackerman, so they
call him a nitwit, while he actually has more sense than the lot of
them thrown together. If there were a hundred-million Forrest J.
Ackermans in the world, it'd be a better place to live in, at least
we'd have a little common sense used occasionally."

Now, while we are very glad to find defenses on the Ackerman side,
we must disagree with Mr. Alexander when he calls our readers too
ignorant to grasp an argument put forth by Mr. Ackerman. Their eager
disapproval with logical objections contradicts this theory. And then
again, the mere fact that they are science fiction and weird fans puts
them above the average, for such readers must be broadminded and open
minded, and not the "What's-good-enough-for-father-is-good-enough-for-me"
or "There-ain't-no-such-animal" types. We believe that this letter
leaves cause for rebuttal on the part of Messrs. Smith and Lovecraft.

Forrest J. Ackerman, of course, does not like the way he has been
treated, and has this to say about it:

"Pardon me, do; but why did you run 'The Boiling Point' in a foreign
language? What a vocalberry on those Weird Men Smith and Lovecraft!
And I think I'll have to change my tag from 'Forrest J. Ackerman,
Scientifictionist' to 'Forrest J. Ackerman, Ebullitionist'. The two
got the word in within the first line of comments. Now Mr. Smith will
be calling Mr. Lovecraft 'Plagiarist', and then maybe Mr. Smith (the
'Skylark') will burst in and say that HE owns the original. Let's have
a contest... Just thought of it--the original Paul illustration that I
treasure _would_ be from _Smith's_ story, 'The City of the Singing
Flame.' I don't get the connection: the Lovecraft says in print 'a
very childish attack', and in his personal reply to me 'your bright
and candid letter.'!?"

It can be seen by the above letter that Ackerman really holds no hard
feeling toward the Weird Men; just a bit of mockery and rare Ackerman
wit.

Just to show that we are always open to both sides, following are a
couple of fans who still choose to 'lay it on thick.'

"Personally, I thought that 'The Light From Beyond' was very good, and
I certainly could see nothing weird about it. It was fantasy, yes, and
not stf, but some of the greatest classics of so-called science
fiction have been almost pure fantasy. Witness: 'The Snake Mother,'
'The Moon Pool,' 'The Time Stream' (Ackerman's objection to this was
particularly obnoxious to me, as I thought it was one of the best
stories ever written. Certainly it offered the most food for thought),
'The Skylark of Space' (partly fantasy), 'The Princess of Mars,' and
other greats. Certainly, there should be something more to science
fiction than rays, machines, villains, heroines, (composed of lipstick
and legs, as Mr. Barlow rather bitterly expresses it) as has been
stressed so greatly of late. There should be an element of fantasy,
strong character, and a well-developed plot in addition. The lack of
those is why so many weird story lovers (like Mr. Barlow) can find so
much fault with stf. I do not blame him. I, myself, as a reader, will
stop reading stf when the fantasy element is dropped completely."
William Crawford (Editor of _Unusual Stories_).

"What does this Ackerman guy know about weird and fantastic fiction?
From the way he writes, he must be an unimaginative person unable to
stretch his mind away from space-ships and foreign star-clusters. I
get that he is an egotistical radical and one who doesn't like
something that is not even intended for him. So far, in telling about
his collection, he has described a sort of madhouse. However, I
certainly would like to see this madhouse, as I can appreciate a thing
or two that is connected with stf. At heart, I am truly a weird and
fantastic fiction fan."--F. Lee Baldwin

There seems to be enough controversy in this month's discussion to
bring in enough letters to fill next month's. Write in and give us
your opinions on the subject. Are Smith's tales fit for _Wonder
Stories_? Does Ackerman know what he's talking about, and are the
Weird Men justified in their criticisms of him? Here's hoping to hear
from you.

                     *      *      *      *      *

    Man is in truth but cosmic dust,
    Which by a sudden whirling gust
    Of forces from unbounded space,
    Spread o'er this planet's tiny face.

                     *      *      *      *      *

If you think that you have anything worthwhile to contribute to

    THE FANTASY FAN

send it in to us for our very serious consideration, we are always
glad to get material from our readers.




UNUSUAL STORIES


The new magazine of fantastic fiction presents such stories as:

    "The White Sybil"
    by Clark Ashton Smith

    "Countries in the Sea"
    by August W. Derleth

    "The Sixth Sense"
    by Stanton A. Coblentz

    "On Board the Space-Ship Terra"
    by L. A. Eshbach

    "The Strange Case of Tony Rizutti"
    by Ralph Milne Farley

    "The Doom that Came to Sarnath"
    by H. P. Lovecraft

    "Tharda, Queen of Vampires"
    by Richard Tooker

    "The Garden of Fear"
    by Robert E. Howard

    "Mars Colonizes"
    by Miles J. Breuer, M.D.

    "When the Waker Sleeps"
