have been used quite often, except that which is not for science
fiction, but has been overdone in weird stories.

"I keep forgetting that each month I am going to receive a copy of
_The Fantasy Fan_ so that, when it does come, it is such a pleasant
surprise. As a regular feature, I enjoy Bob Tucker's report on the
English stf magazines best of all. 'How to Write a Stf Story' was _so_
funny."--Forrest J. Ackerman

"The November TFF is decidedly improving and I look forward to future
issues with much interest. I wonder how many collectors there are that
can discriminate between the trash that seems popular and the best in
Fantasy?"--R. H. Barlow

"The November issue of TFF was magnificent! What got the cake was 'How
to Write a Stf Story' by Hoy Ping Pong. By the way, Editor, who is
this Hoy Ping Pong? Anyway, regardless of who he is, he seems to be
humorously inclined, so let's have more from him. No periodical is
exactly good without a touch of humor."--Ted H. Lutwin

There's no use in concealing the identity Hoy Ping Pong. It is none
other than Bob Tucker, author of the English science fiction series,
and more Hoy Ping Pong articles to come.

"I liked the November issue very much and hope you'll publish more of
Smith's poetry."--Robert E. Howard

"I was certainly disappointed to hear that the _Necronomicon_, _Book
of Eibon_, and the _Nameless Cults_ had no existence except in the
fertile imaginations of Lovecraft, Smith, and Howard. That's not
illusion of reality. Anyone could quote books and authors that never
existed. To me, it is plain fabrication. According to Joseph McCabe,
the monks of the middle ages were adepts at it. I must say, however,
that it was quite a help in giving an illusion of reality to
Lovecraft's stories, and Smith's. It won't be now, though, because the
cat is out of the bag. But what about 'Yog Sothoth' and 'Sattaquo' and
'Thule.' Surely, there must be a legend of some sort to account for
them, or does their ancientness go no farther than 1924? Were they
born about the same time as _Weird Tales_? I notice that the Illusion
of reality has much more force at night than in the daytime."--Carl J.
Smith

It is only an A-1 author that can make you believe that a thing exists
when it really doesn't. Perhaps the cat is out of the bag, at you say,
but we don't believe that it detracts from Smith's, Lovecraft's, or
Howard's stories one bit. However, weird fans will probably not be
satisfied until the aforesaid "fabricators" write up the books _in
toto_ that they have created in their minds. Smith is now working
on a chapter of "The Book of Eibon."

"I was pleased to receive your clever little 'Fantasy Fan' and
consider it highly entertaining and useful and well worth the dollar I
enclose for a year's subscription. From time to time I noticed in the
reader's columns the uprise of little pamphlets, but never gave them
serious thought. This one you have sent me startled me into
appreciating that the fantasy fans are an energetic lot.

"My eulogies and praises to the incomparable Clark Ashton Smith for
his 'Kingdom of the Worm.' He has the magic of words that makes great
writers. We like to honor the memory of Poe as the father of the short
story and the fantastic type of fiction, but Smith surpasses him.

"Enclosed you will find a little story of mine that I tender you
gratis--let us say as a Christmas present, for use in TFF. I wrote it
on the spur of the moment one day, as the idea popped into my mind and
refused to depart."--Eando Binder

We thank Mr. Binder, an author of note, for his excellent story. It
will appear in an early issue of TFF. The theme used is a brand new
one, and we believe will make a big hit with all lovers of weird
fiction.

"The November issue was a gem all the way through, and I am certainly
learning a lot of facts about fantastic fiction that are quite new to
me. It answers numerous questions that I have had in mind for a long
time. I think the comments by the readers constitute a most absorbing
part of your magazine, especially when they are by contributors and
old fans that know the 'ropes' well. Understand that I am a
comparative beginner in the absorbing game of chasing fantastic
literature. It is quite noticeable that the trend is turning even more
toward the fantastic than the pure science fiction, which, it would
seen, has been on the wane for some time. I am not a science fiction
crank, however, and have several good tales in my collection. They are
not interplanetary, though, but ones approaching closer to the
fantastic.

"The poem by Clark Ashton Smith was enormous; yet, more than that. I
do not think one could describe it. 'The Other Gods' by H. P.
Lovecraft added just the right atmosphere to TFF. The mention of
Ulthar in this story recalled a story by the same author named 'The
Cats of Ulthar.'

"As Mr. Ackerman's collection continues to pile up, it seems that in
spite of mania to judge literature, he certainly does a thing up right
when he starts.

"The discovery that the now famous book 'Necronomicon' is entirely
fictitious was a considerable shock. Too bad that such a volume is not
available to all lovers of fiction pertaining to the black arts and
kindred subjects. I had even thought seriously of sending to the State
College Library in quest of a copy in English! I wondered at the time
if it had yet been translated. Why not have Lovecraft write such a
book? I am sure it would sell well. I enjoy reading the denouncement
of Mr. Ackerman."--Duane W. Rime

As Dr. Keller says, it doesn't matter whether a reader praises Forrest
or condemns him, so long as they say _something_. We, also, were on
the verge of sending someplace for the _Necronomicon_ in English.

"Lovecraft's 'The Other Gods' and 'Supernatural Horror in Literature'
are a treat for which I am sure every reader is grateful. 'True Ghost
Stories' is very well presented and Barlow's 'Annals of the Jinns'
very capably upholds fantastic lore. Smith's 'The Kingdom of the Worm'
recalled to my mind Donald Wandrei's 'The Worm King', a poem which
I read in _Weird Tales_ years ago. While different in essence of
tone, these two carry the same eery quality. Although your various
departments have not yet swung into full stride, great promise is
indicated.

"I have a suggestion for Mr. Tucker. If his English connection will
supply him with sufficient information, a column or so on Arthur
Machen and Algernon Blackwood might introduce two very worthy writers
of weird tales to your readers."--Chester D. Cuthbert

We have on hand for early publication, several articles on the works
of the great writers of the past. Watch for them. To our readers: How
did you like Mr. Cuthbert's story "The Sublime Vigil" in the February
1934 issue of _Wonder Stories_? Watch his progress! We predict that in
less than one year he will be one of your favorite authors.

"Glad to see the December issue. All the stories art excellent and the
departments are as interesting as usual."--H. P. Lovecraft

"I have received the November TFF and would say that it is the most
satisfactory issue so far. 'The Other Gods' is indeed a masterpiece of
prose poetry, filled with imaginative overtones. Barlow's second
Annals of the Jinns is memorably touched, and the sense of atmosphere
conveyed is remarkable in view of its brevity. Hoy Ping Pong's article
on how to write scientifiction is most amusing.

"Re the origin of the word 'weird,' which you attributed to Edgar
