flows into Sarlo only forty miles above Sarlo Bay. The city of Sarlo
is here, on the north bank of the Sarlo River, right on the Bay, and
is five-sixths surrounded by water. The Sarlo River is wide and deep,
uncrossable against any real opposition. Thus, Sarlonian strategy
has always been not to make any strong stand anywhere along the West
Branch, but to fight delaying actions merely--making their real stand
on the north bank of the Sarlo, only a few miles from Sarlo City
itself. The Sarlo River, gentlemen, is well called 'Sarlo's Shield.' It
has never been crossed."

"How do you expect to cross it, then, sire?" Schillan asked.

"Strictly speaking, we cross it not, but float down it. We cross the
Tegula at Upper Ford, not Lower...."

"_Upper_ Ford, sire? Above the terrible gorge of the Low Umpasseurs?"

"Yea. That gorge, undefended, is passable. 'Tis rugged, but passage can
be made. Once through the gorge our way to the Lake of the Spiders,
from which springs the Middle Branch of the Sarlo, is clear and open."

"But 'tis held, sire, that Middle Valley is impassable for troops," a
grizzled captain protested.

"We traverse it, nonetheless. On rafts, at six or seven miles an hour,
faster by far than any army can march. But 'tis enough of explanation.
Lord Sciro, attend!"

"I listen, sire."

"At earliest dawn take two centuries of axemen and one century of
bowmen, with the wagonload of wood-workers' supplies about which some
of you have wondered. Strike straight north at forced march. Cross
the Tegula. Straight north again, to the Lake of the Spiders and the
head of the Middle Branch. Build rafts, large enough and of sufficient
number to bear our whole force; strong enough to stand rough usage. The
rafts should be done, or nearly, by the time we get there."

"I hear, sire, and I obey."

Tedric, almost stunned by the novelty and audacity of this, the first
amphibian operation in the history of his world, was dubious but
willing. And as the map of that operation spread itself in his mind, he
grew enthusiastic.

"We attack then, not from the south but from the north-east!"

"Aye, and on solid ground, not across deep water. But to bed,
gentlemen--tomorrow the clarions sound before dawn!"

Dawn came. Sciro and his force struck out. The main army marched away,
up the north bank of the Upper Midvale, which for thirty or forty
miles flowed almost directly from the north-east. There, however, it
circled sharply to flow from the south-east and the Lomarrians left it,
continuing their march across undulating foothills straight for Upper
Ford. From the south, the approach to this ford, lying just above (east
of) the Low Umpasseur Mountains, at the point where the Middle Marches
mounted a stiff but not abrupt gradient to become the Upper Marches,
was not too difficult. Nor was the entrapment of most of the Sarlonians
and barbarians on watch. The stream, while only knee-deep for the most
part, was wide, fast, and rough; the bottom was made up in toto of
rounded, mossy, extremely slippery rocks. There were enough men and
horses and lines, however, so that the crossing was made without loss.

Then, turning three-quarters of a circle, the cavalcade made slow way
back down the river, along its north bank, toward the forbidding gorge
of the Low Umpasseurs.

The north bank was different, vastly different, from the south one.
Mountains of bare rock, incredible thousands of feet higher than
the plateau forming the south bank, towered at the rushing torrent's
very edge. What passed for a road was narrow, steep, full of hair-pin
turns, and fearfully rugged. But this, too, was passed--by dint of what
labor and stress it is not necessary to dwell upon--and as the army
debouched out onto the sparsely-wooded, gullied and eroded terrain of
the high barren valley and began to make camp for the night. Tedric
became deeply concerned. Sciro's small force would have left no obvious
or lasting traces of its passing; but such blatant disfigurements as
these....

He glanced at the king, then stared back at the broad, trampled,
deep-rutted way the army had come. "South of the river our tracks do
not matter," he said, flatly. "In the gorge they exist not. But _those_
traces, sire, matter greatly and are not to be covered or concealed."

"Tedric, I approve of you--you begin to think!" Much to the young man's
surprise, Phagon smiled broadly. "How wouldst handle the thing, if
decision yours?"

"A couple of fives of bowmen to camp here or nearby, sire," Tedric
replied promptly, "to put arrows through any who come to spy."

"'Tis a sound idea, but not enough by half. Here I leave _you_; and a
full century each of our best scouts and hunters. See to it, my lord
captain, that none sees this our trail from here to the Lake of the
Spiders; or, having seen it, lives to tell of the seeing."

Tedric, after selecting his sharp-shooters and watching them melt
invisibly into the landscape, went down the valley about a mile and hid
himself carefully in a cave. These men knew the business in hand a lot
better than he did, and he would not interfere. What he was for was to
take command in an emergency; if the operation were a complete success
he would have nothing whatever to do!

He was still in the cave, days later, when word came that the launching
had begun. Rounding up his guerillas, he led them at a fast pace to the
Lake of the Spiders, around it, and to the place where the Lomarrian
army had been encamped. Four fifty-man rafts were waiting, and Tedric
noticed with surprise that a sort of house had been built on the one
lying farthest down-stream. This luxury, he learned, was for him and
his squire Rahlion and their horses and armor!

The Middle Branch was wide and swift; and to Tedric and his bowmen,
landlubbers all, it was terrifyingly rough and boisterous and full of
rocks. Tedric, however, did not stay a landlubber long. He was not
the type to sit in idleness when there was something physical to do,
something new to learn. And learning to be a riverman was so much
easier than learning to be King Phagon's idea of a strategist!

Thus, stripped to clout and moccasins, Tedric reveled in pitting his
strength and speed at steering-oar or pole against the raft's mass and
the river's whim.

"A good man, him," the boss boatman remarked to one of his mates. Then,
later, to Tedric himself: "'Tis shame, lord, that you got to work at
this lord business. Wouldst make a damn good riverman in time."

"My thanks, sir, and 'twould be more fun, but King Phagon knows best.
But this 'Bend' you talk of--what is it?"

"'Tis where this Middle Branch turns a square angle 'gainst solid rock
to flow west into the Sarlo; the roughest, wickedest bit of water
anybody ever tried to run a raft over. Canst try it with me if you
like."

"'Twould please me greatly to try."

Well short of the Bend, each raft was snubbed to the shore and
unloaded. When the first one was bare, the boss riverman and a score of
his best men stepped aboard. So did Tedric.

"What folly this?" Phagon yelled. "Tedric, ashore!"

"Canst swim, Lord Tedric?" the boss asked.

"Like an eel," Tedric admitted modestly, and the riverman turned to the
king.

"'Twill save you rafts, sire, if he works with us. He's quick as a cat
and strong as a bull, and knows more of white water already than half
my men."

"In that case ..." Phagon waved his hand and the first raft took off.

Many of the rafts were lost, of course; and Tedric had to swim in icy
water more than once, but he loved every exhausting, exciting second
of the time. Nor were the broken logs of the wrecked rafts allowed
to drift down the river as tell-tales. Each bit was hauled carefully
ashore.

Below the Bend, the Middle Branch was wide and deep, hence the
reloaded rafts had smooth sailing; and the Sarlo itself was of
course wider and deeper still. In fact, it would have been easily
navigable by an 80,000-ton modern liner. The only care now was to
avoid discovery--which matter was attended to by several centuries of
far-ranging scouts and by scores of rivermen in commandeered boats.

Moyla's Landing, the predetermined point of debarkation, was a scant
fifteen miles from the city of Sarlo. It was scarcely a hamlet, but
even so any one of its few inhabitants could have given the alarm.
