Harpo looked up sharply. "You actually saw Schiml's signature on it?"

"I saw it. I'm taken off assignment and so are you. We're both shoved
out. Can't you get that straight? After all this time--and just
because they get somebody in here that gets them excited."

Harpo snorted. "So they've gone off on these spook hunts before. Where
do you think it'll take them this time? Extra-sensory powers!" The huge
man spat in disdain. "Have you ever seen anybody with extra-sensory
powers? Well, neither have I. Look, Jacques, let's face it: Schiml
would give his left arm at the shoulder to have proof of extra-sensory
powers in any form." Harpo grinned unpleasantly. "You've seen proof of
that before. He believes in it, he wants to prove it. And every now and
then he's going to have a try at it just to keep himself happy, just to
keep in form. There's no call to get excited."

"But he's got a solid prospect this time," Blackie snapped. "From the
stories I've heard the guy is a phenomenon. Hit top scores on the
cards--highest they've ever recorded here. Other things too, like
peeling the paper off the walls just by looking at them, or closing up
opened wounds in ten minutes."

"So you hear stories! Around here I don't believe anything I hear."
Harpo shifted uneasily. "If there was anything tangible, anything we
could put our hands on, I'd listen. But there's not--no proof, no
nothing but a lot of wild stories. And I've even heard better stories
in my time. You can't go around fighting stories--"

Jeff sat bolt upright, something shouting out in his brain. He grabbed
for his shoes, oblivious to the agonizing pain in his muscles, fumbled
eagerly, his mind screaming in excitement. "What kind of proof do you
want?" he growled.

Harpo stared up at him, as though seeing a ghost. "You awake!" he
gasped. And then: "Any kind of proof!"

"Then take a look at this." And Jeff tossed the crumpled card down in
the middle of the huddle.

Blackie was on her feet, her eyes eager. "Didn't know you were anywhere
near ready to wake up," she said. "You look like they really gave you
the works."

"Well, something happened, all right. I don't know whether I'm coming
or going."

Blackie nodded. "You never do, after testing. They came here for you,
and I told them you'd gone out for a stroll. But I guess they found
you." She put a cup of coffee in Jeff's hand and motioned toward the
card. "You got that out of the file without being spotted?"

Jeff's eyes met hers for the briefest instant. "That's right. And
I heard what you were talking about." He caught the little note of
warning in her eyes: the silent, helpless appeal. He shook his head
imperceptibly. He knew then that she hadn't told the others about their
battle over the dice. He pointed to the card. "I think that answers a
lot of things."

Harpo's eyes were suspicious. "How do you know that's the man?"

"Because I drove him in here, that's why." Jeff's voice was a snarl; it
sounded sharp in the quiet room. "I knew he was here because he came
here to escape me. But I didn't know he had any connection with ESP
until I saw the card."

Harpo stared at the card, then at Jeff. "You mean you drove him in
here?"

"That's right. Because I'd have killed him if he didn't come." Jeff's
face was dark as he turned to the girl. "Tell him, Blackie. Tell him
why I'm here."

Blackie told them. They listened with widening eyes, and the room was
still as a tomb.

"And you came in here to kill this man--nothing more?" Harpo's voice
was incredulous. "But man, you're on thin ice, very thin ice. If they
tested you last night, you'll be assigned. Why, you could be forced to
sign a release any time."

"I know it, I know it. Can't you see why there isn't time to bicker
now?" Jeff's voice cracked in the still room, sharp and urgent. "This
is the man, the one I'm looking for and the one you're looking for, the
one with ESP that's got Schiml and his men so excited! It's here on the
card!"

Harpo's eyes were narrow. "Any other proof besides the card that Conroe
is the man?"

Jeff's voice was low with hate. "Look. I've been hunting the man down
for five years. A long time. I've hunted him wherever he's gone. I've
had the best detective agency in North America working with me hand
and foot, tracking him down. But they haven't caught him. We've almost
caught him, we've haunted him, we've run him back and forth across the
country and world until he's ragged. But we've never caught him. Isn't
there some significance to that? Time and again we've come so close
that we couldn't miss--and then we missed. We've come too close too
many times for coincidence. There's another factor, a factor that's
giving Conroe warning, time after time. It's allowed him to slip out of
perfectly sealed traps--_a factor like precognition, for instance_."

There was a long silence. Then the Nasty Frenchman was on his feet, his
lips stretched in a malicious grin. "If we move fast enough, we can
stop it--cut it off at the bud. We're off the payroll now. But we can
get back on it again, if their boy wonder dies."

Harpo's eyes flashed. "And how do you plan to do it?"

"Nothing simpler in the world. We just find the guy." The Nasty
Frenchman's grin widened. "Then after we find him, we tell our friend
Jeff about it. Nothing more. Jeff'll take it from there. Right, Jeff?"

Jeff's heart pounded against his ribs. "That's right," he said, his
voice hoarse with eagerness. "Just find him for me."

Harpo bent over slowly, poured another cup of coffee. "Then let's talk
plans," he said softly.

       *       *       *       *       *

The planning went smoothly. Jeff sat forward eagerly. The despair and
hopelessness of an hour before evaporated, leaving fingers of wild
excitement creeping through his muscles, up and down his spine. These
people knew where they were; they knew how to hunt in this evil place,
where to go, what to do. This was the help he needed to complete his
mission, the help he'd needed from the start. And now, at last, nothing
would go wrong. Carefully, the last trap was laid--the final drive in
this manhunt that had lasted so long and been so fruitless. This time
there would be no slip.

Harpo fingered the card thoughtfully. "These dates must have some
significance. Were there any signs of Conroe's visits here at those
times?"

Jeff shook his head. "No sign. He couldn't have been here for more than
three days at a time, or I'd have known about it."

Harpo grunted, his eyes sharp on Jeff's face. "And you had no definite,
direct evidence that he was somehow using an extra-sensory talent in
eluding you?"

Jeff scowled. "No direct evidence. I'm afraid not. There was no reason
to suspect it, until I found the card. Then hindsight started filling
in funny things that had gone unnoticed before."

Harpo nodded. "Yes. That's the way it would be. But Schiml must have
had direct enough evidence. This ESP study is just like space travel
was. They've been after it for years; they start after it time after
time, every time a new angle comes up. Because if they succeed it could
mean so much to so many people."

The Nasty Frenchman snorted. "Sure. Like running us out of paying jobs
for good and all, after all the risks we've taken. Open the door to ESP
for them, and there wouldn't be any other work in the Center for twenty
years. And if we don't happen to be what they're looking for--" He ran
his finger across his throat and scowled. "The man is here. We've got
to have information on him, past and present. That means we'll have to
search the Archives. There's no better approach." He turned his sharp
little eyes on Jeff. "You know how the electronic files work. You're
the one that can dig out what we need to know in the Archives."

Jeff nodded. "But I'll need time to work without interruption. Can you
get me into the Archive files without being caught?"

The Nasty Frenchman nodded eagerly. "Nothing to it. Give us half an
hour to clear the way and get the guards taken care of." He glanced up
at Harpo. "The old fire-alarm gag should do it, all right. Then you can
walk right down."

"And can you keep it clear for me, say, for an hour or so?"

"For five hours, if necessary." Harpo stood up sharply. "We'll start
now to get things lined up. When it's clear, I'll give you a flicker on
the phone. Don't answer it. Just come along. Blackie can draw you a map
while you wait." The bald-headed giant started to leave, then turned
back. "And don't let any alarm bells disturb you. We've found ways of
occupying guards before." He touched his forehead briefly, and he and
the Nasty Frenchman disappeared into the corridor.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I think it'll work," Jeff breathed, tucking Blackie's crude penciled
map into his pocket. "I think we've got him. Once we know where he is
and what they're going to do with him--" He grinned up at her, his eyes
shining. "His time's running out, Blackie. He's as good as dead."

The girl leaned forward, pouring coffee, sitting silently. Jeff watched
her face, as if seeing it for the first time. Indeed, for the first
time, the girl's face seemed softer. In the dim light of the room,
the hard lines melted away, magically. Her face appeared younger and
fresher, as though some curious mask had dropped away in the course of
the evening.

But her eyes were troubled as she watched Jeff and lifted her coffee
cup in mock salute. "To the Hunter," she said softly.

Jeff raised his own cup. "Yes. But not for long now."

"It can't go on much longer, Jeff. Your number's up next."

"For assignment?" Jeff's eyes flashed. "Do you think that makes any
difference to me? I'm following through to the end on this, no matter
what happens."

"But, Jeff, you can't sign a release."

Jeff stared at her in the silent room. "Why not? If it's the only thing
I can do--"

Her eyes were wide and very dark. "Oh, Jeff, you're in terrible danger
here."

"I know that."

"You don't, you don't." The girl was shaking her head, tears rising
to her eyes. "You don't know anything, Jeff, about the Mercy Men or
the kind of work they do. Oh, I know, you think you do. But you don't,
really. Look, Jeff--look at it straight--you're young, you're smart.
There are other ways to spend your life, more important things for you
to do. Can't you see that? No man is worth throwing your life away
for, no matter what he's done to you. That's what you're doing. You're
walking down a blind alley, into a death trap! Get out, while you can."

Jeff's head was shaking, his lips tight, until the color fled them,
leaving pale gray lines. "I can't get out. I just can't. Nothing anyone
could say could drive me out now."

"But you've got to run while you can! Oh, yes, go down there tonight
if you must, try to find him. But if you don't find him, cut and run.
Jeff, get out, tonight. They can't stop you; they have no legal hold on
you, yet. But once they bring in a release, you're hooked. It'll be too
late then."

Jeff's eyes narrowed, and he sat down on the bed and faced the girl.
There was an elfin expression on her face, a curious intensity in her
large gray eyes that he had never seen before. "What do you care?" he
asked suddenly. "What do you care what I do?"

The girl's voice was low, and the words tumbled out so rapidly that
he could hardly follow them. "Look, Jeff, you and me--we could work
as a team. Don't you see what we could do? We could get out of here,
together. We could get out of the city, go to the West Coast. The dice,
think of the dice, man--we could clean up! You don't belong in here on
the rack for slaughter. And I wouldn't belong here, either, if we could
work together--"

Somewhere in the distance an alarm bell began ringing, insistently,
clang-clanging down the corridors. Then there was a rush of feet,
shouted orders and calls up and down the hallway, and the squeak of
three jitneys passing by in rapid succession. Then, abruptly, the
corridor fell silent again.

Jeff hardly noticed the clamor. He stared at the girl, his hands
trembling. "Blackie, Blackie, think what you're saying. The tough-luck
jinx. Have you forgotten? You're safe from it here. But outside, what
would happen? We might make a go of it, yes, but what if the jinx
followed us?"

"Oh, but Jeff, that's silly." She swallowed, her eyes almost
overflowing as she tried to blink back the tears. "It isn't just
selfishness, Jeff. I could stay here. I talked to Schiml this
afternoon, before Harpo and Jacques started talking. They're out--yes.
But I'm not. He wants me to stay, says there's a place for me in the
work. But I don't want to stay."

Jeff was shaking his head slowly, his eyes tired. "It's no dice,
Blackie. Not now. After I get Conroe, after I get out of here, then
maybe I could think about it. But I haven't given this dice business
any thought at all. Can't you see? I'd have to think it out, carefully,
all its ramifications. And I haven't been able to do that. It hasn't
mattered enough. I've got a man to kill, first, before anything else.
And I'm going to kill him. I'm going to kill him tonight."

"Then do it for sure. Get him tonight! And then get out, before
something happens--"

In the corner the phone gave two sharp rings, then lapsed into silence.
Their eyes met, sharply, desperately. "Nothing's going to happen," Jeff
said softly. "Don't worry about it. I've been at this too long for
anything to happen."

There was a frantic light in the girl's gray eyes as she looked up at
him, a depth and sincerity he had never seen before. Her eyes pleaded
with him. "You don't know, you don't know...."

And then they were in each other's arms, drawing each other close,
desperately. His hard lips met her soft ones, met and held. Then when
they parted there was another look in her eyes, and he heard her breath
cut sharply by his ear. "Jeff--"

Gently he put a finger to his lips, loosened her arms from around him.
"Don't say it," he whispered. "Not now, Blackie. Not now--"

And then he was outside, in the corridor. The cool air caught him and
he ran down the corridor toward the stairs. He hurried against the time
the men had prepared for his safety. And as he ran, he felt his heart
pounding in his ears, and he knew the hour was drawing close.




CHAPTER TEN


Jacques and Harpo were waiting for him at the head of the escalator. He
nodded and followed them down the corridor to the small jitney car that
was waiting.

"All set?"

"All set. The guards are all busy up in N unit putting out a fire. They
won't be down to bother us for a couple of hours." The Nasty Frenchman
scowled disdainfully. "But you'll have to hurry. When they come back,
we'll have a time stalling them again."

Jeff nodded. "That should be enough. Then maybe we'll have other things
to occupy the guards tonight."

The jitney started with a lurch and a squawk. Harpo handled the
controls, running the little car swiftly down the corridor. It swung
suddenly into a pitch-black tunnel, took an abrupt dip and began to
spiral downward at a wild rate. Jeff grabbed the hand rail and gasped.

"It's a long way down," Harpo chuckled, sitting back in the darkness.
"The Archives hold the permanent records of the entire Hoffman Center
since it was first opened. That's why it's a vault, so that bombing
won't destroy it. It's one of the most valuable tombs in history."

The jitney shot out into a lighted corridor. Jeff swallowed and felt
his ears pop. The little car whizzed through a maze of tunnels and
corridors. Finally it settled down to the floor before the heavy steel
doors at the end of a large corridor.

Without a word, Harpo moved down to the end of the corridor, and drew
the jitney car with him. He opened the motor hood, started pawing
around busily inside.

The Nasty Frenchman chuckled. "If anyone wanders by, that jitney alarm
siren goes off, and Harpo's just a poor technician trying to make it
stop." The little man walked quickly to the steel doors. "It's not the
first time I've had to work on these," he said slyly. "We wanted in
here a few months ago, when they were trying to pull a shakedown deal
on some of us. I worked out the combination pattern then; it took me
three days. They change the combination periodically, of course, but
the pattern is built into the lock."

He opened a small leather case and placed an instrument up against
the lock. A long, thin wire was poised and ready in his other hand.
Jeff heard several muffled clicks; then Jacques inserted the wire
sharply into something. An alarm bell above the door gave one dull,
half-hearted clunk and relapsed into silence, as though changing its
mind at the last moment. A moment later the little Frenchman looked up
and winked, and the steel vault door rolled slowly back.

The place smelled damp and empty. Three walls and half of the fourth
were occupied with electronic file controls. The bulk of the room was
taken up with tables, microviewers, readers, recorders, and other
study-apparatus. There was nothing small in the room; the whole place
breathed of bigness, of complexity, of many years of work and wisdom,
of many lives and many, many deaths. It was a record-room that many
lives had built.

Jeff moved in toward the control panel. He located the master coder
and sat down in a chair before it, his eyes running over it carefully,
sizing up the mammoth filing machine. And then, quite suddenly, he felt
terribly afraid. A knot grew in his stomach and a cold sweat broke out
on his forehead. A face was again looming up sharply in his mind. It
was the huge, ghoulish face that had come to him again and again in his
dreams; the face full of hatred and viciousness--pale and inhuman.

It was the face of a heartless, pointless, bloody assassin. But was
that all? Or was there more to that face, more to that dream than Jeff
had ever suspected? Something deep in his mind stirred, sending a chill
down his spine. His hand trembled as he ran a hand over the control
panel. A ghost was there at his elbow, a ghost that had followed him on
this nebulous trail of bitterness and hatred for so long--a trail which
would end in this very room.

He shook his head angrily. There was no time for panic, no time for
ruminating. He picked the panel-code combination for the Mercy Men and
the research unit. Then he computed the coding for Conroe's name. With
trembling fingers, he typed out the coding, punched the tracer button
and sat back, his heart thumping wildly. He watched the receiver slot
for the telltale file cards and folio.

The file squeaked and chattered and whirred and moaned, and finally the
pale instruction panel lighted up: No Information.

Jeff blinked, a chill running up his back. These files were the
final appeal; the information had to be here. Quickly, he computed a
description coding, fed it in and waited again in mounting tension.
Still no information. He picked the code card from his pocket, the card
from the Mercy Men's file up above, the card with the Hoffman Center's
own picture of Conroe on it. He fed it into the photoelectric tracer,
marked in the necessary coding for an unlimited file search: "Any
person resembling this description in any way: any information on--"
Again he sat back, breathing heavily.

The whirring went on and on. Then, inexorably, the little panel
flickered and spelled out a single word:

"Unknown."

Jeff choked. He stared at the panel, his whole body shaking, and went
through the coding again, step by step, searching for an error, finding
none. It was impossible, it couldn't be so--and yet, the files were
empty of information. As though there had never been a Paul Conroe.
There was not even a reference card to the card in the Mercy Men's
files.

He stared at the panel, his mind rebelling in protest. Nothing,
not even a trace in the one place where there had to be complete
information. He had come to a dead end--the last dead end there could
be in the Hoffman Center.

The Nasty Frenchman lit a cigarette and watched Jeff from bright eyes.
"No luck?"

"No luck," said Jeff, brokenly. "We're beaten. That's all."

"But there must be--"

"Well, there's not!" Jeff slammed his fist down on the table with a
crash, his eyes blazing. "There's not a trace, not a whisper of the man
in here. There has to be--and there's not. It's the same as every other
time: a blank wall. Blank wall after blank wall. I'm getting tired
of them, so miserably tired of running into blind alley after blind
alley." He stood up, his shoulders sagging. "I'm too tired of it to
keep it up. There's no point to gambling any longer. I'm getting out of
here while I've got a whole skin."

"Maybe you've got more time than you think." The Nasty Frenchman eyed
him in alarm. "This is no time to run out. It may be weeks before
you're assigned."

Jeff stared at him. "Well, I know one way to find out." He walked over
to the control panel, stabbed an angry finger at the master coder,
picked out the coding for "J. Meyer." "They'll have me here too," he
snapped. "The whole works about me: what the testing said, what they're
going to do to me. That's one way to find out." Quickly, he typed out
the coding, punched the tracer button....

The machinery whirred again, briefly. Then there was a click in the
receiver slot and another and another. Jeff blinked at it as the
microfilm rolls continued to fall down. Then he reached out to the
single white card which fell on top of the rolls. His fingers were damp
as he took the card. His own death warrant, perhaps? He glanced at the
card and froze. His head began pounding as if it would burst.

"J. Meyer" he had punched in, and that was what the card said--_but not
Jeffrey Meyer_. The card held a photo of a middle-aged, gray-haired
man, and the typewritten name at the top said: JACOB MEYER.

_And the picture was a photograph of his father's face._

       *       *       *       *       *

It was impossible, incredible, but he stared at the card in his hand.
It did not disappear; it stayed there. It still said: "Jacob Meyer";
it still showed the beloved features of his father, staring up at him
blankly from the card. _His father!_

His heart pounded as he stared at the brief typewritten notation below
the picture: "Born 11 August, 2050, Des Moines, Iowa; married 3 Dec.
2077, wife died childbirth 27 November 2078; one son Jeffrey born 27
November 2078." Then below were a series of dates: date of bachelor's
degree, date of Master's and Doctorate; Associate Professor of
Statistics at Rutgers University, 2079-2084; joined Government Bureau
of Statistics in 2085. Finally, at the bottom of the card were a long
series of reference numbers to microfilm files.

Jeff sank down in the chair, his mind spinning helplessly. He turned
dazed eyes to the Nasty Frenchman. "You might as well go," he said.
"I've got to do some reading."

Feverishly, he scooped up the microfilm rolls, carried them to the
nearest reader, twisted the spool into the machine and bent his eyes to
the viewing slot, his heart pounding in his throat....

The first roll was a long, detailed series of abstracts of statistical
papers, all written by Jacob A. Meyer, Ph.D., all covered with marginal
notes in a scrawling, spidery hand and initialed "R.D.S." The papers
covered a multitude of studies; some dealt with the very techniques of
statistical analyses themselves, others were concerned with specific
studies that had been done.

The papers were written in scholarly manner, perfectly well documented,
but the marginal notes found fault continually, both with the samplings
noted and the conclusions drawn. Jeff read through some of the papers
and he scowled. They dated over a period of the four years when his
father had been teaching statistics. There were several dozen papers,
all with marginal notes, none of which made much sense to Jeff. With a
sigh, he pulled out the roll, fed in another.

This one seemed a little more rewarding. It was a letter, signed by
Roger D. Schiml, M.D., dated almost twenty years before, addressed to
the Government Bureau of Statistics. Jeff's eyes skimmed the letter
briefly, catching words here, phrases there:

  ... as director of research at the Hoffman Center, considered it my
  duty to bring this unbelievable condition to the attention of higher
  authorities.... Naturally, a statistical analysis must be made of
  the matter before it can be concluded that there has been a marked
  increase in mental illness of any kind in the general populace ...
  have followed Dr. Meyer's analyses in the past with much interest,
  and would be pleased if he could come to the Hoffman Center within
  the next month to commence such a study....

There was nothing tangible, nothing that made sense. Jeff shuffled
through the rolls, popped another into place in the reader. This time
he read much more closely a letter from an unknown person to Dr.
Schiml. It was dated almost a year later than the former letter. This
note referred in several places to the "Almost unbelievable results of
the statistical study done several months ago." It also referred to the
investigation just concluded of possible disturbing elements in the
analysis. The final paragraph Jeff read through three times, his eyes
nearly popping.

  There was no doubt that the data was sound, and properly collected;
  naturally, the results of the analysis followed mathematically from
  the data. It seemed, therefore, that we were dealing with a disturbing
  factor heretofore quite unsuspected. Our investigation leads us to
  the inavoidable, though hardly credible, conclusion that Dr. Jacob
  A. Meyer _was himself_ the sole disturbing factor in the analysis.
  No other possibility fits the facts of the picture. We recommend
  therefore that an intensive study of Dr. Meyer's previous work be
  undertaken, with a view to answering the obvious questions aroused by
  such a report. We also recommend that this be undertaken without
  delay.

At the top of the letter, in red letters, was the government's careful
restriction: TOP SECRET.

Another roll went into the reader. This held the letter-head of a New
York psychiatrist. Jeff's eyes caught the name and he read eagerly:
