We saw nothing of the wild men of the previous day, and only once were
we menaced by any of the strange denizens of Caprona, when some
frightful nightmare of the sky swooped down upon us, only to be driven
off by a fusillade of bullets.  The thing appeared to be some variety
of pterodactyl, and what with its enormous size and ferocious aspect
was most awe-inspiring.  There was another incident, too, which to me
at least was far more unpleasant than the sudden onslaught of the
prehistoric reptile.  Two of the men, both Germans, were stripping a
felled tree of its branches. Von Schoenvorts had completed his
swagger-stick, and he and I were passing close to where the two worked.

One of them threw to his rear a small branch that he had just chopped
off, and as misfortune would have it, it struck von Schoenvorts across
the face.  It couldn't have hurt him, for it didn't leave a mark; but
he flew into a terrific rage, shouting: "Attention!" in a loud voice.
The sailor immediately straightened up, faced his officer, clicked his
heels together and saluted.  "Pig!" roared the Baron, and struck the
fellow across the face, breaking his nose.  I grabbed von Schoenvorts'
arm and jerked him away before he could strike again, if such had been
his intention, and then he raised his little stick to strike me; but
before it descended the muzzle of my pistol was against his belly and
he must have seen in my eyes that nothing would suit me better than an
excuse to pull the trigger.  Like all his kind and all other bullies,
von Schoenvorts was a coward at heart, and so he dropped his hand to
his side and started to turn away; but I pulled him back, and there
before his men I told him that such a thing must never again
occur--that no man was to be struck or otherwise punished other than in
due process of the laws that we had made and the court that we had
established. All the time the sailor stood rigidly at attention, nor
could I tell from his expression whether he most resented the blow his
officer had struck him or my interference in the gospel of the
Kaiser-breed.  Nor did he move until I said to him:  "Plesser, you may
return to your quarters and dress your wound."  Then he saluted and
marched stiffly off toward the U-33.

Just before dusk we moved out into the bay a hundred yards from shore
and dropped anchor, for I felt that we should be safer there than
elsewhere.  I also detailed men to stand watch during the night and
appointed Olson officer of the watch for the entire night, telling him
to bring his blankets on deck and get what rest he could.  At dinner we
tasted our first roast Caprona antelope, and we had a mess of greens
that the cook had found growing along the stream.  All during the meal
von Schoenvorts was silent and surly.

After dinner we all went on deck and watched the unfamiliar scenes of a
Capronian night--that is, all but von Schoenvorts. There was less to
see than to hear.  From the great inland lake behind us came the
hissing and the screaming of countless saurians. Above us we heard the
flap of giant wings, while from the shore rose the multitudinous voices
of a tropical jungle--of a warm, damp atmosphere such as must have
enveloped the entire earth during the Paleozoic and Mesozoic eras.  But
here were intermingled the voices of later eras--the scream of the
panther, the roar of the lion, the baying of wolves and a thunderous
growling which we could attribute to nothing earthly but which one day
we were to connect with the most fearsome of ancient creatures.

One by one the others went to their rooms, until the girl and I were
left alone together, for I had permitted the watch to go below for a
few minutes, knowing that I would be on deck. Miss La Rue was very
quiet, though she replied graciously enough to whatever I had to say
that required reply.  I asked her if she did not feel well.

"Yes," she said, "but I am depressed by the awfulness of it all. I feel
of so little consequence--so small and helpless in the face of all
these myriad manifestations of life stripped to the bone of its
savagery and brutality.  I realize as never before how cheap and
valueless a thing is life.  Life seems a joke, a cruel, grim joke.  You
are a laughable incident or a terrifying one as you happen to be less
powerful or more powerful than some other form of life which crosses
your path; but as a rule you are of no moment whatsoever to anything
but yourself.  You are a comic little figure, hopping from the cradle
to the grave.  Yes, that is our trouble--we take ourselves too
seriously; but Caprona should be a sure cure for that."  She paused and
laughed.

"You have evolved a beautiful philosophy," I said.  "It fills such a
longing in the human breast.  It is full, it is satisfying, it is
ennobling.  What wondrous strides toward perfection the human race
might have made if the first man had evolved it and it had persisted
until now as the creed of humanity."

"I don't like irony," she said; "it indicates a small soul."

"What other sort of soul, then, would you expect from `a comic little
figure hopping from the cradle to the grave'?" I inquired. "And what
difference does it make, anyway, what you like and what you don't like?
You are here for but an instant, and you mustn't take yourself too
seriously."

She looked up at me with a smile.  "I imagine that I am frightened and
blue," she said, "and I know that I am very, very homesick and lonely."
There was almost a sob in her voice as she concluded.  It was the first
time that she had spoken thus to me.  Involuntarily, I laid my hand
upon hers where it rested on the rail.

"I know how difficult your position is," I said; "but don't feel that
you are alone.  There is--is one here who--who would do anything in the
world for you," I ended lamely.  She did not withdraw her hand, and she
looked up into my face with tears on her cheeks and I read in her eyes
the thanks her lips could not voice. Then she looked away across the
weird moonlit landscape and sighed. Evidently her new-found philosophy
had tumbled about her ears, for she was seemingly taking herself
seriously.  I wanted to take her in my arms and tell her how I loved
her, and had taken her hand from the rail and started to draw her
toward me when Olson came blundering up on deck with his bedding.

The following morning we started building operations in earnest, and
things progressed finely.  The Neanderthal man was something of a care,
for we had to keep him in irons all the time, and he was mighty savage
when approached; but after a time he became more docile, and then we
tried to discover if he had a language. Lys spent a great deal of time
talking to him and trying to draw him out; but for a long while she was
unsuccessful.  It took us three weeks to build all the houses, which we
constructed close by a cold spring some two miles from the harbor.

We changed our plans a trifle when it came to building the palisade,
for we found a rotted cliff near by where we could get all the flat
building-stone we needed, and so we constructed a stone wall entirely
around the buildings.  It was in the form of a square, with bastions
and towers at each corner which would permit an enfilading fire along
any side of the fort, and was about one hundred and thirty-five feet
square on the outside, with walls three feet thick at the bottom and
about a foot and a half wide at the top, and fifteen feet high.  It
took a long time to build that wall, and we all turned in and helped
except von Schoenvorts, who, by the way, had not spoken to me except in
the line of official business since our encounter--a condition of armed
neutrality which suited me to a T.  We have just finished it, the last
touches being put on today.  I quit about a week ago and commenced
working on this chronicle for our strange adventures, which will
account for any minor errors in chronology which may have crept in;
there was so much material that I may have made some mistakes, but I
think they are but minor and few.

I see in reading over the last few pages that I neglected to state that
Lys finally discovered that the Neanderthal man possessed a language.
She has learned to speak it, and so have I, to some extent.  It was
he--his name he says is Am, or Ahm--who told us that this country is
called Caspak.  When we asked him how far it extended, he waved both
arms about his head in an all-including gesture which took in,
apparently, the entire universe. He is more tractable now, and we are
going to release him, for he has assured us that he will not permit his
fellows to harm us. He calls us Galus and says that in a short time he
will be a Galu. It is not quite clear to us what he means.  He says
that there are many Galus north of us, and that as soon as he becomes
one he will go and live with them.

Ahm went out to hunt with us yesterday and was much impressed by the
ease with which our rifles brought down antelopes and deer. We have
been living upon the fat of the land, Ahm having shown us the edible
fruits, tubers and herbs, and twice a week we go out after fresh meat.
A certain proportion of this we dry and store away, for we do not know
what may come.  Our drying process is really smoking.  We have also
dried a large quantity of two varieties of cereal which grow wild a few
miles south of us. One of these is a giant Indian maize--a lofty
perennial often fifty and sixty feet in height, with ears the size of
a man's body and kernels as large as your fist.  We have had to
construct a second store house for the great quantity of this that we
have gathered.

September 3, 1916:  Three months ago today the torpedo from the U-33
started me from the peaceful deck of the American liner upon the
strange voyage which has ended here in Caspak.  We have settled down to
an acceptance of our fate, for all are convinced that none of us will
ever see the outer world again.  Ahm's repeated assertions that there
are human beings like ourselves in Caspak have roused the men to a keen
desire for exploration.  I sent out one party last week under Bradley.
Ahm, who is now free to go and come as he wishes, accompanied them.
They marched about twenty-five miles due west, encountering many
terrible beasts and reptiles and not a few manlike creatures whom Ahm
sent away.  Here is Bradley's report of the expedition:

Marched fifteen miles the first day, camping on the bank of a large
stream which runs southward.  Game was plentiful and we saw several
varieties which we had not before encountered in Caspak. Just before
making camp we were charged by an enormous woolly rhinoceros, which
Plesser dropped with a perfect shot.  We had rhinoceros-steaks for
supper.  Ahm called the thing "Atis."  It was almost a continuous
battle from the time we left the fort until we arrived at camp.  The
mind of man can scarce conceive the plethora of carnivorous life in
this lost world; and their prey, of course, is even more abundant.

The second day we marched about ten miles to the foot of the cliffs.
Passed through dense forests close to the base of the cliffs. Saw
manlike creatures and a low order of ape in one band, and some of the
men swore that there was a white man among them. They were inclined to
attack us at first; but a volley from our rifles caused them to change
their minds.  We scaled the cliffs as far as we could; but near the top
they are absolutely perpendicular without any sufficient cleft or
protuberance to give hand or foot-hold.  All were disappointed, for we
hungered for a view of the ocean and the outside world.  We even had a
hope that we might see and attract the attention of a passing ship. Our
exploration has determined one thing which will probably be of little
value to us and never heard of beyond Caprona's walls--this crater was
once entirely filled with water. Indisputable evidence of this is on
the face of the cliffs.

Our return journey occupied two days and was as filled with adventure
as usual.  We are all becoming accustomed to adventure. It is beginning
to pall on us.  We suffered no casualties and there was no illness.


I had to smile as I read Bradley's report.  In those four days he had
doubtless passed through more adventures than an African big-game
hunter experiences in a lifetime, and yet he covered it all in a few
lines.  Yes, we are becoming accustomed to adventure. Not a day passes
that one or more of us does not face death at least once.  Ahm taught
us a few things that have proved profitable and saved us much
ammunition, which it is useless to expend except for food or in the
last recourse of self-preservation. Now when we are attacked by large
flying reptiles we run beneath spreading trees; when land carnivora
threaten us, we climb into trees, and we have learned not to fire at
any of the dinosaurs unless we can keep out of their reach for at least
two minutes after hitting them in the brain or spine, or five minutes
after puncturing their hearts--it takes them so long to die. To hit
them elsewhere is worse than useless, for they do not seem to notice
it, and we had discovered that such shots do not kill or even disable
them.

September 7, 1916:  Much has happened since I last wrote.  Bradley is
away again on another exploration expedition to the cliffs.  He expects
to be gone several weeks and to follow along their base in search of a
point where they may be scaled.  He took Sinclair, Brady, James, and
Tippet with him.  Ahm has disappeared.  He has been gone about three
days; but the most startling thing I have on record is that von
Schoenvorts and Olson while out hunting the other day discovered oil
about fifteen miles north of us beyond the sandstone cliffs. Olson says
there is a geyser of oil there, and von Schoenvorts is making
preparations to refine it.  If he succeeds, we shall have the means for
leaving Caspak and returning to our own world. I can scarce believe the
truth of it.  We are all elated to the seventh heaven of bliss.  Pray
God we shall not be disappointed.

I have tried on several occasions to broach the subject of my love to
Lys; but she will not listen.



Chapter 7

October 8, 1916:  This is the last entry I shall make upon my
manuscript.  When this is done, I shall be through.  Though I may pray
that it reaches the haunts of civilized man, my better judgment tells
me that it will never be perused by other eyes than mine, and that even
though it should, it would be too late to avail me.  I am alone upon
the summit of the great cliff overlooking the broad Pacific.  A chill
south wind bites at my marrow, while far below me I can see the tropic
foliage of Caspak on the one hand and huge icebergs from the near
Antarctic upon the other.  Presently I shall stuff my folded manuscript
into the thermos bottle I have carried with me for the purpose since I
left the fort--Fort Dinosaur we named it--and hurl it far outward over
the cliff-top into the Pacific.  What current washes the shore of
Caprona I know not; whither my bottle will be borne I cannot even
guess; but I have done all that mortal man may do to notify the world
of my whereabouts and the dangers that threaten those of us who remain
alive in Caspak--if there be any other than myself.

About the 8th of September I accompanied Olson and von Schoenvorts to
the oil-geyser.  Lys came with us, and we took a number of things which
von Schoenvorts wanted for the purpose of erecting a crude refinery.
We went up the coast some ten or twelve miles in the U-33, tying up to
shore near the mouth of a small stream which emptied great volumes of
crude oil into the sea--I find it difficult to call this great lake by
any other name. Then we disembarked and went inland about five miles,
where we came upon a small lake entirely filled with oil, from the
center of which a geyser of oil spouted.

On the edge of the lake we helped von Schoenvorts build his primitive
refinery.  We worked with him for two days until he got things fairly
well started, and then we returned to Fort Dinosaur, as I feared that
Bradley might return and be worried by our absence. The U-33 merely
landed those of us that were to return to the fort and then retraced
its course toward the oil-well.  Olson, Whitely, Wilson, Miss La Rue,
and myself disembarked, while von Schoenvorts and his German crew
returned to refine the oil.  The next day Plesser and two other Germans
came down overland for ammunition. Plesser said they had been attacked
by wild men and had exhausted a great deal of ammunition.  He also
asked permission to get some dried meat and maize, saying that they
were so busy with the work of refining that they had no time to hunt.
I let him have everything he asked for, and never once did a suspicion
of their intentions enter my mind.  They returned to the oil-well the
same day, while we continued with the multitudinous duties of camp life.

For three days nothing of moment occurred.  Bradley did not return; nor
did we have any word from von Schoenvorts.  In the evening Lys and I
went up into one of the bastion towers and listened to the grim and
terrible nightlife of the frightful ages of the past.  Once a
saber-tooth screamed almost beneath us, and the girl shrank close
against me.  As I felt her body against mine, all the pent love of
these three long months shattered the bonds of timidity and conviction,
and I swept her up into my arms and covered her face and lips with
kisses.  She did not struggle to free herself; but instead her dear
arms crept up about my neck and drew my own face even closer to hers.

"You love me, Lys?" I cried.

I felt her head nod an affirmative against my breast.  "Tell me, Lys,"
I begged, "tell me in words how much you love me."

Low and sweet and tender came the answer:  "I love you beyond all
conception."

My heart filled with rapture then, and it fills now as it has each of
the countless times I have recalled those dear words, as it shall fill
always until death has claimed me.  I may never see her again; she may
not know how I love her--she may question, she may doubt; but always
true and steady, and warm with the fires of love my heart beats for the
girl who said that night:  "I love you beyond all conception."

For a long time we sat there upon the little bench constructed for the
sentry that we had not as yet thought it necessary to post in more than
one of the four towers.  We learned to know one another better in those
two brief hours than we had in all the months that had intervened since
we had been thrown together.  She told me that she had loved me from
the first, and that she never had loved von Schoenvorts, their
engagement having been arranged by her aunt for social reasons.

That was the happiest evening of my life; nor ever do I expect to
experience its like; but at last, as is the way of happiness, it
terminated.  We descended to the compound, and I walked with Lys to the
door of her quarters.  There again she kissed me and bade me good
night, and then she went in and closed the door.

I went to my own room, and there I sat by the light of one of the crude
candles we had made from the tallow of the beasts we had killed, and
lived over the events of the evening.  At last I turned in and fell
asleep, dreaming happy dreams and planning for the future, for even in
savage Caspak I was bound to make my girl safe and happy.  It was
daylight when I awoke.  Wilson, who was acting as cook, was up and
astir at his duties in the cook-house. The others slept; but I arose
and followed by Nobs went down to the stream for a plunge.  As was our
custom, I went armed with both rifle and revolver; but I stripped and
had my swim without further disturbance than the approach of a large
hyena, a number of which occupied caves in the sand-stone cliffs north
of the camp. These brutes are enormous and exceedingly ferocious.  I
imagine they correspond with the cave-hyena of prehistoric times. This
fellow charged Nobs, whose Capronian experiences had taught him that
discretion is the better part of valor--with the result that he dived
head foremost into the stream beside me after giving vent to a series
of ferocious growls which had no more effect upon Hyaena spelaeus than
might a sweet smile upon an enraged tusker. Afterward I shot the beast,
and Nobs had a feast while I dressed, for he had become quite a
raw-meat eater during our numerous hunting expeditions, upon which we
always gave him a portion of the kill.

Whitely and Olson were up and dressed when we returned, and we all sat
down to a good breakfast.  I could not but wonder at Lys' absence from
the table, for she had always been one of the earliest risers in camp;
so about nine o'clock, becoming apprehensive lest she might be
indisposed, I went to the door of her room and knocked.  I received no
response, though I finally pounded with all my strength; then I turned
the knob and entered, only to find that she was not there.  Her bed had
been occupied, and her clothing lay where she had placed it the
previous night upon retiring; but Lys was gone.  To say that I was
distracted with terror would be to put it mildly.  Though I knew she
could not be in camp, I searched every square inch of the compound and
all the buildings, yet without avail.

It was Whitely who discovered the first clue--a huge human-like
footprint in the soft earth beside the spring, and indications of a
struggle in the mud.

Then I found a tiny handkerchief close to the outer wall. Lys  had been
stolen!  It was all too plain.  Some hideous member of the ape-man
tribe had entered the fort and carried her off. While I stood stunned
and horrified at the frightful evidence before me, there came from the
direction of the great lake an increasing sound that rose to the volume
of a shriek.  We all looked up as the noise approached apparently just
above us, and a moment later there followed a terrific explosion which
hurled us to the ground.  When we clambered to our feet, we saw a large
section of the west wall torn and shattered.  It was Olson who first
recovered from his daze sufficiently to guess the explanation of the
phenomenon.

"A shell!" he cried.  "And there ain't no shells in Caspak besides
what's on the U-33.  The dirty boches are shellin' the fort.  Come on!"
And he grasped his rifle and started on a run toward the lake.  It was
over two miles, but we did not pause until the harbor was in view, and
still we could not see the lake because of the sandstone cliffs which
intervened.  We ran as fast as we could around the lower end of the
harbor, scrambled up the cliffs and at last stood upon their summit in
full view of the lake. Far away down the coast, toward the river
through which we had come to reach the lake, we saw upon the surface
the outline of the U-33, black smoke vomiting from her funnel.

Von Schoenvorts had succeeded in refining the oil!  The cur had broken
his every pledge and was leaving us there to our fates. He had even
shelled the fort as a parting compliment; nor could anything have been
more truly Prussian than this leave-taking of the Baron Friedrich von
Schoenvorts.

Olson, Whitely, Wilson, and I stood for a moment looking at one
another.  It seemed incredible that man could be so perfidious--that we
had really seen with our own eyes the thing that we had seen; but when
we returned to the fort, the shattered wall gave us ample evidence that
there was no mistake.

Then we began to speculate as to whether it had been an ape-man or a
