sharp arrows.  Upon Ajor and me they looked with covetousness in the
one instance and suspicion in the other; but after they had heard
Chal-az's story, their attitude was more friendly.  A huge savage did
all the talking.  He was a mountain of a man, yet perfectly
proportioned.

"This is Al-tan the chief," said Chal-az by way of introduction.  Then
he told something of my story, and Al-tan asked me many questions of
the land from which I came.  The warriors crowded around close to hear
my replies, and there were many expressions of incredulity as I spoke
of what was to them another world, of the yacht which had brought me
over vast waters, and of the plane that had borne me Jo-oo-like over
the summit of the barrier-cliffs.  It was the mention of the
hydroaeroplane which precipitated the first outspoken skepticism, and
then Ajor came to my defense.

"I saw it with my own eyes!" she exclaimed.  "I saw him flying through
the air in battle with a Jo-oo.  The Alus were chasing me, and they saw
and ran away."

"Whose is this she?" demanded Al-tan suddenly, his eyes fixed fiercely
upon Ajor.

For a moment there was silence.  Ajor looked up at me, a hurt and
questioning expression on her face.  "Whose she is this?" repeated
Al-tan.

"She is mine," I replied, though what force it was that impelled me to
say it I could not have told; but an instant later I was glad that I
had spoken the words, for the reward of Ajor's proud and happy face was
reward indeed.

Al-tan eyed her for several minutes and then turned to me.  "Can you
keep her?" he asked, just the tinge of a sneer upon his face.

I laid my palm upon the grip of my pistol and answered that I could.
He saw the move, glanced at the butt of the automatic where it
protruded from its holster, and smiled.  Then he turned and raising his
great bow, fitted an arrow and drew the shaft far back.  His warriors,
supercilious smiles upon their faces, stood silently watching him.  His
bow was the longest and the heaviest among them all.  A mighty man
indeed must he be to bend it; yet Al-tan drew the shaft back until the
stone point touched his left forefinger, and he did it with consummate
ease.  Then he raised the shaft to the level of his right eye, held it
there for an instant and released it.  When the arrow stopped, half its
length protruded from the opposite side of a six-inch tree fifty feet
away.  Al-tan and his warriors turned toward me with expressions of
immense satisfaction upon their faces, and then, apparently for Ajor's
benefit, the chieftain swaggered to and fro a couple of times, swinging
his great arms and his bulky shoulders for all the world like a drunken
prize-fighter at a beach dancehall.

I saw that some reply was necessary, and so in a single motion, I drew
my gun, dropped it on the still quivering arrow and pulled the trigger.
At the sound of the report, the Kro-lu leaped back and raised their
weapons; but as I was smiling, they took heart and lowered them again,
following my eyes to the tree; the shaft of their chief was gone, and
through the bole was a little round hole marking the path of my bullet.
It was a good shot if I do say it myself, "as shouldn't" but necessity
must have guided that bullet; I simply had to make a good shot, that I
might immediately establish my position among those savage and warlike
Caspakians of the sixth sphere.  That it had its effect was immediately
noticeable, but I am none too sure that it helped my cause with Al-tan.
Whereas he might have condescended to tolerate me as a harmless and
interesting curiosity, he now, by the change in his expression,
appeared to consider me in a new and unfavorable light.  Nor can I
wonder, knowing this type as I did, for had I not made him ridiculous
in the eyes of his warriors, beating him at his own game?  What king,
savage or civilized, could condone such impudence?  Seeing his black
scowls, I deemed it expedient, especially on Ajor's account, to
terminate the interview and continue upon our way; but when I would
have done so, Al-tan detained us with a gesture, and his warriors
pressed around us.

"What is the meaning of this?" I demanded, and before Al-tan could
reply, Chal-az raised his voice in our behalf.

"Is this the gratitude of a Kro-lu chieftain, Al-tan," he asked, "to
one who has served you by saving one of your warriors from the
enemy--saving him from the death dance of the Band-lu?"

Al-tan was silent for a moment, and then his brow cleared, and the
faint imitation of a pleasant expression struggled for existence as he
said:  "The stranger will not be harmed.  I wished only to detain him
that he may be feasted tonight in the village of Al-tan the Kro-lu.  In
the morning he may go his way.  Al-tan will not hinder him."

I was not entirely reassured; but I wanted to see the interior of the
Kro-lu village, and anyway I knew that if Al-tan intended treachery I
would be no more in his power in the morning than I now was--in fact,
during the night I might find opportunity to escape with Ajor, while at
the instant neither of us could hope to escape unscathed from the
encircling warriors.  Therefore, in order to disarm him of any thought
that I might entertain suspicion as to his sincerity, I promptly and
courteously accepted his invitation.  His satisfaction was evident, and
as we set off toward his village, he walked beside me, asking many
questions as to the country from which I came, its peoples and their
customs.  He seemed much mystified by the fact that we could walk
abroad by day or night without fear of being devoured by wild beasts or
savage reptiles, and when I told him of the great armies which we
maintained, his simple mind could not grasp the fact that they existed
solely for the slaughtering of human beings.

"I am glad," he said, "that I do not dwell in your country among such
savage peoples.  Here, in Caspak, men fight with men when they
meet--men of different races--but their weapons are first for the
slaying of beasts in the chase and in defense.  We do not fashion
weapons solely for the killing of man as do your peoples.  Your country
must indeed be a savage country, from which you are fortunate to have
escaped to the peace and security of Caspak."

Here was a new and refreshing viewpoint; nor could I take exception to
it after what I had told Al-tan of the great war which had been raging
in Europe for over two years before I left home.

On the march to the Kro-lu village we were continually stalked by
innumerable beasts of prey, and three times we were attacked by
frightful creatures; but Al-tan took it all as a matter of course,
rushing forward with raised spear or sending a heavy shaft into the
body of the attacker and then returning to our conversation as though
no interruption had occurred.  Twice were members of his band mauled,
and one was killed by a huge and bellicose rhinoceros; but the instant
the action was over, it was as though it never had occurred.  The dead
man was stripped of his belongings and left where he had died; the
carnivora would take care of his burial.  The trophies that these
Kro-lu left to the meat-eaters would have turned an English big-game
hunter green with envy.  They did, it is true, cut all the edible parts
from the rhino and carry them home; but already they were pretty well
weighted down with the spoils of the chase, and only the fact that they
are particularly fond of rhino-meat caused them to do so.

They left the hide on the pieces they selected, as they use it for
sandals, shield-covers, the hilts of their knives and various other
purposes where tough hide is desirable.  I was much interested in their
shields, especially after I saw one used in defense against the attack
of a saber-tooth tiger.  The huge creature had charged us without
warning from a clump of dense bushes where it was lying up after
eating.  It was met with an avalanche of spears, some of which passed
entirely through its body, with such force were they hurled.  The
charge was from a very short distance, requiring the use of the spear
rather than the bow and arrow; but after the launching of the spears,
the men not directly in the path of the charge sent bolt after bolt
into the great carcass with almost incredible rapidity.  The beast,
screaming with pain and rage, bore down upon Chal-az while I stood
helpless with my rifle for fear of hitting one of the warriors who were
closing in upon it.  But Chal-az was ready.  Throwing aside his bow, he
crouched behind his large oval shield, in the center of which was a
hole about six inches in diameter.  The shield was held by tight loops
to his left arm, while in his right hand he grasped his heavy knife.
Bristling with spears and arrows, the great cat hurled itself upon the
shield, and down went Chal-az upon his back with the shield entirely
covering him.  The tiger clawed and bit at the heavy rhinoceros hide
with which the shield was faced, while Chal-az, through the round hole
in the shield's center, plunged his blade repeatedly into the vitals of
the savage animal.  Doubtless the battle would have gone to Chal-az
even though I had not interfered; but the moment that I saw a clean
opening, with no Kro-lu beyond, I raised my rifle and killed the beast.

When Chal-az arose, he glanced at the sky and remarked that it looked
like rain.  The others already had resumed the march toward the
village.  The incident was closed.  For some unaccountable reason the
whole thing reminded me of a friend who once shot a cat in his
backyard.  For three weeks he talked of nothing else.

It was almost dark when we reached the village--a large palisaded
enclosure of several hundred leaf-thatched huts set in groups of from
two to seven.  The huts were hexagonal in form, and where grouped were
joined so that they resembled the cells of a bee-hive.  One hut meant a
warrior and his mate, and each additional hut in a group indicated an
additional female.  The palisade which surrounded the village was of
logs set close together and woven into a solid wall with tough creepers
which were planted at their base and trained to weave in and out to
bind the logs together.  The logs slanted outward at an angle of about
thirty degrees, in which position they were held by shorter logs
embedded in the ground at right angles to them and with their upper
ends supporting the longer pieces a trifle above their centers of
equilibrium.  Along the top of the palisade sharpened stakes had been
driven at all sorts of angles.

The only opening into the inclosure was through a small aperture three
feet wide and three feet high, which was closed from the inside by logs
about six feet long laid horizontally, one upon another, between the
inside face of the palisade and two other braced logs which paralleled
the face of the wall upon the inside.

As we entered the village, we were greeted by a not unfriendly crowd of
curious warriors and women, to whom Chal-az generously explained the
service we had rendered him, whereupon they showered us with the most
well-meant attentions, for Chal-az, it seemed, was a most popular
member of the tribe.  Necklaces of lion- and tiger-teeth, bits of dried
meat, finely tanned hides and earthen pots, beautifully decorated, they
thrust upon us until we were loaded down, and all the while Al-tan
glared balefully upon us, seemingly jealous of the attentions heaped
upon us because we had served Chal-az.

At last we reached a hut that they set apart for us, and there we
cooked our meat and some vegetables the women brought us, and had milk
from cows--the first I had had in Caspak--and cheese from the milk of
wild goats, with honey and thin bread made from wheat flour of their
own grinding, and grapes and the fermented juice of grapes.  It was
quite the most wonderful meal I had eaten since I quit the _Toreador_ and
Bowen J.  Tyler's colored chef, who could make pork-chops taste like
chicken, and chicken taste like heaven.



Chapter 6

After dinner I rolled a cigaret and stretched myself at ease upon a
pile of furs before the doorway, with Ajor's head pillowed in my lap
and a feeling of great content pervading me.  It was the first time
since my plane had topped the barrier-cliffs of Caspak that I had felt
any sense of peace or security.  My hand wandered to the velvet cheek
of the girl I had claimed as mine, and to her luxuriant hair and the
golden fillet which bound it close to her shapely head.  Her slender
fingers groping upward sought mine and drew them to her lips, and then
I gathered her in my arms and crushed her to me, smothering her mouth
with a long, long kiss.  It was the first time that passion had tinged
my intercourse with Ajor.  We were alone, and the hut was ours until
morning.

But now from beyond the palisade in the direction of the main gate came
the hallooing of men and the answering calls and queries of the guard.
We listened.  Returning hunters, no doubt.  We heard them enter the
village amidst the barking dogs.  I have forgotten to mention the dogs
of Kro-lu.  The village swarmed with them, gaunt, wolflike creatures
that guarded the herd by day when it grazed without the palisade, ten
dogs to a cow.  By night the cows were herded in an outer inclosure
roofed against the onslaughts of the carnivorous cats; and the dogs,
with the exception of a few, were brought into the village; these few
well-tested brutes remained with the herd.  During the day they fed
plentifully upon the beasts of prey which they killed in protection of
the herd, so that their keep amounted to nothing at all.

Shortly after the commotion at the gate had subsided, Ajor and I arose
to enter the hut, and at the same time a warrior appeared from one of
the twisted alleys which, lying between the irregularly placed huts and
groups of huts, form the streets of the Kro-lu village.  The fellow
halted before us and addressed me, saying that Al-tan desired my
presence at his hut.  The wording of the invitation and the manner of
the messenger threw me entirely off my guard, so cordial was the one
and respectful the other, and the result was that I went willingly,
telling Ajor that I would return presently.  I had laid my arms and
ammunition aside as soon as we had taken over the hut, and I left them
with Ajor now, as I had noticed that aside from their hunting-knives
the men of Kro-lu bore no weapons about the village streets.  There was
an atmosphere of peace and security within that village that I had not
hoped to experience within Caspak, and after what I had passed through,
it must have cast a numbing spell over my faculties of judgment and
reason.  I had eaten of the lotus-flower of safety; dangers no longer
threatened for they had ceased to be.

The messenger led me through the labyrinthine alleys to an open plaza
near the center of the village.  At one end of this plaza was a long
hut, much the largest that I had yet seen, before the door of which
were many warriors.  I could see that the interior was lighted and that
a great number of men were gathered within.  The dogs about the plaza
were as thick as fleas, and those I approached closely evinced a strong
desire to devour me, their noses evidently apprising them of the fact
that I was of an alien race, since they paid no attention whatever to
my companion.  Once inside the council-hut, for such it appeared to be,
I found a large concourse of warriors seated, or rather squatted,
around the floor.  At one end of the oval space which the warriors left
down the center of the room stood Al-tan and another warrior whom I
immediately recognized as a Galu, and then I saw that there were many
Galus present.  About the walls were a number of flaming torches stuck
in holes in a clay plaster which evidently served the purpose of
preventing the inflammable wood and grasses of which the hut was
composed from being ignited by the flames.  Lying about among the
warriors or wandering restlessly to and fro were a number of savage
dogs.

The warriors eyed me curiously as I entered, especially the Galus, and
then I was conducted into the center of the group and led forward
toward Al-tan.  As I advanced I felt one of the dogs sniffing at my
heels, and of a sudden a great brute leaped upon my back.  As I turned
to thrust it aside before its fangs found a hold upon me, I beheld a
huge Airedale leaping frantically about me.  The grinning jaws, the
half-closed eyes, the back-laid ears spoke to me louder than might the
words of man that here was no savage enemy but a joyous friend, and
then I recognized him, and fell to one knee and put my arms about his
neck while he whined and cried with joy.  It was Nobs, dear old Nobs.
Bowen Tyler's Nobs, who had loved me next to his master.

"Where is the master of this dog?" I asked, turning toward Al-tan.

The chieftain inclined his head toward the Galu standing at his side.
"He belongs to Du-seen the Galu," he replied.

"He belongs to Bowen J. Tyler, Jr., of Santa Monica," I retorted, "and
I want to know where his master is."

The Galu shrugged.  "The dog is mine," he said.  "He came to me
cor-sva-jo, and he is unlike any dog in Caspak, being kind and docile
and yet a killer when aroused.  I would not part with him.  I do not
know the man of whom you speak."

So this was Du-seen!  This was the man from whom Ajor had fled.  I
wondered if he knew that she was here.  I wondered if they had sent for
me because of her; but after they had commenced to question me, my mind
was relieved; they did not mention Ajor.  Their interest seemed
centered upon the strange world from which I had come, my journey to
Caspak and my intentions now that I had arrived.  I answered them
frankly as I had nothing to conceal and assured them that my only wish
was to find my friends and return to my own country.  In the Galu
Du-seen and his warriors I saw something of the explanation of the term
"golden race" which is applied to them, for their ornaments and weapons
were either wholly of beaten gold or heavily decorated with the
precious metal.  They were a very imposing set of men--tall and
straight and handsome.  About their heads were bands of gold like that
which Ajor wore, and from their left shoulders depended the
leopard-tails of the Galus.  In addition to the deer-skin tunic which
constituted the major portion of their apparel, each carried a light
blanket of barbaric yet beautiful design--the first evidence of weaving
I had seen in Caspak.  Ajor had had no blanket, having lost it during
her flight from the attentions of Du-seen; nor was she so heavily
incrusted with gold as these male members of her tribe.

The audience must have lasted fully an hour when Al-tan signified that
I might return to my hut.  All the time Nobs had lain quietly at my
feet; but the instant that I turned to leave, he was up and after me.
Du-seen called to him; but the terrier never even so much as looked in
his direction.  I had almost reached the doorway leading from the
council-hall when Al-tan rose and called after me.  "Stop!" he shouted.
"Stop, stranger! The beast of Du-seen the Galu follows you."

"The dog is not Du-seen's," I replied.  "He belongs to my friend, as I
told you, and he prefers to stay with me until his master is found."
And I turned again to resume my way.  I had taken but a few steps when
I heard a commotion behind me, and at the same moment a man leaned
close and whispered "Kazar!" close to my ear--kazar, the Caspakian
equivalent of beware.  It was To-mar.  As he spoke, he turned quickly
away as though loath to have others see that he knew me, and at the
same instant I wheeled to discover Du-seen striding rapidly after me.
Al-tan followed him, and it was evident that both were angry.

Du-seen, a weapon half drawn, approached truculently.  "The beast is
mine," he reiterated.  "Would you steal him?"

"He is not yours nor mine," I replied, "and I am not stealing him.  If
he wishes to follow you, he may; I will not interfere; but if he wishes
to follow me, he shall; nor shall you prevent." I turned to Al-tan.
"Is not that fair?" I demanded.  "Let the dog choose his master."

Du-seen, without waiting for Al-tan's reply, reached for Nobs and
grasped him by the scruff of the neck.  I did not interfere, for I
guessed what would happen; and it did.  With a savage growl Nobs turned
like lightning upon the Galu, wrenched loose from his hold and leaped
for his throat.  The man stepped back and warded off the first attack
with a heavy blow of his fist, immediately drawing his knife with which
to meet the Airedale's return.  And Nobs would have returned, all
right, had not I spoken to him.  In a low voice I called him to heel.
For just an instant he hesitated, standing there trembling and with
bared fangs, glaring at his foe; but he was well trained and had been
out with me quite as much as he had with Bowen--in fact, I had had most
to do with his early training; then he walked slowly and very
stiff-legged to his place behind me.

Du-seen, red with rage, would have had it out with the two of us had
not Al-tan drawn him to one side and whispered in his ear--upon which,
with a grunt, the Galu walked straight back to the opposite end of the
hall, while Nobs and I continued upon our way toward the hut and Ajor.
As we passed out into the village plaza, I saw Chal-az--we were so
close to one another that I could have reached out and touched him--and
our eyes met; but though I greeted him pleasantly and paused to speak
to him, he brushed past me without a sign of recognition.  I was
puzzled at his behavior, and then I recalled that To-mar, though he had
warned me, had appeared not to wish to seem friendly with me.  I could
not understand their attitude, and was trying to puzzle out some sort
of explanation, when the matter was suddenly driven from my mind by the
report of a firearm.  Instantly I broke into a run, my brain in a whirl
of forebodings, for the only firearms in the Kro-lu country were those
I had left in the hut with Ajor.

That she was in danger I could not but fear, as she was now something
of an adept in the handling of both the pistol and rifle, a fact which
largely eliminated the chance that the shot had come from an
accidentally discharged firearm.  When I left the hut, I had felt that
she and I were safe among friends; no thought of danger was in my mind;
but since my audience with Al-tan, the presence and bearing of Du-seen
and the strange attitude of both To-mar and Chal-az had each
contributed toward arousing my suspicions, and now I ran along the
narrow, winding alleys of the Kro-lu village with my heart fairly in my
mouth.

I am endowed with an excellent sense of direction, which has been
greatly perfected by the years I have spent in the mountains and upon
the plains and deserts of my native state, so that it was with little
or no difficulty that I found my way back to the hut in which I had
left Ajor.  As I entered the doorway, I called her name aloud.  There
was no response.  I drew a box of matches from my pocket and struck a
light and as the flame flared up, a half-dozen brawny warriors leaped
upon me from as many directions; but even in the brief instant that the
flare lasted, I saw that Ajor was not within the hut, and that my arms
and ammunition had been removed.

As the six men leaped upon me, an angry growl burst from behind them.
