"Who are you to make terms for Him Who Speaks for Luata?" it shrilled.
"Tell me the secret or die where you stand!"

"And if I die now, the secret goes with me," Bradley reminded him.
"Never again will you get the opportunity to question another of my
kind who knows the secret."  Anything to gain time, to get the rest of
the Wieroos from the room, that he might plan some scheme for escape
and put it into effect.

The creature turned upon the leader of the party that had brought
Bradley.

"Is the thing with weapons?" it asked.

"No," was the response.

"Then go; but tell the guard to remain close by," commanded the high
one.

The Wieroos salaamed and withdrew, closing the door behind them.  He
Who Speaks for Luata grasped a sword nervously in his right hand.  At
his left side lay the second weapon.  It was evident that he lived in
constant dread of being assassinated.  The fact that he permitted none
with weapons within his presence and that he always kept two swords at
his side pointed to this.

Bradley was racking his brain to find some suggestion of a plan whereby
he might turn the situation to his own account.  His eyes wandered past
the weird figure before him; they played about the walls of the
apartment as though hoping to draw inspiration from the dead skulls and
the hides and the wings, and then they came back to the face of the
Wieroo god, now working in anger.

"Quick!" screamed the thing.  "The secret!"

"Will you give me and the girl our freedom?" insisted Bradley.

For an instant the thing hesitated, and then it grumbled "Yes." At the
same instant Bradley saw two hides upon the wall directly back of the
dais separate and a face appear in the opening.  No change of
expression upon the Englishman's countenance betrayed that he had seen
aught to surprise him, though surprised he was for the face in the
aperture was that of the girl he had but just left hidden beneath the
hides in another chamber.  A white and shapely arm now pushed past the
face into the room, and in the hand, tightly clutched, was the curved
blade, smeared with blood, that Bradley had dropped beneath the hides
at the moment he had been discovered and drawn from his concealment.

"Listen, then," said Bradley in a low voice to the Wieroo.  "You shall
know the secret of cos-ata-lu as well as do I; but none other may hear
it.  Lean close--I will whisper it into your ear."

He moved forward and stepped upon the dais.  The creature raised its
sword ready to strike at the first indication of treachery, and Bradley
stooped beneath the blade and put his ear close to the gruesome face.
As he did so, he rested his weight upon his hands, one upon either side
of the Wieroo's body, his right hand upon the hilt of the spare sword
lying at the left of Him Who Speaks for Luata.

"This then is the secret of both life and death," he whispered, and at
the same instant he grasped the Wieroo by the right wrist and with his
own right hand swung the extra blade in a sudden vicious blow against
the creature's neck before the thing could give even a single cry of
alarm; then without waiting an instant Bradley leaped past the dead god
and vanished behind the hides that had hidden the girl.

Wide-eyed and panting the girl seized his arm.  "Oh, what have you
done?" she cried.  "He Who Speaks for Luata will be avenged by Luata.
Now indeed must you die.  There is no escape, for even though we
reached my own country Luata can find you out."

"Bosh!" exclaimed Bradley, and then:  "But you were going to knife him
yourself."

"Then I alone should have died," she replied.

Bradley scratched his head.  "Neither of us is going to die," he said;
"at least not at the hands of any god.  If we don't get out of here
though, we'll die right enough.  Can you find your way back to the room
where I first came upon you in the temple?"

"I know the way," replied the girl; "but I doubt if we can go back
without being seen.  I came hither because I only met Wieroos who knew
that I am supposed now to be in the temple; but you could go elsewhere
without being discovered."

Bradley's ingenuity had come up against a stone wall.  There seemed no
possibility of escape.  He looked about him.  They were in a small room
where lay a litter of rubbish--torn bits of cloth, old hides, pieces of
fiber rope.  In the center of the room was a cylindrical shaft with an
opening in its face.  Bradley knew it for what it was.  Here the
arch-fiend dragged his victims and cast their bodies into the river of
death far below.  The floor about the opening in the shaft and the
sides of the shaft were clotted thick with a dried, dark brown
substance that the Englishman knew had once been blood.  The place had
the appearance of having been a veritable shambles.  An odor of
decaying flesh permeated the air.

The Englishman crossed to the shaft and peered into the opening.  All
below was dark as pitch; but at the bottom he knew was the river.
Suddenly an inspiration and a bold scheme leaped to his mind.  Turning
quickly he hunted about the room until he found what he sought--a
quantity of the rope that lay strewn here and there.  With rapid
fingers he unsnarled the different lengths, the girl helping him, and
then he tied the ends together until he had three ropes about
seventy-five feet in length.  He fastened these together at each end
and without a word secured one of the ends about the girl's body
beneath her arms.

"Don't be frightened," he said at length, as he led her toward the
opening in the shaft.  "I'm going to lower you to the river, and then
I'm coming down after you.  When you are safe below, give two quick
jerks upon the rope.  If there is danger there and you want me to draw
you up into the shaft, jerk once.  Don't be afraid--it is the only way."

"I am not afraid," replied the girl, rather haughtily Bradley thought,
and herself climbed through the aperture and hung by her hands waiting
for Bradley to lower her.

As rapidly as was consistent with safety, the man paid out the rope.
When it was about half out, he heard loud cries and wails suddenly
arise within the room they had just quitted.  The slaying of their god
had been discovered by the Wieroos.  A search for the slayer would
begin at once.

Lord!  Would the girl never reach the river?  At last, just as he was
positive that searchers were already entering the room behind him,
there came two quick tugs at the rope.  Instantly Bradley made the rest
of the strands fast about the shaft, slipped into the black tube and
began a hurried descent toward the river.  An instant later he stood
waist deep in water beside the girl.  Impulsively she reached toward
him and grasped his arm.  A strange thrill ran through him at the
contact; but he only cut the rope from about her body and lifted her to
the little shelf at the river's side.

"How can we leave here?" she asked.

"By the river," he replied; "but first I must go back to the Blue Place
of Seven Skulls and get the poor devil I left there.  I'll have to wait
until after dark, though, as I cannot pass through the open stretch of
river in the temple gardens by day."

"There is another way," said the girl.  "I have never seen it; but
often I have heard them speak of it--a corridor that runs beside the
river from one end of the city to the other.  Through the gardens it is
below ground.  If we could find an entrance to it, we could leave here
at once.  It is not safe here, for they will search every inch of the
temple and the grounds."

"Come," said Bradley.  "We'll have a look for it, anyway." And so
saying he approached one of the doors that opened onto the skull-paved
shelf.

They found the corridor easily, for it paralleled the river, separated
from it only by a single wall.  It took them beneath the gardens and
the city, always through inky darkness.  After they had reached the
other side of the gardens, Bradley counted his steps until he had
retraced as many as he had taken coming down the stream; but though
they had to grope their way along, it was a much more rapid trip than
the former.

When he thought he was about opposite the point at which he had
descended from the Blue Place of Seven Skulls, he sought and found a
doorway leading out onto the river; and then, still in the blackest
darkness, he lowered himself into the stream and felt up and down upon
the opposite side for the little shelf and the ladder.  Ten yards from
where he had emerged he found them, while the girl waited upon the
opposite side.

To ascend to the secret panel was the work of but a minute.  Here he
paused and listened lest a Wieroo might be visiting the prison in
search of him or the other inmate; but no sound came from the gloomy
interior.  Bradley could not but muse upon the joy of the man on the
opposite side when he should drop down to him with food and a new hope
for escape.  Then he opened the panel and looked into the room.  The
faint light from the grating above revealed the pile of rags in one
corner; but the man lay beneath them, he made no response to Bradley's
low greeting.

The Englishman lowered himself to the floor of the room and approached
the rags.  Stooping he lifted a corner of them.  Yes, there was the man
asleep.  Bradley shook him--there was no response.  He stooped lower
and in the dim light examined An-Tak; then he stood up with a sigh.  A
rat leaped from beneath the coverings and scurried away.  "Poor devil!"
muttered Bradley.

He crossed the room to swing himself to the perch preparatory to
quitting the Blue Place of Seven Skulls forever.  Beneath the perch he
paused.  "I'll not give them the satisfaction," he growled.  "Let them
believe that he escaped."

Returning to the pile of rags he gathered the man into his arms.  It
was difficult work raising him to the high perch and dragging him
through the small opening and thus down the ladder; but presently it
was done, and Bradley had lowered the body into the river and cast it
off.  "Good-bye, old top!" he whispered.

A moment later he had rejoined the girl and hand in hand they were
following the dark corridor upstream toward the farther end of the
city.  She told him that the Wieroos seldom frequented these lower
passages, as the air here was too chill for them; but occasionally they
came, and as they could see quite as well by night as by day, they
would be sure to discover Bradley and the girl.

"If they come close enough," she said, "we can see their eyes shining
in the dark--they resemble dull splotches of light.  They glow, but do
not blaze like the eyes of the tiger or the lion."

The man could not but note the very evident horror with which she
mentioned the creatures.  To him they were uncanny; but she had been
used to them for a year almost, and probably all her life she had
either seen or heard of them constantly.

"Why do you fear them so?" he asked.  "It seems more than any ordinary
fear of the harm they can do you."

She tried to explain; but the nearest he could gather was that she
looked upon the Wieroo almost as supernatural beings.  "There is a
legend current among my people that once the Wieroo were unlike us only
in that they possessed rudimentary wings.  They lived in villages in
the Galu country, and while the two peoples often warred, they held no
hatred for one another.  In those days each race came up from the
beginning and there was great rivalry as to which was the higher in the
scale of evolution.  The Wieroo developed the first cos-ata-lu but they
were always male--never could they reproduce woman.  Slowly they
commenced to develop certain attributes of the mind which, they
considered, placed them upon a still higher level and which gave them
many advantages over us, seeing which they thought only of mental
development--their minds became like stars and the rivers, moving
always in the same manner, never varying.  They called this tas-ad,
which means doing everything the right way, or, in other words, the
Wieroo way.  If foe or friend, right or wrong, stood in the way of
tas-ad, then it must be crushed.

"Soon the Galus and the lesser races of men came to hate and fear them.
It was then that the Wieroos decided to carry tas-ad into every part of
the world.  They were very warlike and very numerous, although they had
long since adopted the policy of slaying all those among them whose
wings did not show advanced development.

"It took ages for all this to happen--very slowly came the different
changes; but at last the Wieroos had wings they could use.  But by
reason of always making war upon their neighbors they were hated by
every creature of Caspak, for no one wanted their tas-ad, and so they
used their wings to fly to this island when the other races turned
against them and threatened to kill them all.  So cruel had they become
and so bloodthirsty that they no longer had hearts that beat with love
or sympathy; but their very cruelty and wickedness kept them from
conquering the other races, since they were also cruel and wicked to
one another, so that no Wieroo trusted another.

"Always were they slaying those above them that they might rise in
power and possessions, until at last came the more powerful than the
others with a tas-ad all his own.  He gathered about him a few of the
most terrible Wieroos, and among them they made laws which took from
all but these few Wieroos every weapon they possessed.

"Now their tas-ad has reached a high plane among them.  They make many
wonderful things that we cannot make.  They think great thoughts, no
doubt, and still dream of greatness to come, but their thoughts and
their acts are regulated by ages of custom--they are all alike--and
they are most unhappy."

As the girl talked, the two moved steadily along the dark passageway
beside the river.  They had advanced a considerable distance when there
sounded faintly from far ahead the muffled roar of falling water, which
increased in volume as they moved forward until at last it filled the
corridor with a deafening sound.  Then the corridor ended in a blank
wall; but in a niche to the right was a ladder leading aloft, and to
the left was a door opening onto the river.  Bradley tried the latter
first and as he opened it, felt a heavy spray against his face. The
little shelf outside the doorway was wet and slippery, the roaring of
the water tremendous.  There could be but one explanation--they had
reached a waterfall in the river, and if the corridor actually
terminated here, their escape was effectually cut off, since it was
quite evidently impossible to follow the bed of the river and ascend
the falls.

As the ladder was the only alternative, the two turned toward it and,
the man first, began the ascent, which was through a well similar to
that which had led him to the upper floors of the temple.  As he
climbed, Bradley felt for openings in the sides of the shaft; but he
discovered none below fifty feet.  The first he came to was ajar,
letting a faint light into the well.  As he paused, the girl climbed to
his side, and together they looked through the crack into a low-ceiled
chamber in which were several Galu women and an equal number of hideous
little replicas of the full-grown Wieroos with which Bradley was not
quite familiar.

He could feel the body of the girl pressed close to his tremble as her
eyes rested upon the inmates of the room, and involuntarily his arm
encircled her shoulders as though to protect her from some danger which
he sensed without recognizing.

"Poor things," she whispered.  "This is their horrible fate--to be
imprisoned here beneath the surface of the city with their hideous
offspring whom they hate as they hate their fathers.  A Wieroo keeps
his children thus hidden until they are full-grown lest they be
murdered by their fellows.  The lower rooms of the city are filled with
many such as these."

Several feet above was a second door beyond which they found a small
room stored with food in wooden vessels.  A grated window in one wall
opened above an alley, and through it they could see that they were
just below the roof of the building.  Darkness was coming, and at
Bradley's suggestion they decided to remain hidden here until after
dark and then to ascend to the roof and reconnoiter.

Shortly after they had settled themselves they heard something
descending the ladder from above.  They hoped that it would continue on
down the well and fairly held their breath as the sound approached the
door to the storeroom.  Their hearts sank as they heard the door open
and from between cracks in the vessels behind which they hid saw a
yellow-slashed Wieroo enter the room.  Each recognized him immediately,
the girl indicating the fact of her own recognition by a sudden
pressure of her fingers on Bradley's arm.  It was the Wieroo of the
yellow slashing whose abode was the place of the yellow door in which
Bradley had first seen the girl.

The creature carried a wooden bowl which it filled with dried food from
several of the vessels; then it turned and quit the room.  Bradley
could see through the partially open doorway that it descended the
ladder.  The girl told him that it was taking the food to the women and
the young below, and that while it might return immediately, the
chances were that it would remain for some time.

"We are just below the place of the yellow door," she said.  "It is far
from the edge of the city; so far that we may not hope to escape if we
ascend to the roofs here."

"I think," replied the man, "that of all the places in Oo-oh this will
be the easiest to escape from.  Anyway, I want to return to the place
of the yellow door and get my pistol if it is there."

"It is still there," replied, the girl.  "I saw it placed in a chest
where he keeps the things he takes from his prisoners and victims."

"Good!" exclaimed Bradley.  "Now come, quickly."  And the two crossed
the room to the well and ascended the ladder a short distance to its
top where they found another door that opened into a vacant room--the
same in which Bradley had first met the girl.  To find the pistol was a
matter of but a moment's search on the part of Bradley's companion; and
then, at the Englishman's signal, she followed him to the yellow door.

It was quite dark without as the two entered the narrow passage between
two buildings.  A few steps brought them undiscovered to the doorway of
the storeroom where lay the body of Fosh-bal-soj.  In the distance,
toward the temple, they could hear sounds as of a great gathering of
Wieroos--the peculiar, uncanny wailing rising above the dismal flapping
of countless wings.

"They have heard of the killing of Him Who Speaks for Luata," whispered
the girl.  "Soon they will spread in all directions searching for us."

"And will they find us?"

"As surely as Lua gives light by day," she replied; "and when they find
us, they will tear us to pieces, for only the Wieroos may murder--only
they may practice tas-ad."

"But they will not kill you," said Bradley.  "You did not slay him."

"It will make no difference," she insisted.  "If they find us together
they will slay us both."

"Then they won't find us together," announced Bradley decisively.  "You
stay right here--you won't be any worse off than before I came--and
I'll get as far as I can and account for as many of the beggars as
possible before they get me.  Good-bye!  You're a mighty decent little
girl.  I wish that I might have helped you."

"No," she cried.  "Do not leave me.  I would rather die.  I had hoped
and hoped to find some way to return to my own country.  I wanted to go
back to An-Tak, who must be very lonely without me; but I know that it
can never be.  It is difficult to kill hope, though mine is nearly
dead.  Do not leave me."

"An-Tak!" Bradley repeated.  "You loved a man called An-Tak?"

"Yes," replied the girl.  "An-Tak was away, hunting, when the Wieroo
caught me.  How he must have grieved for me!  He also was cos-ata-lu,
twelve moons older than I, and all our lives we have been together."

Bradley remained silent.  So she loved An-Tak.  He hadn't the heart to
tell her that An-Tak had died, or how.

At the door of Fosh-bal-soj's storeroom they halted to listen.  No
sound came from within, and gently Bradley pushed open the door.  All
was inky darkness as they entered; but presently their eyes became
accustomed to the gloom that was partially relieved by the soft
starlight without.  The Englishman searched and found those things for
which he had come--two robes, two pairs of dead wings and several
lengths of fiber rope.  One pair of the wings he adjusted to the girl's
shoulders by means of the rope.  Then he draped the robe about her,
carrying the cowl over her head.

He heard her gasp of astonishment when she realized the ingenuity and
boldness of his plan; then he directed her to adjust the other pair of
wings and the robe upon him.  Working with strong, deft fingers she
soon had the work completed, and the two stepped out upon the roof, to
all intent and purpose genuine Wieroos.  Besides his pistol Bradley
carried the sword of the slain Wieroo prophet, while the girl was armed
with the small blade of the red Wieroo.

Side by side they walked slowly across the roofs toward the north edge
of the city.  Wieroos flapped above them and several times they passed
others walking or sitting upon the roofs.  From the temple still rose
the sounds of commotion, now pierced by occasional shrill screams.

"The murderers are abroad," whispered the girl.  "Thus will another
become the tongue of Luata.  It is well for us, since it keeps them too
busy to give the time for searching for us.  They think that we cannot
escape the city, and they know that we cannot leave the island--and so
do I."

