I knew from the direction of our march that they were taking me to
Phutra.  Once there I did not need much of an imagination to picture
what my fate would be. It was the arena and a wild thag or fierce tarag
for me--unless the Mahars elected to take me to the pits.

In that case my end would be no more certain, though infinitely more
horrible and painful, for in the pits I should be subjected to cruel
vivisection.  From what I had once seen of their methods in the pits of
Phutra I knew them to be the opposite of merciful, whereas in the arena
I should be quickly despatched by some savage beast.

Arrived at the underground city, I was taken immediately before a slimy
Mahar.  When the creature had received the report of the Sagoth its
cold eyes glistened with malice and hatred as they were turned
balefully upon me.

I knew then that my identity had been guessed.  With a show of
excitement that I had never before seen evinced by a member of the
dominant race of Pellucidar, the Mahar hustled me away, heavily
guarded, through the main avenue of the city to one of the principal
buildings.

Here we were ushered into a great hall where presently many Mahars
gathered.

In utter silence they conversed, for they have no oral speech since
they are without auditory nerves.  Their method of communication Perry
has likened to the projection of a sixth sense into a fourth dimension,
where it becomes cognizable to the sixth sense of their audience.

Be that as it may, however, it was evident that I was the subject of
discussion, and from the hateful looks bestowed upon me not a
particularly pleasant subject.

How long I waited for their decision I do not know, but it must have
been a very long time.  Finally one of the Sagoths addressed me.  He
was acting as interpreter for his masters.

"The Mahars will spare your life," he said, "and release you on one
condition."

"And what is that condition?" I asked, though I could guess its terms.

"That you return to them that which you stole from the pits of Phutra
when you killed the four Mahars and escaped," he replied.

I had thought that that would be it.  The great secret upon which
depended the continuance of the Mahar race was safely hid where only
Dian and I knew.

I ventured to imagine that they would have given me much more than my
liberty to have it safely in their keeping again; but after that--what?

Would they keep their promises?

I doubted it.  With the secret of artificial propagation once more in
their hands their numbers would soon be made so to overrun the world of
Pellucidar that there could be no hope for the eventual supremacy of
the human race, the cause for which I so devoutly hoped, for which I
had consecrated my life, and for which I was not willing to give my
life.

Yes! In that moment as I stood before the heartless tribunal I felt
that my life would be a very little thing to give could it save to the
human race of Pellucidar the chance to come into its own by insuring
the eventual extinction of the hated, powerful Mahars.

"Come!" exclaimed the Sagoths.  "The mighty Mahars await your reply."

"You may say to them," I answered, "that I shall not tell them where
the great secret is hid."

When this had been translated to them there was a great beating of
reptilian wings, gaping of sharp-fanged jaws, and hideous hissing.  I
thought that they were about to fall upon me on the spot, and so I laid
my hands upon my revolvers; but at length they became more quiet and
presently transmitted some command to my Sagoth guard, the chief of
which laid a heavy hand upon my arm and pushed me roughly before him
from the audience-chamber.

They took me to the pits, where I lay carefully guarded.  I was sure
that I was to be taken to the vivisection laboratory, and it required
all my courage to fortify myself against the terrors of so fearful a
death.  In Pellucidar, where there is no time, death-agonies may endure
for eternities.

Accordingly, I had to steel myself against an endless doom, which now
stared me in the face!



CHAPTER V

SURPRISES

But at last the allotted moment arrived--the moment for which I had
been trying to prepare myself, for how long I could not even guess.  A
great Sagoth came and spoke some words of command to those who watched
over me.  I was jerked roughly to my feet and with little consideration
hustled upward toward the higher levels.

Out into the broad avenue they conducted me, where, amid huge throngs
of Mahars, Sagoths, and heavily guarded slaves, I was led, or, rather,
pushed and shoved roughly, along in the same direction that the mob
moved.  I had seen such a concourse of people once before in the
buried city of Phutra; I guessed, and rightly, that we were bound for
the great arena where slaves who are condemned to death meet their end.

Into the vast amphitheater they took me, stationing me at the extreme
end of the arena.  The queen came, with her slimy, sickening retinue.
The seats were filled.  The show was about to commence.

Then, from a little doorway in the opposite end of the structure, a
girl was led into the arena.  She was at a considerable distance from
me.  I could not see her features.

I wondered what fate awaited this other poor victim and myself, and why
they had chosen to have us die together.  My own fate, or rather, my
thought of it, was submerged in the natural pity I felt for this lone
girl, doomed to die horribly beneath the cold, cruel eyes of her awful
captors.  Of what crime could she be guilty that she must expiate it in
the dreaded arena?

As I stood thus thinking, another door, this time at one of the long
sides of the arena, was thrown open, and into the theater of death
slunk a mighty tarag, the huge cave tiger of the Stone Age.  At my
sides were my revolvers.  My captors had not taken them from me,
because they did not yet realize their nature.  Doubtless they thought
them some strange manner of war-club, and as those who are condemned to
the arena are permitted weapons of defense, they let me keep them.

The girl they had armed with a javelin.  A brass pin would have been
almost as effective against the ferocious monster they had loosed upon
her.

The tarag stood for a moment looking about him--first up at the vast
audience and then about the arena.  He did not seem to see me at all,
but his eyes fell presently upon the girl.  A hideous roar broke from
his titanic lungs--a roar which ended in a long-drawn scream that is
more human than the death-cry of a tortured woman--more human but more
awesome.  I could scarce restrain a shudder.

Slowly the beast turned and moved toward the girl.  Then it was that I
came to myself and to a realization of my duty.  Quickly and as
noiselessly as possible I ran down the arena in pursuit of the grim
creature.  As I ran I drew one of my pitifully futile weapons.  Ah!
Could I but have had my lost express-gun in my hands at that moment! A
single well-placed shot would have crumbled even this great monster.
The best I could hope to accomplish was to divert the thing from the
girl to myself and then to place as many bullets as possible in it
before it reached and mauled me into insensibility and death.

There is a certain unwritten law of the arena that vouchsafes freedom
and immunity to the victor, be he beast or human being--both of whom,
by the way, are all the same to the Mahar.  That is, they were
accustomed to look upon man as a lower animal before Perry and I broke
through the Pellucidarian crust, but I imagine that they were beginning
to alter their views a trifle and to realize that in the gilak--their
word for human being--they had a highly organized, reasoning being to
contend with.

Be that as it may, the chances were that the tarag alone would profit
by the law of the arena.  A few more of his long strides, a prodigious
leap, and he would be upon the girl.  I raised a revolver and fired.
The bullet struck him in the left hind leg.  It couldn't have damaged
him much; but the report of the shot brought him around, facing me.

I think the snarling visage of a huge, enraged, saber-toothed tiger is
one of the most terrible sights in the world.  Especially if he be
snarling at you and there be nothing between the two of you but bare
sand.

Even as he faced me a little cry from the girl carried my eyes beyond
the brute to her face.  Hers was fastened upon me with an expression of
incredulity that baffles description.  There was both hope and horror
in them, too.

"Dian!" I cried.  "My Heavens, Dian!"

I saw her lips form the name David, as with raised javelin she rushed
forward upon the tarag.  She was a tigress then--a primitive savage
female defending her loved one.  Before she could reach the beast with
her puny weapon, I fired again at the point where the tarag's neck met
his left shoulder.  If I could get a bullet through there it might
reach his heart.  The bullet didn't reach his heart, but it stopped him
for an instant.

It was then that a strange thing happened.  I heard a great hissing
from the stands occupied by the Mahars, and as I glanced toward them I
saw three mighty thipdars--the winged dragons that guard the queen, or,
as Perry calls them, pterodactyls--rise swiftly from their rocks and
dart lightning-like, toward the center of the arena.  They are huge,
powerful reptiles.  One of them, with the advantage which his wings
might give him, would easily be a match for a cave bear or a tarag.

These three, to my consternation, swooped down upon the tarag as he was
gathering himself for a final charge upon me.  They buried their talons
in his back and lifted him bodily from the arena as if he had been a
chicken in the clutches of a hawk.

What could it mean?

I was baffled for an explanation; but with the tarag gone I lost no
time in hastening to Dian's side.  With a little cry of delight she
threw herself into my arms.  So lost were we in the ecstasy of reunion
that neither of us--to this day--can tell what became of the tarag.

The first thing we were aware of was the presence of a body of Sagoths
about us.  Gruffly they commanded us to follow them.  They led us from
the arena and back through the streets of Phutra to the audience
chamber in which I had been tried and sentenced.  Here we found
ourselves facing the same cold, cruel tribunal.

Again a Sagoth acted as interpreter.  He explained that our lives had
been spared because at the last moment Tu-al-sa had returned to Phutra,
and seeing me in the arena had prevailed upon the queen to spare my
life.

"Who is Tu-al-sa?" I asked.

"A Mahar whose last male ancestor was--ages ago--the last of the male
rulers among the Mahars," he replied.

"Why should she wish to have my life spared?"

He shrugged his shoulders and then repeated my question to the Mahar
spokesman.  When the latter had explained in the strange sign-language
that passes for speech between the Mahars and their fighting men the
Sagoth turned again to me:

"For a long time you had Tu-al-sa in your power," he explained.  "You
might easily have killed her or abandoned her in a strange world--but
you did neither.  You did not harm her, and you brought her back with
you to Pellucidar and set her free to return to Phutra.  This is your
reward."

Now I understood.  The Mahar who had been my involuntary companion upon
my return to the outer world was Tu-al-sa.  This was the first time
that I had learned the lady's name.  I thanked fate that I had not left
her upon the sands of the Sahara--or put a bullet in her, as I had been
tempted to do.  I was surprised to discover that gratitude was a
characteristic of the dominant race of Pellucidar.  I could never think
of them as aught but cold-blooded, brainless reptiles, though Perry had
devoted much time in explaining to me that owing to a strange freak of
evolution among all the genera of the inner world, this species of the
reptilia had advanced to a position quite analogous to that which man
holds upon the outer crust.

He had often told me that there was every reason to believe from their
writings, which he had learned to read while we were incarcerated in
Phutra, that they were a just race, and that in certain branches of
science and arts they were quite well advanced, especially in genetics
and metaphysics, engineering and architecture.

While it had always been difficult for me to look upon these things as
other than slimy, winged crocodiles--which, by the way, they do not at
all resemble--I was now forced to a realization of the fact that I was
in the hands of enlightened creatures--for justice and gratitude are
certain hallmarks of rationality and culture.

But what they purposed for us further was of most imminent interest to
me.  They might save us from the tarag and yet not free us.  They
looked upon us yet, to some extent, I knew, as creatures of a lower
order, and so as we are unable to place ourselves in the position of
the brutes we enslave--thinking that they are happier in bondage than
in the free fulfilment of the purposes for which nature intended
them--the Mahars, too, might consider our welfare better conserved in
captivity than among the dangers of the savage freedom we craved.
Naturally, I was next impelled to inquire their further intent.

To my question, put through the Sagoth interpreter, I received the
reply that having spared my life they considered that Tu-al-sa's debt
of gratitude was canceled.  They still had against me, however, the
crime of which I had been guilty--the unforgivable crime of stealing
the great secret.  They, therefore, intended holding Dian and me
prisoners until the manuscript was returned to them.

They would, they said, send an escort of Sagoths with me to fetch the
precious document from its hiding-place, keeping Dian at Phutra as a
hostage and releasing us both the moment that the document was safely
restored to their queen.

There was no doubt but that they had the upper hand.  However, there
was so much more at stake than the liberty or even the lives of Dian
and myself, that I did not deem it expedient to accept their offer
without giving the matter careful thought.

Without the great secret this maleless race must eventually become
extinct.  For ages they had fertilized their eggs by an artificial
process, the secret of which lay hidden in the little cave of a far-off
valley where Dian and I had spent our honeymoon.  I was none too sure
that I could find the valley again, nor that I cared to.  So long as
the powerful reptilian race of Pellucidar continued to propagate, just
so long would the position of man within the inner world be
jeopardized.  There could not be two dominant races.

I said as much to Dian.

"You used to tell me," she replied, "of the wonderful things you could
accomplish with the inventions of your own world.  Now you have
returned with all that is necessary to place this great power in the
hands of the men of Pellucidar.

"You told me of great engines of destruction which would cast a
bursting ball of metal among our enemies, killing hundreds of them at
one time.

"You told me of mighty fortresses of stone which a thousand men armed
with big and little engines such as these could hold forever against a
million Sagoths.

"You told me of great canoes which moved across the water without
paddles, and which spat death from holes in their sides.

"All these may now belong to the men of Pellucidar.  Why should we fear
the Mahars?

"Let them breed! Let their numbers increase by thousands.  They will
be helpless before the power of the Emperor of Pellucidar.

"But if you remain a prisoner in Phutra, what may we accomplish?

"What could the men of Pellucidar do without you to lead them?

"They would fight among themselves, and while they fought the Mahars
would fall upon them, and even though the Mahar race should die out, of
what value would the emancipation of the human race be to them without
the knowledge, which you alone may wield, to guide them toward the
wonderful civilization of which you have told me so much that I long
for its comforts and luxuries as I never before longed for anything.

"No, David; the Mahars cannot harm us if you are at liberty.  Let them
have their secret that you and I may return to our people, and lead
them to the conquest of all Pellucidar."

It was plain that Dian was ambitious, and that her ambition had not
dulled her reasoning faculties.  She was right.  Nothing could be
