"They aren't!" cried Hiram.  "If they had stayed, Mr. King said
they'd be barred from the meets in a few days."

"Well, help me all you can."

"Queer, isn't it?" spoke Hiram, as the revenue officer left them.

"It is a rather strange proceeding," admitted Dave.

At five o'clock that afternoon the two friends were down at the
south pylons awaiting the coming in of the machines engaged in the
non-stop race.  A great crowd was gathered, for according to
estimated schedules some of the monoplanes would be due within the
coming half hour.

"If it's the Aegis first," spoke Hiram, "it makes three winning
stunts for Mr. King in two days."

A sort of instantaneous flutter pervaded the people as some word
starting from the judge's stand passed electrically through the
crowd.

"They've sighted something," shouted an excited spectator.

"Yes, there's one of the airships," added a quick voice.

"I see it!"

"There's another!"

"Hurrah!"

Hiram stood looking up into the sky, fairly trembling with suspense.
A man standing by Dave had a field glass.

"I make out two," he spoke to an inquirer at his side.

"I think I can tell you who they are if you'll give me your glass
for a minute," said Dave.

"Certainly," replied the man.

"What is it, Dave?" cried Hiram, as, watching the face of his comrade
closely, he discerned an intense expression upon it.

"Aegis in the lead--" began Dave, lowering the field glass.

"Aegis in the lead!" ran from the spot in receding echoes as the
news passed down the line.

"That's King's craft."

"I knew it!"

"Butterfly a close second," reported Dave.

"There's another one!"

"And another!"

"See them come!" cried an excited old farmer.  "Say, it beats the
electric cars down at Poseyville!"

The field was in a wild flutter.  The contesting aircraft came
nearer and nearer.  Finally Hiram could make out the Aegis fully a
mile in the lead, the wings set for a drop straight beyond the south
pylon.

"He's won--Mr. King has won!" he shouted again and again, fairly
dancing up and down.

The crowd surged towards the landing point as the Aegis gracefully
sailed to earth, ran a stopping course, and Robert King stepped out
amid the frantic cheers of his friends and admiring spectators in
general.

The great aviator looked please and proud.  Old Grimshaw trotted at
his side on the way to the Aegis hangar.

"Say, you're taking about everything there is in sight," he
remarked, with one of his grim chuckles.

"I've run the limit on the set spurts, I guess," replied the expert
airman.  "I'm going to look, for something better."

"What is there that's better than these famous stunts of yours, Mr.
King?" inquired Hiram.

"A record beater of some account," was the quick response.

"Record breaker of what?" pressed the persistent Hiram.

"Well," said Mr. King with an animated sparkle in his eye, "you and
Dashaway come down to the hangar this evening, and I'll tell you all
about it."





CHAPTER IX

A GIANT AIRSHIP


Dave Dashaway and his friend were promptly on hand at the Aegis
hangar at eight o'clock that evening.

Usually the boys took their meals with Mr. King.  A group of the
airman's admirers, however, had insisted on a special dinner at a
hotel just outside the grounds.  Hiram piloted the way for Dave to
the restaurant on the field.  He had worked for the man having it in
charge, and the best meal possible was set out for them free of
charge.

They found Mr. King in the little partitioned off room of the Aegis
hangar which he used as an office.  The airman sat before a desk
littered up with a variety of papers.  One of these Dave noticed as
he entered, was a detailed drawing of an immense airship.

"Oh, arrived, eh?" spoke the aviator with a pleasant smile, as the
boys came into view.  "Glad of it.  Get comfortable seats and we'll
have a little chat."

The boys settled themselves in camp chairs, Mr. King closed the door
of the apartment and sat down again.  Hiram regarded him eagerly and
expectantly.

"I've got something to tell you, lads," began the airman, after a
brief thoughtful pause.  "This is business, and of course you will
be wise enough to treat it confidentially."

"I love to keep secrets," declared the ardent Hiram, and Dave smiled
and nodded assent to the sentiment.

"I have been thinking and planning for a big event for some time,"
continued Mr. King.

"As how, now?" asked Hiram, devoured with suspense.

"Well, in the first place I propose to build a giant airship."

"I know," said Hiram.  "A big passenger monoplane."

"No," interrupted the aviator.  "What I want is a dirigible
airship."

"Pshaw! only a balloon!" remarked Hiram disappointedly.

"Not at all," corrected the good-natured airman.  "Except for the
self-sustaining power, it will be constructed on the best aeroplane
principles.  I have been working on it for some months, and only
yesterday I got figures on the machine."

"What is it for, Mr. King?" submitted the inquisitive Hiram,
"exhibitions?"

"No.  It's first big feat is to cross the Atlantic."

"Cross the Atlantic Ocean!" almost gasped the excited Hiram.

"Cross the Atlantic!" repeated Dave, in a startled yet thoughtful
manner.

He sat looking fixedly at the aviator as if fascinated.  The
novelty, the immensity of the proposition, stunned Dave.

"Can it be done?" he asked in a low, intense tone, vast dreams
running through his mind a lightning speed.

"According to my calculations, yes," replied Mr. King definitely.
"Oh, it is no new idea with me.  The project has been the constant
ideal of every advanced airman.  It has got to come to that, if
aeronautics is the progressive science we enthusiasts believe it to
be."

"I would like to be the first one to win such a triumph," said Dave.

"Yes, the first one gets the fame," said the airman.  "The prize,
too.  If such an experiment was rationally started I believe the
profession and its backers would put up a small fortune to go to the
successful winner.  Now, boys, I have great confidence in you.  What
has held me back has been the lack of capital."

"Say, Mr. King," broke in Hiram impetuously, "I've got nearly thirty
dollars saved up, and Dave--"

"It will take bigger amounts than we three put together can earn
just to get the plans of the giant airship on paper," said Mr. King,
with an indulgent smile at his loyal young friends.  "If I go to any
regular aero promoters they will want all the proceeds.  I can raise
a few thousand dollars myself and do as much more among my friends
but, all put together, the amount wouldn't make even a beginning."

"How much will it take, Mr. King?" asked Dave seriously.

"At least twenty-five thousand dollars."

"Whew!" whistled Hiram.

"It's no child's play.  It's a big risk, and there's no doing it
half way," declared Mr. King.  "Last night while I was planning over
it, a sudden idea came to me.  Dashaway, you remember that fellow
who stole my watch and money and medal from you?"

"You mean the young thief who called himself Briggs, and then
Gregg?"

"Exactly."

"Yes, Mr. King."

"And how he used some letters sent to your father from a great
friend of his?"

"Mr. Dale?" nodded Dave, wondering what all this had to do with the
giant airship scheme.

"Well, as you know, that young scamp, Gregg, had gone to Mr. Dale,
who had never seen you, and by means of the letters stolen from you
made him believe that he was the son of his old friend.  So
delighted was Mr. Dale, that he practically adopted young Gregg.  In
fact, he was on the point of making the pretended Dave Dashaway heir
to all his fortune."

"You told me about that," said Dave.

"When we left Dayton to come here, we had to make a hurried jump to
fill our contract, as you know.  I let Gregg go, after recovering my
stolen property from him, but I got a written confession of his bold
imposture, first.  You know my plan was for you and me to go where
Mr. Dale lives, and introduce him to the real Dave Dashaway.  You
see, although I have managed to scare that old tyrant guardian of
yours, Silas Warner, into leaving you alone, I feared he might work
some trick to get you back in his clutches again."

"I've thought a good deal about that lately," said Dave.

"My plan was to have this Mr. Dale go to Brookville, show up Warner,
and apply for your guardianship."

"Yes, then I would feel safe," said Dave.

"Well, Mr. Dale, having been an old balloonist, would probably not
object to your remaining in the same line of business in which your
father was famous."

"I should think he would be pleased," remarked Hiram, who was always
interested and active in any conversation going on.

"I counted on that," resumed the aviator.  "At all events, not being
able to go or send Dave to Warrenton to meet this Mr. Dale, I wrote
to a friend of mine who lives at Warrenton.  I told him the whole
story, instructing him to inform Mr. Dale, so if this Gregg came
around again, he would be ready to treat him as an imposter.  My
friend wrote me only yesterday that Mr. Dale was off on an
automobile trip, and might not be back for a day or two.  He said
that Mr. Dale was a very lonely old bachelor.  He had been delighted
to take up Gregg, believing him to be the son of his old balloonist
comrade, so you would, be sure to receive a really grand welcome,
Dave."

"I'm glad of that," said Dave, filled with deep gratitude as he
contrasted his present circumstances with his former forlorn
condition.

"Now then, to business," continued Mr. King briskly.  "I don't want
to 'work' anybody with my personal schemes, but I see a chance to
put my giant airship project on its feet."

"Why," cried Dave brightly, "you mean to interest Mr. Dale?"

"That's just what I do mean," assented the aviator.

Dave rose to his feet, excited and pleased.

"Mr. King," he said earnestly, "I not only would do all I could to
have Mr. Dale join you, but I feel sure he would be glad to take an
interest in your plan."

"It's worth trying, anyway," responded the airman.  "I'm going to go
by rail to Warrenton to-morrow, in the hope of finding Mr. Dale at
home.  I shall send you to him later."

"All this isn't grand, or exciting, or anything of that sort, is it,
now!" ejaculated Hiram, as Dave and he returned to the Baby Racer
hangar.

"I hope Mr. King's plans come out, all right," responded Dave.  "I'll
do a good deal to repay him for all he has done for me."

"And me, too," echoed Hiram.  "He's a fine fellow!"

Mr. King departed on his journey the next day.  Dave was not on the
programme, so he practiced some with the hydroplane.  Coming home
for dinner, he found a letter from the Interstate people.

They were cheery and optimistic over the completion of their new
model aero-hydroplane.  It had been tested and worked splendidly.
The company stated that they would ship the machine to the meet at
Columbus two days later.

Dave told Hiram about the machine, and the hitter was in a fever of
expectation over its anticipated arrival.

The boys were eating their supper at the King hangar later in the
day, when a telegraph messenger appeared.

"Message for Mr. Dave Dashaway," he said.  "I'm your man," replied
Dave.

He signed for the message, tore open the envelope, and glanced
rapidly over the enclosure.  His face clouded as he did so, for the
message was from his employers, the Interstate Aero Company, and it
read:

"Cancel all dates.  Come on at once.  Trouble."





CHAPTER X

SOMETHING WRONG


