The servants had been merely informed that Ida was a relative of Miss
Ludington's, and though they were very curious as to what connection she
might be, their speculations did not extend beyond the commonly
recognized modes of relationship. The housekeeper, indeed, who had been
in Miss Ludington's employ many years, and supposed she knew all about
the family, thought it strange that she could recall no young lady
relative answering to Ida's description. But as she found that her most
ingenious efforts entirely failed to extract any information on the
subject from Miss Ludington, Paul, or Ida herself, she was obliged, like
the rest, to accept the bare fact that the new-comer was Miss Ida
Ludington, and that she was somehow related to Miss Ludington; a fact
speedily supplemented by the discovery that to please Miss Ida was the
surest way to the favour of Miss Ludington and Mr. Paul.

On that score, however, there was no need of any special inducement,
Ida's sweet face, and gracious, considerate ways, having already made her
a favourite with all who were attached to the household.

It was ten days or a fortnight after Ida had been in the house that Miss
Ludington received a letter from Dr. Hull, in which that gentleman said
that he should do himself the honour of calling on her the following day.

He said she might be interested to know that he had already received
several communications from Mrs. Legrand, through mediums, in which she
had declared herself well content to have died in demonstrating so great
a truth as that immortality is not individual, but personal. She
considered herself to be most fortunate in that her death had not been a
barren one, as most deaths are; but that in dying, she had been permitted
to become the second mother of another, and far brighter life than hers
had been. She felt that she had made a grand barter for her own earthly
existence, which had been so sick and weary.

The bulk of Dr. Hull's letter, which was quite a long one, consisted of
further quotations from Mrs. Legrand's communications.

She said that she had been welcomed by a great multitude of spirits, who
to her had owed the beginning of their recognition on earth, and that
their joy over this discovery, which should bring consolation to many
mournful mortals, as well as to themselves, was only equalled by their
wonder that it had not been made years before. It appeared that, since
intercourse between the two worlds had first begun, it had been the
constant effort of the spirits to teach this truth to men; but the stupid
refusal of the latter to comprehend had till now baffled every attempt.
How it had been possible that men who had reached the point of believing
in immortality at all should be content to rest in the inadequate and
preposterous conception that it only attached to the latest phase of the
individual, was the standing wonder of the spirit world.

It was as if one should throw away the contents of a cup of wine, and
carefully preserve the dregs in the bottom.

That so loose an association of personalities as the individual, and
those personalities so utterly diverse, no two of them even alive at the
same time, should have impressed even the most casual observer as a unit
of being--a single person--was accounted a marvel by the angels. If men
had believed all the members of a family to have but one soul among them,
their mistake would have been more excusable, for the members of a family
are, at least, alive at the same time, while the persons of an individual
are not even that.

Dr. Hull said that he had gathered from Mrs. Legrand's communications
that she had seen many things which would teach mortals not to grieve for
their departed friends, as for shades exiled to a world of strangers. To
such mourners she sent word that their own past selves, who have likewise
vanished from the earth, are keeping their dear dead company in heaven.
And far more congenial company to them are these past selves than their
present selves would be, who, through years and changes since their
separation, have often grown out of sympathy with the departed, as they
will find when they shall meet them. The aged husband, who has mourned
all his life the bride taken from him in girlhood, will find himself
well-nigh a stranger to her, and his mourning to have been superfluous;
for all these years his own former self, the husband of her youth, has
borne her company.

Dr. Hull said, in closing, that, as probably Miss Ludington would
presume, his particular motive in making bold to break in upon her
privacy was a desire, which he was sure she would not confound with
vulgar curiosity, to see again the young lady who had succeeded to his
friend's earthly life in so wonderful a manner, and to learn, what, if
any, were the later developments in her case. He was preparing a book
upon the subject, in which, of course without giving the true names, he
intended to make the facts of the case known in the world. Its
publication, he felt assured, would mark a new departure in spiritualism.

Miss Ludington read the letter aloud to Ida and Paul, as all three sat
together in the gloaming on the piazza. As Paul from time to time, during
the reading, glanced at Ida he noticed that she kept her face averted.

"I am glad," said Miss Ludington, as she finished the letter, "that Mrs.
Legrand is happy. It is so hard to realize that about the dead. The
feeling that, our happiness was purchased by her death has been the only
cloud upon it. And yet it would be strange indeed if she were not happy.
As she says, she did not die a barren death, but in giving birth. And it
was no tiny infant's existence, of doubtful value, that she exchanged her
life for, but a woman's in the fulness of her youth and beauty. Such a
destiny as hers never fell to a mother before."

"Never before," echoed Paul, rising to his feet in an access of
enthusiasm; "but who shall say that it may not often fall to the lot of
women in the ages to come, as the relations between the worlds of men and
of spirits, become more fully known? The dark and unknown path that Ida
trod that night back to our world will, doubtless, in future times,
become a beaten and lighted way. This woman through whom she lives again
did not die of her own choice; but I do not find it incredible that many
women will hereafter be found willing and eager to die as she did, to
bring back to earth the good, the wise, the heroic, and beloved. The
world will never need to lose its heroes then, for there will never lack
ardent and devoted women to contend for such crowns of motherhood."

He stopped abruptly, for he had observed that Ida's face betrayed acute
distress.

"Forgive me," he said. "You do not like us to talk of this."

"I think I do not," she replied, in a low voice, without looking up. "It
affects me very strangely to think about it much. I would like to forget
it if I could and feel that I am like other people."

She had, in fact, shown a marked and increasing indisposition almost from
the first to discuss the events of that wonderful night at Mrs.
Legrand's. After having had the circumstances once fully explained to
her, she had never since referred to them of her own accord.

She apparently had the shrinking which any person, and especially a
woman, would naturally have from the idea of being regarded as something
abnormal and uncanny, and mingled with this was, perhaps, a certain
sacred shamefacedness, at the thought that this most intimate and vital
mystery of her second birth had been witnessed and was the subject of
curious speculations.




CHAPTER XI.



The ladies were out driving, the following afternoon, when Dr. Hull
arrived, but Paul was at home. He brought out some cigars, and they made
themselves comfortable on the piazza.

Dr. Hull was full of questions about Ida? how she appeared; what
relations had established themselves between Miss Ludington and her;
whether she showed any memory whatever of her disembodied state; whether
the knowledge of the mystery involving her seemed in any way to affect
her spirits or temper, or to set her apart in her own estimation from
others, with many other acute and carefully considered queries calculated
to elicit the facts of her mental and spiritual condition?

"There is one point," said the doctor, "about which I am particularly
curious. How is it with her memory of her former life on earth? Does it
break off suddenly, as if on some particular day or hour her spirit had
made way for its successor, and passed away from earth?"

"On the contrary," said Paul, "she has intimated, in talking over the
past with Miss Ludington, that the memory of her life on earth is clear
and precise during its earlier portions, but that toward the last it
grows hazy and indistinct."

"Exactly," broke in the doctor. "Just as if her personality had a little
overlapped and melted at the edge into that which followed it. Yes, it is
as I thought it might be. Youth, or childhood, or infancy, or any other
epoch of life, does not abruptly cease and give place to another. Their
souls are gradually withdrawn as the light is withdrawn from the sky at
evening, and a space of twilight renders the transition from one to the
other perceptible only in the result, not in the process. This I think is
a view of the matter, that is corroborated by the testimony of our own
consciousness, don't you, Mr. De Riemer?"

"On the whole, yes," replied Paul. "And still, if she had said that the
severing of her personality from that which succeeded it was sharp and
clearly defined, so that up to a certain day, or even hour, her memory
was full and distinct, and then became a blank, there are passages in my
own experience, and I think in that of many persons, which her statement
would have made comprehensible. I think that to many, perhaps to all
persons of reflective turn of mind, there come days, even hours, when
they feel that they have suddenly passed from one epoch of life into
another. A voice says in their hearts with unmistakable clearness,
'Yesterday I was young; to day I am young no longer.' There is also
sometimes a day, I think, when the middle-aged man becomes suddenly aware
that he is old. Who shall deny the truth of these intuitions, or say that
it is not in that very day and hour that the spirit of youth or of
maturity takes its flight?"

"By the way," said Dr. Hull, "have you ever speculated on the probable
number of the souls of an individual? It is an interesting question."

"I suppose that the number may greatly differ in different individuals,"
replied Paul. "In individuals of many-sided minds and versatile
dispositions, there are, perhaps, more distinct personalities than
constitute an individual of less complex character. But how many in
either case only God can tell. Who can say? It may be that with every
breath which I expire a soul or spiritual impression of myself is sent
forth. The universe is large enough even for that. Such may at least be
the case in moments of special intensity, when we live, as we say, a year
in an hour."

They smoked on awhile in silence. Presently Paul said, "When the world
comes to recognize the composite character of the individual, that it is
composed of not one, but many persons, a new department will be added to
ethics, relating to the duties of the successive selves of an individual
to one another. It will be recognized, on the one hand, that it is the
duty of a man to fulfil all reasonable obligations incurred by his past
selves, on the same principle that a pious son fulfils the equitable
obligations incurred by a parent. This duty is, indeed, recognized
to-day, although not on the correct basis. As regards the ethical
relation of a man to the selves who succeed him, a wholly new idea will
be introduced. It will be seen that the duty of a man to lead a wise
life, to be prudent, to make the most of his powers, to maintain a good
name, is not a duty to himself, merely an enlightened selfishness, as it
is now called, but a genuine form of altruism, a duty to others, as truly
as if those others bore different names instead of succeeding to his
name. It will be seen that a man's duty to his later selves is like the
duty of a father to his helpless children: to provide for their
inheritance, to see that he leaves them a sound body and a good name, if
nothing more. It will be perceived that the man who is charitably called
'his own worst enemy,' is not only no better, but worse, than if he were
the enemy of his neighbours, because he is blasting coming lives that
have a far nearer claim upon him than any neighbour can have.

"There will arise, also, in that day, I fancy," said Paul, "some rather
delicate questions, as to how far a man may properly bind his future
selves by pledges and engagements which he has no means of knowing will
meet with their approval, and which may quite possibly prove intolerable
yokes to them."

"Ah!" exclaimed the doctor, "that is indeed an interesting point. And,
meanwhile, I should say the intelligible discussion of these questions
will involve a modification in grammatical usage. If we believe that our
present selves are distinct persons from our past selves, it is
manifestly improper to use the first person in speaking of our past
selves. Either the third person must be used, or some new grammatical
form invented."

"Yes," said Paul. "If entire accuracy is sought the first person cannot
be properly employed by any one in referring either to his past or his
future selves, to what has been done or to what will be done by them."

At this moment the carriage drew up before the house, and Paul helped the
ladies out.

Miss Ludington greeted Dr. Hull cordially, and stopped upon the piazza in
hat and shawl to talk with him. But Ida merely bowed stiffly, with
lowered eyes, and passed within.

Before they were called to tea Paul found an opportunity to tell the
doctor how sensitive Ida was to any discussion of the mystery connected
with her, and to suggest that at table any direct reference to the
subject should be avoided.

The expression of disappointment on Dr. Hull's countenance seemed to
indicate that he had anticipated thoroughly cross-questioning her in the
interest of spiritual science; but he said that he would regard Paul's
suggestion, and even admitted that it was, perhaps, natural she should
feel as she did, although he had not anticipated it.

At the table, therefore, Ida was spared any direct reference to herself
as a phenomenon, and although Dr. Hull talked of nothing but spiritualism
and the immortality of past selves, it was in their broad and general
aspects that the subjects were discussed.

"Your nephew," he said to Miss Ludington, "has evidently given much time
and profound thought to these matters; and although I am an old man, and
have been more interested in the spiritual than the material universe for
these many years, I was glad of an opportunity to sit at his feet this
afternoon."

Turning to Paul, he added, "What you were saying about the possibility
that souls, or, at least, spiritual impressions, destined to eternity,
are given forth by us constantly, as if at every breath, is wonderfully
borne out in a passage from a communication I had from Mrs. Legrand
yesterday, to which I meant to have alluded at the time you were
speaking. She said that those who supposed that the spirit-land contained
only one soul for every individual that had ever lived had no conception
of its vastness, and that the stream of souls constantly ascending is
like a thick mist rising from all the earth. The phrase struck me as
strangely strong, but I can conceive now how she might have come to use
it.

"What is your conjecture, or have you none at all," he added, after a
moment's thought, still addressing Paul, "as to the relation which will
exist in the spirit-land among the several souls of the same individual?"

"It seems to me," said Paul, "that the souls of an individual, being
contemporaneous over there, and all together in the eternal present, will
be capable of blending in a unity which here on earth, where one is gone
before another comes, is impossible. The result of such a blending would
be a being which, in stead of shining with the single ray of a soul on
earth, would blaze from a hundred facets simultaneously. The word
'individual,' as applied here on earth, is a misuse of language. It is
absurd to call that an individual which every hour divides. The, earthly
stage of human life is so small that there is room for but one of the
persons of an individual upon it at one time. The past and future selves
have to wait in the side scenes. But over there the stage is larger.
There will be room for all at once. The idea of an individual, all whose
personalities are contemporaneous, may there be realized, and such an
individual would be, by any earthly measurement, a god.

"But there are many individuals," he pursued after a pause, "of which we
cannot imagine a blending of the successive persons to be possible.
There, for instance, are cases where there exist radical and bitter
oppositions and differences of character, and propensity between the
youth and the manhood of the individual. In the case of such ill-assorted
personalities a divorce _ex vinculo individui_ may be the only remedy;
and, possibly, the parties to it may be sent back to earth, to take their
chances of finding more congenial companions."

Ida had not said a word during the time they had sat at table. She had,
indeed, scarcely lifted her eyes from her plate.

As they rose she challenged Paul to a game at croquet, for which the
twilight left ample opportunity.

Miss Ludington and Dr. Hull sat upon the piazza in full view of the
players.

"What do you call her?" he asked, abruptly, after a pause in their
conversation.

"Why, we call her Ida, of course," replied Miss Ludington, with some
surprise. "What else could we call her? Is not her name Ida Ludington?"

"On my own account," said Dr. Hull, "I should not have needed to ask you,
because I am acquainted with the circumstances of the reassumption of her
earthly life and name, but how would you introduce her to one who was not
so acquainted--to any one, in fact, besides yourself, your nephew, and
myself?"

"In the same way, I suppose," replied Miss Ludington.

"Precisely," said the doctor "but if they were acquainted with your
family, or if they took any special interest in her, would they not want
to know what was the nature of her relationship to you? She could not be
your daughter. They would ask what was her connection with your family.
To tell them the truth would be of no use at all, for no one on earth
would believe what we know to be true, nor could I blame them, for I,
myself, would not have believed it if I had not been a witness."

Miss Ludington was silent a while. Then she said: "It does not matter; we
see few, I may say no strangers, or even acquaintances; we live alone. It
is enough that we know her."

"Yes," replied the doctor. "It is, indeed, quite another thing to what it
would be if you had a large circle of acquaintances. So long as you live,
it is not important, and I presume that your health is good."

"What is it that is not important?" demanded Miss Ludington.

"Why that she should have a name," replied the doctor, lifting his
eyebrows with an expression of slight surprise. "Unfortunately, the
courts do not recognize such a relation as exists between you and this
young lady. You are the only Miss Ludington in the eye of the law, and
she is non-existent, or, at least, an anonymous person. She has not so
much as a name sign on a hotel-register. But so long as you live to look
after her she is not likely to suffer."

"But I may die!" exclaimed Miss Ludington.

"In that case it would be rather awkward for her," said the doctor. "She
would die with you in the eye of the law" and here he branched off into
rather a fantastical discourse on the oddities and quiddities of the law
and lawyers, against whom he seemed to have a great grudge.

"But, Dr. Hull, what can I do about it?" said Miss Ludington, as he
quieted down.

"Excuse me. About what?"

"How can I give her a name in the eye of the law?"

"Oh--ah--exactly? Well, that's easy enough; there are two ways. You can
adopt her, or some young fellow can marry her, and if I were a young
man--if you'll excuse an old gentleman for the remark--it would not be my
fault if she were not provided with a legal title very soon."

Declining Miss Ludington's proposal to send him to the ferry in her
carriage, the doctor, soon after, took his leave.

He paused as he passed the croquet-ground and stood watching the players.
It came Ida's turn, and he waited to see her play. It was a very easy
shot which she had to make; she missed it badly. He bade them
good-evening, and went on.




CHAPTER XII.



It was but a few days after Dr. Hull's visit that Miss Ludington had a
sudden illness, lasting several days, which, during its crisis, caused
much alarm.

Ida turned all the servants out of the sick-room and constituted herself
nurse, watcher, and chambermaid, if she lay down at all it was only after
leaving a substitute charged to call her upon the slightest occasion.
Light and quick of step, strong and gentle of hand, patient, tireless,
and tender, she showed herself an angel of the sick-room.

There was, indeed, something almost eager in the manner in which she
seized upon this opportunity of devoting herself to Miss Ludington, and
the zeal with which she made the most of every possibility of rendering
her a service. She seemed, in fact, almost sorry when the patient had no
further need of her especial attendance.

To Miss Ludington the revelation that she was so dear to Ida was
profoundly affecting. It was natural that she should adore Ida, but that
Ida should be correspondingly devoted to her touched her in proportion to
its unexpectedness. "I should be glad to be sick always, with you to
nurse me, my sister," she said. Whenever she addressed Ida by this title
of sister her voice lingered upon the syllables as if she were striving
to realize all the mysterious closeness and tenderness of the relation
between them which its use implied.

The period of convalescence, during which Miss Ludington sat in her room,
lasted several days, and one evening she sent for Paul. She was alone
when he came in, and after he had inquired after her condition, she
motioned him to a chair.

"Sit down, Paul," she said; "I want to have a little talk with you."

He sat down and she went on: "I find that I have been greatly enfeebled
by this attack, and though the doctor tells me I may regain reasonable
health, he warns me that I shall not live for ever, and that when I die I
may die without much warning."

Expressions of mingled grief, surprise, and incredulity from Paul
interrupted her at this point, but she presently went on:--

"It is really nothing to distress yourself over, my dear child. He does
not say that I may not live on indefinitely, but only that when death
comes he is likely to enter without knocking, and I'm sure any sensible
person would much rather have it so. It was of Ida that I wanted to speak
to you. Since I have been sick, and especially since what the doctor told
me, I have been thinking what would become of her if I should die. Did
you ever consider, Paul, that she has not even a name? The world does not
recognize the way by which she came back into it, and in the eye of the
law she has no right to the name of Ida Ludington, or to any other."

"I suppose not," said Paul.

"It does not matter while I live," pursued Miss Ludington; "but what if I
should die?"

"Let us not talk of that," replied Paul, "or think of it. Yet even in
that event I should be here to protect her."

Miss Ludington regarded the young man for some moments without speaking,
and then, as a slight colour tinged her cheek she said, "Paul, do you
love her?"

"Do you need to ask me that?" he answered.

"No, I do not," she replied; and then as she cast down her eyes, and the
colour in her cheek grew deeper, she went on: "You know, Paul, that, as
society is constituted, there is but one way in which a young man can
protect a young girl who is not his relative, and that is by marrying
her. Have you thought of that?"

Paul's face flushed a deep crimson, and his forehead reddened to the
roots of the hair; after which the colour receded, and he became quite
pale; and then he flushed again deeper than before, till his eyes became
congested, and he saw Miss Ludington sitting there before him, with
downcast eyes and a spot of colour in either cheek, as through a fiery
mist.

Yes, he had thought of it.

The idea that, being of mystery though she was, Ida was still a woman,
and that he might one day possess her as other men possess their wives,
had come to him, but it had caused such an ungovernable ferment in his
blood, and savoured withal of such temerity, that he had been fairly
afraid to indulge it. In the horizon of his mind it had hovered as a
dream of unimaginable felicity which might some day in the far future
come to pass; but that was all.

Finally he said, in a husky voice, "I love her."

"I know you do," replied Miss Ludington. "No one but myself knows how you
have loved her. You are the only man in the world worthy of her, but you
are worthy even of her."

"But she would not marry me," said Paul. "She is very good to me, but she
has never thought of such a thing. It is I that love her, and she is very
good to let me; but she does not love me. How should she?"

"I think she does," said Miss Ludington, with a tone of quiet assurance.
"I have never said anything to her about it; but I have observed her. A
woman can generally read a woman in that particular, and it would be
