mysterious man was hiding, and since then I can't find him."

Then the frightened lad proceeded to explain what he and Mark had
undertaken, and the outcome of it; how his chum had failed to meet him
at the rendezvous, and how Jack had searched through the old house
without result.

"There's but one thing to do," declared Professor Henderson, when he
had listened to the story. "We must go back there and make a more
thorough search."

"What--to-night?" exclaimed the German.

"Surely. Why not? We can't leave Mark there all alone. He may be hurt,
or in trouble."

"That's what I think," said Jack. "I'll tell Washington and Andy, and
we'll go back and hunt for him. Poor Mark! If he had only waited for
me, perhaps this would never have happened, and if I hadn't stopped at
the dog-fight maybe Mark would have waited for me. Well, it's too late
to worry about that now. The thing is to find him; and I guess we can."

Jack would not stop longer than to snatch a hasty bite of supper before
he joined the searching party. Washington and he carried lanterns,
while Andy Sudds had his trusty rifle, and the two professors brought
up in the rear, armed with stout clubs, for Jack's account of the
affair made them think that perhaps they might have to deal with a
violent man.

"Hadn't you better notify the police?" suggested Andy. "A couple of
constables would be some help."

"Not very much," declared Jack. "Besides, there are only two in
Bayside, and it's hard to locate either one when you want them. I guess
we can manage alone."

"Yes, I would rather not notify the police if it can be avoided," said
Professor Henderson.

The searching party hurried along the country highway, which was now
deserted, as it was quite dark. Their lanterns flashed from side to
side, but they had no hope of getting any trace of Mark until they came
to the old barn, at least, though Jack wished several times that he
might meet his chum running toward them along the road.

They reached the barn in due course, and while Washington, Jack and
Andy began a search of it, the two scientists went up to the house of
the man who owned it and enlisted his aid. They asked him if he had
seen Mark around that afternoon, but the farmer had not.

"But me an' my hired man'll come out and help you hunt through the
barn," he said. "I remember once, when I was a lad, that my brother
fell off the hay mow and lay unconscious in a manger for five hours
before we found him. Maybe that's what's happened to this young man,"
suggested Mr. Hampton, which was the farmer's name.

"I looked around pretty well this afternoon," explained Jack, when the
farmer and his man had reached the barn, "but, of course, I didn't know
all the nooks and corners."

A thorough search of the structure, however, failed to reveal the
presence of Mark, and then the farmer volunteered to accompany the
party on to the old Preakness house. His offer was received with
thanks, and, bringing two more lanterns with them, Mr. Hampton and his
man added considerable to the illumination.

They went through the old mansion from garret to cellar, and called
repeatedly, but there was no answer. And good reason, for in the secret
room, with his captive, the mysterious man heard the first approach of
the searching party; and he quickly bound Mark and gagged him, so that
he could not answer.

There was nothing to do but to leave, and it was with sad hearts that
Jack and his friends departed, their search having been unavailing.
They turned toward home, which they reached quite late, but found
nothing disturbed.

No one in Professor Henderson's house slept much that night, and in the
morning pale and wan faces looked at each other, all asking the same
question: "Where is Mark?"

But no one could answer.

They talked over the matter, and decided that Jack, with Andy and
Washington, should form a searching party to scour the surrounding
country. The two scientists were too old for such work, and, as the aid
of the police was not desired, it was felt that the three could do all
that was necessary.

Accordingly, while Professor Henderson and his German friend went to
work on the damaged motor, which did not need as much repairing as at
first was thought to put it in working shape again, Jack and the two
men started off to hunt for Mark.

They were gone all that day, returning very much discouraged at dusk,
saying that they could get no trace of him.

"I don't see where he can be!" exclaimed Jack desperately, for, though
the two lads were not related, they had been friends so long, and had
shared so many pleasures and dangers together, that they were like
brothers. "You won't start for the moon until you find him, will you,
Professor?" asked Jack.

"No, indeed; though we could start to-morrow if he was here," replied
the aged scientist. "The special tools came to-day, and the motor has
been repaired. We have tested it, and the Cardite power works even
better than did the Etherium apparatus."

"Then we can start as soon as Mark is found?" asked Andy Sudds.

"Yes, for everything has been put inside the projectile, and all that
remains is to haul it out of the shed, point it at the moon, and start
the motor."

"Then I guess I'll give my gun a final cleaning, and get ready. There
may be good hunting on the moon," said the old hunter.

Jack was tired from his long tramp that day, searching for his missing
chum, but before he went to bed he wanted to go out and take a look at
the big projectile, which was now ready to start for the moon.

As he turned around the corner of the immense shed to enter the door,
he was startled by seeing a figure coming toward him. Jack started,
rubbed his eyes, and peered again.

"Is it possible? Can I be mistaken?" he whispered.

The figure came nearer. Jack, who had come to a halt, broke into a run.

"Mark! Mark!" he cried joyously. "Oh, you've come back! Where have you
been?"

Jack was about to clasp his chum in his arms when he saw that Mark's
arm was in a sling, and that his face was all bandaged up, so that
scarcely any of his features showed. Had it not been for the clothes,
and a certain stoutness of which Mark never could seem to get rid, Jack
would scarcely have known his friend.

"Why, Mark, what happened?" cried Jack. "Have you met with an accident?
Where have you been? In a hospital? What became of you? Why didn't you
wait for me?"

"I can't answer all those questions at once," was the reply, and Jack
thought Mark's voice was curiously muffled and hoarse, entirely unlike
his usual tones. But he ascribed that to the bandages around the mouth.

"Well, answer one at a time then," said Jack, and there was an
undefinable, strange air about his chum which cooled Jack's first
impulse of gladness. "Whatever happened to you, Mark? Are you hurt?"

"I was--yes," came the reply, in short, jerky tones. "I had an
accident, and I've been in a hospital. That's why I couldn't send you
word. But I'm all right now. When does the projectile start?"

"To-morrow, now that you're here. But tell me more about it. Where were
you hurt?"

"On my head and arm."

"No; I mean where did the accident occur?"

"Oh, in the old house where I went to--to look for that man."

"Did you find him?" asked Jack eagerly.

"No. He's not there now."

"Well, never mind. We won't bother about him. Come on to the house. My,
but I'm glad to see you again! And so will the others be."

In his enthusiasm at seeing his chum again Jack wanted to hug him. He
approached Mark, but the latter cried out:

"Look out! Don't come too close!"

"Why not? Have you caught some disease?"

"No, but you might hurt my broken arm!"

"Oh, is it broken? That's tough luck. Did you fall?"

"Yes--in the old house. I fell down stairs."

"And your head is all bandaged up, too," went on Jack, trying to peer
into his friend's face through the roll of bandages.

"Look out! Don't come too near!" again warned the other. "You might
jostle against me, and knock off some of the bandages."

"Did you lose some of your teeth, the reason your voice sounds so
funny?" asked Jack.

"Yes, I did knock out a few when I tumbled. But don't bother about me.
I'll be all right soon. Let's go in the house. I want to go to bed."

"But they'll all want to see you, and hear about the accident, Mark,"
insisted Jack. "My, but we've been all worked up about you. How did you
happen to be taken to a hospital?"

"A farmer came along, and I hailed him. Then I lost consciousness, and
couldn't let you know where I was. But never mind the details. I'm
anxious to get started on the trip to the moon. Couldn't we start
to-night?"

"I don't believe so. You need rest. But come on in the house." Then
Jack hurried on ahead, calling: "Mark's found! Mark is back!"

His cries brought all of the others out on the porch, and at first they
could scarcely believe the good news, but soon Jack and the new arrival
came in sight. As Jack had been, the two professors and the others were
startled when they saw how Mark was bundled up in bandages.

"He fell down stairs," explained Jack.

"Come over here where it's light, so I can see you," suggested
Professor Henderson. "Perhaps some of the bandages have slipped off
since you came from the hospital. Why did you come alone? Why didn't
you send us word where you were as soon as you were conscious, and we
would have come for you."

"Oh, I didn't want to bother you," explained the bundled-up figure. "I
managed to walk it all right."

"But your injuries may need attention," insisted Mr. Henderson. "I know
something about doctoring. Come here where I can see."

"No--no--the--light hurts my eyes," was the hasty reply. "I guess I'll
go to bed, so as to be all ready to start in the morning. Why don't you
leave for the moon to-night, professor?"

"There are still a few little details to look after. But are you sure
you are well enough to go with us? We may meet with hardships up on the
moon."

"Oh, I'm all ready to go," was the answer. "I'd start to-night if I
could. But now I must get to bed."

"Don't you want supper?" asked Jack.

"No, I had some just before I left the hospital."

"What hospital was it?" inquired Andy Sudds. "I was in one once, and I
didn't like it. There wa'nt enough air for me."

"I forget the name of the place," came the reply. "I can't think
clearly. I need sleep."

The newcomer kept in the shadows of the room, as if the light hurt his
eyes, and appeared restless and ill at ease. With the hand that was not
in a sling he pulled the bandages closer about his face.

"Can't you tell us more about what happened?" asked Jack, for Mark was
not usually so reticent, and his chum noticed it.

"There isn't much to tell," was the response. "I went to the old house,
and I was looking around when I happened to tumble down stairs. I must
have been knocked unconscious, but when I came to I crawled outside. A
farmer was driving past, and I asked him to take me to a hospital."

"Why didn't you come home?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"Oh, I didn't want to make any trouble and delay work on the
projectile. I figured that I could be with you in a few hours, and you
wouldn't worry. But they insisted that I must stay in the hospital when
they got me there. Then I lost consciousness again, and couldn't manage
to let you know where I was. But I'm all right now."

"Why didn't you wait for me at the barn, when I went to send the
telegram, as you promised you would?" asked Jack, who felt a little
hurt at his chum's neglect.

"Did I promise to wait for you at some barn?"

"Yes; don't you remember?" and Jack gazed at the bandaged figure in
surprise.

"Oh, yes--I--I guess I do. But I want to go to bed now," and pulling
the cloths closer about his face the injured one started from the
apartment.

"Here. That's not the way up to your room. The stairs are over here,"
called Jack, for he saw the newcomer taking the wrong direction.

"Oh, yes. Guess my mind must be wandering," and with an uneasy laugh
the injured one turned about. They heard him going up stairs, and a
little later Jack followed. He found that Mark's room was not occupied.

"Hi, Mark! Where are you?" he called, in some alarm.

"Here," was the answer, and the voice came from Jack's own apartment.

"Well, you're in the wrong bunk."

"Am I? Well, I must have made another mistake. My head can't be right,"
and with that the other came out and hastily went into the adjoining
apartment.

For a moment Jack stood in the hall. He looked at the door that had
closed behind the bandaged figure.

"There's something wrong," said Jack in a low voice. "How strange Mark
acts! I wonder what can be the matter?"




CHAPTER XI

READY FOR THE MOON


There were busy times for the moon-voyagers the next day. They were up
early, for at the last moment many little details needed to be settled.
The Cardite motor had been thoroughly repaired, for the damage caused
by the unknown enemy had done no permanent harm.

When the injured one appeared the bandage on his head seemed larger
than ever, and his features were almost hidden. He still wore his arm
in a sling.

"Well, how do you feel?" asked Jack, looking narrowly at the figure. He
could not get rid of a suspicion that something was wrong with Mark.

"Oh, I'm feeling pretty fair," was the mumbled answer. "I didn't sleep
much, though."

"Well, take care of yourself," advised Jack. "We are about ready to
start. We'll get off about noon, Professor Henderson says. Don't try to
do anything and injure your broken arm. You certainly had a tough time
of it."

"Yes, I guess I did. I can't do much to help you."

"You don't need to. We're all but finished. Just hang around and watch
me work. There isn't much to do."

But though Jack gave an invitation to remain near him, the other seemed
to prefer being off by himself. He wandered in and out of the
