horn before the others have even started.




WATER-LILY FAMILY _(Nymphaeaceae)_

Large Yellow Pond, or Water, Lily; Cow Lily; Spatterdock

_Nymphaea advena (Nuphar advena)_

_Flowers_--Yellow or greenish outside, rarely purple tinged, round,
depressed, 1-1/2 to 3-1/2 in. across. Sepals 6, unequal, concave, thick,
fleshy; petals stamen-like, oblong, fleshy, short; stamens very
numerous, in 5 to 7 rows; pistil compounded of many carpels, its
stigmatic disc pale red or yellow, with 12 to 24 rays. _Leaves:_
Floating, or some immersed, large, thick, sometimes a foot long,
egg-shaped or oval, with a deep cleft at base, the lobes rounded.

_Preferred Habitat_--Standing water, ponds, slow streams.

_Flowering Season_--April-September.

_Distribution_--Rocky Mountains eastward, south to the Gulf of Mexico,
north to Nova Scotia.

Comparisons were ever odious. Because the Yellow Water-lily has the
misfortune to claim relationship with the sweet-scented white species
must it never receive its just meed of praise? Hiawatha's canoe, let it
be remembered,

      "Floated on the river
  Like a yellow leaf in autumn,
  Like a yellow water-lily."

But even those who admire Longfellow's lines see less beauty in the
golden flower-bowls floating among the large, lustrous, leathery leaves.


Sweet-scented White Water-lily; Pond Lily; Water Nymph; Water
Cabbage

_Castalia odorata (Nymphaea odorata)_

_Flowers_--Pure white or pink tinged, rarely deep pink, solitary, 3 to 8
in. across, deliciously fragrant, floating. Calyx of 4 sepals, green
outside; petals of indefinite number, overlapping in many rows, and
gradually passing into an indefinite number of stamens; outer row of
stamens with petaloid filaments and short anthers, the inner yellow
stamens with slender filaments and elongated anthers; carpels of
indefinite number, united into a compound pistil, with spreading and
projecting stigmas. _Leaves_: Floating, nearly round, slit at bottom,
shining green above, reddish and more or less hairy below, 4 to 12 in.
across, attached to petiole at centre of lower surface. Petioles and
peduncles round and rubber-like, with 4 main air-channels. _Rootstock_:
(Not true stem) thick, simple or with few branches, very long.

_Preferred Habitat_--Still water, ponds, lakes, slow streams.

_Flowering Season--_June-September.

_Distribution_--Nova Scotia to Gulf of Mexico, and westward to the
Mississippi.

Sumptuous queen of our native aquatic plants, of the royal family to
which the gigantic _Victoria regia_ of Brazil belongs, and all the
lovely rose, lavender, blue, and golden exotic water-lilies in the
fountains of our city parks, to her man, beast, and insect pay grateful
homage. In Egypt, India, China, Japan, Persia, and Asiatic Russia, how
many millions have bent their heads in adoration of her relative the
sacred lotus! From its centre Brahma came forth; Buddha, too, whose
symbol is the lotus, first appeared floating on the mystic flower
_(Nelumbo nelumbo)_. Happily the lovely pink or white "sacred bean" or
"rose-lily" of the Nile, often cultivated here, has been successfully
naturalized in ponds about Bordentown, New Jersey, and may be elsewhere.
If he who planteth a tree is greater than he who taketh a city, that man
should be canonized who introduces the magnificent wild flowers of
foreign lands to our area of Nature's garden.




CROWFOOT FAMILY _(Ranunculaceae)_

Common Meadow Buttercup; Tall Crowfoot; Kingcups; Cuckoo Flower;
Goldcups; Butter-flowers; Blister-flowers

_Ranunculus acris_

_Flowers_--Bright, shining yellow, about 1 in. across, numerous,
terminating long slender footstalks. Calyx of 5 spreading sepals;
corolla of 5 petals; yellow stamens and carpels. _Stem:_ Erect, branched
above, hairy (sometimes nearly smooth), 2 to 3 feet tall, from fibrous
roots. _Leaves:_ In a tuft from the base, long petioled, of 3 to 7
divisions cleft into numerous lobes; stem leaves nearly sessile,
distant, 3-parted.

_Preferred Habitat_--Meadows, fields, roadsides, grassy places.

_Flowering Season_--May-September.

_Distribution_--Naturalized from Europe in Canada and the United States;
most common North.

What youngster has not held these shining golden flowers under his chin
to test his fondness for butter? Dandelions and Marsh Marigolds may
reflect their color in his clear skin, too, but the buttercup is every
child's favorite. When

  "Cuckoo-buds of yellow hue
  Do paint the meadows with delight,"

daisies, pink clover, and waving timothy bear them company here; not
the "daisies pied," violets, and lady-smocks of Shakespeare's England.
How incomparably beautiful are our own meadows in June! But the glitter
of the buttercup, which is as nothing to the glitter of a gold dollar in
the eyes of a practical farmer, fills him with wrath when this immigrant
takes possession of his pastures. Cattle will not eat the acrid, caustic
plant--a sufficient reason for most members of the _Ranunculaceae_ to
stoop to the low trick of secreting poisonous or bitter juices.
Self-preservation leads a cousin, the garden monk's hood, even to
murderous practices. Since children will put everything within reach
into their mouths, they should be warned against biting the buttercup's
stem and leaves, that are capable of raising blisters. "Beggars use the
juice to produce sores upon their skin," says Mrs. Creevy. A designer
might employ these exquisitely formed leaves far more profitably.

By having its nourishment thriftily stored up underground all winter,
the Bulbous Buttercup _(R. bulbosus)_ is able to steal a march on its
fibrous-rooted sister that must accumulate hers all spring; consequently
it is first to flower, coming in early May, and lasting through June. It
is a low and generally more hairy plant, but closely resembling the tall
buttercup in most respects, and, like it, a naturalized European
immigrant now thoroughly at home in fields and roadsides in most
sections of the United States and Canada.

Commonest of the early buttercups is the Tufted species _(R.
fascicularis)_, a little plant seldom a foot high, found in the woods
and on rocky hillsides from Texas and Manitoba east to the Atlantic,
flowering in April or May. The long-stalked leaves are divided into
from three to five parts; the bright yellow flowers, with rather narrow,
distant petals, measure about an inch across. They open sparingly,
usually only one or two at a time on each plant, to favor pollination
from another one.

Scattered patches of the Swamp or Marsh Buttercup _(R. septentrionalis)_
brighten low, rich meadows also with their large satiny yellow flowers,
whose place in the botany even the untrained eye knows at sight. The
smooth, spreading plant sometimes takes root at the joints of its
branches and sends forth runners, but the stems mostly ascend. The large
lower mottled leaves are raised well out of the wet, or above the grass,
on long petioles. They have three divisions, each lobed and cleft. From
Georgia and Kentucky far northward this buttercup blooms from April to
July, opening only a few flowers at a time--a method which may make it
less showy, but more certain to secure cross-pollination between
distinct plants.


Tall Meadow-rue

_Thalictrum polygamum (T. Cornuti)_

_Flowers_--Greenish white, the calyx of 4 or 5 sepals, falling early; no
petals; numerous white, thread-like, green-tipped stamens, spreading in
feathery tufts, borne in large, loose, compound terminal clusters 1 ft.
long or more. _Stem_: Stout, erect, 3 to 11 ft. high, leafy, branching
above. _Leaves_: Arranged in threes, compounded of various shaped
leaflets, the lobes pointed or rounded, dark above, paler below.

_Preferred Habitat_--Open sunny swamps, beside sluggish water,
low meadows.

_Flowering Season_--July-September

_Distribution_--Quebec to Florida, westward to Ohio.

Masses of these soft, feathery flowers, towering above the ranker growth
of midsummer, possess an unseasonable, ethereal, chaste, spring-like
beauty. On some plants the flowers are fleecy white and exquisite;
others, again, are dull and coarser. Why is this? Because these are what
botanists term polygamous flowers, _i.e._, some of them are perfect,
containing both stamens and pistils; some are male only; others, again,
are female. Naturally an insect, like ourselves, is first attracted to
the more beautiful male blossoms, the pollen bearers, and of course it
transfers the vitalizing dust to the dull pistillate flowers visited
later. But the meadow-rue, which produces a super-abundance of very
light, dry pollen, easily blown by the wind, is often fertilized through
that agent also, just as grasses, plantains, sedges, birches, oaks,
pines, and all cone-bearing trees are. As might be expected, a plant
which has not yet ascended the evolutionary scale high enough to
economize its pollen by making insects carry it invariably overtops
surrounding vegetation to take advantage of every breeze that blows.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Early Meadow-rue (_T. dioicum_), found blooming in open, rocky woods
during April and May, from Alabama northward to Labrador, and westward
to Missouri, grows only one or two feet high, and, like its tall sister,
bears fleecy, greenish-white flowers, the staminate and the pistillate
ones on different plants.


Liver-leaf; Hepatica; Liverwort; Round-lobed, or Kidney Liver-leaf;
Noble Liverwort; Squirrel Cup

_Hepatica triloba (H. Hepatica)_

_Flowers_--Blue, lavender, purple, pinkish, or white; occasionally, not
always, fragrant; 6 to 12 petal-like, colored sepals (not petals, as
they appear to be), oval or oblong; numerous stamens, all bearing
anthers; pistils numerous; 3 small, sessile leaves, forming an involucre
directly under flower, simulate a calyx, for which they might be
mistaken. _Stems:_ Spreading from the root, 4 to 6 in. high, a solitary
flower or leaf borne at end of each furry stem. _Leaves:_ 3-lobed and
rounded, leathery, evergreen; sometimes mottled with, or entirely,
reddish purple; spreading on ground, rusty at blooming time, the new
leaves appearing after the flowers. _Fruit:_ Usually as many as pistils,
dry, 1-seeded, oblong, sharply pointed, never opening.

_Preferred Habitat_--Woods; light soil on hillsides.

_Flowering Season_--December-May.

_Distribution_--Canada to northern Florida, Manitoba to Iowa and
Missouri. Most common East.

Even under the snow itself bravely blooms the delicate hepatica, wrapped
in fuzzy furs as if to protect its stems and nodding buds from cold.
After the plebeian Skunk Cabbage, that ought scarcely to be reckoned
among true flowers--and William Hamilton Gibson claimed even before
it--it is the first blossom to appear. Winter sunshine, warming the
hillsides and edges of woods, opens its eyes.

  "Blue as the heaven it gazes at,
  Startling the loiterer in the naked groves
  With unexpected beauty; for the time
  Of blossoms and green leaves is yet afar."

"There are many things left for May," says John Burroughs, "but nothing
fairer, if as fair, as the first flower, the hepatica. I find I have
never admired this little firstling half enough. When at the maturity of
its charms, it is certainly the gem of the woods. What an individuality
it has! No two clusters alike; all shades and sizes.... A solitary
blue-purple one, fully expanded and rising over the brown leaves or the
green moss, its cluster of minute anthers showing like a group of pale
stars on its little firmament, is enough to arrest and hold the dullest
eye. Then, ... there are individual hepaticas, or individual families
among them, that are sweet scented. The gift seems as capricious as the
gift of genius in families. You cannot tell which the fragrant ones are
till you try them. Sometimes it is the large white ones, sometimes the
large purple ones, sometimes the small pink ones. The odor is faint, and
recalls that of the sweet violets. A correspondent, who seems to have
carefully observed these fragrant hepaticas, writes me that this gift of
odor is constant in the same plant; that the plant which bears
sweet-scented flowers this year will bear them next."

Pollen-feeding flies and female hive bees frequent these blossoms on the
first warm days. Whether or not they are rewarded by finding nectar is
still a mooted question. They seem to do so.


Wood Anemone; Wind-flower

_Anemone quinquefolia_

_Flowers_--Solitary, about 1 in. broad, white or delicately tinted with
blue or pink outside. Calyx of 4 to 9 oval, petal-like sepals; no
petals; stamens and carpels numerous, of indefinite number. _Stem:_
Slender, 4 to 9 in. high, from horizontal elongated rootstock. _Leaves:_
On slender petioles, in a whorl of 3 to 5 below the flower, each leaf
divided into 3 to 5 variously cut and lobed parts; also a late-appearing
leaf from the base.

_Preferred Habitat_--Woodlands, hillsides, light soil, partial shade.

_Flowering Season_--April-June.

_Distribution_--Canada and United States, south to Georgia, west to
Rocky Mountains.

According to one poetical Greek tradition, Anemos, the wind, employs
these exquisitely delicate little star-like namesakes as heralds of his
coming in early spring, while woods and hillsides still lack foliage to
break his gusts' rude force. Pliny declared that only the wind could
open anemones! Another legend utilized by countless poets pictures Venus
wandering through the forests grief-stricken over the death of her
youthful lover.

  "Alas, the Paphian! fair Adonis slain!
  Tears plenteous as his blood she pours amain;
  But gentle flowers are born and bloom around
  From every drop that falls upon the ground:
  Where streams his blood, there blushing springs the rose;
  And where a tear has dropped, a wind-flower blows."

Indeed, in reading the poets ancient and modern for references to this
favorite blossom, one realizes as never before the significance of an
anthology, literally a flower gathering.

But it is chiefly the European Anemone that is extolled by the poets.
Nevertheless our more slender, fragile, paler-leaved, and
smaller-flowered species, known, strange to say, by the same scientific
name, possesses the greater charm. Doctors, with more prosaic eyes than
the poets, find acrid and dangerous juices in the anemone and its kin.
Certain European peasants will run past a colony of these pure, innocent
blossoms in the belief that the very air is tainted by them. Yet the
Romans ceremonially picked the first anemone of the year, with an
incantation supposed to guard them against fever. The identical plant
that blooms in our woods, which may be found also in Asia, is planted on
graves by the Chinese, who call it the "death flower."

Note the clusters of tuberous, dahlia-like roots, the whorl of thin,
three-lobed rounded leaflets on long, fine petioles immediately below
the smaller pure white or pinkish flowers usually growing in loose
clusters, to distinguish the more common Rue Anemone _(Anemonella
thalictroides_ or _Syndesmon thalictroides_ or _Thalictrum
anemonoides)_ from its cousin the solitary flowered wood or true
anemone. Generally there are three blossoms of the Rue Anemone to a
cluster, the central one opening first, the side ones only after it has
developed its stamens and pistils to prolong the season of bloom and
encourage cross-pollination by insects. In the eastern half of the
United States, and less abundantly in Canada, these are among the most
familiar spring wild flowers. Pick them and they soon wilt miserably;
lift the plants early, with a good ball of soil about the roots, and
they will unfold their fragile blossoms indoors, bringing with them
something of the unspeakable charm of their native woods and hillsides
just waking into life.


Virgin's Bower; Virginia Clematis; Traveller's Joy; Old Man's Beard

_Clematis virginiana_

_Flowers_--White and greenish, about 1 in. across or less, in loose
clusters from the axils. Calyx of 4 or 5 petal-like sepals; no petals;
stamens and pistils numerous, of indefinite number; the staminate and
