     First her sweet eyes his Eagle-form beguiles,
     And HEBE feeds him with ambrosial smiles;
     Next the chang'd God a Cygnet's down assumes,
     And playful LEDA smooths his glossy plumes;
235  Then glides a silver Serpent, treacherous guest!
     And fair OLYMPIA folds him in her breast;
     Now lows a milk-white Bull on Afric's strand,
     And crops with dancing head the daisy'd land.--
     With rosy wreathes EUROPA'S hand adorns
240  His fringed forehead, and his pearly horns;
     Light on his back the sportive Damsel bounds,
     And pleased he moves along the flowery grounds;
     Bears with slow step his beauteous prize aloof,
     Dips in the lucid flood his ivory hoof;
245  Then wets his velvet knees, and wading laves
     His silky sides amid the dimpling waves.
     While her fond train with beckoning hands deplore,
     Strain their blue eyes, and shriek along the shore;
     Beneath her robe she draws her snowy feet,
250  And, half-reclining on her ermine seat,
     Round his raised neck her radiant arms she throws,
     And rests her fair cheek on his curled brows;
     Her yellow tresses wave on wanton gales,
     And high in air her azure mantle sails.
255  --Onward He moves, applauding Cupids guide,
     And skim on shooting wing the shining tide;
     Emerging Triton's leave their coral caves,
     Sound their loud conchs, and smooth the circling waves,
     Surround the timorous Beauty, as she swims,
260  And gaze enamour'd on her silver limbs.
     --Now Europe's shadowy shores with loud acclaim
     Hail the fair fugitive, and shout her name;
     Soft echoes warble, whispering forests nod,
     And conscious Nature owns the present God.
265  --Changed from the Bull, the rapturous God assumes
     Immortal youth, with glow celestial blooms,
     With lenient words her virgin fears disarms,
     And clasps the yielding Beauty in his arms;
     Whence Kings and Heroes own illustrious birth,
270  Guards of mankind, and demigods on earth.


[_Inconstant Jove_. l. 229. The purer air or ether in the antient
mythology was represented by Jupiter, and the inferior air by Juno; and
the conjunction of these deities was said to produce the vernal showers,
and procreate all things, as is further spoken of in Canto III. l. 204.
It is now discovered that pure air, or oxygene, uniting with variety of
bases forms the various kinds of acids; as the vitriolic acid from pure
air and sulphur; the nitrous acid from pure air and phlogistic air, or
azote; and carbonic acid, (or fixed air,) from pure air and charcoal.
Some of these affinities were perhaps portrayed by the Magi of Egypt,
who were probably learned in chemistry, in their hieroglyphic pictures
before the invention of letters, by the loves of Jupiter with
terrestrial ladies. And thus physically as well as metaphysically might
be said "Jovis omnia plena."]


       VI. "GNOMES! as you pass'd beneath the labouring soil,
     The guards and guides of Nature's chemic toil,
     YOU saw, deep-sepulchred in dusky realms,
     Which Earth's rock-ribbed ponderous vault o'erwhelms,
275  With self-born fires the mass fermenting glow,
     And flame-wing'd sulphurs quit the earths below.


[_With self-born fires_. l. 275. After the accumulation of plains and
mountains on the calcareous rocks or granite which had been previously
raised by volcanic fires, a second set of volcanic fires were produced
by the fermentation of this new mass, by which after the salts or acids
and iron had been washed away in part by elutriation, dissipated the
sulphurous parts which were insoluble in water; whence argillaceous and
siliceous earths were left in some places; in others, bitumen became
sublimed to the upper part of the stratum, producing coals of various
degrees of purity.]


       1. "HENCE ductile CLAYS in wide expansion spread,
     Soft as the Cygnet's down, their snow-white bed;
     With yielding flakes successive forms reveal,
280  And change obedient to the whirling wheel.
     --First CHINA'S sons, with early art elate,
     Form'd the gay tea-pot, and the pictured plate;
     Saw with illumin'd brow and dazzled eyes
     In the red stove vitrescent colours rise;
285  Speck'd her tall beakers with enamel'd stars,
     Her monster-josses, and gigantic jars;
     Smear'd her huge dragons with metallic hues,
     With golden purples, and cobaltic blues;
     Bade on wide hills her porcelain castles glare,
290  And glazed Pagodas tremble in the air.


[_Hence ductile clays_ l. 277. See additional notes, No. XX.]

[_Saw with illumin'd brow_. l. 283. No colour is distinguishable in the
red-hot kiln but the red itself, till the workman introduces a small
piece of dry wood, which by producing a white flame renders all the
other colours visible in a moment.]

[_With golden purples_. l. 288. See additional notes, No. XXI.]


       "ETRURIA! next beneath thy magic hands
     Glides the quick wheel, the plaistic clay expands,
     Nerved with fine touch, thy fingers (as it turns)
     Mark the nice bounds of vases, ewers, and urns;
295  Round each fair form in lines immortal trace
     Uncopied Beauty, and ideal Grace.


[_Etruria! next_. l. 291. Etruria may perhaps vie with China itself in
the antiquity of its arts. The times of its greatest splendour were
prior to the foundations of Rome, and the reign of one of its best
princes, Janus, was the oldest epoch the Romans knew. The earliest
historians speak of the Etruscans as being then of high antiquity, most
probably a colony from Phoenicia, to which a Pelasgian colony acceded,
and was united soon after Deucalion's flood. The peculiar character of
their earthern vases consists in the admirable beauty, simplicity, and
diversity of forms, which continue the best models of taste to the
artists of the present times; and in a species of non-vitreous encaustic
painting, which was reckoned, even in the time of Pliny, among the lost
arts of antiquity, but which has lately been recovered by the ingenuity
and industry of Mr. Wedgwood. It is supposed that the principal
manufactories were about Nola, at the foot of Vesuvius; for it is in
that neighbourhood that the greatest quantities of antique vases have
been found; and it is said that the general taste of the inhabitants is
apparently influenced by them; insomuch that strangers coming to Naples,
are commonly struck with the diversity and elegance even of the most
ordinary vases for common uses. See D'Hancarville's preliminary
discourses to the magnificent collection of Etruscan vases, published by
Sir William Hamilton.]


       "GNOMES! as you now dissect with hammers fine
     The granite-rock, the nodul'd flint calcine;
     Grind with strong arm, the circling chertz betwixt,
300  Your pure Ka-o-lins and Pe-tun-tses mixt;
     O'er each red saggars burning cave preside,
     The keen-eyed Fire-Nymphs blazing by your side;
     And pleased on WEDGWOOD ray your partial smile,
     A new Etruria decks Britannia's isle.--
305  Charm'd by your touch, the flint liquescent pours
     Through finer sieves, and falls in whiter showers;
     Charm'd by your touch, the kneaded clay refines,
     The biscuit hardens, the enamel shines;
     Each nicer mould a softer feature drinks,
310  The bold Cameo speaks, the soft Intaglio thinks.


[Illustration: _H. Webber init    J. Holloway sculpt Copied from Capt.
Phillip's Voyage to Botany Bay, by permission of the Proprietor_]

[Transcriber's note: names of painter and engraver are only guesswork.]

[Illustration: AM I NOT A MAN AND A BROTHER]


       "To call the pearly drops from Pity's eye,
     Or stay Despair's disanimating sigh,
     Whether, O Friend of art! the gem you mould
     Rich with new taste, with antient virtue bold;
315  Form the poor fetter'd SLAVE on bended knee
     From Britain's sons imploring to be free;
     Or with fair HOPE the brightening scenes improve,
     And cheer the dreary wastes at Sydney-cove;
     Or bid Mortality rejoice and mourn
320  O'er the fine forms on PORTLAND'S mystic urn.--


[_Form the poor fetter'd Slave_. l. 315. Alluding to two cameos of Mr.
Wedgwood's manufacture; one of a Slave in chains, of which he
distributed many hundreds, to excite the humane to attend to and to
assist in the abolition of the detestable traffic in human creatures;
and the other a cameo of Hope attended by Peace, and Art, and Labour;
which was made of clay from Botany Bay; to which place he sent many of
them to shew the inhabitants what their materials would do, and to
encourage their industry. A print of this latter medallion is prefixed
to Mr. Stockdale's edition of Philip's Expedition to Botany Bay.]

[_Portland's mystic urn_. l. 320. See additional notes, No. XXII.]


       "_Here_ by fall'n columns and disjoin'd arcades,
     On mouldering stones, beneath deciduous shades,
     Sits HUMANKIND in hieroglyphic state,
     Serious, and pondering on their changeful state;
325  While with inverted torch, and swimming eyes,
     Sinks the fair shade of MORTAL LIFE, and dies.
     _There_ the pale GHOST through Death's wide portal bends
     His timid feet, the dusky steep descends;
     With smiles assuasive LOVE DIVINE invites,
330  Guides on broad wing, with torch uplifted lights;
     IMMORTAL LIFE, her hand extending, courts
     The lingering form, his tottering step supports;
     Leads on to Pluto's realms the dreary way,
     And gives him trembling to Elysian day.
335  _Beneath_ in sacred robes the PRIESTESS dress'd,
     The coif close-hooded, and the fluttering vest,
     With pointing finger guides the initiate youth,
     Unweaves the many-colour'd veil of Truth,
     Drives the profane from Mystery's bolted door,
340  And Silence guards the Eleusinian lore.--


[Illustration: _The Portland Vase_]

[Illustration: _The first Compartment_, London Published Dec'r 1st 1791
by J. Johnson, St. Paul's Church Yard.]

[Transcriber's note: 2nd line with date very small and nearly illegible]

[Illustration: _The second Compartment_]

[Illustration: _The Handles & Bottom of the Vase._ London Published
Dec'r 1st 1791 by J. Johnson, St. Paul's Church Yard.]


       "Whether, O Friend of Art! your gems derive
     Fine forms from Greece, and fabled Gods revive;
     Or bid from modern life the Portrait breathe,
     And bind round Honour's brow the laurel wreath;
345  Buoyant shall sail, with Fame's historic page,
     Each fair medallion o'er the wrecks of age;
     Nor Time shall mar; nor steel, nor fire, nor rust
     Touch the hard polish of the immortal bust.


[_Fine forms from Greece_. l. 342. In real stones, or in paste or soft
coloured glass, many pieces of exquisite workmanship were produced by
the antients. Basso-relievos of various sizes were made in coarse brown
earth of one colour; but of the improved kind of two or more colours,
and of a true porcelain texture, none were made by the antients, nor
attempted I believe by the moderns, before those of Mr. Wedgwood's
manufactory.]


        2. "HENCE sable COAL his massy couch extends,
350  And stars of gold the sparkling Pyrite blends;
     Hence dull-eyed Naphtha pours his pitchy streams,
     And Jet uncolour'd drinks the solar beams,
     Bright Amber shines on his electric throne,
     And adds ethereal lustres to his own.
355  --Led by the phosphor-light, with daring tread
     Immortal FRANKLIN sought the fiery bed;
     Where, nursed in night, incumbent Tempest shrouds
     The seeds of Thunder in circumfluent clouds,
     Besieged with iron points his airy cell,
360  And pierced the monster slumbering in the shell.


[_Hence sable Coal_. l. 349. See additional notes, No. XXIII. on coal.]

[_Bright Amber shines_. l. 353. Coal has probably all been sublimed more
or less from the clay, with which it was at first formed in decomposing
morasses; the petroleum seems to have been separated and condensed again
in superior strata, and a still finer kind of oil, as naphtha, has
probably had the same origin. Some of these liquid oils have again lost
their more volatile parts, and become cannel-coal, asphaltum, jet, and
amber, according to the purity of the original fossil oil. Dr. Priestley
has shewn, that essential oils long exposed to the atmosphere absorb
both the vital and phlogistic part of it; whence it is probable their
becoming solid may in great measure depend, as well as by the exhalation
of their more volatile parts. On distillation with volatile alcaly all
these fossil oils are shewn to contain the acid of amber, which evinces
the identity of their origin. If a piece of amber be rubbed it attracts
straws and hairs, whence the discovery of electricity, and whence its
name, from electron the Greek word for amber.]

[_Immortal Franklin_. l. 356. See note on Canto I. l. 383.]


       "So, born on sounding pinions to the WEST,
     When Tyrant-Power had built his eagle nest;
     While from his eyry shriek'd the famish'd brood,
     Clenched their sharp claws, and champ'd their beaks for blood,
365  Immortal FRANKLIN watch'd the callow crew,
     And stabb'd the struggling Vampires, ere they flew.
     --The patriot-flame with quick contagion ran,
     Hill lighted hill, and man electrised man;
     Her heroes slain awhile COLUMBIA mourn'd,
370  And crown'd with laurels LIBERTY return'd.

       "The Warrior, LIBERTY, with bending sails
     Helm'd his bold course to fair HIBERNIA'S vales;--
     Firm as he steps, along the shouting lands,
     Lo! Truth and Virtue range their radiant bands;
375  Sad Superstition wails her empire torn,
     Art plies his oar, and Commerce pours her horn.

       "Long had the Giant-form on GALLIA'S plains
     Inglorious slept, unconscious of his chains;
     Round his large limbs were wound a thousand strings
380  By the weak hands of Confessors and Kings;
     O'er his closed eyes a triple veil was bound,
     And steely rivets lock'd him to the ground;
     While stern Bastile with iron cage inthralls
     His folded limbs, and hems in marble walls.
385  --Touch'd by the patriot-flame, he rent amazed
     The flimsy bonds, and round and round him gazed;
     Starts up from earth, above the admiring throng
     Lifts his Colossal form, and towers along;
     High o'er his foes his hundred arms He rears,
390  Plowshares his swords, and pruning hooks his spears;
     Calls to the Good and Brave with voice, that rolls
     Like Heaven's own thunder round the echoing poles;
     Gives to the winds his banner broad unfurl'd,
     And gathers in its shade the living world!


[_While stern Bastile_. l. 383. "We descended with great difficulty into
the dungeons, which were made too low for our standing upright; and were
so dark, that we were obliged at noon-day to visit them by the light of
a candle. We saw the hooks of those chains, by which the prisoners were
fastened by their necks to the walls of their cells; many of which being
below the level of the water were in a constant state of humidity; from
which issued a noxious vapour, which more than once extinguished the
candles. Since the destruction of the building many subterraneous cells
have been discovered under a piece of ground, which seemed only a bank
of solid earth before the horrid secrets of this prison-house were
disclosed. Some skeletons were found in these recesses with irons still
fastened to their decayed bones." Letters from France, by H.M. Williams,
p. 24.]


395    VII. "GNOMES! YOU then taught volcanic airs to force
     Through bubbling Lavas their resistless course,
     O'er the broad walls of rifted Granite climb,
     And pierce the rent roof of incumbent Lime,
     Round sparry caves metallic lustres fling,
400  And bear phlogiston on their tepid wing.


[_And pierce the rent roof_. l. 398. The granite rocks and the limestone
rocks have been cracked to very great depths at the time they were
raised up by subterranean fires; in these cracks are found most of the
metallic ores, except iron and perhaps manganese, the former of which is
generally found in horizontal strata, and the latter generally near the
surface of the earth.

Philosophers possessing so convenient a test for the discovery of iron
by the magnet, have long since found it in all vegetable and animal
matters; and of late Mr. Scheele has discovered the existence of
manganese in vegetable ashes. Scheele, 56 mem. Stock. 1774. Kirwan. Min.
353. Which accounts for the production of it near the surface of earth,
and thence for its calciform appearance, or union with vital air.
Bergman has likewise shewn, that the limestones which become bluish or
dark coloured when calcined, possess a mixture of manganese, and are
thence preferable as a cement to other kinds of lime. 2. Bergman, 229.
Which impregnation with manganese has probably been received from the
decomposition of superincumbent vegetable matters.

These cracks or perpendicular caverns in the granite or limestone pass
to unknown depths; and it is up these channels that I have endeavoured
to shew that the steam rises which becomes afterwards condensed and
produces the warm springs of this island, and other parts of the world.
(See note on Fucus, Vol. II.) And up these cracks I suppose certain
vapours arise, which either alone, or by meeting with something
descending into them from above, have produced most of the metals; and
several of the materials in which they are bedded. Thus the ponderous
earth, Barytes, of Derbyshire, is found in these cracks, and is
stratified frequently with lead-ore, and frequently surrounds it. This
ponderous earth has been found by Dr. Hoepfner in a granite in
Switzerland, and may have thus been sublimed from immense depths by
great heat, and have obtained its carbonic or vitriolic acid from above.
Annales de Chimie. There is also reason to conclude that something from
above is necessary to the formation of many of the metals: at Hawkstone
in Shropshire, the seat of Sir Richard Hill, there is an elevated rock
of siliceous sand which is coloured green with copper in many places
high in the air; and I have in my possession a specimen of lead formed
in the cavity of an iron nodule, and another of lead amid spar from a
crack of a coal-stratum; all which countenance the modern production of
those metals from descending materials. To which should be added, that
the highest mountains of granite, which have therefore probably never
been covered with marine productions on account of their early
elevation, nor with vegetable or animal matters on account of their
great coldness, contain no metallic ores, whilst the lower ones contain
copper and tin in their cracks or veins, both in Saxony, Silesia, and
Cornwall. Kirwan's Mineral. p. 374.

The transmutation of one metal into another, though hitherto
undiscovered by the alchymists, does not appear impossible; such
transmutations have been supposed to exist in nature, thus lapis
calaminaris may have been produced from the destruction of lead-ore, as
it is generally found on the top of the veins of lead, where it has been
calcined or united with air, and because masses of lead-ore are often
found intirely inclosed in it. So silver is found mixed in almost all
lead-ores, and sometimes in seperate filaments within the cavities of
lead-ore, as I am informed by Mr. Michell, and is thence probably a
partial transmutation of the lead to silver, the rapid progress of
modern chemistry having shewn the analogy between metallic calces and
acids, may lead to the power of transmuting their bases: a discovery
much to be wished.]


       "HENCE glows, refulgent Tin! thy chrystal grains,
     And tawny Copper shoots her azure veins;
     Zinc lines his fretted vault with sable ore,
     And dull Galena tessellates the floor;
405  On vermil beds in Idria's mighty caves
     The living Silver rolls its ponderous waves;
     With gay refractions bright Platina shines,
     And studs with squander'd stars his dusky mines;
     Long threads of netted gold, and silvery darts,
410  Inlay the Lazuli, and pierce the Quartz;--
     --Whence roof'd with silver beam'd PERU, of old,
     And hapless MEXICO was paved with gold.

       "Heavens! on my sight what sanguine colours blaze!
     Spain's deathless shame! the crimes of modern days!
415  When Avarice, shrouded in Religion's robe,
     Sail'd to the West, and slaughter'd half the globe;
     While Superstition, stalking by his side,
     Mock'd the loud groans, and lap'd the bloody tide;
     For sacred truths announced her frenzied dreams,
420  And turn'd to night the sun's meridian beams.--
     Hear, oh, BRITANNIA! potent Queen of isles,
     On whom fair Art, and meek Religion smiles,
     Now AFRIC'S coasts thy craftier sons invade
     With murder, rapine, theft,--and call it Trade!
425  --The SLAVE, in chains, on supplicating knee,
     Spreads his wide arms, and lifts his eyes to Thee;
     With hunger pale, with wounds and toil oppress'd,
     "ARE WE NOT BRETHREN?" sorrow choaks the rest;--
     --AIR! bear to heaven upon thy azure flood
430  Their innocent cries!--EARTH! cover not their blood!

       VIII. "When Heaven's dread justice smites in crimes o'ergrown
     The blood-nursed Tyrant on his purple throne,
     GNOMES! YOUR bold forms unnumber'd arms outstretch,
     And urge the vengeance o'er the guilty wretch.--
435  Thus when CAMBYSES led his barbarous hosts
     From Persia's rocks to Egypt's trembling coasts,
     Defiled each hallowed fane, and sacred wood,
     And, drunk with fury, swell'd the Nile with blood;
     Waved his proud banner o'er the Theban states,
440  And pour'd destruction through her hundred gates;
     In dread divisions march'd the marshal'd bands,
     And swarming armies blacken'd all the lands,
     By Memphis these to ETHIOP'S sultry plains,
     And those to HAMMON'S sand-incircled fanes.--
445  Slow as they pass'd, the indignant temples frown'd,
     Low curses muttering from the vaulted ground;
     Long ailes of Cypress waved their deepen'd glooms,
     And quivering spectres grinn'd amid the tombs;
     Prophetic whispers breathed from S
450  And MEMNON'S lyre with hollow murmurs rung;
     Burst from each pyramid expiring groans,
     And darker shadows stretch'd their lengthen'd cones.--
     Day after day their deathful rout They steer,
     Lust in the van, and rapine in the rear.


[_Thus when Cambyses_.  l. 435. Cambyses marched one army from Thebes,
after having overturned the temples, ravaged the country, and deluged it
