
Pain, however, is not the only symptom of the invasion of
the body by pyogenic or parasitic organisms.  Fever, invariably,
and chills, often, accompany the course of the infections.
Can these phenomena also be explained as adaptations of the motor
mechanism for the good of the individual?

As the phenomena of chills and fever are most strikingly exhibited
in malaria, let us study the course of events in that disease.
It is known that the malarial parasite develops in the red
blood-corpuscles, and that the chills and fever appear when
the cycle of parasitic development is complete and the adults
are ready to escape from the corpuscles of the blood plasma.
Bass, of New Orleans, has proved that the favorable temperature
for the growth of the malarial organism is 98'0, and that at 102'0
the adult organisms will be killed, though the latter temperature
is not fatal to the spores.  The adult life of the malarial
parasite begins after its escape into the blood plasma, and it is
there that the organism is most susceptible to high temperature.
We must infer, therefore, that the fever is an adaptation on the part
of the host for despatching the enemy.

What, then, may be the protective part played by the chill?
A chill is made up of intermittent contractions of all the external
muscles of the body.  This activity results in an increase
of the body heat and in an anemia of the superficial parts
of the body, so that less heat can be lost by radiation.
By this means, therefore, the external portions of the body contribute
measurably to the production of the beneficent and saving fever.

It must be remembered that this power of adaptation is not peculiar
to man alone, but that it is a quality shared by all living creatures.
While the human body has been adapting itself for self-protection
by producing a febrile reaction whereby to kill the invading organisms,
the invaders on their side have been adapting themselves for a life
struggle within the body of the host.  In these mortal conflicts
between invaders and host, therefore, the issue is often in doubt,
and sometimes one and sometimes the other will emerge victorious.

We must believe that a similar adaptive response exists in all
parasitic infections--the cycles varying according to the stages in
the development of the invaders.  If the bacteria develop continuously,
the fever is constant instead of intermittent, since the adequate
stimulus is constantly present.

Bacteriology has taught us that both heat and cold are fatal
to pathogenic infections; for this reason either of the apparently
contradictory methods of treatment may help, _i.  e_., either hot
or cold applications.  It should be borne in mind, however, that we have
to deal not only with the adult organisms, but with the spores also.
The application of cold may keep the spores from developing,
while heat may promote their development, and the course of the disease
may vary, therefore, according to our choice of treatment.

From this viewpoint, we can understand the intermittent temperature
in a patient who is convalescing from an extreme infection,
as peritonitis, pylephlebitis, multiple abscess of the liver, etc.
In these conditions there may occur days of normal temperature,
followed by an abrupt rise which will last for several days--
this in turn succeeded by another remittance.  This cycle may be
repeated several times, and on our hypothesis we may believe it
is caused by the successive development to maturity of spores
of varying ages.

If these premises are sound, the wisdom of reducing the temperature
in case of infection may well be questioned.

On this mechanistic basis the emotions also may be explained
as activations of the entire motor mechanism for fighting,
for escaping, for copulating.
 *   *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *
 *   *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

The emotions, then, are the preparation for phylogenetic activities
(Fig. 48). If the activities were consummated, the fuel--glycogen--
and the activating secretions from the thyroid, the adrenals,
the hypophysis, would be consumed.  In the activation without
action these products must be eliminated as waste products
and so a heavy strain is put upon the organs of elimination.
It is obvious that the body under emotion might be clarified
by active muscular exercise, but the subject of the emotion is so
strongly integrated thereby that it is difficult for him to engage
in diverting, clarifying exertion.
 *   *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *
 *   *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *    *

So, as we have indicated already, certain deleterious effects are
produced when the body mechanism is activated without resultant action.
For example, the output of adrenalin is increased, and, as a consequence,
arteriosclerosis and cardiovascular disease may occur in persons
who have been subjected to prolonged emotional strain, since it
has been proved that the prolonged administration of adrenalin
will cause these conditions.  We have stated that the emotions cause
increased output of glycogen.  Glycogen is a step toward diabetes,
and therefore this disease, too, is prone to appear in persons
under emotional strain.  It is most common in those races which
are especially emotional in character, so we are not surprised
to find it especially prevalent among Jews.  So common is this
particular result of prolonged emotion that some one has said,
"When the stocks go down in New York, diabetes goes up."
Nephritis, also, may result from emotional stress, because of the strain
put upon the kidneys by the unconsumed activating substances.
The increased heart action and the presence of these activating
secretions may cause myocarditis and heart degeneration.
Claudication also may result from the impaired circulation.

The emotions may cause an inhibition of the digestive secretions
and of intestinal peristalsis.  This means that the digestive processes
are arrested, that putrefaction and autointoxication will result,
and that still further strain will thus be put upon the organs
of elimination.  Who has not observed in himself and in others when under
the influence of fear, anger, jealousy, or grief that the digestive
processes and general well-being are rapidly and materially altered;
while as tranquillity, peace, and happiness return the physical
state improves accordingly?

Dentists testify that as a result of continued strong emotion the character
of the saliva changes, pyorrhea develops, and the teeth decay rapidly.
Every one knows that strong emotion may cause the hair to fall
out and to become prematurely gray.

As to the most important organ of all--the brain--every one is
conscious of its impaired efficiency under emotional strain,
and laboratory researches show that the deficiency is accounted
for by actual cell deterioration; so the individual who day by day
is under heavy emotional strain finds himself losing strength slowly--
especially do his friends note it.  By summation of stimuli
his threshold becomes lowered until stimuli, which under normal
conditions would be of no effect, produce undue responses.
"The grasshopper becomes a burden," and prolonged rest and change
of environmental conditions are necessary for restoration.

If in a long emotional strain the brain is beaten down;
if the number of "low-efficiency" cells increases, the driving
power of the brain is correspondingly lessened and therefore
the various organs of the body may escape through the very
inefficiency of the brain to produce in them forced activity.
On the other hand, if the brain remains vigorous, the kidneys
may take the strain and break down; if the kidneys do not break,
the blood-vessels may harden; if the blood-vessels are not affected,
the thyroid may become hyperplastic and produce Graves' disease;
if the thyroid escapes, diabetes may develop; while if the iron
constitution of the mechanism can successfully bear the strain
in all its parts, then the individual will break his competitors,
and their mechanisms will suffer in the struggle.

This whole train of deleterious results of body activation without
action may be best observed and studied in that most emotional
of diseases--exophthalmic goiter.  In this disease the constantly
stimulated distance ceptors dispossess the contact ceptors from
the common path, and drive the motor mechanism to its own destruction,
and the patient has the appearance of a person in great terror,
or of a runner approaching the end of a Marathon race (Figs. 16
and 48 to 54).

Exophthalmic goiter may result from long emotional or mental stress
in those cases in which the thyroid takes the brunt of the strain upon
the mechanism.  As adrenalin increases blood-pressure, so thyroid
secretion increases brain activity, and increased brain activity
in turn causes an increased activation of the motor mechanism
as a whole.

We know that a deficiency or lack of thyroid secretion will inhibit
sexual emotion and conception, will produce stupidity and inertia;
will diminish vitality.  On the other hand, excessive thyroid secretion
drives the entire mechanism at top speed; the emotions are intensified;
the skin becomes soft and moist, the eyes are brilliant and staring;
the limbs tremble; the heart pounds loudly and its pulsations often
are visible; the respiration is rapid; the stimulation of the fear
mechanism causes the eyes to protrude (Fig. 16); the temperature
mounts at every slight provoca-tion and may reach the incredible
height of 110'0 even.  In time, the entire organism is destroyed--
literally consumed--by the concentration of dynamic energy.
It is interesting to note that in these patients emotion gains complete
possession of the final common path; they are wild and delirious--
but they never have pain.

All the diseases caused by excessive motor activity may be called
kinetic diseases.  Against the conditions in life which produce
them man reacts in various ways.  He intro-


{illust. caption = FIG.  51.--CROSS-COUNTRY RACE.  Winner of six-mile
cross-country race showing typical expression of exhaustion.
(Copyright by Underwood and Underwood, N. Y.) duces restful variety
into his life by hunting and fishing; by playing golf and tennis;
by horseback riding; by cultivating hobbies which effectually.
turn the current of his thoughts{illust. caption = FIG.  52.--{A B
and C} from the consuming stress and strain of his business
or professional life.  These diversions are all rational
attempts to relieve tension by self-preservative reactions.
For the same reason man attempts to relieve the strain of
contention with his fellow-man by unions, trusts, corporations.
In spite of all efforts, however, many constitutions are
still broken daily in the fierce conflicts of competition.
We know how often the overdriven individual endeavors to minimize
the activities of his motor mechanism by the use of agents which diminish
brain activity, such as alcohol, tobacco, and various narcotics.
Occasionally also, some person, who can find no respite from his own
relentless energies, seeks relief in oblivion by suicide.

Most fortunately, two fundamental instincts--self-preservation and
the propagation of the species--act powerfully to prevent
this last fatal result, and instead the harassed individual
seeks from others the aid which is lacking within himself.
He may turn to the priest who seeks and often secures the final
common path for faith in an over-ruling Providence, a faith which in
many incontrovertible instances has proved sufficient in very truth
to move mountains of lesser stimuli; or he turns to a physician,
who too often treats the final outcome of the hyperactivity only.
The physician who accepts the theory of the kinetic diseases,
however, will not only repair as far as he may the lesions caused
by the disordered and forced activities, but will, by compelling and
forceful suggestion, secure the final common path for right conduct,
that is, for a self- and species-preservative course of action
as opposed to wrong conduct-a self- and species-destructive
course of action.

By forcefully imparting to his patient the knowledge of the far-reaching
effects of protracted emotional strain, of overwork, and of worry,
the physician will automatically raise his threshold to the damaging
activating stimuli which have produced the evil results.
Even though some parts of his organism may have been permanently disabled,
a patient thus protected may yet rise to a plane of poise and
efficiency far above that of his uncontrolled fellows.

In extreme cases it does not seem unreasonable to believe that the
uncontrolled patient might be rescued by the same principle which has
proved effective in saving patients from the emotional and traumatic strain
of surgical operations--the principle of anoci-association. That is,
by disconnecting one or more of the activating organs from the brain,
the motor mechanism might be saved from its self-destruction.

Under this hypothesis, that man in disease, as in health,
is the product of his phylogeny as well as of ontogeny, the sphere
of the physician's activities takes on new aspects of far-reaching
and inspiring significance.  Prognosis will become definite in proportion
to the physician's knowledge not only of the ontogenetic history of
the individual patient, but also of the phylogenetic history of the race.
As that knowledge increases, as he appreciates more and more keenly
the significance of environment in its effect upon individual development,
in so far will the physician be in a position to contribute mightily
to the welfare of the race.



THE KINETIC SYSTEM[*]


[*] Address delivered before the New York State Medical Society, April 28,
1914, to which has been added a further note regarding studies
of hydrogen ion concentration in the blood.


In this paper I formulate a theory which I hope will harmonize a large
number of clinical and experimental data, supply an interpretation
of certain diseases, and show by what means many diverse causes
produce the same end effects.

Even should the theory prove ultimately to be true, it will in the mean
time doubtless be subjected to many alterations.  The specialized
laboratory worker will, at first, fail to see the broader clinical view,
and the trained clinician may hesitate to accept the laboratory findings.
Our viewpoint has been gained from a consideration of both lines
of evidence on rather a large scale.

The responsibility for the kinetic theory is assumed by myself,
while the responsibility for the experimental data is shared fully
by my associates, Dr. J. B. Austin, Dr. F. W. Hitchings, Dr. H. G. Sloan,
and Dr. M. L. Menten.[t]


[t] From H. K. Cushing Laboratory of Experimental Medicine,
Western Reserve University, Cleveland.


Introduction

The self-preservation of man and kindred animals is effected
through mechanisms which transform latent energy into kinetic energy
to accomplish adaptive ends.  Man appropriates from environment
the energy he requires in the form of crude food which is refined
by the digestive system; oxygen is taken to the blood and carbon
dioxid is taken from the blood by the respiratory system;
to and from the myriads of working cells of the body, food and oxygen
and waste are carried by the circulatory system; the body is cleared
of waste by the urinary system; procreation is accomplished through
the genital system; but none of these systems was evolved primarily
for the purpose of transforming potential energy into kinetic energy
for specific ends.  Each system transforms such amounts of potential
into kinetic energy as are required to perform its specific work;
but no one of them transforms latent into kinetic energy for the purposes
of escaping, fighting, pursuing, nor for combating infection.
The stomach, the kidneys, the lungs, the heart strike no physical
blow-their role is to do certain work to the end that the blow may
be struck by another system evolved for that purpose.  I propose
to offer evidence that there is in the body a system evolved primarily
for the transformation of latent energy into motion and into heat.
This system I propose to designate "The Kinetic System."

The kinetic system does not directly circulate the blood,
nor does it exchange oxygen and carbon dioxid; nor does it perform
the functions of digestion, urinary elimination, and procreation;
but though the kinetic system does not directly perform these functions,
it does play indirectly an important role in each, just as the kinetic
system itself is aided indirectly by the other systems.

The principal organs which comprise the kinetic system are
the brain, the thyroid, the adrenals, the liver, and the muscles.
The brain is the great central battery which drives the body;
the thyroid governs the conditions favoring tissue oxidation;
the adrenals govern immediate oxidation processes; the liver fabricates
and stores glycogen; and the muscles are the great converters
of latent energy into heat and motion.

Adrenalin alone, thyroid extract alone, brain activity alone,
and muscular activity alone are capable of causing the body temperature
to rise above the normal.  The functional activity of no other gland
of the body alone, and the secretion of no other gland alone, can cause
a comparable rise in body temperature--that is, neither increased
functional activity nor any active principle derived from the kidney,
the liver, the stomach, the pancreas, the hypophysis, the parathyroids,
the spleen, the intestines, the thymus, the lymphatic glands,
or the bones can, _per se_, cause a rise in the general body
temperature comparable to the rise that may be caused by the activity
of the brain or the muscles, or by the injection of adrenalin
or thyroid extract.  Then, too, when the brain, the thyroid,
the adrenals, the liver, or the muscles are eliminated, the power
of the body to convert latent into kinetic energy is impaired or lost.
I shall offer evidence tending to show that an excess of either
internal or external environmental stimuli may modify one or more
organs of the kinetic system, and that this modification may cause
certain diseases.  For example, alterations in the efficiency
of the cerebral link may yield neurasthenia, mania, dementia;
of the thyroid link, Graves' disease, myxedema; of the adrenal link,
Addison's disease, cardiovascular disease.

This introduction may serve to give the line of our argument.
We shall now consider briefly certain salient facts which relate to
the conversion of latent into kinetic energy as an adaptive reaction.
The experimental data are so many that they will later be published
in a monograph.

The amount of latent energy which may be converted into kinetic
energy for adaptive ends varies in different species, in individuals
of the same species, in the same individual in different seasons;
in the life cycle of growth, reproduction and decay;
in the waking and sleeping hours; in disease and in activity.
We shall here consider briefly the reasons for some of those variations
and the mechanisms which make them possible.


Biologic Consideration of the Adaptive Variation in Amounts
of Energy Stored in Various Animals

Energy is appropriated from the physical forces of nature
that constitute the environment.  This energy is stored in
the body in quantities in excess of the needs of the moment.
In some animals this excess storage is greater than in other animals.
Those animals whose self-preservation is dependent on purely
mechanical or chemical means of defense--such animals as crustaceans,
porcupines, skunks or cobras--have a relatively small amount
of convertible (adaptive) energy stored in their bodies.
On the contrary, the more an animal is dependent on its muscular
activity for self-preservation, the more surplus available
(adaptive) energy there is stored in its body.  It may be true that all
animals have approximately an equal amount per kilo of chemical energy--
but certainly they have not an equal amount stored in a form
which is available for immediate conversion for adaptive ends.
Adaptive Variation in the Rate of Energy Discharge

What chance for survival would a skunk have without odor; a cobra
without venom; a turtle without carapace; or a porcupine shorn
of its barbs, in an environment of powerful and hostile carnivora?
And yet in such an hostile environment many unprotected animals
survive by their muscular power of flight alone.  It is evident that
the provision for the storage of "adaptive" energy is not the only
evolved characteristic which relates to the energy of the body.
The more the self-preservation of the animal depends on motor activity,
the greater is the range of variation in the rate of discharge of energy.
The rate of energy discharge is especially high in animals evolved
along the line of hunter and hunted, such as the carnivora and
the herbivora of the great plains.


Influences That Cause Variation in the Rate of Output of Energy
in the Individual

Not only is there a variation in the rate of output of energy among
various species of animals, but one finds also variations in the rate
of output of energy among individuals of the same species.
If our thesis that men and animals are mechanisms responding to
environmental stimuli be correct, and further, if the speed of energy
output be due to changes in the activating organs as a result of
adaptive stimulation, then we should expect to find physical changes
in the activating glands during the cycles of increased activation.
What are the facts?  We know that most animals have breeding
seasons evolved as adaptations to the food supply and weather.
Hence there is in most animals a mating season in advance of
the season of maximum food supply so that the young may appear at
the period when food is most abundant.  In the springtime most birds
and mammals mate, and in the springtime at least one of the great
activating glands is enlarged--the thyroid in man and in animals shows
seasonal enlargement.  The effect of the increased activity is seen
in the song, the courting, the fighting, in the quickened pulse,
and in a slightly raised temperature.  Even more activation
than that connected with the season is seen in the physical state
of mating, when the thyroid is known to enlarge materially,
though this increased activity, as we shall show later, is probably
no greater than the increased activity of other activating glands.
In the mating season the kinetic activity is speeded up; in short,
there exists a state--a fleeting state--of mild Graves' disease.
In the early stages of Graves' disease, before the destructive phenomena
are felt, the kinetic speed is high, and life is on a sensuous edge.
Not only is there a seasonal rhythm to the rate of flow of energy,
but there is a diurnal variation--the ebb is at night,
and the full tide in the daytime.  This observation is verified
by the experiments which show that certain organs in the kinetic
chain are histologically exhausted, the depleted cells being
for the most part restored by sleep.

We have seen that there are variations in speed in different species,
and that in the same species speed varies with the season of the year
and with the time of day.  In addition there are variations also in
the rate of discharge of energy in the various cycles of the life
of the individual.  The young are evolved at high speed for growth,
so that as soon as possible they may attain to their own power
of self-defense; they must adapt themselves to innumerable bacteria,
to food, and to all the elements in their external environment.
Against their gross enemies the young are measurably protected
by their parents; but the parents--except to a limited extent in
the case of man--are unable to assist in the protection of the young
against infectious disease.

The cycle of greatest kinetic energy for physiologic ends is the period
of reproduction.  In the female especially there is a cycle of increased
activity just prior to her development into the procreative state.
During this time secondary sexual characters are developed--
the pelvis expands, the ovaries and the uterus grow rapidly,
the mammary glands develop.  Again in this period of increasing
speed in the expenditure of energy we find the thyroid,
the adrenals, and the hypophysis also in rapid growth.
Without the normal development of the ovary, the thyroid,
and the hypophysis, neither the male nor the female can develop
the secondary sexual characters, nor do they develop sexual desire
nor show seasonal cycles of activity, nor can they procreate.
The secondary sexual characters--sexual desire, fertility--may be
developed at will, for example, by feeding thyroid products from
alien species to the individual deprived of the thyroid.

At the close of the child-bearing period there is a permanent
diminution of the speed of energy discharge, for energy is no
longer needed as it was for the self-preservation of the offspring
before adolescence, and for the propagation of the species
during the procreative period.  Unless other factors intervene,
this reduction in speed is progressive until senescent death.
The diminished size of the thyroid of the aged bears testimony
to the part the activating organs bear in the general decline.

We have now referred to variations in the rate of discharge of
energy in different species; in individuals of the same species;
in cycles in the same individual--such as the seasons of food supply,
the periods of wakefulness and of sleep, the procreative period,
and we have spoken of those variations caused artificially
by thyroid feeding, thus far having confined our discussion
to the conversion for adaptive purposes of latent into kinetic
energy in muscular and in procreative action.  We shall now consider
the conversion of latent into kinetic energy in the production of
heat,[*] and endeavor to answer the questions which arise at once:
Is there one mechanism for the conversion of latent energy into heat
and another mechanism for its conversion into muscular action?
What is the adaptive advantage of fever in infection?


[*] We use the terms "heat" and "muscular action" in the popular sense,
though physicists use them to designate one and the same kind of energy.

The Purpose and the Mechanism of Heat Production in Infections

Vaughan has shown that the presence in the body of any alien protein
causes an increased production of heat, and that there is no difference
between the production of fever by foreign proteins and by infections.
Before the day of the hypodermic needle and of experimental medicine,
the foreign proteins found in the body outside the alimentary tract
were brought in by invading microorganisms.  Such organisms interfered
with and destroyed the host.  The body, therefore, was forced
to evolve a means of protection against these hostile organisms.
The increased metabolism and fever in infection might operate
as a protection in two ways--the increased fever, by interfering
with bacterial growth, and the increased metabolism, by breaking up
the bacteria.  Bacteriologists have taught us that bacteria grow best
at the normal temperature of the body, hence fever must interfere
with bacterial growth.  With each rise of one degree centigrade
the chemical activity of the body is increased 10 per cent.
In acute infections there is aversion to food and frequently there
is vomiting.  In fever, then, we have diminished intake of energy,
but an increased output of energy--hence the available potential
energy in the body is rapidly consumed.  This may be an adaptation
for the purpose of breaking up the foreign protein molecules
composing the bacteria.  Thus the body may be purified by a chemical
combustion so furious that frequently the host itself is destroyed.
The problems of immunity are not considered here.

As to the mechanism which produces fever, we postulate that it
is the same mechanism as that which produces muscular activity.
Muscular activity is produced by the conversion of latent energy
into motion, and fever is produced largely in the muscles by
the conversion of latent energy into heat.  We should, therefore,
find similar changes in the brain, the adrenals, the thyroid,
and the liver, whatever may be the purpose of the conversion of energy--
whether for running, for fighting, for the expression of emotion,
or for combating infection.

We shall first present experimental and clinical evidence which tends
to show what part is played by the brain in the production of both
muscular and febrile action, and later we shall discuss the parts
played by the adrenals, the thyroid, and the liver.  Histologic Changes
in the Brain-cells in Relation to the Maintenance of Consciousness
and to the Production of the Emotions, Muscular Activity, and Fever

We have studied the brain-cells in human cases of fever,
and in animals after prolonged insomnia; after the injection
of the toxins of gonococci, of streptococci, of staphylococci,
and of colon, tetanus, diphtheria, and typhoid bacilli; and after
the injection of foreign proteins, of indol and skatol, of leucin,
and of peptones.  We have studied the brains of animals which had been
activated in varying degrees up to the point of complete exhaustion
by running, by fighting, by rage and fear, by physical injury,
and by the injection of strychnin (Figs. 2, 4, 5, and 37). We have
studied the brains of salmon at the mouth of the Columbia River
and at its headwater (Fig. 55); the brains of electric fish,
the storage batteries of which had been partially discharged,
and of those the batteries of which had been completely discharged;
the brains of woodchucks in hibernation and after fighting;
the brains of humans who had died from anemia resulting from hemorrhage,
from acidosis, from eclampsia, from cancer and from other chronic diseases
(Figs. 40 to 43, 56, 74, and 75). We have studied also the brains
