The first of these three winters (1878-1879) killed all the arborescent
veronicas and a few sumacs. As for the fuchsias and myrtles, they were
frozen down to the level of the soil.

I now come to the effects of this severe cold upon the insects.

The Lepidoptera, which before were rare, became more and more common in
1879, 1880, and 1881, and so much so that during the last named year they
abounded; and species that had formerly been detected only at certain
favored points spread over the entire coast and into the interior of the
country. The geometers appeared in numbers that were unheard of. But this
change was especially striking as regards the Noctuellae, in view of the
previous rarity of the individuals belonging to this family.

We have here an example of the direct relation of cause to effect,
although I am not in a position to assert that the effect is always
produced in the same way. To me there is no question as to the fact that
the constitution of those insects which nature has accorded the faculty
of liberating is strengthened, and that their chances of life are
increased, if the cold of winter is intense enough to plunge them into an
absolute rest, and is not unseasonably affected by warm, spring-like
days. It is certain that such cold is capable of contributing largely to
the multiplication of the individuals of such species as hibernate in the
egg state, and it also has a beneficent influence upon those species
which, like the small social larvae, pass this season upon the earth
enveloped in a silken envelope, or, like the larvae of the Noctuellae,
between dead leaves or upon the ground itself.

On another hand, it cannot be doubted that mild winters greatly
contribute to the bringing about of a destruction of larvae and chrysalids
in two ways: First, they favor the development of mould, which, as well
known, attacks the larvae of insects when these have been enfeebled by an
excess of rain or dampness; and second, they permit beasts of prey to
continue to exercise their activity. Now, these latter are numerous.
Moles, instead of burying themselves deeply, then continue to excavate
near the surface, and shrew mice are constantly in search of food. These
small mammals, which abound in this district, destroy a large number of
chrysalids of Lepidoptera.

It is the same with birds. As soon as severe cold begins to prevail in
the north and east, they come in troops to the open fields and the
sheltered slope of the hills of our district. But it is scarcely worth
while to stop to tell of the skill and perseverance of these destroyer of
larvae. We may mention, the woodpecker, however, as a skillful searcher
for insects that lie hidden in places where the sun has melted the snow.
The carnivorous Coleoptera and the Forficulae are likewise generally in
motion during mild winters. Doubtless these last-named do not make very
large inroads in the ranks of larvae and chrysalids every day; yet, having
no other food, they destroy a goodly number of them. But I believe that
the devastations made in the army of insects by all these enemies united
do not equal those made by certain crustaceans--the wood lice.

During mild winters these pests multiply, eat, and prosper out of bounds,
and to such a point that, in a climate like ours, they become a true
scourge that prevails everywhere, out of doors and within. Once in a
place, they begin to look for larvae and chrysalids, which they devour.
The severe cold seems to have destroyed a certain number of them, since
they are now not so numerous by far; and it has at least certainly put a
stop to their devastations at an epoch when the larvae are more
particularly exposed to the attacks of their enemies. It is to this
cause, as well as to the preceding, that I am led to attribute the
extraordinary multiplication of so many species during the three last
summers, which were separated by severe winters. Last winter was mild,
and there is therefore no reason to expect that there will be another
multiplication; but I hope that the harm done by such a season will be
slight. It is the progressive multiplication of the destroyers, joined to
the correlative disappearance of the victims caused by a series of
temperate seasons, that is to be feared.

In support of the proposition that I maintain, I may mention still
another fact. While this district (Pembroke, Wales) is relatively poor in
species whose larvae feed and hibernate in the open air a few species of
Noctuellae, whose larvae live buried in the earth, are always abundant. The
country is relatively rich in spices of _Tortrix_, which develop and
hibernate in the stalks or roots of plants. It is also worthy of remark
that very few of our species seem to be incapable of enduring a severe
winter.--_C.G. Barret, in Science et Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




SILK WORM EGGS.


Prof. C.V. Riley, entomologist, announces that the Department of
Agriculture, Washington, will purchase during the coming summer such
quantities of silk worm eggs as may be deemed necessary for the
distribution that it is proposed to make for the season of 1886. So far
as found practicable, the eggs will be purchased of American producers.
There are certain precautions, however, that must be taken to insure
purchase. Eggs of improved races only (preferably of the French or
Italian Yellow Races) will be bought, and the producer should send one or
two samples of pierced cocoons with the eggs. In addition to this the
producer must conform to certain rules to be hereafter explained, so that
an examination may be made that will serve to show the degree of purity
of the eggs. No silk culturist should use his crop for the production of
eggs unless the worms have shown, until they began the spinning of their
cocoons, every sign of perfect, robust health. Any indication of the
disease called _flacherie_, from which the worms so often die after the
fourth moult and turn black from putrefaction, or of any other disease
from which silk worms suffer, should be considered as ample reason for
not using the cocoons for the purpose in question. They should, on the
other hand, be sold for the filature. If the worms have all the
indications of health until the spinning period, then the cocoons may be
used for the production of eggs. The following brief instructions will
prove of service to those who which to secure sound eggs:

[Illustration]

For each ounce of eggs to be produced, about three-quarters of a pound of
fresh cocoons from the finest and firmest in the lot should be chosen.
These should be strung in sets upon a thread, care being taken not to
pierce the chrysalis, and the strings hung in a cool, darkened room. The
moths generally emerge from the cocoons early in the morning, and will be
seen crawling about over these, the males being noticeable by their
smaller abdomens, more robust antennae, and by their greater activity. The
moths should be placed, regardless of sex, on a table, where they will
soon find their mates and couple. As soon as formed, the couples should
be removed to another table, that they may not be disturbed by the
flutterings of the single moths.

There should be prepared for each ounce of eggs to be produced, about
one hundred small bags of fine muslin, made in the following manner: Cut
the cloth in pieces 3x6 inches. Then fold one end over so as to leave a
single edge of about three-quarters of an inch, as shown in the
accompanying cut. This should be sewn up into a bag with the upper end
open, and then turned inside out, so that the seams will cause the sides
to bulge. Thus completed they are called "cells." The cells should be
strung on a cord stretched across the room.

The moths couple as a rule about eight o'clock in the morning. About four
in the afternoon they should be separated by taking them by the wings and
drawing them gently apart. Each female should now be placed by herself in
a cell, which is then closed by a pin as shown in the figure. Here she
will lay her eggs and in due time die. The males may as a rule be thrown
away, but it is wise to keep a few of the more active ones, in case there
should be a superabundance of females the following day.

When the females have finished laying their eggs, which operation
occupies about thirty-six hours, they are ready to be shipped to this
office. The cells, with their inclosed moths and eggs, should be placed
in a strong box of wood or tin, being packed in such a manner that they
will not be crushed, and mailed to the entomologist at the department. By
using the inclosed return penalty slip, payment of postage may be
avoided. The name of the sender should be placed in each box. The moths,
as soon as received, will be examined microscopically, and the eggs of
those which are found to be free from disease will be weighed and paid
for at the rate of $2.50 per ounce of 25 grammes (about 6-7 of an ounce
avoirdupois). Silk culturists are advised not to attempt the production
of eggs unless they are adepts at the industry, and have had at least one
season's experience. We would advise each person desiring to sell, to
send a sample first, with a statement of the quantity offered.

       *       *       *       *       *


Dr. Zintgraff of Bonn has taken a phonograph with him to Africa. He
intends to bring home phonograms of the savage dialects which he will
hire the natives to speak into the machine.

       *       *       *       *       *

[NATURE.]




DETERMINING THE MEAN DENSITY OF THE EARTH.


In _Nature_ for March 5 (p. 408) Prof. Mayer suggests an improvement in
our method of determining the mean density of the earth, from which it
appears that our plan has not been properly understood. This
misunderstanding, no doubt, has arisen from the incomplete description of
our method given in the _Nature_ (Jan. 15. p. 260) report of the
_Proceedings_ of the Berlin Physical Society, which report was probably
the only source of information accessible to Prof. Mayer. We are led
therefore to give a short description of our method.

Let H I K L represent a section of a cubical block of lead, about two
meters in the edge, and weighing 100,000 kilos. The balance, A B C, is
placed in the middle of the upper horizontal surface. It bears the
scale-pans, D and E. Under these scale-pans the block is bored vertically
through, and two other scale-pans, F and G, are suspended below the
block, attached to the balance by means of rods passing through these
openings.

A weight D is brought into equilibrium by weights in G. The weight in D
is acted upon by the earth's attraction + that of the block, and that in
G by the earth's attraction - that of the block. The weights in G are then
greater than that in D by twice the attraction of the block. The weight
in D in now removed to F, and counterbalanced by weights in E. The weight
in E will be less than that in F by twice the attraction of the block.
The difference of the two weighings gives therefore four times the
attraction of the block. A correction must be introduced for the
variation in the earth's attraction due to the different heights of D, E
and F, G.

[Illustration]

In order to obtain as great a deflection of the balance by the method
suggested by Prof. Mayer, each of the mercury spheres must exert the same
attraction as our lead block. This would require spheres having radii of
about one meter. The length of the beam of the balance would be
necessarily at least two meters. Besides, each mass of mercury, would
exert some attraction on the weight on the other side, and thus lessen
the deviation of the balance.

The method given by Prof. Mayer, except for the suggested employment of
mercury, is then no improvement on ours. If we should use mercury, we
would construct a cubical vessel to contain it, and use it as we propose
to use the lead block. The advantage of using mercury is, however,
counterbalanced by the difficulty of obtaining it in such large
quantities as would be necessary.

ARTHUR KONIG.

FRANZ RICHARZ.

Berlin, Physical Institute of the University, March 15.

       *       *       *       *       *




PHYSICS WITHOUT APPARATUS.


_The Porosity and Permeability of Bodies._--Take two tumblers of the same
size, place one of them upon a table, and pour into it a small quantity
of nearly boiling water. Cover this glass with a sheet of cardboard, and
invert the other one upon it. This second tumbler must be previously
wiped so as to have it perfectly dry and transparent. In a few seconds
the steam from the lower tumbler will traverse the cardboard (which will
thus exhibit its permeability), and will gradually fill the upper
tumbler, and condense and run down its sides. Wood and cloth may be
experimented with in succession, and will give the same results; but
there are other substances that are _impermeable_, and will not allow
themselves to be traversed. Such, for example, is the vulcanized rubber
of which waterproofs are made. This experiment explains to us why fog
is, as has been well said, so _penetrating_. It traverses the tissue of
our overcoat and of our flannel, and comes into contact with our body. On
the contrary, a rubber coat preserves us against its action.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--EXPERIMENT UPON THE PERMEABILITY OF BODIES.]

_A Hot Air Balloon_.--Make a hollow cylinder of small diameter out of a
sheet of paper such as is used for cigarette packages, and turn in the
ends slightly so that it shall preserve its form. If the cylinder seems
too difficult to make, a cone may be substituted. Now set fire to the
cylinder or cone at its upper part. The paper will burn and become
converted into a thin sheet of ashes, which will contract and curl
inward. This light residuum of ashes, being filled with air rarefied by
combustion, will suddenly rise to a distance of two or three yards. Here
we have a Montgolfier balloon.--_La Nature_.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--PRINCIPLE OF THE HOT AIR BALLOON.]

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CASINO AT MONTE CARLO.


The little city is situated about half way between Nizza and Mentone, and
it formerly was the chief city of a principality that belonged to the
family Grimaldi. Prince Florestan sold in 1860 his royal prerogatives to
the Emperor Napoleon, for three million francs, consequently the land
came under the jurisdiction of the French republic, but the city remained
in the Prince's possession, who, however, gave to the gambler Blanc the
privilege of erecting a gambling house upon the rocky shore of the sea.

[Illustration: THE CASINO AT MONTE CARLO.]

Enormous sums of money were spent to give this isolated cliff its present
appearance, covered as it is with beautiful buildings, hotels, and
villas, besides the magnificent Casino building, which was erected in
1862. Directly facing the sea, there is a succession of most beautiful
gardens and terraces.

But this establishment, which seems like paradise, has had a most
disastrous effect upon thousands of persons, and for a long time the
subject of influencing the French government to put a stop to this
gambling house has been agitated. It can scarcely be imagined how much
misery it has already caused. It is evident to every one that the keeper
of the bank makes considerable profit, as the chances are 63 times
greater in his favor than those of the player.

It is admitted that the profits amount every year to 17 million francs.
One can well imagine how many fortunes have been consumed every year to
make this profit; but the number cannot be determined.

       *       *       *       *       *




ON AN EXPRESS ENGINE.


It is a somewhat unpromising morning--the river is dark with fog and the
huge arch of the station nearly hidden by mist and steam. A cold, damp
wind makes the passengers hurry into the carriages, and strikes us
sharply as we step on to the foot-plate of the engine, which has just
joined the train. But as we get behind the shelter of the screen, we feel
a generous and slightly unctuous sensation of warmth very comforting to a
chilly man. The brasswork of the engine shines brilliantly, the footboard
has been newly scrubbed, and the driver and stoker stand waiting for the
signal. The needle shows that the steam is just below the pressure at
which it would begin to blow off; the water in the gauge glass is just
where it ought to be; in fact, the engine is in perfect condition and
ready for a start. The line is clear, the guard's whistle is answered by
our own, and we glide almost imperceptibly past the last few yards of the
platform. The driver opens the regulator till he is answered by a few
sounding puffs from the funnel, and then stands on the lookout for
signals so numerous that one wonders how he can tell which of the many
waving arms is raised or lowered for his guidance.

So he goes on, with hand on regulator and lever, gradually admitting more
steam as signal after signal comes nearer and then flies past us, till at
last we are clear of the suburbs and find ourselves on a gentle incline
and a straight road, with the open fields on either side. It is now that
the real business of the journey begins. Locomotives are as sensitive and
have as many peculiarities as horses, and have to be as carefully studied
if you would ride them fast and far. The lever is put into the most
suitable notch for working the steam expansively; the driver's hand is on
the regulator, not to be removed for the rest of the trip; the furnace
door is thrown wide open, and firing begins in earnest. Here it may not
be amiss to state, for the benefit of the uninitiated, that the regulator
controls the supply of steam from the boiler, while the lever enables the
driver to reverse the engine, or, as we have already stated, to expand
the steam by cutting it off before the end of the stroke. The engine
answers to the appeal like a living thing, and seems, with its steady
beat and sonorous blast, to settle down to its work. It is pleasant from
our seat in the corner of the screen to see this preparation for the work
ahead--the absolute calm of driver and stoker, who exchange no word, but
go steadfastly and quietly about their business; to feel the vibrations
from the rails beneath throb through one with slowly increasing rapidity,
or watch the trees and houses go past as gulls flap past a boat. For
there is a certain apparent swagging movement of the objects past which
one travels which can only be likened to the peculiar flight of a large
sea-bird. But now there are signs of increased activity on the
foot-plate; the stoker is busy controlling the feed of water to the
boiler, and fires at more frequent intervals; the driver's hand moves
oftener as he coaxes and encourages the engine along the road, his
slightest gesture betraying the utmost tension of eye and ear; the
stations, instead of echoing a long sullen roar as we go through them,
flash past us with a sudden rattle, and the engine surges down the line,
the train following with hot haste in its wake. We are in a cutting, and
the noise is deafening. Looking ahead, we see an apparently impenetrable
wall before us. Suddenly the whistle is opened, and we are in one of the
longest tunnels in England. The effect produced is the opposite of that
with which we are familiar in a railway carriage, for the change is one
from darkness to light rather than from light to darkness. The front of
the fire-box, foot-plate, and the tender, which had been rather hazily
perceived in the whirl of surrounding objects, now strike sharply on the
eye, lit up by the blaze from the fire, while overhead we see a glorious
canopy of ruddy-glowing steam. The speed is great, and the flames in the
fire-box boil up and form eddies like water at the doors of an opening
lock. Far ahead we see a white speck, which increases in size till the
fierce light from the fire pales, and we are once more in open day. The
weather has lifted, the sky is gray, but there is no longer any
appearance of mist. The hills on the horizon stand out sharply, and seem
to keep pace with us as the miles slip past. The line is clear; but there
is an important junction not far distant, and we slacken speed, to insure
a prompt pull-up should we find an adverse signal. The junction signals
are soon sighted; neither caution nor danger is indicated, and, once
clear of the station, we steam ahead as fast as ever. One peculiarity of
the view of the line ahead strikes us. Looking at a railroad line from a
field or neighboring highway, even where the rails are laid on a steep
incline, the rise and fall of the road is not very strikingly apparent.
Seen through the weather-glass, the track appears to be laid up hill and
down dale, like a path on the downs above high cliffs. Over it all we
advance, the engine laboring and puffing on one or two heavy gradients,
in spite of a full supply of steam, or tearing down the inclines with
hardly any, or none at all and the brake on. And here it may be noted
that, like modern men, modern engines have been put upon diet, and are
not allowed to indulge in so much victual as their forefathers. The
engine-driver, like the doctor of the new school, is determined not to
ruin his patient by over-indulgence, and will tell you severely enough
that "he will never be guilty of choking his engine with an over-supply
of steam." In the mean time, the character of the country we travel
through has changed. It has become more open, and there is a stiff
sea-breeze, which makes itself distinctly felt through the rush of air
produced by the speed at which we are going. We fly past idle streams and
ponds, and as the steam swirls over them are disappointed at producing
so little effect; but the ducks, their inhabitants, are well used to such
visitations, and hardly deign to move a feather. Suddenly we plunge into
a series of small chalk cuttings, and on emerging from them find
ourselves parallel with a grand line of downs. We speed by a curve or
two, and find ourselves on the sea-shore; one more tunnel, and with steam
off we go soberly into the last station. But there is one step more. The
breeze blows about our ears. Before us the rails are wet, for the sea
swept over them not many hours since, and to accomplish the last few
yards of our journey the lever controlling the sand-box must be used
liberally, to prevent slipping; the signal is given, and at a walking
pace we make our way to where the steamer is awaiting us. A gentle
application of the brake pulls us up, and the journey is over. It is
difficult to realize, as the engine stands quietly under the lee of the
pier while the driver examines the machinery, and the fire, burned low,
throws out a gentle warmth as we stand before it, that half an hour ago
we were tearing along the line at full speed, while the foot-plate that
is now so pleasant to lounge on throbbed beneath us. Nothing now remains
but to kill time as best we may till the return trip many hours hence. It
scarcely promises to be as comfortable as our morning ride, for the
weather has changed--it is blowing half a gale, and the rain comes down
in sheets. Our train is timed to start in the small hours, and the night
seems dirty and depressing enough as we make our way for a cup of coffee
to the refreshment room, where a melancholy Italian sits in sad state
eating Bath buns and drinking brandy. We walk past the train, laden with
miserable sea-sick humanity, and step on the engine, which stands in the
dark at the end of the platform. Time is up, and we pass from the dim
half-light of the station into outer darkness. A blacker night there
could hardly be; looking ahead there is nothing to be seen but one's own
reflection in the weather-glass. We are in the midst of obscurity, which
suddenly changes to a rich light as the whistle is opened and we enter a
tunnel. The effect is far more striking than in the daytime. The light is
more concentrated, and the mouth of the tunnel we have just entered might
be the entrance to Hades--for there is no telltale spot of light to prove
to our senses the existence of any opening at the other end. The sound
echoed from the walls and roof has a tremendous quality, and resolves
itself into a grand sort of Wagnerian rhythm, making a vast crescendo,
till with a rush we clear the tunnel, and are once more under the open
sky. The pace is increasing, the steady beat of the engine tells more
distinctly on the ear than in the daytime; the foot-plate is lit up by
the glare from the fire-door; but still there is nothing to be seen ahead
but the impenetrable night. Looking back, however, the scene is very
different. The tender and guard's van glow in the light thrown by the
fire, trees and houses by the side of the track stand out sharply for a
moment and are then lost to sight, the light from the carriage windows
produces the effect of the wake of a ship seen from the stern. Gradually
the clouds have rolled away, leaving the sky clear. The moon is seen
fitfully through the whirling steam; the surrounding country is visible
for miles round. The effect produced is unspeakably beautiful. In the
mean time let us turn our attention to the working of the engine. In the
