
PREPARATION OF STANDARD SOLUTIONS

!Approximate Strength, 0.1 N!

PROCEDURE.--Weigh out on the rough balances 13 grams of commercial
iodine. Place it in a mortar with 18 grams of potassium iodide and
triturate with small portions of water until all is dissolved. Dilute
the solution to 1000 cc. and transfer to a liter bottle and mix
thoroughly (Note 1).[1]

[Footnote 1: It will be found more economical to have a considerable
quantity of the solution prepared by a laboratory attendant, and to
have all unused solutions returned to the common stock.]

Weigh out 25 grams of sodium thiosulphate, dissolve it in water which
has been previously boiled and cooled, and dilute to 1000 cc., also
with boiled water. Transfer the solution to a liter bottle and mix
thoroughly (Note 2).

[Note 1: Iodine solutions react with water to form hydriodic acid
under the influence of the sunlight, and even at low room temperatures
the iodine tends to volatilize from solution. They should, therefore,
be protected from light and heat. Iodine solutions are not stable for
long periods under the best of conditions. They cannot be used in
burettes with rubber tips, since they attack the rubber.]

[Note 2: Sodium thiosulphate (Na_{2}S_{2}O_{3}.5H_{2}O) is
rarely wholly pure as sold commercially, but may be purified by
recrystallization. The carbon dioxide absorbed from the air by
distilled water decomposes the salt, with the separation of sulphur.
Boiled water which has been cooled out of contact with the air should
be used in preparing solutions.]


INDICATOR SOLUTION

The starch solution for use as an indicator must be freshly prepared.
A soluble starch is obtainable which serves well, and a solution of
0.5 gram of this starch in 25 cc. of boiling water is sufficient. The
solution should be filtered while hot and is ready for use when cold.

If soluble starch is not at hand, potato starch may be used. Mix about
1 gram with 5 cc. of cold water to a smooth paste, pour 150 cc. of
!boiling! water over it, warm for a moment on the hot plate, and put
it aside to settle. Decant the supernatant liquid through a filter
and use the clear filtrate; 5 cc. of this solution are needed for a
titration.

The solution of potato starch is less stable than the soluble starch.
The solid particles of the starch, if not removed by filtration,
become so colored by the iodine that they are not readily decolorized
by the thiosulphate (Note 1).

[Note 1: The blue color which results when free iodine and starch
are brought together is probably not due to the formation of a true
chemical compound. It is regarded as a "solid solution" of iodine in
starch. Although it is unstable, and easily destroyed by heat, it
serves as an indicator for the presence of free iodine of remarkable
sensitiveness, and makes the iodometric processes the most
satisfactory of any in the field of volumetric analysis.]


COMPARISON OF IODINE AND THIOSULPHATE SOLUTIONS

PROCEDURE.--Place the solutions in burettes (the iodine in a
glass-stoppered burette), observing the usual precautions. Run out 40
cc. of the thiosulphate solution into a beaker, dilute with 150 cc. of
water, add 1 cc. to 2 cc. of the soluble starch solution, and titrate
with the iodine to the appearance of the blue of the iodo-starch.
Repeat until the ratio of the two solutions is established,
remembering all necessary corrections for burettes and for temperature
changes.


STANDARDIZATION OF SOLUTIONS

Commercial iodine is usually not sufficiently pure to permit of its
use as a standard for thiosulphate solutions or the direct preparation
of a standard solution of iodine. It is likely to contain, beside
moisture, some iodine chloride, if chlorine was used to liberate the
iodine when it was prepared. It may be purified by sublimation after
mixing it with a little potassium iodide, which reacts with the iodine
chloride, forming potassium chloride and setting free the iodine. The
sublimed iodine is then dried by placing it in a closed container over
concentrated sulphuric acid. It may then be weighed in a stoppered
weighing-tube and dissolved in a solution of potassium iodide in a
stoppered flask to prevent loss of iodine by volatilization. About 18
grams of the iodide and twelve grams of iodine per liter are required
for an approximately tenth-normal solution.

An iodine solution made from commercial iodine may also be
standardized against arsenious oxide (As_{4}O_{6}). This substance
also usually requires purification by sublimation before use.

The substances usually employed for the standardization of a
thiosulphate solution are potassium bromate and metallic copper. The
former is obtainable in pure condition or may be easily purified by
re-crystallization. Copper wire of high grade is sufficiently pure
to serve as a standard. Both potassium bromate and cupric salts in
solution will liberate iodine from an iodide, which is then titrated
with the thiosulphate solution.

The reactions involved are the following:

(a) KBrO_{3} + 6KI + 3H_{2}SO_{4} --> KBr + 3I_{2} + 3K_{2}SO_{4} + 3H_{2}O,

(b) 3Cu + 8HNO_{3} --> 3Cu(NO_{3})_{2} + 2NO + 4H_{2}O,
    2Cu(NO_{3})_{2} + 4KI --> 2CuI + 4KNO_{3} + I_{2}.

Two methods for the direct standardization of the sodium thiosulphate
solution are here described, and one for the direct standardization of
the iodine solution.


!Method A!

PROCEDURE.--Weigh out into 500 cc. beakers two portions of about
0.150-0.175 gram of potassium bromate. Dissolve each of these in 50
cc. of water, and add 10 cc. of a potassium iodide solution containing
3 grams of the salt in that volume (Note 1). Add to the mixture 10 cc.
of dilute sulphuric acid (1 volume of sulphuric acid with 5 volumes of
water), allow the solution to stand for three minutes, and dilute to
150 cc. (Note 2). Run in thiosulphate solution from a burette until
the color of the liberated iodine is nearly destroyed, and then add 1
cc. or 2 cc. of starch solution, titrate to the disappearance of the
iodo-starch blue, and finally add iodine solution until the color
is just restored. Make a blank test for the amount of thiosulphate
solution required to react with the iodine liberated by the iodate
which is generally present in the potassium iodide solution, and
deduct this from the total volume used in the titration.

From the data obtained, calculate the relation of the thiosulphate
solution to a normal solution, and subsequently calculate the similar
value for the iodine solution.

[Note 1:--Potassium iodide usually contains small amounts of potassium
iodate as impurity which, when the iodide is brought into an acid
solution, liberates iodine, just as does the potassium bromate used as
a standard. It is necessary to determine the amount of thiosulphate
which reacts with the iodine thus liberated by making a "blank test"
with the iodide and acid alone. As the iodate is not always uniformly
distributed throughout the iodide, it is better to make up a
sufficient volume of a solution of the iodide for the purposes of the
work in hand, and to make the blank test by using the same volume of
the iodide solution as is added in the standardizing process. The
iodide solution should contain about 3 grams of the salt in 10 cc.]

[Note 2: The color of the iodo-starch is somewhat less satisfactory in
concentrated solutions of the alkali salts, notably the iodides. The
dilution prescribed obviates this difficulty.]


!Method B!

PROCEDURE.--Weigh out two portions of 0.25-0.27 gram of clean copper
wire into 250 cc. Erlenmeyer flasks (Note 1). Add to each 5 cc. of
concentrated nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.42) and 25 cc. of water, cover,
and warm until solution is complete. Add 5 cc. of bromine water and
boil until the excess of bromine is expelled. Cool, and add strong
ammonia (sp. gr. 0.90) drop by drop until a deep blue color indicates
the presence of an excess. Boil the solution until the deep blue is
replaced by a light bluish green, or a brown stain appears on the
sides of the flask (Note 2). Add 10 cc. of strong acetic acid (sp.
gr. 1.04), cool under the water tap, and add a solution of potassium
iodide (Note 3) containing about 3 grams of the salt, and titrate
with thiosulphate solution until the color of the liberated iodine
is nearly destroyed. Then add 1-2 cc. of freshly prepared starch
solution, and add thiosulphate solution, drop by drop, until the blue
color is discharged.

From the data obtained, including the "blank test" of the iodide,
calculate the relation of the thiosulphate solution to the normal.

[Note 1: While copper wire of commerce is not absolutely pure, the
requirements for its use as a conductor of electricity are such that
the impurities constitute only a few hundredths of one per cent and
are negligible for analytical purposes.]

[Note 2: Ammonia neutralizes the free nitric acid. It should be added
in slight excess only, since the excess must be removed by boiling,
which is tedious. If too much ammonia is present when acetic acid is
added, the resulting ammonium acetate is hydrolyzed, and the ammonium
hydroxide reacts with the iodine set free.]

[Note 3: A considerable excess of potassium iodide is necessary for
the prompt liberation of iodine. While a large excess will do no harm,
the cost of this reagent is so great that waste should be avoided.]


!Method C!

PROCEDURE.--Weigh out into 500 cc. beakers two portions of 0.175-0.200
gram each of pure arsenious oxide. Dissolve each of these in 10 cc. of
sodium hydroxide solution, with stirring. Dilute the solutions to 150
cc. and add dilute hydrochloric acid until the solutions contain a few
drops in excess, and finally add to each a concentrated solution of
5 grams of pure sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO_{3}) in water. Cover the
beakers before adding the bicarbonate, to avoid loss. Add the starch
solution and titrate with the iodine to the appearance of the blue of
the iodo-starch, taking care not to pass the end-point by more than a
few drops (Note 1).

From the corrected volume of the iodine solution used to oxidize the
arsenious oxide, calculate its relation to the normal. From the
ratio between the solutions, calculate the similar value for the
thiosulphate solution.

[Note 1: Arsenious oxide dissolves more readily in caustic alkali than
in a bicarbonate solution, but the presence of caustic alkali during
the titration is not admissible. It is therefore destroyed by the
addition of acid, and the solution is then made neutral with the
solution of bicarbonate, part of which reacts with the acid, the
excess remaining in solution.

The reaction during titration is the following:

Na_{3}AsO_{3} + I_{2} + 2NaHCO_{3} --> Na_{3}AsO_{4} + 2NaI + 2CO_{2}
+ H_{2}O

As the reaction between sodium thiosulphate and iodine is not always
free from secondary reactions in the presence of even the weakly
alkaline bicarbonate, it is best to avoid the addition of any
considerable excess of iodine. Should the end-point be passed by a few
drops, the thiosulphate may be used to correct it.]




DETERMINATION OF COPPER IN ORES


Copper ores vary widely in composition from the nearly pure copper
minerals, such as malachite and copper sulphide, to very low grade
materials which contain such impurities as silica, lead, iron, silver,
sulphur, arsenic, and antimony. In nearly all varieties there will be
found a siliceous residue insoluble in acids. The method here given,
which is a modification of that described by A.H. Low (!J. Am. Chem.
Soc.! (1902), 24, 1082), provides for the extraction of the copper
from commonly occurring ores, and for the presence of their common
impurities. For practice analyses it is advisable to select an ore of
a fair degree of purity.

PROCEDURE.-- Weigh out two portions of about 0.5 gram each of the
ore (which should be ground until no grit is detected) into 250 cc.
Erlenmeyer flasks or small beakers. Add 10 cc. of concentrated nitric
acid (sp. gr. 1.42) and heat very gently until the ore is decomposed
and the acid evaporated nearly to dryness (Note 1). Add 5 cc. of
concentrated hydrochloric acid (sp. gr. 1.2) and warm gently. Then
add about 7 cc. of concentrated sulphuric acid (sp. gr. 1.84) and
evaporate over a free flame until the sulphuric acid fumes freely
(Note 2). It has then displaced nitric and hydrochloric acid from
their compounds.

Cool the flask or beaker, add 25 cc. of water, heat the solution
to boiling, and boil for two minutes. Filter to remove insoluble
sulphates, silica and any silver that may have been precipitated as
silver chloride, and receive the filtrate in a small beaker, washing
the precipitate and filter paper with warm water until the filtrate
and washings amount to 75 cc. Bend a strip of aluminium foil (5 cm. x
12 cm.) into triangular form and place it on edge in the beaker. Cover
the beaker and boil the solution (being careful to avoid loss of
liquid by spattering) for ten minutes, but do not evaporate to small
volume.

Wash the cover glass and sides of the beaker. The copper should now be
in the form of a precipitate at the bottom of the beaker or adhering
loosely to the aluminium sheet. Remove the sheet, wash it carefully
with hydrogen sulphide water and place it in a small beaker. Decant
the solution through a filter, wash the precipitated copper twice by
decantation with hydrogen sulphide water, and finally transfer the
copper to the filter paper, where it is again washed thoroughly, being
careful at all times to keep the precipitated copper covered with the
wash water. Remove and discard the filtrate and place an Erlenmeyer
flask under the funnel. Pour 15 cc. of dilute nitric acid (sp. gr.
1.20) over the aluminium foil in the beaker, thus dissolving any
adhering copper. Wash the foil with hot water and remove it. Warm this
nitric acid solution and pour it slowly through the filter paper,
thereby dissolving the copper on the paper, receiving the acid
solution in the Erlenmeyer flask. Before washing the paper, pour 5 cc.
of saturated bromine water (Note 3) through it and finally wash the
paper carefully with hot water and transfer any particles of copper
which may be left on it to the Erlenmeyer flask. Boil to expel the
bromine. Add concentrated ammonia drop by drop until the appearance of
a deep blue coloration indicates an excess. Boil until the deep blue
is displaced by a light bluish green coloration, or until brown stains
form on the sides of the flask. Add 10 cc. of strong acetic acid (Note
4) and cool under the water tap. Add a solution containing about 3
grams of potassium iodide, as in the standardization, and titrate with
thiosulphate solution until the yellow of the liberated iodine is
nearly discharged. Add 1-2 cc. of freshly prepared starch solution and
titrate to the disappearance of the blue color.

From the data obtained, calculate the percentage of copper (Cu) in the
ore.

[Note 1: Nitric acid, because of its oxidizing power, is used as a
solvent for the sulphide ores. As a strong acid it will also dissolve
the copper from carbonate ores. The hydrochloric acid is added to
dissolve oxides of iron and to precipitate silver and lead. The
sulphuric acid displaces the other acids, leaving a solution
containing sulphates only. It also, by its dehydrating action, renders
silica from silicates insoluble.]

[Note 2: Unless proper precautions are taken to insure the correct
concentrations of acid the copper will not precipitate quantitatively
on the aluminium foil; hence care must be taken to follow directions
carefully at this point. Lead and silver have been almost completely
removed as sulphate and chloride respectively, or they too would
be precipitated on the aluminium. Bismuth, though precipitated on
aluminium, has no effect on the analysis. Arsenic and antimony
precipitate on aluminium and would interfere with the titration if
allowed to remain in the lower state of oxidation.]

[Note 3: Bromine is added to oxidize arsenious and antimonious
compounds from the original sample, and to oxidize nitrous acid formed
by the action of nitric acid on copper and copper sulphide.]

[Note 4: This reaction can be carried out in the presence of sulphuric
and hydrochloric acids as well as acetic acid, but in the presence
of these strong acids arsenic and antimonic acids may react with the
hydriodic acid produced with the liberation of free iodine, thereby
reversing the process and introducing an error.]




DETERMINATION OF ANTIMONY IN STIBNITE


Stibnite is native antimony sulphide. Nearly pure samples of this
mineral are easily obtainable and should be used for practice, since
many impurities, notably iron, seriously interfere with the accurate
determination of the antimony by iodometric methods. It is, moreover,
essential that the directions with respect to amounts of reagents
employed and concentration of solutions should be followed closely.

PROCEDURE.--Grind the mineral with great care, and weigh out two
portions of 0.35-0.40 gram into small, dry beakers (100 cc.).
Cover the beakers and pour over the stibnite 5 cc. of concentrated
hydrochloric acid (sp. gr. 1.20) and warm gently on the water bath
(Note 1). When the residue is white, add to each beaker 2 grams of
powdered tartaric acid (Note 2). Warm the solution on the water bath
for ten minutes longer, dilute the solution very cautiously by adding
water in portions of 5 cc., stopping if the solution turns red. It
is possible that no coloration will appear, in which case cautiously
continue the dilution to 125 cc. If a red precipitate or coloration
does appear, warm the solution until it is colorless, and again dilute
cautiously to a total volume of 125 cc. and boil for a minute (Note
3).

If a white precipitate of the oxychloride separates during dilution
(which should not occur if the directions are followed), it is best to
discard the determination and to start anew.

Carefully neutralize most of the acid with ammonium hydroxide solution
(sp. gr. 0.96), but leave it distinctly acid (Note 4). Dissolve 3
grams of sodium bicarbonate in 200 cc. of water in a 500 cc. beaker,
and pour the cold solution of the antimony chloride into this,
avoiding loss by effervescence. Make sure that the solution contains
an excess of the bicarbonate, and then add 1 cc. or 2 cc. of starch
solution and titrate with iodine solution to the appearance of the
blue, avoiding excess (Notes 5 and 6).

From the corrected volume of the iodine solution required to oxidize
the antimony, calculate the percentage of antimony (Sb) in the
stibnite.

[Note 1: Antimony chloride is volatile with steam from its
concentrated solutions; hence these solutions must not be boiled until
they have been diluted.]

[Note 2: Antimony salts, such as the chloride, are readily hydrolyzed,
and compounds such as SbOCl are formed which are often relatively
insoluble; but in the presence of tartaric acid compounds with complex
ions are formed, and these are soluble. An excess of hydrochloric acid
also prevents precipitation of the oxychloride because the H^{+} ions
from the acid lessen the dissociation of the water and thus prevent
any considerable hydrolysis.]

[Note 3: The action of hydrochloric acid upon the sulphide sets free
sulphureted hydrogen, a part of which is held in solution by the acid.
This is usually expelled by the heating upon the water bath; but if it
is not wholly driven out, a point is reached during dilution at which
the antimony sulphide, being no longer held in solution by the acid,
separates. If the dilution is immediately stopped and the solution
warmed, this sulphide is again brought into solution and at the same
time more of the sulphureted hydrogen is expelled. This procedure must
be continued until the sulphureted hydrogen is all removed, since it
reacts with iodine. If no precipitation of the sulphide occurs, it
is an indication that the sulphureted hydrogen was all expelled on
solution of the stibnite.]

[Note 4: Ammonium hydroxide is added to neutralize most of the acid,
thus lessening the amount of sodium bicarbonate to be added. The
ammonia should not neutralize all of the acid.]

[Note 5: The reaction which takes place during titration may be
expressed thus:

Na_{3}SbO_{3} + 2NaHCO_{3} + I_{2} --> Na_{3}SbO_{4} + 2NaI + H_{2}O +
2CO_{2}.]

[Note 6: If the end-point is not permanent, that is, if the blue of
the iodo-starch is discharged after standing a few moments, the cause
may be an insufficient quantity of sodium bicarbonate, leaving the
solution slightly acid, or a very slight precipitation of an antimony
compound which is slowly acted upon by the iodine when the latter is
momentarily present in excess. In either case it is better to discard
the analysis and to repeat the process, using greater care in the
amounts of reagents employed.]




CHLORIMETRY


The processes included under the term !chlorimetry! comprise
those employed to determine chlorine, hypochlorites, bromine, and
hypobromites. The reagent employed is sodium arsenite in the presence
of sodium bicarbonate. The reaction in the case of the hypochlorites
is

NaClO + Na_{3}AsO_{3} --> Na_{3}AsO_{4} + NaCl.

The sodium arsenite may be prepared from pure arsenious oxide,
