prepare healthful dishes than to do the reverse.

       *       *       *       *       *




TIME REQUIRED TO DIGEST DIFFERENT FOODS.


_The Monitor de la Salud_ contains in a recent number the results of some
experiments lately made by E. Jessen on the time required for the
digestion of certain kinds of food. The stomach of the person on whom the
experiments were made was emptied by means of a pump; 100 grammes, equal
to 1,544 grains, or about 2-2/3 ounces, of meat, finely chopped and mixed
with three times the quantity of water, were introduced. The experiment
was considered ended when the matter, on removal by the pump, was found to
contain no muscular fibre.

It will be remembered that the gramme weighs nearly 15-1/2 grains, and the
cubic centigramme is equal to 1 gramme. The 2-2/3 ounces of meat were
therefore mixed with nearly eight ounces of water, before being introduced
into the stomach.

The results were as follows:

  Beef, raw, and finely chopped.  2  hours.
    "   half cooked.              21/2   "
    "   well cooked.              3    "
    "   slightly roasted.         3    "
    "   well roasted.             4    "
  Mutton, raw.                    2    "
  Veal.                           21/2   "
  Pork.                           3    "

The digestibility of milk was examined in the same way. The quantity used
was regulated so that the nitrogen should be the same as in the 100
grammes of beef.

  602 cubic centimeters, nearly sixteen ounces,
      of cow's milk, not boiled, required.        31/2 hours
  602 cubic centimeters, boiled.                  4    "
  602   "       "        sour.                    31/2   "
  675   "       "        skimmed.                 31/2   "
  656   "       "        goat's milk, not boiled. 31/2   "

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ORGANIZATION AND PLAN OF THE UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.[7]

[Footnote 7: Communicated to the National Academy of Sciences at the
October meeting in 1884.]

By J.W. POWELL.


A Scientific institution or bureau operating under government authority
can be controlled by statute and by superior administrative authority but
to a limited extent. These operations are practically carried on by
specialists, and they can be controlled only in their financial operations
and in the general purposes for which investigations are made. Their
methods of investigation are their own--originate with themselves, and are
carried out by themselves. But in relation to the scientific operations of
such a government institution, there is an unofficial authority which,
though not immediately felt, ultimately steps in to approve or condemn,
viz., the body of scientific men of the country; and though their
authority is not exercised antecedently and at every stage of the work,
yet it is so potent that no national scientific institution can grow and
prosper without their approval, but must sooner or later fall and perish
unless sustained by their strong influence.

As director of the Geological Survey, I deeply realize that I owe
allegiance to the scientific men of the country, and for this reason I
desire to present to the National Academy of Sciences the organization and
plan of operations of the Survey.


A TOPOGRAPHIC MAP OF THE UNITED STATUS.

Sound geologic research is based on geography. Without a good topographic
map geology cannot even be thoroughly studied, and the publication of the
results of geologic investigation is very imperfect without a good map;
but with a good map thorough investigation and simple, intelligible
publication become possible. Impelled by these considerations, the Survey
is making a topographic map of the United States. The geographic basis of
this map is a trigonometric survey by which datum points are established
throughout the country; that is, base-lines are measured and a
triangulation extended therefrom. This trigonometric work is executed on a
scale only sufficiently refined for map-making purposes, and will not be
directly useful for geodetic purposes in determining the figure of the
earth. The hypsometric work is based upon the railroad levels of the
country. Throughout the greater part of the country, there is a system of
railroad lines, constituting a net-work. The levels or profiles of these
roads have been established with reasonable accuracy, and as they cross
each other at a multiplicity of points, a system of checks is afforded, so
that the railroad surface of the country can be determined therefrom with
all the accuracy necessary for the most refined and elaborate topographic
maps. From such a hypsometric basis the reliefs for the whole country are
determined, by running lines of levels, by trigonometric construction, and
in mountainous regions by barometric observation.

The primary triangulation having been made, the topography is executed by
a variety of methods, adapted to the peculiar conditions found in various
portions of the country. To a large extent the plane-table is used. In the
hands of the topographers of the Geological Survey, the plane-table is not
simply a portable draughting table for the field; it is practically an
instrument of triangulation, and all minor positions of the details of
topography are determined through its use by trigonometric construction.

The scale on which the map is made is variable. In some portions of the
prairie region, and in the region of the great plains, the topography and
the geology alike are simple, and maps on a comparatively small scale are
sufficient for practical purposes. For these districts it is proposed to
construct the sheets of the map on a scale of 1-250,000, or about four
miles to the inch. In the mountain regions of the West the geology is more
complex, and the topography more intricate; but to a large extent these
regions are uninhabited, and to a more limited extent uninhabitable. It
would therefore not be wise to make a topographic or geologic survey of
the country on an excessively elaborate plan. Over much of this area the
sheets of the map will also be constructed on a scale of 1-250,000, but in
special districts that scale will be increased to 1-125,000, and in the
case of important mining districts charts will be constructed on a much
larger scale. In the eastern portion of the United States two scales are
adopted. In the less densely populated country a scale of 1-125,000 is
used; in the more densely populated regions a scale of 1-62,500 is
adopted, or about one mile to the inch. But throughout the country a few
special districts of great importance, because of complex geologic
structure, dense population, or other condition, will require charts on
still larger scales. The area of the United States, exclusive of Alaska,
is about three million square miles, and a map of the United States,
constructed on the plan set forth above, will require not less than 2,600
sheets. It may ultimately prove to require more than that, from the fact
that the areas to be surveyed on the larger scale have not been fully
determined. Besides the number of sheets in the general map of the United
States, there will be several hundred special maps on large scales, as
above described.

Such is a brief outline of the plan so far as it has been developed at the
present time. In this connection it should be stated that the map of the
United States can be completed, with the present organization of the
Geological Survey, in about 24 years; but it is greatly to be desired that
the time for its completion may be materially diminished by increasing the
topographic force of the Geological Survey. We ought to have a good
topographic map of the United States by the year 1900. About one-fifth of
the whole area of the United States, exclusive of Alaska, has been
completed on the above plan. This includes all geographic work done in the
United States under the auspices of the General Government and under the
auspices of State Governments. The map herewith shows those areas that
have been surveyed by various organizations on such a scale and in such a
manner that the work has been accepted as sufficient for the purposes of
the Survey.

Much other work has been done, but not with sufficient refinement and
accuracy to be of present value, though such work subserved its purpose in
its time. An examination of the map will show that the triangulation of
the various organizations is already largely in advance of the topography.
The map of the United States will be a great atlas divided into sheets as
above indicated. In all of those areas where the survey is on a scale of
1-250,000, a page of the atlas will present an area of one degree in
longitude and one degree in latitude. Where the scale is 1-125,000, a page
of the atlas-sheet will represent one-fourth of a degree. Where the scale
is 1-62,500, the atlas-sheet will represent one-sixteenth of a degree. The
degree sheet will be designated by two numbers--one representing latitude,
the other longitude. Where the sheets represent fractional degrees, they
will be labeled with the same numbers, with the addition of the
description of the proper fractional part.

The organization, as at present established, executing this work, is as
follows: First, an astronomic and computing division, the officers of
which are engaged in determining the geographic coordinates of certain
primary points. Second, a triangulation corps engaged in extending a
system of triangulation over various portions of the country from measured
base-lines. Third, a topographic corps, organized into twenty-seven
parties, scattered over various portions of the United States. Such, in
brief outline, is the plan for the map of the United States, and the
organization by which it is to be made. Mr. Henry Gannett is the Chief
Geographer.


PALEONTOLOGY.

Before giving the outline of the plan for the general geologic survey, it
will be better to explain the accessory plans and organizations. There are
in the Survey, as at present organized, the following paleontologic
laboratories:

1. A laboratory of vertebrate paleontology for formations other than the
Quaternary. In connection with this laboratory there is a corps of
paleontologists. Professor O.C. Marsh is in charge.

2. There is a laboratory of invertebrate paleontology of Quaternary age,
with a corps of paleontologists, Mr. Wm. H. Dall being in charge.

3. There is a laboratory of invertebrate paleontology of Cenozoic and
Mesozoic age, with a corps of paleontologists. Dr. C.A. White is in
charge.

4. There is a laboratory of invertebrate paleontology of Paleozoic age,
with a corps of paleontologists. Mr. C.D. Walcott is in charge.

5. There is a laboratory of fossil botany, with a corps of paleobotanists,
Mr. Lester F. Ward being in charge.

The paleontologists and paleobotanists connected with the laboratories
above described, study and discuss in reports the fossils collected by the
general geologists in the field. They also supplement the work of the
field geologists by making special collections in important districts and
at critical horizons; but the paleontologists are not held responsible for
areal and structural geology on the one hand, and the geologists are not
held responsible for paleontology on the other hand. In addition to the
large number of paleontologists on the regular work of the Geological
Survey, as above described, several paleontologists are engaged from time
to time to make special studies.


CHEMISTRY.

There is a chemic laboratory attached to the Survey, with a large corps of
chemists engaged in a great variety of researches relating to the
constitution of waters, minerals, ores, and rocks. A part of the work of
this corps is to study the methods of metamorphism and the paragenesis of
minerals, and in this connection the chemists do work in the field; but to
a large extent they are occupied with the study of the materials collected
by the field geologists. Professor F.W. Clarke is in charge of this
department.


PHYSICAL RESEARCHES.

There is a physical laboratory in the Survey, with a small corps of men
engaged in certain physical researches of prime importance to geologic
philosophy. These researches are experimental, and relate to the effect of
temperatures, pressures, etc., on rocks. This laboratory is under the
charge of the chief chemist.


LITHOLOGY.

There is a lithologic laboratory in the Survey, with a large corps of
lithologists engaged in the microscopic study of rocks. These lithologists
are field geologists, who examine the collections made by themselves.


STATISTICS.

There is in the Survey a division of mining statistics, with a large corps
of men engaged in statistic work, the results of which are published in an
annual report entitled "Mineral Resources." Mr. Albert Williams, Jr., is
the Chief Statistician of the Survey.


ILLUSTRATIONS.

There is in the Survey a division organized for the purpose of preparing
illustrations for paleontologic and geologic reports. Mr. W.H. Holmes is
in charge of this division. Illustrations will not hereafter be used for
embellishment, but will be strictly confined to the illustration of the
text and the presentation of such facts as can be best exhibited by
figures and diagrams. All illustrations will, as far as possible, be
produced by relief methods, such as wood-engraving, photo-engraving, etc.
As large numbers of the reports of the Survey are published, this plan is
demanded for economic reasons; but there is another consideration believed
to be of still greater importance; illustrations made on stone cannot be
used after the first edition, as they deteriorate somewhat by time, and it
is customary to use the same lithographic stone for various purposes from
time to time. The illustrations made for the reports of the Survey, if on
relief-plates that can be cheaply electrotyped, can be used again when
needed. This is especially desirable in paleontology, where previously
published figures can be introduced for comparative purposes. There are
two methods of studying the extinct life of the globe. Fossils are indices
of geological formations, and must be grouped by formations to subserve
the purpose of geologists. Fossils also have their biologic relations, and
should be studied and arranged in biologic groups. Under the plan adopted
by the Survey, the illustrations can be used over and over again for such
purposes when needed, as reproduction can be made at the small cost of
electrotyping. These same illustrations can be used by the public at large
in scientific periodicals, text-books, etc. All the illustrations made by
the Geological Survey are held for the public to be used in this manner.


LIBRARY.

The library of the Survey now contains more than 25,000 volumes, and is
rapidly growing by means of exchanges. It is found necessary to purchase
but few books. The librarian, Mr. C.C. Darwin, has a corps of assistants
engaged in bibliographic work. It is proposed to prepare a catalogue of
American and foreign publications upon American geology, which is to be a
general authors' catalogue. In addition to this, it is proposed to publish
bibliographies proper of special subjects constituting integral parts of
the science of geology.


PUBLICATIONS.

The publications of the Survey are in three series: Annual Reports,
Bulletins, and Monographs. The Annual Report constitutes a part of the
Report of the Secretary of the Interior for each year, but is a distinct
volume. This contains a brief summary of the purposes, plans, and
operations of the Survey, prepared by the Director, and short
administrative reports from the chiefs of divisions, the whole followed by
scientific papers. These papers are selected as being those of most
general interest, the object being to make the Annual Report a somewhat
popular account of the doings of the Survey, that it may be widely read by
the intelligent people of the country. Of this 5,650 copies are published
as a part of the Secretary's report, and are distributed by the Secretary
of the Interior, Senators, and Members of the House of Representatives;
and an extra edition is annually ordered of 15,000 copies, distributed by
the Survey and members of the Senate and House of Representatives. Four
annual reports have been published; the fifth is now in the hands of the
printer.

The Bulletins of the Survey are short papers, and through them somewhat
speedy publication is attained. Each bulletin is devoted to some specific
topic, in order that the material ultimately published in the bulletins
can be classified in any manner desired by scientific men. Nine bulletins
have been published, and seven are in press. The bulletins already
published vary in size from 5 to 325 pages each; they are sold at the cost
of press-work and paper, and vary in price from five to twenty cents each;
4,900 copies of each bulletin are published; 1,900 are distributed by
Congress, 3,000 are held for sale and exchange by the Geological Survey.

The Monographs of the Survey are quarto volumes. By this method of
publication the more important and elaborate papers are given to the
public. Six monographs, with two atlases, have been issued; five
monographs, with two atlases, are in press; 1,900 copies of each monograph
are distributed by Congress; 3,000 are held for sale and exchange by the
Survey at the cost of press-work, paper, and binding. They vary in price
from $1.05 to $11.

The chiefs of divisions supervise the publications that originate in their
several corps. The general editorial supervision is exercised by the Chief
Clerk of the Survey, Mr. James C. Pilling.


GENERAL GEOLOGY.

In organizing the general geologic work, it became necessary, first, to
consider what had already been done in various portions of the United
States; and for this purpose the compilation of a general geologic map of
the United States was begun, together with a Thesaurus of American
formations. In addition to this the bibliographic work previously
described was initiated, so that the literature relating to American
geology should be readily accessible to the workers in the Survey. At this
point it became necessary to consider the best methods of apportioning the
work; that is, the best methods of dividing the geologic work into parts
to be assigned to the different corps of observers. A strictly geographic
apportionment was not deemed wise, from the fact that an unscientific
division of labor would result, and the same classes of problems would to
a large extent be relegated to the several corps operating in field and in
the laboratory. It was thought best to divide the work, as far as
possible, by subject-matter rather than by territorial areas; yet to some
extent the two methods of division will coincide. There are in the Survey
at present:

First, a division of glacial geology, and Prof. T.C. Chamberlin, formerly
State Geologist of Wisconsin is at its head, with a strong corps of
assistants. There is an important field for which definite provision has
not yet been made, namely, the study of the loess that constitutes the
bluff formations of the Mississippi River and its tributaries. But as this
loess proves to be intimately associated with the glacial formations of
the same region, it is probable that it will eventually be relegated to
the glacial division. Perhaps the division may eventually grow to such an
extent that its field of operations will include the whole Quaternary
geology.

Second, a division of volcanic geology is organized, and Capt. Clarence E.
Dutton, of the Ordnance Corps of the Army, is placed in charge, also with
a strong corps of assistants.

Third and fourth, two divisions have been organized to prosecute work on
the archaean rocks, embracing within their field not only all rocks of
archaean age, but all metamorphic crystalline schists, of whatever age they
may be found. The first division has for its chief Prof. Raphael Pumpelly,
assisted by a corps of geologists, and the field of his work is the
crystalline schists of the Appalachian region, or eastern portion of the
United States, extending from northern New England to Georgia. He will
also include in his studies certain paleozoic formations which are
immediately connected with the crystalline schists and involved in their
orographic structure.

The second division for the study of this class of rocks is in charge of
Prof. Roland D. Irving, with a corps of geologists, and his field of
operation is in the Lake Superior region. It is not proposed at present to
undertake the study of the crystalline schists of the Rocky Mountain
region.

Fifth, another division has been organized for the study of the areal,
structural, and historical geology of the Appalachian region, extending
from the Atlantic, westward, to the zone which separates the mountain
region from the great valley of the Mississippi. Mr. G.K. Gilbert has
charge of this work, and has a large corps of assistants.

Sixth, it seemed desirable, partly for scientific reasons and partly for
administrative reasons, that a thorough topographic and geologic survey
should be made of the Yellowstone Park, and Mr. Arnold Hague is in charge
of the work, with a corps of assistants. When it is completed, his field
will be expanded so as to include a large part of the Rocky Mountain
region, but the extent of the field is not yet determined.

It will thus be seen that the general geologic work relating to those
areas where the terranes are composed of fossiliferous formations is very
imperfectly and incompletely organized. The reason for this is twofold:
First, the work cannot be performed very successfully until the maps are
made; second, the Geological Survey is necessarily diverting much of its
force to the construction of maps, and cannot with present appropriations
expand the geologic corps so as to extend systematic work in the field
over the entire country.


ECONOMIC GEOLOGY.

Under the organic law of the Geological Survey, investigations in economic
geology are restricted to those States and Territories in which there are
public lands; the extension of the work into the eastern portion of the
United States included only that part relating to general geology. Two
mining divisions are organized. One, in charge of Mr. George F. Becker,
with headquarters at San Francisco, California, is at the present time
