interposed, and the opacity of one of them, the efflux that occurred
around the disk, P, is quite sharply reproduced upon the sensitized plate
by a circle like that which we observed in Figs. 2 and 3. It will be
seen, besides, that an infinite number of ramifications in every
direction has been produced around the ball, and we can follow the travel
of the spark that leaped between the ball and disk in two directions
situated in the prolongation of one another.

Under the two principal and clearly marked lines that this spark made
there are seen two other, very pale and much wider ones, that present no
sinuosities parallel with the first.

The results of these experiments are very curious. The position of the
plates was varied in 18 different ways, as was also the form of the
conductors. We have spoken of those only that appear to us to present the
most interest. Unfortunately, notwithstanding the skill of the engraver,
it is impossible to render with accuracy all the details that are seen
upon examining the negative. The proofs that have been printed upon paper
present much less sharpness than the negative, for there are certain
parts of the figures on the glass that do not show in the print.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

We have been content here to make known the results obtained, without
drawing any conclusions from them. It is to be hoped that these
experiments, which can be easily repeated by means of the apparatus
described above, will be repeated and discussed by electricians, and that
they will contribute toward making known to us the nature of the
mysterious agent that will give its name to our era.--_G. Mareschal,
in La Lumiere Electrique._

       *       *       *       *       *




THE TRUE CONSTANT OF GRAVITY.


Many of the readers of this journal may like to participate in the
discussion of the following proposition. The statement is this:

The space through which a body, near the surface of the earth, at mean
latitude, _in vacuo_, descends by virtue of the accelerating force of
gravity in 1/1000 of an hour is precisely 2,500 geometric inches = 100
geometric cubits = the side of a square geometric acre.

[The geometric inch is taken, in accordance with the view of Sir John
Herschel, at 1/1,000,000,000 of twice the polar axis of the earth, and
equals 1-1/1000 English inches very nearly.]

The strict decimal relation of the proposition is shown by the following
table. It has been tested by Clairaut's theorem, and by other existing
expressions, and has been found to agree, far within the probable limits
of errors in observation, with the most approved values of the constant.
In fact, it is contained in the existing expressions; but the _decimal_
relation does not appear unless we state the unit of linear measure as a
decimal of the earth's semi-polar axis, and, at the same time, divide the
circle, both for time and for general purposes, _geometrically, i.e._, by
strict decimalization upon the hour-angle. A mathematical reason
underlies the proposition.

Time in       Acquired    Squares   Total      Ratio of       Descent in
Thousandths   Velocity,   of the    Descent,   Spaces, Each   Successive
of an Hour.   Cubits.     Time.     Cubits.    Interval of    Intervals,
                                               Time.          Cubits.

     1           200          1         100          1             100
     2           400          4         400          3             300
     3           600          9         900          5             500
     4           800         16       1,600          7             700
     5         1,000         25       2,500          9             900
     6         1,200         36       3,600         11           1,100
     7         1,400         49       4,900         13           1,300
     8         1,600         64       6,400         15           1,500
     9         1,800         81       8,100         17           1,700
    10         2,000        100      10,000         19           1,900

So that--
                                                    Cubits.   Acre Sides.
In 1/10,000 of an hour, the total
descent =                                                1  =       1/100

In 1/1000 of an hour, the total descent =              100  =      1

In 1/100 of an hour, the total descent =            10,000  =    100

And so on, in strict _decimal_ relation with the earth's semi-polar axis.

A two-fold reason why the constant for latitude 45 deg. is vastly better than
any other, is in its having this simple relation with the semi-axis, and
at the same time a less complex way of applying the correction for
latitude.

JACOB M. CLARK.

New York, February, 1885.

       *       *       *       *       *




ORIGIN OF THUNDERSTORMS.


At the recent congress of German medical men and physicists, Dr. S.
Hoppe, of Hamburg, read a paper in which he sought to show that the
electricity of thunderstorms is generated by the friction of vapor
particles generated by the evaporation of water. This opinion was
strengthened by several experiments in which compressed cold air was
allowed to rush into a copper vessel containing warm moist air, thus
generating a large amount of electricity. He concludes that the rise of a
column of warm moist air into the colder atmosphere above will be
followed by a thunderstorm if it acquires sufficient velocity to prevent
neutralization of the electricity generated by the friction of the air.
Hence, in his opinion, open districts denuded of forests are more liable
to thunderstorms than wooded regions, where the trees forbid the rise of
humid air currents.

       *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVISED TOYS.


Do our readers remember all those ingenious toys which our mothers and
sisters improvised in order to amuse us? We took a walk into the country,
and our eldest sister or our mother picked a wild poppy, turned its red
petals back and encircled them with a thread, and stuck a sprig of grass
into the seed vessel to represent a headdress of feathers. Here was a
fresh and pretty doll (Fig. 1). Another day it was the season of lilacs.
The children gathered branches by the armful, and from these the mother
picked off the flowers and strung them one by one with a needle. Here was
a bracelet or a necklace. An acorn was picked up in the woods, the mother
carved it with a pen-knife, and behold a basket. From a nutshell she made
a boat, and from a green almond a rabbit. Sometimes she carved the
rabbit's ears out of the almond itself, but in most cases they were made
from a pretty rose-colored radish.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Doll made of a Wild Poppy.]

Do you remember the cork from which, by the aid of a few long needles for
bars, an ingenious fly-cage was formed? And the castle of cards, four,
five, and eight stories high? And then those famous card tents in a row,
that fell one after another when the first one in the line was
overturned?

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--Hygrometric Doll; its Dress Colored with
Chloride of Cobalt.]

How we passed the evenings with our eyes fixed upon our mothers, who
patiently, with their skillful scissors, cut horses and dogs out of old
white, red, and blue cards! And how many plays, without costing a cent,
served to amuse the children by exercising their ingenuity! The mother
marked at hazard five dots upon a sheet of paper. The question was to
draw a man, one of the dots showing the place of the head and the other
four the feet and hands.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--Old Man made of Lobster's Claws.]

When the dessert was brought upon the table, it became a question of
manufacturing a head out of an orange. That is not very difficult; two
holes for the eyes, a large slit for the mouth, and nothing easier than
to simulate the teeth and nose. The head was placed upon a napkin
stretched over the top of a champagne glass. This was one of our great
amusements. The napkin was drawn ultimately to the right and left, and
this moved the head and caused it to assume most comical positions. But
what caused irresistible laughter was when a sly hand pressed the head
and made it open its mouth wide. And then what pigs we manufactured with
a lemon perched upon four matches!

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--Crocus Flowering in a Perforated Pot.]

Without mentioning Chinese shadows, how many cheap amusements there are
that can be varied to infinity merely by various combinations of the
fingers interlocked in diverse manners!

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--1. Paper Cross. 2. Method of Making the
Cross. 3. Rabbits Made of Green Almonds. 4. Basket Made of Sedges. 5.
Acorn Basket. 6. Fly-cage Made of a Cork.]

All such amusements were much in vogue in former times, but we are
assured that to-day mothers are less conversant with these curious and
droll inventions, which were once transmitted like the tales of Mother
Goose. They buy playthings for their children at great expense, and allow
the latter to amuse themselves all by themselves. The toy paid for and
given, the child is no longer in their mind. Those mothers who have
preserved the traditions of these little pastimes, and know how to
skillfully vary them, find therein so many resources for amusing their
children. Then it is so pleasant to see the eyes of the latter eagerly
fixed upon the scissors, and to hear their exclamations of pleasure and
their fresh laughter when the paper is transformed under expert fingers
into a boat, house, or what not!

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--The Lesson in Drawing.--An Illustrated
Five-spot of Hearts.]

It has required millions of mothers and nurses to put their wits to work
to amuse their children in order to form that collection of charming
combinations that at present constitutes a sort of science. Mr. Gaston
Tissandier not long ago conceived the happy idea of bringing together in
an illustrated volume a description of some of these improvised toys and
amusing plays, and it is from this that the accompanying illustrations
(which sufficiently explain themselves) are taken.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE AEOLIAN HARP.


The AEolian harp is a musical instrument which is set in action by the
wind. The instrument, which is not very well known, is yet very curious,
and at the request of some of our readers we shall herewith give a
description of it.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--KIRCHER'S AEOLIAN HARP.]

According to a generally credited opinion, it is to Father Kircher, who
devised so many ingenious machines in the seventeenth century, that we
owe the first systematically constructed model of an AEolian harp. We must
add, however, that the fact of the spontaneous resonance of certain
musical instruments when exposed to a current of air had struck the
observers of nature in times of remotest antiquity.

Without dwelling upon the history of the AEolian harp, we may say that in
modern times this instrument has been especially constructed in England,
Scotland, Germany, and Alsace. The AEolian harp of the Castle of Baden
Baden, and those of the four turrets of Strassburg Cathedral are
celebrated.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--FROST & KASTNER'S IMPROVED AEOLIAN HARP.]

We shall first describe Kircher's harp, which this Jesuit savant
constructed according to an observation made by Porta in 1558. The
instrument consists of a rectangular box (Fig. 1), the sounding board of
which, containing rose-shaped apertures, is provided with a certain
number of strings stretched over two bridges and fastened to pegs at the
extremities. This box carries a ring that serves for suspending it.
Kircher recommends that the box be made of very sonorous fir wood, like
that employed in the construction of stringed instruments. He would have
it 1.085 meters in length, 0.434 meter in width, and 0.217 meter in
height, and would provide it with fifteen catgut strings, tuned, not like
those of other instruments to the third, fourth, or fifth, but all in
unison or to the octave, in order, says he, that its sound shall be very
harmonious. The experiments of Kircher showed him the necessity of
employing a sort of concentrator in order to increase the force of the
wind, and to obtain all the advantage possible from the current of air
that was directed against the strings. The place where the instrument is
located should not, according to him, be exposed to the open air, but
must be a closed one. The air, nevertheless, must have free access to it
on both sides of the harp. The force of the wind may be concentrated upon
such a point in different ways; either, for example, by means of conical
channels, or spiral ones like those used for causing sounds to reach the
interior of a house from a more elevated place, or by means of a sort of
doors. These latter, two in number, are adapted to a kind of receptacle
made of boards and presenting the appearance of a small closet. In the
back part of this receptacle there is a slit, and in front of this the
harp is hung in a slightly oblique position. The whole posterior portion
of the apparatus must be situated in the apartment, while the doors must
remain outside the window (Fig. I). In later times the AEolian harp has
been improved by Messrs. Frost and Kastner, whose apparatus is
represented in Fig. 2. It consists of a rectangular box with two sounding
boards, each provided with eight catgut strings. In order to limit the
current of air and to bring it with more force against the strings, two
wings are adapted near the thin surfaces opposed to the wind, so that the
current may reach each group of cords on passing through the narrow
aperture between the obliquely inclined wing and the body of the
instrument. The dimensions of the resonant box are as follows: height,
1.28 meters; width, 0.27 meter; and thickness, 0.075 meter. Distance
between the two bridges, or length of the sonorous portion of the cords,
about 1 meter; width of the wings, 0.14 meter. Distance between the
sounding board and the wings, 0.42 meter. Inclination of the wings, 50
degrees.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--AEOLIAN HARP IN THE OLD CASTLE OF BADEN
BADEN.]

The celebrated AEolian harps of the old castle of Baden Baden are entirely
different, and merit description. One of them (Fig. 3) is formed of a
resonant box, the construction of which differs from that of AEolian harps
with a rectangular box, in that it is prolonged beyond the place occupied
by the strings, and is rounded off behind. In the opposite side there are
two long and narrow apertures. To prevent the apparatus from being
injured by the weather, it is inclosed in a sort of case occupying the
recess of the window in the old ruined castle in which it is exposed.
Behind the harp there is a wire lattice door, the purpose of which seems
to be to protect the instrument against the attempts of robbers or the
indiscreet contact of tourists. We annex to the general view of the
instrument a front and profile plan (Fig. 4). The AEolian harp has often
inspired both writers of prose and poetry. Chateaubriand, in _Les
Natchez_, compares its sounds to the magic concerts that the celestial
vaults resound. Without attributing such effects to the instrument, it
must be admitted that it possesses remarkable properties, which act upon
the nervous system and cause very different impressions, according to the
temperament of those who listen to its accords.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.--PLAN OF THE BADEN BADEN INSTRUMENT.]

Hector Berlioz, in his _Voyage Musicale en Italie_, has given as follows
the curious effects that an AEolian harp produced upon his lively and
impassioned imagination: "On one of those gloomy days that sadden the end
of the year, listen, while reading Ossian, to the fantastic harmony of an
AEolian harp swinging at the top of a tree deprived of verdure, and I defy
you not to experience a profound feeling of sadness and of _abandon_, and
a vague and infinite desire for another existence."

An English physician, Dr. J.M. Cox, in his practical _Observations_ upon
dementia, asserts that unfortunate lunatics have been seen whose
sensitiveness was such that ordinary means of cure had to be given up
with them, but who were instantly calmed by the sweet and varied accords
of an AEolian harp. Other observers narrate that they have heard the
efficacy of Aeolian sounds spoken of in Scotland for producing sleep.

Telegraph wires are often, under the influence of the winds, submitted to
vibrations which reproduce the phenomena of the Aeolian harp. The
electric telegraph, which, before the construction of the Kehl bridge,
directly traversed the Rhine, very frequently resounded, and the observer
who placed his ear against the poles on the bank of the river was enabled
to hear something like a far-off sound of bells.--_La Nature_.

       *       *       *       *       *




PHYSICS WITHOUT APPARATUS.

MANUFACTURE OF ILLUMINATING GAS.


[Illustration: FIG. 1.--PRODUCTION OF ILLUMINATING GAS.]

Burn a piece of paper of about the size of the hand upon a clean
porcelain plate, and this will serve to show the phenomena of
carbonization and the formation of empyreumatic products under the action
of heat. Under the burned paper there will be found a yellowish deposit
which sticks to the fingers, and which consists of oil of paper produced
by distillation. An idea of the production of illuminating gas through
the distillation of coal may be easily given by means a single clay pipe.
Upon filling the bowl of this with fragments of coal, closing the opening
with clay, and, after the latter is dry, placing the bowl in a coal fire
so that the stem shall project, gas will soon be observed issuing from,
the latter, and, when lighted, will give a very bright flame. If the pipe
seems to be a little too costly, recourse maybe had to a large piece of
wrapping paper rolled into the form of a cornucopia, and held in the left
hand by means of the pointed end. If, after an aperture has been made in
this near the point, the base be lighted, the heat developed by the flame
will produce a sort of distillation of the organic matter of the paper,
and the empyreumatic and gaseous products will rise in the cone, and make
their exit through the orifice, where they may be lighted with a match
(Fig. 1). It goes without saying that this experiment lasts but a few
seconds; but, as short as this period is, it is sufficient to give a
demonstration of the production of illuminating gas through the
distillation of organic matters. Care should be taken not to set anything
on fire while performing it, and it is well to operate over a pavement,
and far from any inflammable materials.


ELASTICITY OF BODIES.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--EXPERIMENT ON THE ELASTICITY OF BODIES.]

Mould a piece of fresh bread with the fingers so as to give it the size
and shape shown in Fig. 2. If this object be placed upon a wooden table,
and a hard blow be given it with the fist, it will be found impossible to
